Little did we know that the construction of classrooms through Christ-centered humanitarian projects would create rooms for Christ in the hearts of many children using these classrooms to educate their minds. During a thanksgiving dinner organized by one of the municipal directors in the Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, an opinion leader made a surprise invitation to the Church. She said, “The Church has done a wonderful job in construction and renovations of the classrooms and toilets in our municipality. We now invite you to come and help us in fighting the degradation of moral values among the younger generation which is now an emerging issue.”

Moral values teach us good virtues, including honesty, truthfulness, kindness, integrity, helpfulness, compassion, love, respect for others, hard work, cooperation, and forgiveness. Our leaders are fully aware that the youth are the future, and that they are the driving force of every nation. With such prophetic understanding, one of the four priorities for the Africa Central Area is strengthening faith for the rising generation. So, when this invitation came to the Church, local leaders were very proactive and immediately took action with the emphasis placed on studying the doctrines of the gospel.

They immediately organized some materials through the Church Education System program and teachers, are now teaching religion classes in these public schools. It is amazing to see that more than 80 percent of those attending these religion classes are not of our faith. As the word has spread regarding these religion classes more heads of these public schools are making invitations to the Church to also consider organizing similar classes in their schools. It is evident that as they study the scriptures and learn about Jesus Christ and His atoning sacrifice, they will have a desire to create rooms in their hearts so that the Spirit of the Lord can dwell with them.

As Elder Boyd K. Packer (1924–2015) taught, “the study of the doctrines of the gospel will improve behavior quicker than a study of behavior will improve behavior. ... That is why we stress so forcefully the study of the doctrines of the gospel.”

During the last week of June 2023, more than 300 youth from the Tanzania Dar es Salaam Mission participated in the For the Strength of Youth event that was held for the first time ever in Tanzania. For five days they participated in inspiring devotionals, classes, and activities, which helped them strengthen their faith in Jesus Christ and learn how to hear Him.

Elder Thierry K. Mutombo, First Counselor in the Africa Central Area Presidency, spoke to the youth during an inspiring devotional that emphasized using their divine potential to meet their increasingly difficult challenges.

Several youth who are not of our faith attended this FSY event. All of them learned about it from their friends or relatives who are members of the Church. Each of them expressed gratitude for the principles they learned during FSY.

One of these youths made a remarkable insight when he said, “I didn’t know that there was a proper way of dancing until we were taught so by leaders supervising the dancing time.” By sharing their positive experience in the gospel with others, our youth were doing what our prophets and apostles have once termed as the “easily understandable principles taught to each of us from childhood: love, share, and invite.”

As the Church continues to emphasize the teaching of youth about gospel doctrines in public schools and likewise invite them into meetings and events for the youth like FSY, it will help them to strengthen their faith in Jesus Christ and ultimately help them in avoiding immoral behavior and becoming a force to reckon with in building future leaders, strong nations and families.
