In a world where darkness is ever increasing, light will always continue to shine. That light, which brings our hope and happiness, comes because of Jesus Christ, the Light of the World.

President Dallin H. Oaks, First Counselor in the First Presidency, has taught:

“Jesus Christ is the light of the world because he is the source of the light which ‘proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space’ (D&C 88:12). His light is ‘the true light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world’ (D&C 93:2). …

“… His example and his teachings illuminate the path we should walk.”

We focus on Christ’s light especially at Christmastime, but it shines for us year round, and we can seek to share His light in all we do. These quotes from Church leaders, shared on social media, can help us understand more about how Christ is the Light of the World and how we can emulate His light in our lives.

“This year, I will celebrate Christmas for the 99th time. Over these many years, I have marveled at the increased goodwill and human kindness that always emerge during this sacred season. As we commemorate the birth of Him who is the Light of the World, new light is kindled in each of us. Today we need the light of Jesus Christ more than ever. As we follow Him, we can each help to make this a better world.”

President Russell M. Nelson, Facebook, Dec. 18, 2022, facebook.com/russell.m.nelson.

“Because so many of us are struggling with the challenges of the past year and more, it can be difficult to know where we can turn for peace.

“This Christmas, I invite you to share the light of the Savior Jesus Christ with those around you. It is HIS light and HIS love that will heal our hearts during this season—and during all of life’s challenges.”

Video: “The Christmas season is near and dear to my heart, as I know it is to many of you. Given all that we have experienced during this past year and more, may I share a message about how we can help transform lives during this special time of year?

“… I invite you to ponder the ways you personally can reach out and help others experience the Light of Jesus Christ this Christmas. This Christmas, some are still waiting for the lights to come on again. That is why we love to share the light of Jesus Christ when so many around us are burdened with fear and uncertainty.

“I invite you to make room in your heart for those around you who may be struggling to see the Light of the Savior and to feel His love. No gifts will mean as much as acts of pure love you offer to the lonely, the worn down, and the weary. These are gifts that remind us and them of the true reason for the season: the gift of God’s Son, Jesus Christ, who was born to cast out all fear and bring everlasting light and joy to all who follow Him.

“I wish you, my beloved friends, a very merry Christmas and a joyful season of helping others see and feel the light of Jesus Christ.”

President Russell M. Nelson, Facebook, Dec. 16, 2021, facebook.com/russell.m.nelson.

“This holiday season, lift your voices and fill your hearts with the joy and gratitude that Christ is the Prince of Peace. He lives, bringing light and life into the world. He is our Redeemer and our Savior at Christmas and always.”

Video: “This is the time to think about Jesus Christ. And show in our deeds and in our words that it is part of our life—that as He brings light and life into the world, that we try to do the same in our limited sphere of influence. And we need to lift our voices and fill our hearts with the joy and with the gratitude that Christ is the King of Peace, the Prince of Peace. Christ lives. He is real. He is our Redeemer at Christmas and always.”

Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf, Facebook, Dec. 11, 2022, facebook.com/dieterf.uchtdorf.

“Our scriptures speak of Jesus Christ as the light and life of the world.

“I share my conviction that as we go with haste to apply principles of peace and goodwill found in the gospel of Jesus Christ in our families, communities, congregations, and nations, that we can see miracles.”

Elder Quentin L. Cook, Facebook, Nov. 30, 2022, facebook.com/quentin.lcook.

“As Christians, members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints believe that all of us are children of a loving Father in Heaven and that Jesus Christ is His Only Begotten Son. Our scriptures speak of Jesus Christ as the light and life of the world. His light is the ‘true light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world’ (Doctrine and Covenants 93:2).

“May we all become points of light during this special season. Jesus Christ provided the light and perfect example. He devoted His life to the poor, the needy, the sick and the afflicted, and the successful completion of the eternal plan for which He alone was qualified. He is the light and has set the example for us. May we each have the Christmas spirit as we light the world with our love and goodwill.”

Elder Quentin L. Cook, Facebook, Dec. 19, 2022, facebook.com/quentin.lcook.

“Like the inhabitants of many countries, the COVID-19 pandemic has had a significant effect on those in Argentina and Chile. The emotional toll people still struggle with is evident.

“However, it’s becoming a brighter season for them. As I observed on my recent visit to Argentina and Chile, people are entering a new phase full of joy, service, and fellowship. There is power and enthusiasm behind this new direction. It is the light that comes from the Savior. His love and our faith can see us through even the darkest and loneliest times.”

Elder D. Todd Christofferson, Facebook, June 28, 2022, facebook.com/dtodd.christofferson.

“We celebrate the light and truth Jesus Christ brought into this world.

“Our quest in life is to seek for light and truth and receive the magnificent blessing of having Him walk with us, despite the darkness that exists in the world today. Throughout this wonderful time and the rest of the year as well, we should consider how light and truth help us walk with the Savior. Walking with Him is always the road best traveled.”

Elder Ulisses Soares, Facebook, Dec. 23, 2022, facebook.com/soares.u.

“Jesus Christ is the light of the world for all of God’s children. When we follow Him, His light brings peace and joy to each of us.”

Elder Ulisses Soares, Facebook, Nov. 16, 2022, facebook.com/soares.u.

“As mothers, and now grandmothers, we know the Christmas season can be a little chaotic. Sometimes it’s a season of joy and gathering, and sometimes it can be painful or difficult.

“No matter what your Christmas season feels like this year, we hope you can find time to #LightTheWorld by serving others together with your children or other loved ones. Whether the children in your life are toddlers or teenagers, they are willing and capable of making a difference! As we conscientiously serve with our children and loved ones, we will strengthen our relationships with each other, nurture learning as we try new things, and build unity and strength as we extend the Savior’s love to those around us. As we focus on Jesus Christ, our lives will be more filled with His light.

“Find a way to share kindness that works for your family and your situation. You don’t need to add anything to your to-do list. The Spirit will help you know how you can lift others together.”

President Susan H. Porter, Facebook, Dec. 11, 2022, facebook.com/PrimaryPresident.

“Christmastime is a beautiful season of light. This light shines on trees, homes, and most specifically in hearts. The light we see at Christmas symbolizes the Light of Christ. We can share this Light as we strive to serve one another.”

Sister Amy A. Wright, Facebook, Dec. 16, 2021, facebook.com/Primary2ndCounselor.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="157679241" id="aside1_p1">Note: At the time of this post, Sister Wright was the Second Counselor in the Primary General Presidency. She now serves as the First Counselor in the Primary General Presidency, and you can find her recent posts at <a href="https://www.facebook.com/Primary1stCounselor">facebook.com/Primary1stCounselor</a>.</p> [/SIDEBAR]
