A COLLECTION OF PASSAGES FROM "MORMON" WORKS, SETTING FORTH "MORMON"
VIEWS OF DEITY.

In this chapter I present a collection of "Mormon" utterances on the subject of Deity, of man, and of his relationship to God. They are selected from discourses and other writings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, from the Book of Mormon, the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price, some of the earlier Church publications, and last of all, I give, by permission, a recent discourse by President Joseph F. Smith. These utterances are arranged in an order, and with the view of establishing the fact that from the beginning of what the world calls "Mormonism," the views contended for in the body of this work, have been the doctrine of the Church.

The Father and the Son are Represented as Distinct Persons, and also as Being in the Form of Men, in the First Vision of the Prophet of the New Dispensation.

It is well known that while the Prophet Joseph Smith was a lad, but fourteen years of age, he became much exercised on the subject of religion, and very much perplexed in consequence of the division and strife existing among the religious sects, by which he was surrounded. And now his own account as to how he sought wisdom and obtained a very important revelation, in which he learned very important truths, both concerning God and the state of the religious world:

    In the midst of this war of words and tumult of opinions, I often
    said to myself: What is to be done? Who of all these parties are
    right; or, are they all wrong together? If any one of them be
    right, which is it, and how shall I know it? While I was laboring
    under the extreme difficulties caused by the contests of these
    parties of religionists, I was one day reading the Epistle of
    James, first chapter and fifth verse, which reads:

    If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all
    men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.

    Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the
    heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter
    with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on
    it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from
    God, I did; for how to act I did not know, and unless I could get
    more wisdom than I then had, I would never know; for the teachers
    of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of
    scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling
    the question by an appeal to the Bible.

    At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in
    darkness and confusion, or else I must do as James directs, that
    is, ask of God. I at length came to the determination to ask of
    God, concluding that if he gave wisdom to them that lacked wisdom,
    and would give liberally, and not upbraid, I might venture.

    So, in accordance with this, my determination to ask of God, I
    retired to the woods to make the attempt. It was on the morning of
    a beautiful clear day, early in the spring of eighteen hundred and
    twenty. It was the first time in my life that I had made such an
    attempt, for amidst all my anxieties, I had never as yet made the
    attempt to pray vocally.

    After I had retired to the place where I had previously designed to
    go, having looked around me, and finding myself alone, I kneeled
    down and began to offer up the desires of my heart to God. I had
    scarcely done so when immediately I was seized upon by some power
    which entirely overcame me, and had such an astonishing influence
    over me, as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick
    darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I
    were doomed to sudden destruction.

    But, exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out of
    the power of this enemy which had seized upon me; and at the very
    moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to
    destruction--not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some
    actual being from the unseen world, who had such marvelous power as
    I had never before felt in any being--just at this moment of great
    alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the
    brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon
    me. It no sooner appeared than I felt myself delivered from the
    enemy which held me bound.

    When the light rested upon me I saw two personages, whose
    brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in
    the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name, and said,
    pointing to the other: "This is my beloved Son, hear Him!"

    My object in going to enquire of the Lord, was to know, which,
    of all the sects, was right; that I might know which to join. No
    sooner, therefore, did I get possession of myself, so as to be able
    to speak, than I asked the personages who stood above me in the
    light, which of all the sects, was right--and which I should join.

    I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all
    wrong, and the personage who addressed me said that all their
    creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors were
    all corrupt; that they draw near to me with their lips, but their
    hearts are far from me; they teach for doctrines the commandments
    of men, having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof.

    He again forbade me to join with any of them; and many other things
    did he say unto me, which I cannot write at this time.[A]

Of the importance of this vision, and the effects growing out of it, I have elsewhere said:

First, it is a flat contradiction to the sectarian assumption that revelation had ceased; that God had no further communication to make to man.

Second, it reveals the errors into which men had fallen, concerning the personages of the Godhead. It makes it manifest that God is not an incorporeal being without form, or body, or parts; on the contrary he appeared to the Prophet in the form of a man, as he did to the ancient prophets. Thus, after centuries of controversy, the simple truth of the Scriptures, which teach that man was created in the likeness of God--hence God must be the same in form as man--was re-affirmed.

Third, it corrected the error of the theologians respecting the oneness of the persons of the Father and the Son. Instead of being one person, as the theologians teach, they are distinct in their personality; and there is a plurality of Gods, for the Father and the Son are two individuals, as much so as any father and son on earth; and the oneness of the Godhead referred to in the scriptures, must have reference to unity of purpose and of will; the mind of one being the mind of the other, and so as to will and other attributes. In other words, the oneness of the Godhead is a moral and spiritual union, not a physical one.

The announcement of these truths, coupled with that other truth proclaimed by the Son of God, viz: that none of the sects and churches of Christendom were acknowledged as the church or kingdom of God, furnish the elements for a religious revolution that will affect the very foundations of modern Christian theology. In a moment, all the rubbish concerning theology, which had accumulated through all the centuries since the gospel and authority to administer its ordinances had been taken from the earth, was grandly swept aside--the living rocks of truth were made bare upon which the Church of Christ was to be founded--a New Dispensation of the gospel was about to be committed to the earth--God had raised up a witness for himself among the children of men.[A]

THE DOCTRINE OF THE GODHEAD ACCORDING TO THE BOOK OF MORMON.

The Book of Mormon is not a formal treatise on the subject of theology. It is in the main an abridgment of ancient Nephite and Jaredite records, and recounts the hand-dealings of God with these ancient peoples. The existence of God it takes for granted, and, of course, since its revelations are local, that is, they pertain to this earth and its inhabitants only, it has reference to our Godhead alone. It makes reference, therefore, only to our God, and speaks of him in the singular number--as being one. But notwithstanding this, the three persons of the Godhead are frequently spoken of as being separate and distinct personalities, as the following passages will illustrate. A Nephite prophet, reasoning upon the subject of the resurrection and the restoration that will be brought about in connection therewith, says:

    But all things shall be restored to their perfect frame, as they
    are now, or in the body, and shall be brought and be arraigned
    before the bar of Christ the Son, and God the Father, and the Holy
    Spirit, which is one eternal God, to be judged according to their
    works, whether they be good or whether they be evil.[A]

Again, the Savior when instructing the Nephites in the manner of baptizing, said:

    And now behold, these are the words which ye shall say, calling
    them [those to be baptized] by name; saying: Having authority given
    me of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of
    the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. * * * And after this manner
    shall ye baptize in my name, for behold, verily I say unto you;
    that the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost are one; and I am
    in the Father, and the Father in me, and the Father and I are one.
    * * * * And this is my doctrine, and it is the doctrine which the
    Father hath given unto me; and I bear record of the Father, and the
    Father beareth record of me, and the Holy Ghost beareth record of
    the Father and me. * * * * This is my doctrine, and I bear record
    of it from the Father; and whoso believeth in me, believeth in the
    Father also, and unto him will the Father bear record of me; for he
    will visit him with fire, and with the Holy Ghost.[A]

Also the Prophet Mormon, speaking of the work of Christ, says:

    And he hath brought to pass the redemption of the world, whereby
    he that is found guiltless before him at the judgment day, hath it
    given unto him to dwell in the presence of God in his kingdom, to
    sing ceaseless praises with the choirs above, unto the Father and
    unto the Son, and unto the Holy Ghost, which are one God.[A]

Seeing, then, that reference is so frequently made to the members of the Godhead as separate and distinct persons, it is clear that the Book of Mormon is in harmony with the views contended for in the body of this work, as to the plurality of Gods, and the doctrine receives increased emphasis from other passages of the work. The Prophet Alma, for instance, says:

    He [God] gave commandments unto men, they having first transgressed
    the first commandments as to things which were temporal, and
    becoming as Gods, knowing good from evil, etc.[A]

Then again, the Savior when instructing the Nephite apostles, said to them:

    Ye shall be judges of this people, according to the judgment which
    I shall give unto you, which shall be just; therefore, what manner
    of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am. * * *
    * And ye shall sit down in the Kingdom of my Father; yea, your joy
    shall be full, even as the Father hath given me fullness of joy;
    and ye shall be even as lam, and I am even as the Father; and the
    Father and I are one.[A]

If the disciples became as Christ, and Christ, we are assured, is as the Father is, then these words of Jesus contemplate that these men will become as God now is, and hence Gods, and hence a plurality of Gods.

With reference to the form of God, the Book of Mormon has two very important and very emphatic passages on the subject. The first Nephi, in a great vision given to him of the future, was attended by a spirit who gave him explanations, as the several parts of his vision passed before him. And now Nephi's account:

    And it came to pass that the Spirit said unto me, Look! and I
    looked, and beheld a tree; * * * * and the beauty thereof was
    far beyond, yea, exceeding all beauty, and the whiteness thereof
    did exceed the whiteness of the driven snow. And it came to pass
    after I had seen the tree, I said unto the Spirit: I behold thou
    hast shown unto me the tree which is precious above all. And he
    said unto me: What desirest thou? And I said unto him: To know the
    interpretation thereof; for I spake unto him as a man speaketh;
    for I beheld that he was in the form of a man; yet, nevertheless, I
    knew that it was the Spirit of the Lord; and he spake unto me as a
    man speaketh with another.[A]

The second passage alluded to is found in the book of Ether. The Prophet Moriancumr, the brother of Jared, when about to depart with his colony in barges across the great deep, had prepared certain stones which he prayed the Lord to make luminous, that they might have light in the barges while on their journey. He had approached the Lord with great faith, and expressed full confidence in the power of God to do the thing for which he prayed; and now the Book of Mormon statement of the matter:

    And it came to pass that when the brother of Jared had said these
    words, behold the Lord stretched forth his hand and touched the
    stones, one by one with his finger; and the vail was taken from
    off the eyes of the brother of Jared, and he saw the finger of
    the Lord; and it was as the finger of a man, like unto flesh and
    blood; and the brother of Jared fell down before the Lord, for he
    was struck with fear. * * * * And the Lord said unto him, arise,
    why hast thou fallen? And he said unto the Lord, I saw the finger
    of the Lord, and I feared lest he should smite me; for I knew not
    that the Lord had flesh and blood. And the Lord said unto him,
    Because of thy faith thou hast seen that I shall take upon me flesh
    and blood; and never has man come before me with such exceeding
    faith as thou hast; for were it not so, you could not have seen
    my finger. * * * * And when he had said these words, behold, the
    Lord shewed himself unto, him, and said, Because thou knowest these
    things, you are redeemed from the fall; therefore you are brought
    back into my presence; therefore I shew myself unto you. Behold, I
    am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem
    my people. Behold, I am Christ. I am the Father and the Son.[A]
    In me shall all mankind have light, and that eternally, even they
    who shall believe on my name; and they shall become my sons and my
    daughters. And never have I shewed myself unto, man whom I have
    created, for never has man believed in me as thou hast. Seest thou
    that thou art created after mine own image? Yea, even all men were
    created in the beginning, after mine own image. Behold, this body,
    which you now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I
    created after the body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee
    to be in the spirit, will I appear unto my people in the flesh.[B]

From this it will be seen that the Book of Mormon is in harmony with the Bible's plain anthropomorphism; as also the one is in harmony with the other in affirming the necessary plurality of Gods.

THE DOCTRINES OF THE GODHEAD AND MAN ACCORDING TO THE BOOK OF
ABRAHAM.

The book of Abraham came into the hands of the Prophet Joseph Smith in the form of Egyptian papyrus, in the summer of 1835. The following winter in his history the Prophet frequently speaks of working upon the translation of this ancient record. The translation was not completed and published, however, until March, 1842, at Nauvoo, when it appeared in the Times and Seasons, numbers 9 and 10, Vol. III. In his writings and teachings the Prophet frequently refers to this ancient record with every mark of approval. In the first publication of the work the introductory heading declared it to be "the Book of Abraham, written by his own hand upon papyrus." It will be understood, then, that its doctrines are those of the great prophet-patriarch, Abraham. The book gives an account of the call of Abraham from Ur of the Chaldees and his sojourn and adventures in Egypt. The extracts from it here given deal with the revelations of God to the patriarch concerning the planetary system, pre-existence and nature of man, and the creation of the earth by the Gods--for Abraham throughout his account of creation uses the plural, "the Gods said let there be light;" "the Gods said let us make man in our image," etc., etc., hence it is clear that the doctrine of the plurality of Gods was plainly taught through this sacred scripture in the days of Joseph Smith, for he translated it, and it was published by him in the Times and Seasons while he was the editor of that journal. And now a few extracts from the book itself:

    And I, Abraham, had the Urim and Thummim, which the Lord my God
    had given unto me, in Ur of the Chaldees; and I saw the stars,
    that they were very great, and that one of them was nearest unto
    the throne of God; and there were many great ones which were near
    unto it; and the Lord said unto me: These are the governing ones;
    and the name of the great one is Kolob, because it is near unto
    me, for I am the Lord thy God: and I have set this one to govern
    all those which belong to the same order as that upon which thou
    standest. And the Lord said unto me, by the Urim and Thummim, that
    Kolob was after the manner of the Lord, according to its times
    and seasons in the revolutions thereof; that one revolution was
    a day unto the Lord, after his manner of reckoning, it being one
    thousand years according to the time appointed unto that whereon
    thou standest. This is the reckoning of the Lord's time, according
    to the reckoning of Kolob. * * * *

    And the Lord said unto me: Now, Abraham, these two facts exist,
    behold thine eyes see it; it is given unto thee to know the times
    of reckoning, and the set time, yea, the set time of the earth upon
    which thou standest, and the set time of the greater light which
    is set to rule the day, and the set time of the lesser light which
    is set to rule the night. Now the set time of the lesser light is
    a longer time as to its reckoning than the reckoning of the time
    of the earth upon which thou standest. And where these two facts
    exist, there shall be another fact above them, that is, there shall
    be another planet whose reckoning of time shall be longer still;
    and thus there shall be the reckoning of the time of one planet
    above another, until thou come nigh unto Kolob, which Kolob is
    after the reckoning of the Lord's time, which Kolob is set nigh
    unto the throne of God, to govern all those planets which belong to
    the same order as that upon which thou standest. And it is given
    unto thee to know the set time of all the stars that are set to
    give light, until thou come near unto the throne of God. Thus I,
    Abraham, talked with the Lord face to face, as one man talketh with
    another; and he told me of the works which his hands had made: and
    he said unto me: My son, my son, (and his hand was stretched out,)
    behold I will show you all these. And he put his hand upon mine
    eyes, and I saw those things which his hand had made, which were
    many; and they multiplied before mine eyes, and I could not see the
    end thereof.

    * * * *

    And it was in the night time when the Lord spake these words unto
    me: I will multiply thee, and thy seed after thee, like unto these;
    and if thou canst count the number of sands, so shall be the number
    of thy seeds. And the Lord said unto me: Abraham, I show these
    things unto thee before ye go into Egypt, that ye may declare
    all these words. If two things exist, and there be one above the
    other, there shall be greater things above them; therefore Kolob
    is the greatest of all the Kokaubeam (stars) that thou hast seen,
    because it is nearest unto me. Now, if there be two things, one
    above the other, and the moon be above the earth, then it may be
    that a planet or star may exist above it; * * * as, also, if there
    be two spirits, and one shall be more intelligent than the other,
    yet these two spirits, notwithstanding one is more intelligent than
    the other, have no beginning; they existed before, they shall have
    no end, they shall exist after, for they are gnolaum, or eternal.
    And the Lord said unto me: These two facts do exist, that there are
    two spirits, one being more intelligent than the other; there shall
    be another more intelligent than they; I am the Lord thy God, I am
    more intelligent than them all. * * * *

    I dwell in the midst of them all; I now, therefore, have come down
    unto thee to deliver unto thee the works which my hands have made,
    wherein my wisdom excelleth them all, for I rule in the heavens
    above, and in the earth beneath, in all wisdom and prudence, over
    all the intelligences thine eyes have seen from the beginning; I
    came down in the beginning in the midst of all the intelligences
    thou hast seen.

    Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that
    were organized before the world was; and among all these there were
    many of the noble and great ones; and God saw these souls that they
    were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I
    will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits,
    and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou
    art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born. And there
    stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those
    who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there,
    and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth
    whereupon these may dwell; and we will prove them herewith, to see
    if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall
    command them; and they who keep their first estate shall be added
    upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory
    in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and
    they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their
    heads for ever and ever. And the Lord said: Whom shall I send? And
    one answered like unto the Son of Man: Here am I, send me. And
    another answered and said: Here am I, send me. And the Lord said:
    I will send the first. And the second was angry, and kept not his
    first estate; and, at that day, many followed after him. And then
    the Lord said: Let us go down. And they went down at the beginning,
    and they, that is, the Gods, organized and formed the heavens
    and the earth. And the earth, after it was formed, was empty and
    desolate, because they had not formed anything but the earth; and
    darkness reigned upon the face of the deep, and the Spirit of the
    Gods was brooding upon the face of the waters. And they (the Gods)
    said: Let there be light; and there was light. And they (the Gods)
    comprehended the light, for it was bright; and they divided the
    light, or caused it to be divided, from the darkness. And the Gods
    called the light Day, and the darkness they called Night, And it
    came to pass that from the evening until morning they called night;
    and from the morning until the evening they called day; and this
    was the first, or the beginning, of that which they called day and
    night. And the Gods also said: Let there be an expanse in the midst
    of the waters, and it shall divide the waters from the waters.
    And the Gods ordained the expanse, so that it divided the waters
    which were under the expanse from the waters which were above the
    expanse; and it was so, even as they ordained. (Pearl of Great
    Price, pp. 60-67.)

And thus the account of creation proceeds throughout the seven periods thereof, and it is always the Gods did this or that until the whole work of creation was prepared for man.

THE GODHEAD ACCORDING TO THE DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS.

The book of Doctrine and Covenants in the main is a collection of revelations given through the Prophet Joseph Smith. It is not a formal treatise upon theology. This collection of revelations assumes the existence of God, and only incidentally treats of His being and attributes. And since the revelations pertain to our earth, and its heavens, and our God, the singular number is used in speaking of God; and yet in these revelations the persons of the Godhead are spoken of as being distinct from one another in the sense of being separate and distinct individuals, as the following passages illustrate:

    There is a God in heaven, who is infinite and eternal, from
    everlasting to everlasting, the same unchangeable God, the framer
    of heaven and earth, and all things which are in them; and that
    he created man, male and female, after his own image and his own
    likeness, created he them and gave unto them commandments that they
    should love and serve him, the only living and true God, and that
    he should be the only being whom they should worship. But by the
    transgression of these holy laws, man became sensual and devilish,
    and became fallen man. Wherefore the Almighty God gave his Only
    Begotten Son, as it is written in those scriptures which have
    been given of him. He suffered temptations but gave no heed unto
    them; he was crucified, died, and rose again the third day; and
    ascended into heaven, to sit down on the right hand of the Father,
    to reign with almighty power according to the will of the Father,
    that as many as would believe and be baptized in his holy name, and
    endure in faith to the end, should be saved; not only those who
    believed after he came in the meridian of time, in the flesh, but
    all those from the beginning, even as many as were before he came,
    who believed in the words of the holy prophets, who spake as they
    were inspired by the gift of the Holy Ghost, who truly testified of
    him in all things, should have eternal life, as well as those who
    should come after, who should believe in the gifts and callings of
    God by the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of the Father, and of
    the Son; which Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one God, infinite
    and eternal, without end. Amen.[A]

So also in section ninety-three the distinction between Father and Son and Holy Spirit is clearly made; and man declared to be of the same race with God. Indeed one may say that the supposed gulf of separation is swept away; that on the one hand the divinity of man is proclaimed, and on the other, the humanity of God. That is, there is identity of race between Gods and men; though man is now in a fallen state, working upward towards God, through the plan of redemption in Christ Jesus:

    Every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth
    on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments,
    shall see my face and know that I am, and that I am the true light
    that lighteth every man that cometh into the world; and that I am
    in the Father, and the Father in me, and the Father and I are one:
    the Father because he gave me of his fullness, and the Son because
    I was in the world and made flesh my tabernacle, and dwelt among
    the sons of men. I was in the world and received of my Father,
    and the works of him were plainly manifest; and John saw and bore
    record of the fullness of my glory, and the fullness of John's
    record is hereafter to be revealed: and he bore record, saying, I
    saw his glory that he was in the beginning before the world was;
    therefore in the beginning the Word was, for he was the Word, even
    the messenger of salvation the light and the Redeemer of the world;
    the Spirit of truth, who came into the world, because the world was
    made by him, and in him was the life of men and the light of men.
    The worlds were made by him; men were made by him: all things were
    made by him, and through him, and of him. And I, John, bear record
    that I beheld his glory, as the glory of the Only Begotten of the
    Father, full of grace and truth, even the Spirit of truth, which
    came and dwelt in the flesh, and dwelt among us. And I, John, saw
    that he received not of the fullness at the first, but received
    grace for grace: and he received not of the fullness at first,
    but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fullness;
    and thus he was called the Son of God, because he received not of
    the fullness at the first. And I, John, bear record, and lo, the
    heavens were opened, and the Holy Ghost descended upon him in the
    form of a dove, and sat upon him, and there came a voice out of
    heaven saying, This is my beloved Son. And I, John, bear record
    that he received a fullness of the glory of the Father; and he
    received all power, both in heaven and on earth, and the glory of
    the Father was with him, for he dwelt in him. * * * And I give unto
    you these sayings that ye may understand and know how to worship,
    and know what you worship, that you may come unto the Father in
    my name, and in due time receive of his fullness. * * * And now,
    verily I say unto you, I was in the beginning with the Father, and
    am the first-born. * * * Ye were also in the beginning with the
    Father; that which is Spirit, even the Spirit of truth. * * * Man
    was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of
    truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be. All truth is
    independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for
    itself, as all intelligence also, otherwise there is no existence.
    Behold, here, is the agency of man, and here is the condemnation
    of man, because that which was from the beginning is plainly
    manifest unto them, and they receive not the light. And every
    man whose spirit receiveth not the light is under condemnation,
    for man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and
    element, inseparably connected, receive a fullness of joy; and
    when separated, man cannot receive a fullness of joy. The elements
    are the tabernacle of God; yea man is the tabernacle of God, even
    temples; and whatsoever temple is defiled, God shall destroy that
    temple.[A]

Again:

    The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the
    Son also: but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but
    is a personage of Spirit. Were it not so, the Holy Ghost could not
    dwell in us.[A]

Since then there is in these revelations, a recognition of the distinction between the persons of the Godhead, it is clear that the doctrine of a plurality of Gods is recognized. It is also incidentally recognized in other passages of the Doctrine and Covenants. In section seventy-six, where a description is given of the blessedness of those who believe and obey the gospel, it is said:

    They are they who are the church of the first born. They are they
    into whose hands the Father has given all things. They are they
    who are Priests and Kings, who have received of his fullness, and
    of his glory, and are Priests of the Most High, after the order of
    Melchizedek, which was after the order of Enoch, which was after
    the order of the Only Begotten Son; wherefore, as it is written,
    they are Gods, even the sons of God--wherefore all things are
    theirs; whether life or death, or things present, or things to
    come, all are theirs and they are Christ's and Christ is God's.[A]

The revelation in which the above passage appears was first published in the Evening and Morning Star, July, 1832. Again, in a prayer and prophecy written by Joseph Smith while in Liberty prison, March, 1839, in the course of describing the power and glory and blessedness to be revealed in the dispensation of the Fullness of Times, the prophet declares that all things shall be made known--

    According to that which was ordained in the midst of the Council
    of the Eternal God of all other Gods, before this world was.[A]

Again, in speaking of those who fall short of complete obedience to the fullness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and describing their limitations the Prophet says:

    From henceforth they are not Gods, but are angels of God, forever
    and ever.[A]

On the other hand he declares that all those who obey the fullness of the gospel--

    Shall pass by the angels, and the Gods, * * * to their exaltation
    and glory in all things. * * * Then shall they be Gods, because
    they have no end; therefore shall they be from everlasting to
    everlasting, because they continue; then shall they be above all,
    because all things are subject unto them. Then shall they be
    Gods, because they have all power, and the angels are subject unto
    them.[A]

Thus the revelations of God to the Church from the earliest times, and now collected in the Doctrine and Covenants, teach that men and Gods are identical in race, and that there is a plurality of Gods.

THE "MORMON" DOCTRINE OF DEITY AS SET FORTH IN THE DISCOURSES OF THE
PROPHET JOSEPH SMITH AND EARLY CHURCH PUBLICATIONS.

From the King Follett Sermon, April 7, 1844.[A]

    It is necessary for us to have an understanding of God himself in
    the beginning.

    * * * *

    There are but a very few beings in the world who understand
    rightly the character of God. The great majority of mankind do not
    comprehend anything, either that which is past, or that which is to
    come, as respects their relationship to God.

    * * * *

    If men do not comprehend the character of God, they do not
    comprehend themselves.

    * * * *

    What sort of a being was God in the beginning? Open your ears and
    hear, all ye ends of the earth. * * * God himself was once as
    we are now, and is an exalted Man, and sits enthroned in yonder
    heavens! That is the great secret. If the vail was rent today, and
    the great God who holds this world in its orbit; and who upholds
    all worlds and all things by his power, was to make himself
    visible--I say, if you were to see him today, you would see him
    like a man in form--like yourselves, in all the person, image,
    and very form as a man; for Adam was created in the very fashion,
    image, and likeness of God, and received instructions from, and
    walked, talked, and conversed with him, as one man talks and
    communes with another.

    * * * *

    It is necessary we should understand the character and being of
    God, and how he came to be so; for I am going to tell you how God
    came to be God. We have imagined and supposed that God was God from
    all eternity. I will refute that idea, and will take away the vail,
    so that you may see. * * * It is the first principle of the gospel
    to know for a certainty the character of God, and to know that we
    may converse with him as one man converses with another, and that
    he was once a man like us; yea, that God himself, the Father of us
    all, dwelt on an earth, the same as Jesus Christ himself did.

    * * * *

    The scriptures inform us that Jesus said, "As the Father hath power
    in himself, even so hath the Son power"--to do what? Why, what the
    Father did. The answer is obvious--in a manner to lay down his body
    and take it up again. Jesus, what are you going to do? To lay down
    my life, as my Father did, and take it up again. Do you believe it?
    If you do not believe it, you do not believe the Bible.[A]

    * * * *

 doeth, these also the Son doeth likewise" (St. John 5:19).

    Here, then, is eternal life: to know the only wise and true God;
    and you have got to learn how to be Gods yourselves, and to be
    kings and priests to God, the same as all Gods have done before
    you--namely, by going from one small degree to another, and from a
    small capacity to a great one; from grace to grace, from exaltation
    to exaltation, until you attain to the resurrection of the dead,
    and are able to dwell in everlasting burnings, and to sit in glory,
    as do those who sit enthroned in everlasting power.

    * * * *

    How consoling to the mourners when they are called to part with
    a husband, wife, father, mother, child or dear relative, to know
    that although the earthly tabernacle is laid down and dissolved,
    they shall rise again to dwell in everlasting burnings, in immortal
    glory, not to sorrow, suffer, or die any more; but they shall be
    heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ. What is it? [i. e.,
    to be joint heirs with Jesus Christ]. To inherit the same power,
    the same glory, and the same exaltation, until you arrive at the
    station of a God and ascend the throne of eternal power, the same
    as those who have gone before. What did Jesus do? Why, I do the
    things I saw my Father do when worlds came rolling into existence.
    My Father worked out his kingdom with fear and trembling, and I
    must do the same; and when I get my kingdom, I shall present it to
    my Father, so that he may obtain kingdom upon kingdom, and it will
    exalt him in glory. He will then take a higher exaltation, and I
    will take his place, and thereby become exalted myself. So that
    Jesus treads in the tracks of his Father, and inherits what God did
    before; and God is thus glorified and exalted in the salvation and
    exaltation of all his children. It is plain beyond disputation, and
    you thus learn some of the first principles of the gospel, about
    which so much has been said.

    * * * *

    When you climb up a ladder, you must begin at the bottom, and
    ascend step by step, until you arrive at the top; and so it is
    with the principles of the gospel--you must begin with the first,
    and go on until you learn all the principles of exaltation. But
    it will be a great while after you have passed through the vail
    before you will have learned them. It is not all to be comprehended
    in this world: it will be a great work to learn our salvation and
    exaltation, even beyond the grave.

    * * * *

    I shall comment on the very first Hebrew word in the Bible; I
    will make a comment on the very first sentence of the history
    of the creation in the Bible. Berosheit: I want to analyze
    the word. Baith--in, by, through, etc. Rosh--the head.
    Sheit--grammatical termination. When the inspired man wrote it,
    he did not put the bath there. A Jew, without any authority, added
    the word: he thought it too bad to begin to talk about the head!
    It read at first, "The head one of the Gods brought forth the
    Gods." That is the true meaning of the words. Baurau signifies
    to bring forth. If you do not believe it, you do not believe the
    learned man of God. * * * Thus the head God brought forth the
    Gods in the grand council. * * * The head God called together the
    Gods, and sat in grand council to bring forth the world. The grand
    Councilors sat at the head in yonder heavens, and contemplated the
    creation of the worlds which were created at that time. * * * In
    the beginning, the head of the Gods called a council of the Gods,
    and they came together and concocted a plan to create the world and
    people it.

    * * * *

From the Discourse of June 16, 1844.[A]

 a plurality of Gods. * * *
    Berosheit baurau Eloheim ait aushamayeen vehau auraits, rendered
    by King James' translators, "In the beginning God created the
    heavens and the earth." I want to analyze the word Berosheit:
    Rosh, the head; Sheit, a grammatical termination. The Baith
    was not originally put there when the inspired man wrote it, but
    it has been since added by a Jew. Baurau signifies to bring
    forth; Eloheim is from the word, Eloi, God, in the singular
    number; and by adding the word heim, it renders it Gods. It read
    first--"In the beginning the head of the Gods brought forth the
    Gods," or, as others have translated it--"The head of the Gods
    called the Gods together."

    * * * *

    The head God organized the heavens and the earth. * * * In the
    beginning the heads of the Gods organized the heavens and the
    earth. * * * * If we pursue the Hebrew text further it reads
    Berosheit baurau Eloheim ait aushamayeen vehau auraits.-"The head
    one of the Gods said, Let us make man in our own image." I once
    asked a learned Jew if the Hebrew language compels us to render
    all words ending in heim in the plural, why not render the first,
    Eloheim, plural? He replied, That is the rule with few exceptions;
    but in this case it would ruin the Bible. He acknowledged I was
    right.

    * * * *

    In the very beginning the Bible shows there is a plurality of Gods
    beyond the power of refutation. * * * The word Eloheim ought to
    be in the plural all the way through--Gods. The head of the Gods
    appointed one God for us; and when you take a [this] view of the
    subject, it sets one free to see all the beauty, holiness, and
    perfection of all the Gods.

    Many men say there is one God; the Father, the Son, and the Holy
    Ghost are only one God! I say that is a strange God, three in one,
    and one in three! It is a curious organization. "Father, I pray not
    for the world; but I pray for them which thou hast given me." * * *
    * I want to read the text to you myself--"Holy Father, keep through
    thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one,
    as we are." I am agreed with the Father and the Father is agreed
    with me, and we are agreed as one. The Greek shows that it should
    be agreed.

    "Father, I pray for them which thou hast given me out of the world,
    and not for these alone, but for them also which shall believe
    on me through their word, that they may all be agreed, as thou,
    Father, art agreed with me, and I with thee, that they also may be
    agreed with us," and all come to dwell in unity, and in all the
    glory and everlasting burnings of the Gods; and then we shall see
    as we are seen, and be as our God, and he is as his Father.

    * * * *

    I want to reason a little on this subject. I learned it by
    translating the [Egyptian] papyrus which is now in my house. I
    learned a testimony concerning Abraham, and he reasoned concerning
    the God of heaven. "In order to do that," said he, "suppose we
    have two facts: that supposes another fact may exist--two men on
    the earth, one wiser than the other, would logically show that
    another who is wiser than the wisest may exist. Intelligences
    exist one above another, so that there is no end to them." If
    Abraham reasoned thus--If Jesus Christ was the Son of God, and John
    discovered that God, the Father of Jesus Christ, had a Father, you
    may suppose that he had a Father also. Where was there ever a
    son without a father? And where was there ever a father without
    first being a son? Whenever did a tree or anything spring into
    existence without a progenitor? And everything comes in this way:
    Paul says that which is earthly is in the likeness of that which
    is heavenly. Hence, if Jesus had a Father, can we not believe that
    he [that Father] had a Father also? I despise the idea of being
    scared to death at such doctrine, for the Bible is full of it. * *
    * Jesus said that the Father wrought precisely in the same way as
    his Father had done before him. As the Father had done before, he
    laid down his life, and took it up the same as his Father had done
    before [him].

    * * * *

    They found fault with Jesus Christ because he said he was the Son
    of God, and made himself equal with God. * * * What did Jesus say,
    "Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are Gods? If he called
    them Gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the Scriptures
    cannot be broken, say ye of him whom the Father has sanctified and
    sent into the world, Thou blasphemest, because I said I am the Son
    of God?" It was through him that they drank of the spiritual rock.
    * * * * Jesus, if they were called Gods unto whom the word of God
    came, why should it be thought blasphemy that I should say I am the
    Son of God?

    * * * *

    They who obtain a glorious resurrection from the dead are exalted
    far above principalities, powers, thrones, dominions, and angels,
    and are expressly declared to be heirs of God and joint heirs
    with Jesus Christ, all having eternal power. The Scriptures are a
    mixture of very strange doctrines to the Christian world, who are
    blindly led by the blind. I will refer to another Scripture. "Now,"
    says God, when he visited Moses in the bush, * * * "Thou shalt be
    a God unto the children of Israel." God said: "Thou shalt be a God
    unto Aaron, and he shall be thy spokesman." I believe those Gods
    that God reveals as Gods, to be sons of God, and all can cry Abba,
    Father! Sons of God who exalt themselves to be Gods, even from
    before the foundation of the world, and are the only Gods I have a
    reverence for. John said he was a king. "And from Jesus Christ, who
    is the faithful witness, and the first begotten of the dead, and
    the Prince of the kings of the earth. Unto him that loved us, and
    washed us from our sins in his own blood, and hath made us kings
    and priests unto God and his Father; to him be glory and dominion
    forever and ever. Amen." O thou God who art King of kings and Lord
    of lords, the sectarian world, by their actions, declare--"We
    cannot believe thee."

USE OF THE WORD ELOHIM.[A]

BY PROFESSOR W. H. CHAMBERLIN, OF THE BRIGHAM YOUNG COLLEGE, LOGAN,
UTAH.

Two words, El, of which Elim was the plural form, and Eloah, of which Elohim was the plural, were applied generally to Deity by the Hebrew people. All these forms are found in the other Semitic languages, and are, therefore, very ancient in origin.

Under severest discipline the people of Israel were educated in the school of monotheism, in order that God's nature might be revealed to man, and in order that unity might be introduced into the moral life of man. Under this discipline, the people of Israel must have learned to apply the plural form Elohim, which their fathers had used of Deity, in speaking of the one God whom they had been taught to serve.

The Hebrew language would allow them to do this, for a few nouns, when used by them in the plural, seemed to magnify the original idea. In such cases the plural form was treated grammatically as singular. An example may be found in Job 40:15, where the plural form behemoth is used to intensify the image of the animal there being described, as is shown by context. In the same verse, the behemoth is referred to by the singular pronoun he.

But the use of Elohim, in this sense, by the later writers of Israel, is not necessarily opposed to the view that in the earliest documents or writings which the Hebrews possessed, it was applied to a plurality of Gods.

The objection to this view has been made that, with the plural form Elohim, in Gen. 1, the singular verb is used. Such a use of a singular predicate with a plural subject is, however, common in Hebrew. On page 111 of Harper's Hebrew Syntax we find the following rule covering the case, viz: "When the predicate precedes the subject it may agree with the subject in number or it may assume the primary form, viz.: third masculine singular, whatever be the number of the following subject." So the plural form Elohim after a singular verb, the construction found in Gen. i, and elsewhere, is no proof that it is singular in any sense. Similar constructions are found with other words in Gen. i:14, where the singular of the verb haya, be, is followed by the plural noun meoroth, lights; in Gen. 41:50, where the singular verb yullodh, was born, is followed by the plural noun sheney banim, two sons; in Job 42:15, where the singular verb nimtsa, was found, is followed by the plural noun nashim, women. Many similar examples might be given to illustrate the rule.

That Elohim was used in the plural sense in Gen. 1, is shown in the 26th verse, where the Elohim in referring to themselves use the plural suffix, nu, our, twice; and they also use the plural form of the verb naaseh, let us make. Also in Gen. 11:7, where nerdhah, let us descend, and nabhlah, let us confuse, two verbs in the plural form, proceed from the mouth of God, In Gen 3:5. the plural construct participle, yodhe, knowers of, modifies the noun, Elohim, which therefore is also plural. It is just possible that this participle is predicated of the subject you, but the participle would then follow the finite verb, giving a very unusual construction for the early Hebrew writers. One such construction is, however, found in Gen. 4:17, "he became (one) building a city."

The thought of the possibility of God's having with him great associates was alive even to the time of Isaiah, as is shown in Isaiah 6:8, where Jehovah said, "Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?" Jehovah was a personal name applied to the Being who guided Israel, and afterwards lived on the earth as Jesus Christ. (III Nephi, 15:5, Doc. and Cov. sec. 110.) Probably few of the Jews were ever able to distinguish Jehovah from Elohim, as it was latterly used, i. e., in the singular sense, and so when late writers wrote down the portion of Genesis where the name of Jehovah began to be used, they placed next to it, for the same purpose for which we now place the marginal reading, the word Elohim. So we have in Gen. 2:4; 3:24, and in some other places, the expression Jehovah Elohim, translated the Lord God. The words were put together late in Israel's history when Elohim had come to be used in the singular; Jehovah Elohim meant Jehovah, i. e., God. Later the explanatory use of the word Elohim was forgotten, and the two words combined to apply to God. (f Brown's Hebrew Lexicon, the most authoritative lexicon in English, for the above explanation.)

The use of the singular noun Eloah is almost confined to poetry. It is used in Psalm 18 and in Deut. 32. There is ground for saying that the Savior on the cross in crying out to his Father, used the singular form Eloah. In combining Eloah with the suffix i, meaning my, and expressing the result in Greek the h would be dropped, for there is no letter h in the Greek alphabet. A, which was merely introduced to assist the Hebrew to pronounce the h, would also be dropped. The result would give us Eloi, the form given in the basic gospel, in Mark 15:34. (See also Judges 5:5, of the Septuagint).

In the year 1830, we find Joseph Smith, in the face of the tradition of the whole world, daring to render the word Elohim in Gen i, et seq., in the plural. It is one great evidence of the divinity of the Church of Jesus Christ restored in these last days that its prophet said many things, in the day in which he lived, that a progressive people are beginning to appreciate as true; and so we find learned men sympathizing with the daring position taken above. With reference to Gen. 1:26, and similar passages, we find as one explanation in the lexicon mentioned above, a lexicon based on the work of Gesenius, the great German Hebrew scholar, that God was in consultation with angels. Now, since the term "angel," a term used loosely by the scholars, is made there to mean and refer to superhuman beings sufficiently advanced in intelligence to be included in a consultation with God, we have our prophet's explanation exactly. In conclusion I shall quote the words of the great Biblical scholar, the Rev. A. B. Davidson of Edinburgh, in explanation of the same: "The use of 'us' by the divine speaker (Gen. 1:26, 3:22, 11:17) is strange, but is perhaps due to his consciousness of being surrounded by other beings of a loftier order than men (Is. 5:8)." (See Hasting's Dictionary of the Bible, page 205.)

OMNIPRESENCE OF GOD.[A]

BY ELDER WILLIAM HENRY WHITTALL.

In comparing the ideas of others with our own upon any subject, with a view of coming to a clear understanding and just conclusion on the points discussed, it is both important and necessary that a clear definition of terms be given and received. Most of the disputes which arise in all classes of society, religious and secular, would be avoided to a great extent, if the disputants clearly understood and attended to each other's terms, and clearly defined their own.

Words are frequently used in such different sense--sometimes primary, and sometimes secondary--sometimes literal, and sometimes figurative, that a misconception is often likely to arise, which might be easily prevented, were a plain definition of terms given at the outset. Opposite parties are too apt to place their own constructions on each other's expressions.

"Omnipresence" as all will admit means presence everywhere.

Now, strictly speaking, matter, in its most extensive and comprehensive sense, is the only thing that can be said to be literally everywhere. There are various kinds and degrees of matter; but matter as a whole, and in a general sense, is the only thing that we can conceive of as being everywhere present, and nowhere absent.

One reservation, however, must here be made, for the sake of scientific accuracy,--namely, that wherever matter exists and moves, there is of necessity a corresponding or proportionate extent of space wherein to move.

There is no such thing, however, in all the creations of God, as what is called empty space.

But this fact does not in the least affect our argument; for the motion of matter is merely the displacement of one thing by another--one particle occupying the space which had been previously occupied by another. Thus, if I thrust my hand into a mass of sand, I do not penetrate the grains of sand, (although I do penetrate the sand as a mass,) the hand merely going between, or making its way by displacing the grains with which it comes in contact. No particle of matter can occupy the same identical space as another at the same time; consequently, no portion of matter can in an exclusive and strictly literal sense be omnipresent.

The nearest approach to a literal omnipresence, that we can conceive of, is that of the particles of one kind and degree of matter commingling with those of another.

The following may serve as a simple illustration: In a homely cup of tea, we find the particles of the tea itself intimately mingling with those of the water; those of the sugar mingling with those of the other two elements; and then, again, there are the particles of caloric or heat everywhere present throughout the whole. Yet no one particle of either water, (itself a compound of gases), or tea, or sugar, or cream, can occupy the same space as any other particle. This simple illustration, however homely and commonplace, may serve as an example, on a small scale, of the nearest idea that can be formed of a literal omnipresence, or presence everywhere. The plainer the simile, the better for ease and clearness of thought.

We have now to define what we mean by the term "God."

This word, like many others, is frequently used to represent different ideas. We sometimes employ it in reference to Deity as a person. One of the old prophets saw God sitting on a throne. Of course, then, according to this personal sense of the word, God could not have been everywhere present; for he was on a throne. We often read of God as sitting down, standing up, walking about, &c. Now, a person, when sitting down, does not occupy the same space as when standing up. He always occupies the same amount of space, but no more, whatever posture he may place himself in, or however much he may change his relative positions by moving hither and thither.

Hence it is utterly impossible for God to be personally omnipresent.

But we sometimes speak of God in reference to his attributes of love, wisdom, goodness, influence, power, authority, &c.

The next question, then, is, Can he be said to be omnipresent in these respects?

Yes, undoubtedly so; but not literally.

As these are all abstract terms, it is evident that they cannot be used in a strictly literal sense. Love, power, goodness, wisdom, &c., are not things which occupy space. We cannot measure knowledge by the yard, wisdom by the pint, influence by the inch, or power by the gallon. We cannot speak of authority as occupying so many square or cubic feet of space, or describe the height, depth, length, or width of intelligence or faith. These are all abstract terms; and in describing the extent of any attribute of God or man, we are bound to speak figuratively. We thus speak of "infinite power," of "boundless love," of "illimitable wisdom," of "unbounded influence," of "unlimited authority," of "infinite goodness," &c. If we examine such expressions closely, we cannot but see that they are used in a relative and figurative sense, and not in a strictly literal one. We cannot find room for all these things everywhere. If one thing occupied all space literally, we certainly could not locate half a dozen everywhere! The absurdity of the thing only proves the fallacy of the idea of literal ubiquity in reference to any attribute, the terms, expressive of which cannot be literalized.

But again: We often speak of God in reference to his agents. For example, the Apostle Paul says, "No man taketh this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron." Moses, who called and ordained Aaron, was God's agent. All the servants of the Lord are called by his agents acting in his name and by his authority. When a man is called and ordained to certain functions of the Priesthood, we say that God called him, and that he is a servant of God. Thus, in a relative sense, God may be and is said to be present where he is personally absent, just as her Majesty the Queen may be said to be present throughout all her dominions by her official and representative agents. She is not literally, but virtually or officially, representatively or vicariously present wherever her regal authority is swayed. It is not actually she who is present, but her agents or authorities, who act in her name in her various principalities and colonies.

Again: We often use the term "God" in reference to his Spirit, whereby he is said to be omnipresent.

But we also frequently use the term "Spirit" in more sense than one. Sometimes we speak of the Holy Spirit or Holy Ghost as a person. The Father, the Son, and the Spirit are three distinct persons,--the first two being personages of tabernacle, and the last a personage of spirit. In this sense the Spirit can be no more spatially extended, and no more omnipresent, than the Father or the Son. If, indeed, either of the three could be personally and substantially present everywhere--that is, filling all space, it would puzzle the astutest intellect to conceive where the other two could be located!

The spirit of God, then, or the Holy Ghost, as a personage, cannot be literally omnipresent, although we may (as we often do) speak of him as being present here and there by his influence, authority, and power.

But we also frequently speak of the Spirit of God as a divine substance or influence, of power diffused throughout the spiritual and physical universe, giving vitality, activity, and force to the various things around us, according to certain spiritual and natural laws.

It is, indeed, the inherent life and soul of all things--the inner and eternal principle of life and being. Whether we speak of "Nature" or of the "God of nature," we mean the same thing, unless, by way of distinction, we connect with the latter expression the idea of personality. In the former sense, God is everywhere.

President Young, upon this subject, says--"It is the Deity within us that causes increase. * * * He is in every person upon the face of the earth. The elements that every individual is made of and lives in possess the Godhead * * The Deity within us is the great principle that causes us to increase and to grow in grace and truth."

It will thus be evident that God is, by his Spirit, in this sense, omnipresent. Indeed, we arrive at the conclusion that God (although local in personality) may be said, in various ways and in different senses of the word, to be everywhere present. President Young says--"He is omnipotent, and fills immensity by his agents, by his influence, by his Spirit, and by his ministers." So that, go wheresoever we may, God is there, in some way or other. If we ascend to the heavens above, he is there; if we make the grave our bed, he is there; if we fly to any part of the earth or sea, he is there, and his providence will protect the just.
