Hyrum L. Andrus, Joseph Smith and World Government ( 1958)

PREFACE

For some time I have had a deep interest in the social, economic and political aspects of Joseph Smith's thought. That interest prompted me in large measure to organize my graduate studies at Brigham Young University and at Syracuse University around the Prophet and the historical picture of his day. Thus, my major academic interest has been in the religious, social, economic and political picture in America between the time of the founding of our Constitution and the American Civil War, and to study the rise and development of the Church in this historical background. My master's thesis and my doctoral dissertation were both written on the Prophet Joseph Smith and his effort to set the mold of a new socio-religious, economic and political system that would eventually rise to world-wide power and influence.

Since completing my doctoral studies in 1955, my interest in the above studies has continued. This volume is in large part the result of research since that time. It is, however, based in many ways upon my previous research and includes many of my former findings.

The material here presented is a part of a larger study I have had underway for several years—that of producing a work that will adequately define Joseph Smith's social, economic and political concepts in their religious setting, while placing the Prophet in context with the historical picture of his age. But because of the importance and nature of the information contained in the present volume, it seems proper to publish it at this time. I take full responsibility for the views herein set forth.

I wish to acknowledge the assistance of those who have aided me in my studies over the past years. They include the members of my graduate committee at Brigham Young University and at Syracuse University. Grateful acknowledgment is also made to the Church Historian's Office for important material that has gone into this volume; to Jacob Heinerman, of the Cottage Book Store, Provo, for assistance in locating pertinent information; and to my wife, parents, students and friends for the encouragement they have given to me along the way. I also wish to thank Dean B. Farnsworth and Soren F. Cox of the Brigham Young University faculty for checking the manuscript for grammatical errors and others of the faculty for reading parts of the manuscript and offering helpful suggestions.

—THE AUTHOR
