Hyrum L. Andrus, Joseph Smith and World Government ( 1958)

Chapter II

ORGANIZING THE GOVERNMENT OF GOD

THE STORY of the organization of the political department of the Kingdom of God has never before been told, except in brief and incomplete statements made by some of its early members. The development of the new adjunct to the priesthood did not come without forethought on the part of the Prophet. Under date of February 20, 1844, he reported:

I instructed the Twelve Apostles to send out a delegation and investigate the locations of California and Oregon, and hunt out a good location, where we can build a city in a day, and have a government of our own, get up into the mountains, where the devil cannot dig us out, and live in a healthful climate, where we can live as old as we have a mind to. [^1]

The immediate incentive to commence organizing the Government of God came with Joseph Smith's effort to move the Saints to the West. In this effort he and others claimed the assistance of divine revelation. Contrary to what is sometimes supposed, however, it required thought, exertion, and the consideration of several alternatives before the picture of precisely where to locate the Saints in the West was made clear. God's injunction to first "study it out in your mind" [^2] was still in force. Revelation on matters pertaining to the exodus of the Saints was not considered as being automatic, any more than the revelation process Joseph Smith claimed to utilize in the translation of the Book of Mormon. Thus, we find the Mormon leader studying things out and considering several programs and alternatives for planting his followers in the West. One plan he considered was to colonize a portion of Texas. It was while considering this plan that Joseph Smith organized the nucleus of the Government of God.

During the early 1840's, a group of men known as the Black River Lumber Company had been located at Black River Falls, Wisconsin Territory, for the purpose of getting out lumber for the construction of the Nauvoo Temple and the Nauvoo House. After having to a great extent accomplished their mission, the group in the "Pineries" wrote to the Authorities at Nauvoo expressing their desire to remove to "the tablelands of Texas." There they proposed to establish "a place of gathering for all the South." From this region they hoped to spread the gospel throughout Texas, Brazil, the West Indian Islands and adjacent areas. [^3] When Bishop George Miller delivered two letters expressing the desire of these men, Joseph Smith commented: "I perceive that the spirit of God is in the pineries as well as here, and we will call together some of our wise men, and proceed to set up the Kingdom of God by organizing some of its officers." [^4]

The Prophet's comment that the Spirit of the Lord was in the pineries as well as at Nauvoo implies that he recognized the suggestions on the part of the above group to be generally in accord with his own inspiration to look toward the West. The removal of the Saints to the West, however, was not a function to be carried out by the Church as a religious body. For this reason the Prophet commenced organizing the Government of God. The fact that he did so indicates the limitations he set to the powers of the Church and the separate and distinct functions of the Church and the political organ he developed.

The Prophet's account of the organization of the latter body is as follows:

Present—Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, John Taylor, George A. Smith, William W. Phelps, John M. Bernhisel, Lucien Woodworth, George Amos Fielding, Alpheus Cutler, Levi Richards, Newel K. Whitney. Lorenzo D. Wasson, and William Clayton, whom I organized into a special council, to take into consideration the subject matter contained in the above letters, and also the best policy for this people to adopt to obtain their rights from the nation and insure protection for themselves and children; and to secure a resting place in the mountains, or some uninhabited region, where we can enjoy the liberty of conscience guaranteed to us by the Constitution of our country, and rendered doubly sacred by the precious blood of our fathers, and denied to us by the present authorities, who have smuggled themselves into power in the States and Nation. [^5]

In his report of the organization of this council, Brigham Young also noted that it was to be an organ concerned with political matters. It had as its objective, he said, the task of determining "the best manner to settle our people in some distant and unoccupied territory; where we could enjoy our civil and religious rights, without being subject to constant oppression and mobocracy, under the protection of our own laws, subject to the Constitution. We held a number of sessions," he continued, "and investigated the principles upon which our national government is founded; and the true foundation and principles of all governments." [^6]

It is very probable that during one of the above mentioned meetings Joseph Smith dictated the revelation giving the constitutional principles of the new government.

The General Council also prepared several memorials to Congress for redress of grievances. [^7] One such memorial was delivered to the Federal government by Heber C. Kimball and Lyman Wight, who left Nauvoo for that purpose on May 20, 1844. [^8] But the main task of the council was to settle the Saints in the West. We shall see later how this body of men initiated and carried out the exodus and the colonization of the Great Basin.

Meetings of the General Council were held almost daily for some time after its organization. On March 14th, Joseph Smith reported that Lucien Woodworth had been "sent on a mission to Texas." [^9] The nature of his mission is not revealed in the Prophet's record. However, George Miller reports that the intention was to "send a minister to the then Republic of Texas to make a treaty with the cabinet of Texas for all that country north of a west line from the falls of the Colorado River to the Nueces, thence down the same to the Gulf of Mexico, and along the same to the Rio Grande, and up the same to the United States Territory." Texas was expected to acknowledge the Saints "as a nation," said Miller. On the other hand, the Saints were to help the Texas government "defend themselves against Mexico, standing as a go-between [between] the billigerant powers." Woodworth was chosen to represent the interest of the Saints in these negotiations. In the event an agreement was finally entered into, the Black River Lumber Company was "to take possession of the newly acquired territory." [^10]

Miller's statement that Texas was expected to acknowledge the Latter-day Saints as "a nation" needs some explanation. This statement implies that the Prophet was considering the possibility of moving the whole Church to the above described area. That some consideration was given to such a move is no doubt true. How seriously Joseph Smith looked upon that plan and how far he went in carrying it out, however, is another matter. At first it seems that only the Black River Lumber Company was to go to Texas, following the completion of the proper negotiations. There they were to establish "a place of gathering for all the South." [^11]

In a letter dated June 12, 1849, Miller wrote:

In the spring of 1844, Joseph organized a council of fifty. I was one of that number. The question arose in regard to settling those Saints in the South, that were making lumber in Wisconsin, for building the temple and Nauvoo House. The decision of the council was had, and Lucien Woodworth, George Miller, and Lyman Wight appointed to settle the company and their families, and procure a place for a stake for the gathering of the saints; whereupon Lucien Woodworth forthwith started to Texas and returned the first of May. He negotiated with Samuel Houston (then President of the Republic of Texas) for a district of country to colonize the before mentioned saints upon, which was to have been ratified at the meeting of the Texas Congress. . . . [^12]

In the same light, Brigham Young and Willard Richards wrote from Nauvoo to Reuben Hedlock, in England, May 3, 1844: "If any of the brethren wish to go to Texas, we have no particular objection. You may send a hundred thousand there if you can." Then, with reference to the newly organized political organ, they added: "The kingdom is organized; and, although as yet no bigger than a grain of mustard seed, the little plant is in a flourishing condition, and our prospects brighter than ever." [^13]

There are several matters that must be considered along with the Texas episode if one is to get an accurate picture of this phase of Mormon history, according to the available facts. First, a word about the historical picture. The territory then under consideration as a place of settlement for the Saints "was a portion of the territory in dispute between Texas and Mexico." [^14] It had been ceded to Texas when she won her independence from Mexico in 1836. President Santa Anna, having been captured by the Texans, was forced to "sign a treaty as president of Mexico recognizing the independence of Texas and the territorial claim of that republic as far south as the Rio Grande." His authority to do this was later challenged by the Mexican congress upon the grounds that he had no right to relinquish so extensive a grant, much of which the Texans could not claim as land they had settled. [^15]

Following the release of Santa Anna, the Mexicans promptly repudiated the treaty of Velasco and thereafter kept up a series of threats, intrigues with the Indians, and petty raids aimed at destroying the new republic. Matters would have been worse had it not been that the antagonists were separated from each other by an uninhabited strip spreading northeastward from the Rio Grande and varying in width from about one hundred and twenty miles at the coast to over six hundred at its upper end. [^16]

The Texas government was anxious to have strong groups of colonists take over the job of settling her vast uninhabited regions, including the above territory. It was in desperate need of money; and its principle source of revenue came from the sale of public lands. For these and other reasons, several colonizing schemes were given more or less serious considerations, including an attempt to locate 8,000 French colonists "in such a way as to create a shield between the hostile Indians and the outermost Texan settlers." [^17] The so-called Kennedy Grant of 1842 was another attempt to colonize a large number of European settlers in Texas. [^18]

During the forepart of 1843, an armistice was agreed upon by Texas and Mexico, which lasted until June, 1844. Here was an opportune time for the two powers to arrive at some agreement regarding the disputed Territory. It was during the latter part of this period that the Mormon leaders were negotiating with the Texas Government. There is some evidence that the government of Mexico was also a party to these negotiations. [^19]

Back at the center of Mormon activities in Nauvoo, Joseph Smith reported that on May 2, 1844, Lucien Woodworth returned from Texas, where he had been sent by the General Council pursuant to their meeting of March 14th. The following day he gave an account of his mission to that body. [^20] In a letter dated June 28, 1855, George Miller wrote of these developments. Said he:

. . . Woodworth returned from Texas. The council convened to hear his report. It was altogether as we could wish it. On the part of the church there were commissioners appointed to meet the Texan Congress to sanction or ratify the said treaty, partly entered into by our minister and the Texan cabinet. A Mr. Brown, Lucien Woodworth and myself were the commissioners appointed to meet the Texas Congress, and, upon the consummation of the treaty, Wight and myself were to locate the Black River Lumber Company on the newly acquired territory, and do such other things as might be necessary in the premises, and report to the Council of the Kingdom. It was further determined in Council that all the elders should set out on missions to all the States to get up an electorial ticket, and do everything in our power to have Joseph elected president. If we succeeded in making a majority of the voters converts to our faith, and elected Joseph president, in such an event the dominion of the Kingdom would be forever established in the United States; and if not successful, we could fall back on Texas, and be a kingdom notwithstanding. [^21]

Miller's statement implies that the plan to move the Church to Texas was pretty much decided upon at this time. This, however, was not the fact. According to available information there were two general purposes behind the Prophet's negotiations with the Texas government. The first has been mentioned: that of establishing a stake of Zion in that area as a gathering place for the Saints. In this plan, there was no intention to move the whole Church to Texas. Second, there was evidently some talk of setting up an independent government in that area, should circumstances make it necessary to do so. The latter proposal, however, was but one of other alternatives then being considered by the Prophet and his associates. He was then a candidate for the Presidency of the United States. In his "Views of the Powers and Policies of the Government of the United States," [^22] he clearly defines himself as an expansionist—one who desired to extend the jurisdiction of the United States as far west as possible. "Oregon belongs to this government honorably," he exclaimed, "and when we have the red man's consent, let the Union spread from the east to the west sea; and if Texas petitions Congress to be adopted among the sons of liberty, give her the right hand of fellowship, and refuse not the same friendly grip to Canada and Mexico." [^23] These views are consistent with the Prophet's concept of the United States Constitution as a heaven-inspired document containing principles destined to be extended throughout the world. They leave little room for belief that he hoped to establish an independent state in the Texas area outside of the jurisdiction of the United States Constitution, except as a plan of last resort subject to the outcome of other alternatives. Again, the intent behind the organization of the General Council was to establish the Saints in the West under their own political laws, "subject to the Constitution." [^24]

The reasons why Joseph Smith decided to run for the Presidency will not be discussed here. Suffice it to say that foremost among those reasons was his desire to bring the cause of the Saints before the nation and thus gain redress for the wrongs that had been perpetrated upon them. This objective might have been achieved without winning the election.

The Prophet was aware that should he be elected it would only be by the greatest possible effort and through the favor of fortune. Said George Miller: "It was thought and urged by the council that so great an undertaking would require, in order to insure success, the entire and united effort of the official members of the church." [^25] Accordingly, the Quorum of the Twelve made arrangement for a series of conferences to be held in strategic places throughout the Union, terminating at Washington, D. C. the following September 7th through the 15th. Besides the twelve, nearly 340 of the most capable men in the Church were also sent out to work in the Prophet's interest throughout the Union. That the General Council was involved in these matters is evident not only from Miller's comments but also from the following notation made by Joseph Smith, April 25th:

In general council from 10 till 12, and from 2 to 5, when they adjourned sine die, after appointing a State Convention to meet in Nauvoo on 17th May. The council then dispersed to go abroad in the nations. [^26]

During the period of his negotiations with the Texas government, Joseph Smith was also seeking for authority from the Federal government to raise a police force of 100,000 men to establish the jurisdiction of the United States throughout the West and to give protection and order to the colonization of that vast area. The memorial was drawn up by Willard Richards and "read, discussed, and approved by the general council" on March 26, 1844, almost two weeks after Woodworth's initial commission to go to Texas. A similar memorial was later prepared for President John Tyler, in the event the first should fail to be accepted by Congress. Orson Hyde was chosen to carry the memorials to Washington and there work with Orson Pratt and John E. Page to secure the passage of the first through Congress. [^27] Though it failed to gain the support of Congress, this memorial reveals the Prophet's desire to assist in extending the westward border of the United States to the Pacific and to open this new territory to the American homebuilder, along with his own people. The Prophet's proposal was by nature incompatible with any plan to establish an independent government in the area of Texas.

On May 13th, Joseph Smith attended a meeting of the General Council, at which time two letters from Orson Hyde were read. In the first, dated April 25th, Hyde reported that Congress appeared "deeply interested in the Oregon question," but due to several factors involving them in national and international politics they were not apt to act favorably upon the Prophet's memorial. Nevertheless, Hyde stated, there was a general consensus of opinion that the Mormon leader had "an undoubted right" to colonize his people in some area of the West, but it would have to be without government support. In his concluding paragraph, Hyde wrote:

. . . Most of the settlers in Oregon and Texas are our old enemies, the mobocrats of Mo. If, however, the settlement of Oregon or Texas be determined upon, the sooner the move is made the better, and I would not advise any delay for the action of government for there is such a jealousy of our rising power already, that government will do nothing to favor us. If the saints possess the kingdom, I think they will have to take it, and the sooner it is done, the more easily it is accomplished.

Your superior wisdom must determine whether to go to Oregon, to Texas, or to remain within these United States and send forth the most efficient men to build up churches, and let them remain for the time being. [^28]

To Hyde, the Texas matter was still open for discussion.

In his second letter, dated April 26th, Hyde reported that the Mormon delegates in Washington had held a long conversation with Stephen A. Douglas; and reported that "he is ripe for Oregon and the California." The Senator from Illinois was said to have declared that "he would resign his seat in Congress if he could command the force that Mr. Smith could, and would be on the march to the country in a month." Douglas also agreed that the Latter-day Saints had a legitimate right to raise up an independent nation in the West, should it be necessary. Hyde wrote: "Douglas says he would equally as soon go to that country without an act of Congress as with; 'and that in five years a noble state might be formed; and then if they would not receive us into the Union, we would have a government of our own.'" [^29]

Finally, in a letter dated April 30, 1844, Hyde reviewed the various alternatives, one of which the Saints might choose in locating themselves in the West. Among other things, he mentioned the possibility of establishing a stake of Zion in Texas, as a gathering place for some of the Saints. But when it came to the proposal to set up an independent government in that area, Hyde struck a note of caution. Should such a plan be followed, he pointed out, the Saints would be forced to organize and support both an army and a navy in addition to the costs of government in its functions at home and abroad. Such a load, he concluded, would discourage those who had money to invest in the area and might even sink the infant government.

From the above evidence, it is plain that the plan to move the Church to Texas was never really decided upon. In the minds of the Mormon leaders, such a decision was not to be made until after the election of 1844. And even then it would be subject to existing circumstances. So far as Texas and Mexico were concerned, their armistice was terminated in June, 1844; and with the election of Polk to the Presidency the stage was set for the entrance of Texas into the Union, followed by the outbreak of the war with Mexico.

What Joseph Smith would have done about Texas had his life not been abruptly terminated may be subject to debate. In light of the post-election situation and the threat of war with Mexico, however, it seems highly probable that he would have looked elsewhere, as Brigham Young later did. About all that can be truthfully said, from existing evidence, is that the Prophet was considering several plans by which to secure his people in the free exercise of their constitutional rights. He sought for this end by bringing the injustices the Saints had suffered to the attention of the nation through his campaign for the presidency; he sought for the consent and assistance of the Federal government in locating the Saints and others in the West; and, finally, he even considered the alternative of establishing the Saints in the capacity of an independent nation, should all other alternatives fail.

There should be no particular odium attached to the fact that the Prophet gave consideration to this latter alternative. It is a fundamental proposition upon which legitimate governments are founded that all men have the inherent right to provide for their political welfare—to establish justice and provide for their domestic transquility. Brigham Young, in officially organizing the State of Deseret in 1849, relied upon this inherent right. In doing so, he was establishing what the Saints considered to be the Government of God. But even though they considered the government of Deseret in this light, they immediately applied for statehood in the Union. It can be conjectured that, had Joseph Smith lived and gone to Texas, he too would have applied for statehood in the Union as soon as conditions were favorable. As it was, the existing circumstances made it necessary for the Latter-day Saints to consider establishing an independent government of their own, in the event they went to Texas. First, they could not hope to extend United States jurisdiction into this particular area had they wanted to obtain a territorial government. An effort to do so would surely have been resented by Mexico. On the other hand, it would have been impracticable to consider affiliating with either the government of Texas or Mexico. Neither of these countries would have been willing to see so large a body as the Latter-day Saints occupy this disputed territory under the flag of the other country. Nor would association with either of these countries have been compatible with the aims and aspirations of the Prophet and his associates in relation to their views on the Kingdom of God and the United States Constitution. The only alternative left was to plan for a government that would in every way meet their needs and satisfy their desires, should they make this move.

It should be noted that in his effort to lay the necessary plans for such an eventuality, the Prophet came very near entering the field of international politics. On May 6, 1844, Joseph Smith recorded that he met with the General Council all day. During this meeting it was "voted to send Almon W. Babbitt on a mission to France and Lucien Woodworth to Texas." [^30] The nature of Woodworth's mission to Texas has already been indicated. But the purpose of Babbitt's assignment to go to France is not too clear. By profession he was a lawyer. That the Council of Fifty, after deliberating all day, would vote to send Babbitt to France on business of a religious nature, while Woodworth went to Texas to consider further negotiations on a treaty for the organization of a new state in the West, seems highly improbable. It would be more in harmony with existing developments to send Babbitt to France to determine the French government's reaction to the organization of such a state. A comment by Brigham Young and Willard Richards in their letter to Reuben Hedlock in England, dated three days before the above meeting, seems to confirm this view, as well as to indicate that the decision to send an envoy to France had received some thought prior to the May 6th meeting. They wrote:

We are glad to hear a door is open in France, and sure we have no objections to your going over and preaching. . . . We are in hopes of sending a special messenger to France in a few days; if so, very likely he may call on you, and you pass over and give him an introduction: this would be pleasant for you all. [^31]

A study of Babbitt's activities thereafter, however, shows that he never departed on this mission. It may be that Orson Hyde's letter from Washington, along with other developments prior to the time Babbitt was ready to leave Nauvoo, changed the Mormon attitude on the Texas proposal. Then, too, developments leading up to the Prophet's martyrdom also kept him busy in Illinois.

The death of Joseph Smith, the changing political scene, and the existing need to consolidate affairs under new leadership altered the plans that had been partially made concerning the Texas proposal. It was at this point that a decision was definitely made to move to the Great Basin. Said George A. Smith:

After the death of Joseph Smith, when it seemed as if every trouble and calamity had come upon the Saints, Brigham Young, who was President of the Twelve, then the presiding Quorum of the Church, sought the Lord to know what they should do, and where they should lead the people for safety, and while they were fasting and praying daily on this subject, President Young had a vision of Joseph Smith, who showed him the mountain that we now call Ensign Peak, immediately north of Salt Lake City, and there was an ensign fell upon that peak, and Joseph said, "Build under the point where the colors fall and you will prosper and have peace." The Pioneers had no pilot or guide, none among them had ever been in the country or knew anything about it. However, they travelled under the direction of President Young until they reached this valley. When they entered it, President Young pointed to the point and, said he, "I want to go there." He went up to the point and said, "This is Ensign Peak. Now, brethren, organize your exploring parties, so as to be safe from Indians; go and explore where you will, and you will come back every time and say this is the best place." They accordingly started out exploring companies and visited what we now call Cache, Malad, Tooele, and Utah valleys, and other parts of the country in various directions, but all came back and declared this was the best spot. [^32]

But to such men as George Miller and Lyman Wight the previous proposals were still to be carried out. Miller later wrote that he suggested that the appropriate authorities get together and "clothe" themselves "with the necessary papers, and proceed to meet the Texas Congress as before Joseph's death agreed upon". Continuing, he explained:

Woodworth and myself waited on Brigham, requesting him to convene the authorities so that the proper papers might be made out, and so we could be able to complete the unfinished negotiations of the treaty for the territory mentioned in my former letter. To my utter astonishment Brigham wholly refused to have anything to do in the matter, saying that he had no faith in it, and would do nothing to raise means for an outfit or expenses. Thus all hopes were cut off of establishing a dominion of the kingdom at a time when there seemed to be a crisis, and I verily believed that all that we had concocted in council might so easily be accomplished. I was really cast down and dejected. [^33]

Meanwhile, said Miller, "Lyman Wight became disaffected towards his brethren of the Twelve." When the Black River Lumber Company returned to Nauvoo, he, "ever fond of authority, placed himself at the head of this company, and as it had been announced by the Twelve from the stand that Joseph had laid out a work that would take twenty years to accomplish, Lyman averred that he would commence his work then, and solicited me to take my place and go with him to locate the Black River Company." [^34] Although Miller reluctantly followed the leadership of Brigham Young for a time, Wight set out for Texas. Some time later, when Brigham Young summoned him to Salt Lake City, Wight replied that "nobody under the light of the heavens except Joseph Smith or John Smith, the president of the Fifty, could call him from Texas." [^35] There he remained while the Church commenced the colonization of the Great Basin.

Footnotes

To the Editors of the Bulletin:

"Gentlemen:—An express has just arrived here from the city of Mexico, bringing the important intelligence that JOE SMITH, the celebrated Mormon Prophet, of the Latter-day Saints, has concluded a treaty with President Santa Anna for the purchase of Texas; for which he agrees to assume ten millions of the Mexican debt to England, and has hypothecated the State of Illinois as collateral security for the faithful redemption of said debt. Commissioners have already been appointed to run the boundary line, &c. General Ampudia and Martin Perfecto de Cos are named on the part of Santa Anna, and PROPHET MILLER and tigertail on the part of JOE SMITH. By a secret article in the treaty it is further stipulated between the high contracting parties that SANTA ANNA shall transport President Houston to the Fiji Islands, within the space of three months, and that all the Negroes in Texas shall be delivered up to Commodore Elliot, of Chinese memory, to be equally divided between LORD BROUGHAM and DANIEL O'COMWELL."—"Mormons in Ohio, Illinois, Missouri, etc. 1844." (News Clippings copied from papers in Ohio, Illinois, Missouri, etc.) Brigham Young University Library, p. 24. This typewritten copy gives the date as January 20, 1844, but this is evidently an error, as it would have been too early to coincide with the facts presented in this paper. The writer has not as yet been able to locate an original copy of this paper."

"When we came out of the canyon into full view of the valley, I turned the side of my carriage around, open to the west, and President Young arose from his bed and took a survey of the country. While gazing on the scene before us, he was enwrapped in vision for several minutes. He had seen the valley before, in vision; and upon this occasion he saw the future glory of Zion and of Israel as they would be, planted in the valleys of these mountains. When the vision had passed, he said: "It is enough. This is the right place, drive on.'"—The Christmas News, December 20, 1924. Cited in Ibid.

Brigham Young confirmed Woodruff's account, stating that as he looked upon the valley, "The Spirit of Light rested upon me, and hovered over the valley, and I felt that there the Saints would find protection and safety."—Journal History, July 23, 1847. Erastus Snow also verified Wilford Woodruff's account, declaring that "President Young said then, and afterwards to all the camp, that this was the place he had seen long since in vision; it was here he had seen the tent settling down from heaven and resting, and a voice said unto him: 'Here is the place where my people of Israel shall pitch their tents.'"—Utah Pioneers, 1880, p. 47. Cited in B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, III, 279.

Although these statements do not fully coincide with each other and seem to indicate there may have been more than one vision received by Brigham Young, it should be remembered that even though he was very feeble, one of the first things he did was to climb what he then named Ensign Peak. He also expressed the idea, before they had time to explore the region, that the brethren might go out and search for a better site but they would always return and say, "This is the spot for us to locate."—See Wilford Woodruff's Journal, under date of July 26, 1847, also, Roberts, op. cit., p. 279.

"He did not acknowledge you as the first President of the Church. . . . Father John Smith he will obey, he says: and if he should call him to Salt Lake, he would try to go."—Journal History, under date of March 4, 1849.

Wight's reference to John Smith as president of the Fifty raises problem. Joseph Smith was initially chosen as chairman of the General Council; and Brigham Young succeeded him in this position, as well as in the leadership of the Church.

---
Notas:
[^1] Johnson to Gibbs, p. 22.
[^2] From a paper entitled "In the Days of Long Ago," prepared by William Hayden, an early acquaintance of Brigham Young. This paper was read before the Cayuga county Historical Society and published in The Auburn Bulletin, February 17, 1904.
[^3] D.H.C., II, xxiv.
[^4] "Salt Lake High Council Record," MS, (1869-1872), pp. 83-4.
[^5] J.D., XII, 269-70.
[^6] D.H.C., VII, 387.
[^7] Ibid., pp. 387-8.
[^8] Ibid., pp. 395, 401, 405, 406-7, 439.
[^9] Ibid., p. 447.
[^10] See Ibid., 454-5. There is further evidence to support the fact that the so-called Council of Fifty was the General Council mentioned above. B. H. Roberts identifies it as such. See ibid., p. 439. See also Journal History, under date of September 9, 1845. In his diary, Hosea Stout identifies the September 30th meeting as being held by the Council of Fifty. To quote: "Tues. Sept. 30th, 1845. . . went to the Seventies Hall where the Council of 50 were in Session, when I arrived there I was informed by President Jos. Young that [Charles C.] Rich had gone on the hill. I then went to the Temple and there met him."—"Diary of Hosea Stout," typewritten copy, Brigham Young University, II, 64.
[^11] Journal History, March 27, 1846. On date of October 11, 1845, Brigham Young reported that, "The council met at Elder John Taylor's in Nauvoo. The brethren joined in prayer, and wrote a circular for the agents to take abroad with them."—Journal History, under above date. This circular had to do with the exodus west, then being planned. That evening at 7 p.m., President Brigham Young met for council and prayer. After prayer the brethren,
[^12] D.H.C., VII, 567; Journal History, January 11, 1846.
[^13] D.H.C., VII, 567.
[^14] On January 13, 1846, Stout wrote:
[^15] D.H.C., VII, 567.
[^16] "Diary of Hosea Stout," II, January 19, 1846. There may be some discrepancy between Stout's date for this meeting and that given by Brigham Young. The latter stated that on the nineteenth the temple was engaged for other purposes which could have prevented a meeting of the council there on that date. On the eighteenth, however, he reported:
[^17] John D. Lee, "Diaries and Official Records of John D. Lee, 1844-1846, 1850-1851, 1861-1878," unpublished diaries, minutes, etc. kept by Lee during the above years (not complete), Brigham Young University Library, February 17, 1846.
[^18] Journal History, March 27, 1848. See Lee, "Diaries and Official Records of John D. Lee," March 9, 1846, where he indicates that the "Council" made the decision to reorganize at this point.
[^19] Journal History, March 27, 1846. This reorganization also was effected by the council.
[^20] Johnson to Gibbs, pp. 22-3.
[^21] Miller, op. cit., pp. 22-3.
[^22] "Diary of John D. Lee, 1844, 1846, 1850-1851," February 22, 1846. The writer has taken the liberty of editing quotes from this unpublished diary by supplying some needed punctuation marks and correcting misspelled words.
[^23] Ibid., under the above date.
[^24] Ibid., under the above date.
[^25] These letters reversed spell FIFTY, Lee's way, at times, of designating the Council of Fifty.
[^26] "Diary of John D. Lee, 1844, 1846, 1850-1851," April 2, 1846.
[^27] Ibid., under the above date.
[^28] Idem.
[^29] Ibid., under date of April 20, 1846.
[^30] Ibid., under above date.
[^31] A term used to designate the General Council. See "Diary of John D. Lee, 1844, 1846, 1850-1851," under date of May 20, 1846. See also Journal History, under date of May 20, 1846, where the meeting Lee designates is seen to be the General Council or at least a group of its members.
[^32] "Diary of John D. Lee, 1844, 1846, 1850-1851," under date of May 8, 1846.
[^33] Journal History, May 20, 1846.
[^34] "Diary of John D. Lee, 1844, 1846, 1850-1851," under same date.
[^35] "Diaries and Official Records of John D. Lee," May 20, 1846; Journal History, May 20, 1846.
