Hyrum L. Andrus, Joseph Smith and World Government ( 1958)

Chapter III

NEW VIEWS ON THE EXODUS

THE GENERAL COUNCIL played an important role in the affairs of the Latter-day Saints under the leadership of Brigham Young, who became "the head" of the council after the death of Joseph Smith. [^1] It then became the great colonizer's responsibility to build up the Kingdom of God according to the pattern that Joseph had set. And he of all men was most aptly fitted for such a task. As a young man he acquired the reputation of being quick and active in mind and mature in judgment. In late years a prominent merchant of Cayuga County, New York—where Brigham had resided for sixteen years prior to 1829—stated with emphasis that "Brigham Young was as fine a speciman of young manhood" as he had ever seen. [^2]

In joining the Church, it was Brigham Young's one desire to learn the doctrines of the kingdom from its modern prophet. Of his experience with Joseph Smith during the Zion's Camp episode he later said: "I would not exchange the experience gained in that expedition for all the wealth in Geauga County [Ohio]." [^3] On another occasion he declared:

I have travelled with Joseph a thousand miles. . . . I have watched him and observed everything he said or did. . . . For the town of Kirtland I would not give the knowledge I got from Joseph from this journey; and then you may take the State of Ohio and the United States, and I would not give that knowledge for them. It has done me good and you good and this was the starting point of my knowledge how to lead Israel. I watched every word and summed it up, and I knew just as well how to lead this kingdom as I know the way to my own house. It is a God within me, and God upon me; God by day and by night, and it is for his kingdom on the earth. [^4]

The success of the exodus is sufficient proof that the modern Moses learned his lessons well. In like manner, Brigham Young sought information from Joseph on other points pertaining to the great latter-day work. In his later life, while referring to Zion's "principles of government, and how to apply them to families, neighborhoods and nations," President Young revealed how attentive he had been in learning such things from Joseph Smith. Said he:

In the days of the Prophet Joseph, such moments were more precious to me than all the wealth of the world. No matter how great my poverty—if I had to borrow meal to feed my wife and children, I never let an opportunity pass of learning what the Prophet had to impart. This is the secret of the success of your humble servant. [^5]

As Brigham Young presented himself before the Saints as their leader and lawgiver in the stead of their martyred Prophet, it is reported by several reliable witnesses that the mantle of Joseph fell upon him with such power that it seemed as though Joseph and not Brigham addressed the Saints that day. This incident was but the great consummation in the merging of Joseph into Brigham. That fusion process had been going on for some ten years past. And with its completion Brigham Young was prepared to build upon the foundation that Joseph had laid with a minimum of deviation. Thus, in many ways it was Joseph, not Brigham, who launched the exodus and successfully carried it out; it was Joseph, not Brigham, who founded the Saints in the West, in their political as well as in their religious capacity. In this great project, the General Council played a dominant role. As previously noted, it was that body of men who laid the plans for the exodus and thereafter made all major decisions in carrying out the project. This fact has not been known to historians. It appreciably alters the existing concept of the move to the West, in that it indicates that the initiative in these matters was not taken by the Church as a religious body, but by men acting in a political capacity under the direction of the priesthood.

Several notations appear in Brigham Young's Journal, indicating the nature and extent of the General Council's activities in planning the exodus. On March 18, 1845, he met with the General Council all day. [^6] On the 22nd, he again met with this body; and among other things, "the subject of the western mission was considered and occupied the most of the day." [^7] Other meetings followed; and on September 9, 1845, the General Council "Resolved that a company of 1500 men be selected to go to Great Salt Lake valley and that a committee of five be appointed to gather information relative to emigration, and report the same to the council." [^8] The forced exodus of the Saints from Nauvoo later altered these plans.

On September 30th, the General Council met at the Seventies Hall. At this meeting, Parley P. Pratt reported that he had made a calculation for an outfit that every family of five persons would require. [^9] His report was preliminary to a more complete report made to the council, October 4th. On that date the committee that was appointed by the President to acquire and lay before the council all the necessary information in regard to the outfitting of families for emigration west of the mountains reported their findings, taken "from the best works on the subject." [^10]

In planning the exodus, the General Council organized the Saints into companies for the westward journey. A note in the Journal History gives the following information of the subject:

When it was decided that the Saints would remove from Nauvoo about twenty-five men were selected by the General Council and called captains of hundreds, whose business it was severally to select one hundred families and see that they were prepared for a journey across the Rocky Mountains; afterwards the captains of hundreds selected their own captains of fifties, and tens, clerks, etc. [^11]

On January 11, 1846, while the above organizations were being effected, Brigham Young reported that, "The General Council met and arranged to make an early start west." [^12] Two days later another council was held in the temple. [^13] The latter meeting, according to the diary of Hosea Stout, was also a meeting held by the Council of Fifty. [^14] Concerning what then occurred, Brigham Young recorded: "The captains of fifties and tens made reports of the number in their respective companies, who were prepared to start west immediately, should the persecutions of our enemies compel us to do so: one hundred and forty horses and seventy wagons were reported ready for immediate service." [^15] On January 19th, Hosea Stout reported another meeting of the Council of Fifty. "It was there decided, among other things, that the captains of the different emigrating companies should arrange and prepare as many of their families as [they] could with [out] leaving them to suffer." [^16]

When the exodus commenced, the initial organization effected by the General Council was revised and perfected. Such reorganizations occurred, first, at Sugar Creek, some seven miles from Nauvoo. Here Brigham Young explained that, "The former organization will have nothing to do with our arrangements or traveling on the road. It was only designed to start the order and to organize the people that they might grow into the order that would be." [^17] The next major revision took place at Richardson's point, about fifty-five miles from Nauvoo. [^18] Then, after the pioneers had arrived at the Chariton River, still another reorganization was carried out. [^19]

Consistent with the purpose of its organization, the General Council, said Benjamin F. Johnson, directed "all general movements relating to our exodus as a people from Nauvoo." [^20] In carrying out this task, it met frequently during the early period of the exodus. Bishop Miller stated that, "While we were camped on Sugar Creek there was hardly a night without a council." [^21] John D. Lee, as Brigham Young's clerk, kept minutes of many of these meetings during the early stages of the exodus. He specifically identifies several of these meetings as having been held by the Council of Fifty or General Council. Although he merely designates the meetings held at Sugar Creek as having been held by "the Council," the minutes indicate that they were meetings of an established body set up to direct the activities of the Saints in all matters pertaining to the move west. There can be little doubt that they were held by the General Council. To quote the minutes of one of these council meetings, held February 22, 1846:

. . . Sunday at 10 morn. In the forenoon Chas. C. Rich who had the day previous been appointed to look after the grain and provider, reported as follows—to the council. I have obtained about 350 bushels of corn and oats on tithing. . . .

2nd, the subject of policy and economy was up before the council and decided that the camp should be called together and they be instructed to stop using such articles as will be most suitable to take on the road-such things as flour, dried beans, crackers, sugar, dried beef and pork—and use corn meal, fresh beef, potatoes, etc., which are articles that are plenty and easy obtained and will not keep as long and be as convenient on the road as the articles mentioned.

3rd, J. D. Lee, by request of Willard Richards, presented a bill of tin brought into the camp by Wm. F. Cahoon (before the council) amounting to $53.00 and some cents, which he proposed to sell by wholesale at a discount of 15 per cent. The council decided that E. R. Rockwood and J. D. Lee go and examine the tin and ascertain whether they are the articles that this camp needs or not. . . .

4th, the council [decided] that all reports of corn, grain, provisions, wagons, teams, etc. be handed to J. D. Lee.

5th Meeting adjourned [until] 4 eve. [^22]

The minutes of the second meeting of the council that day also indicate the nature of that body's work in supervising affairs among the Saints while they were at Sugar Creek. Lee wrote:

At the time previously appointed [i.e. 4:00 p.m.] council convened. Bro. Isaac Fuller's case was laid before the council and was decided that he should return and settle up his business and bring the avails of his property to assist the camp,—instructing him to pass by the way of Nauvoo and council Pres. Br. Young on the subject—as he might have arranged matters that would materially change the face of our movement.

2nd, The pioneers were instructed through the messenger (John Gleason) that was sent to Capt. Markham to shell 100 bushels of corn and have it ground for the benefit of the camp-in connection with 300 bushels of wheat [that] was ordered to be sent by Pres. B. Young.

3rd, it was moved, seconded and carried that Parley P. Pratt and Amasa Lyman be sent with the faith and prayers of this council to visit the members on this side of the river and obtain all the oxen and wagons that they can for the journey—after which the meeting closed. Parley P. Pratt, Pres., J. D. Lee, clerk. [^23]

When it came to the work of directing the movements of the camp, here again it was the General Council that discussed the subject and issued instructions on such matters. On February 23, 1846, Lee reported the following:

The council convened at 10 morning in Elder Willard Richard's tent. Pres. Brigham Young took the chair and organized the council . . . Pres. B. Young observed that the council was called together to consult the best route for us to travel; and after deliberating upon the subject, it was decided that the best road and most convenient at this season of the year was to keep on the line between Iowa and Mo., it being settled, which would afford opportunity of purchasing food for both ourselves and teams. Next, shall we wait for Bishop Whitney or let him follow on. Decided that we prosecute our journey as soon as the weather should moderate, to some point where we can call a halt for a season. 4th. Let Capt. Stephen Markham take a part of his Pioneers and go ahead and look out a camping ground where we can get feed for the stock—and return and report to us. Let Capt. Samuel Bent take 50 wagons and follow on. This being attended to, council closed. Brigham Young Pres. John D. Lee, Clerk. [^24]

As the exodus progressed, companies of Saints moving west were scattered out over the countryside, making it difficult for all members of the General Council to get together on given occasions. It seems that many within the council were assigned to key positions in the various companies; many captains of hundreds, captains of fifties, and at least some captains of tens were members of the General Council. Though this arrangement gave central direction to the exodus, it made it difficult for all members of the General Council to get together at any appointed time. Even though many who were thus separated put forth great effort to attend such meetings, at times it was deemed proper not to convene the whole council. On such occasions, only those readily available would meet. In many such cases, John D. Lee would specify who of the Council of the Twelve and who else of the Council of Fifty were present. For example, on April 2, 1846, he wrote:

. . . at 11 a.m. a convention of the council met some 200 yards south of the encampment. Pres[ent] of the Twelve: B. Young, H. C. Kimball, O. Pratt, P. P. Pratt, G. A. Smith. Father John Smith, Bishop Miller, A. P. Rockwood, Shadrack Roundy, B. F. Johnson, [and] J. D. Lee [were also present] of the council of the Y T F I F, [^25] Capt. Stuart, Winter, Benson & others. Several letters were laid before the council and one latter was answered to Elder O. Hyde by J. D. Lee, clerk. Council also decided that the camp roll on 5 miles this evening over a bad road before rain and it would reduce the travel for the morrow [from] 19 miles to 14. [^26]

On another such occasion Lee wrote:

Sat. Apr. 18, '46. Pleasant Point Encampment. Council convened in the grove west of the encampment at 10 a.m. Present of the Twelve: Pres. B. Young, H. C. Kimball, John Taylor, P. P. Pratt, and Willard Richards. Of the council of the Y T F I F—Bishop Whitney, G. Miller, Wm. Clayton, John Smith, Samuel Bent, J. M. Grant, C. Shumway, Theodore Turley, P. B. Lewis, E. Snow, J. D. Lee and Peter Haws, and a number of the commanders of companies.

Pres. Young said that unless our hands can be united it will be utterly impossible for us to proceed on over the mountains with our hands as they have been since we started—the teams that were turned out for the benefit of the church have been smuggled by individuals and have been converted to the removing of their own families and thereby have clogged the wheels. It now remains for the council to say who shall go over the mountain. It was moved by Capt. Markham that the Pres. select such as shall go and not the council. The Pres. said, If you leave it to me I will say that every one that can fit out may go. [^27]

The council then turned its attention to more immediate problems then existing within the camp of Israel. The captains of tens were directed to make a study of the needs of their people and report the situation to their respective companies, that the problem of allocating foodstuffs, etc., to those in need might better be facilitated. Agents were sent out to trade with the settlers in the surrounding area for materials needed in the move west. Finally, after taking care of other business then pending, the artillery company was directed to prepare seats in the grove near Brigham Young's encampment, that the Saints might gather for worship the next day. The council then adjourned to meet again the following Monday. [^28]

When the council again met, Lee states that Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, John Taylor, and Willard Richards of the Quorum of the Twelve were present. Others of the "Council of Y T F I F" that were present included Newel K. Whitney, George Miller, Jedediah M. Grant, Peter Haws, Benjamin F. Johnson, John Smith, Charles Spencer, John D. Lee, and two others not clearly identified in Lee's account. Among other things, reports were read from several companies, giving an account of then circumstances and problems. The request on the part of many persons to return of Nauvoo for one reason or another was considered and instructions given to counsel such persons to stay and plant a crop and promote the work in that particular area. [^29]

On April 29, 1846, those available of the General Council again met. After disposing of the business at hand, they turned then attention to their newly designated camping ground. The settlement "was called by the President Garden Grove." The name was then submitted to the council and sanctioned by the same. [^30]

Later when another settlement was contemplated, "a convention of the council" met in the evening of March 8, 1846, to discuss the subject. President Young suggested the propriety of sending two or three men to the north to select the place for a settlement. Accordingly it was decided by the council "that Pres. Young select the men to go and select a place for a settlement."

After the new settlement had been established at Mount Pisgah an important meeting was held on May 20th, two days after the new site had been designated. Here again, it was impossible to convene the full membership of the General Council. The Journal History reports that "Brigham Young met in Council at the Post Office with Elders Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Geo. Smith, Amasa M. Lyman, Willard Richards, Bishops Newel K. Whitney and George Miller, six of the general council and three others." [^31] Lee's report of this meeting is in harmony with that given in the Journal History, except that he specifically designates those of the General Council who were present, including the apostles and bishops, who were also members. [^32]

During this meeting the council "chatted on various subjects—mostly on the expedition for the mountains." Heber C. Kimball remarked that to proceed as they were then doing would result in failure to reach their destination. Too many difficulties were being placed in the way of the leading brethren.

Parley P. Pratt suggested that the council use their authority to get the necessary teams to move themselves and as many others as they felt in their wisdom should go to the mountains. George A. Smith stated that he was willing to give up his teams and stay until President Young's families were removed.

As the discussion continued, it was evident that the council was of the opinion that the President and his families should go and such others as he might select; whereupon Brigham Young stated that he was willing to stay and let those go over the mountains who were ready, but that they would have to be willing to go and make improvements. If not, they should assist those who did go. After further discussing the subject,

Elder Kimball made a motion to the effect that the Twelve stay here and let those who are ready go on. The motion was seconded by Dr. Richards. Pres. Young moved that the Twelve and such others as they might select should go over the mountains; carried. [^33]

As the exodus progressed, the previous plans of the council were disrupted by the call for the Mormon Battalion. Here again the General Council played a dominant role in the affairs of the Saints. Said Bishop George Miller:

Brigham called a council; I did not attend. The result of their deliberations was that they should enlist a battalion for one year's term of service, the men to be then mustered out of service, with permission to retain their arms, and they stipulated that such mustering out of service should take place at San Francisco. [^34]

Although Bishop Miller does not specify that the above took place at a meeting of the General Council, Benjamin F. Johnson specifically states that such was the case. In referring to the Council of Fifty and its consideration of these matters, he said:

To show you that I did know the motive of President Young in sending the Battalion, I will say, that I was one of that special council organized by the Prophet, of which I have written, and of which Brigham Young being the head, I still held my seat and still had a voice in all general movements relating to our exodus as a people from Nauvoo. . . . I was present at the arrival of Colonel Little and company at Garden Grove, with the requisition, by count for five hundred volunteers for the American Army. . . . It was well understood at the time, as the subject was fully ventilated by the Council. [^35]

The effort to send a company to the West that year did not materialize. When the General Council met on August 1, 1846, President Young suggested that they consider stopping and prepare for winter. After some discussion, it was decided that it would not be wise for any company to attempt to gain their destination that season. This matter being settled, it was then voted that the Saints keep as close together the coming winter as they conveniently could. [^36]

The final arrangements for moving west to the Rocky Mountains were made at Winter Quarters. To this end a series of meetings was held by the General Council in the latter part of December, 1846. Beginning on Christmas day, "the General Council met at Dr. W. Richard's octagon," and held two sessions that day. [^37] The following day Brigham Young met with the General Council at 10:00 a.m. and deliberated upon the subject of the gathering of Israel to the mountains. Again two sessions were held, the last of which dismissed at 9:00 p.m. [^38] Brigham Young again met with members of the General Council the morning of December 27th. When the council convened that afternoon, Elder Ezra T. Benson was appointed to accompany Bishop George Miller to his encampment at Ponca Village, [^39] some one hundred fifty miles or more northwest of Winter Quarters, "at the junction of the Running Water River and the Missouri." [^40]

George Miller and James Emmitt, as members of the General Council, had come down from Ponca Village to be in attendance at the above meetings, arriving on Christmas day. [^41] Miller later wrote of his activities at the time, stating:

Part of the teams we sent down to Missouri, having stayed longer than I had anticipated, and Brigham Young having sent an express to me to meet them in council at winter quarters, and bring James Emmit with me (as he had also in Joseph Smith's life-time been organized into the council of the fifty Princes of the Kingdom), and not to fail in coming, as important matters were to be taken up in the said council for their deliberation and action, I, at the receiving of the message, thought I should not go. But my son Joshua not having yet returned from Missouri, where he had gone with others to purchase grain, I altered my mind and concluded to go, and, after the counselling should have ended, help my son home to Ponca Village. . . . Emmitt and I set off. . . . When we arrived at the winter quarters, the council convened, but their deliberations amounted to nothing. However I was not wholly overlooked in their deliberations. Brigham Young, Kimball and Richards proposed that I should come down to Winter Quarters, bringing with me part of my family, and take my place with Bishop Whitney in managing the fiscal concerns of the Church, and that I should be supported out of the revenues of the Church; which, however, was not done. This council, originally consisting of fifty-three members, of whom some twenty had gone on missions, or were by deaths and other means absent, was now swelled to a great crowd under Brigham's reign. [^42]

On January 4, 1847, Brigham Young wrote to Charles C. Rich, at Mount Pisgah, concerning the meetings that had been concluded a few days prior. Said he:

Our council met at Christmas and decided to send on a pioneer company as early as possible with plows, seed, grain etc., and make preparations for eatables at the foot of the mountains, on this side; and when grass starts we will follow on with as many as can go, or as many as it is wisdom to go and be sustained at that point, for we consider it best so far as practicable to raise grain ahead instead of carting it; as we have before said to you we shall want to gather up all the able-bodied men who can leave, to go in the pioneer company, and we expect soon to send a delegation to your place to explain all particulars accompanied probably by some of the Twelve. [^43]

The plans made at this time were later altered somewhat, but it is significant that the General Council, consistent with the whole picture of the exodus, was the body that initiated and carried out these final preparations for locating the Saints in the West.

It is also noteworthy that when the revelation known as "The Word and Will of the Lord" was given to the Saints by Brigham Young in January, 1847, setting forth the organization to be followed from that time on in the exodus, the General Council, along with the several bodies of the priesthood, acknowledged it. Said Lee in his Journal:

. . . in council with the Twelve at E. T. Benson's when the word and will of the Lord concerning the journeyings of Israel was first laid before the council as a revelation to the church and acknowledged by the Council of Fifty. The revelation was then presented to the First Presidency of the Seventies and so on down and acknowledged. [^44]

From the facts presented in this chapter it can be concluded that, while priesthood leadership prevailed in the exodus, those acting in and under its authority were not functioning in a religious capacity. The priesthood of Zion was largely functioning in the political sphere of the Kingdom of God during the move to the West. It is little wonder that Ezra T. Benson expressed the thought that during the exodus the Saints were "considered a distinct nation." [^45]

Footnotes

". . . appointed additional captains of hundreds, making twenty-five companies, as follows: 1st, the Twelve; 2nd, Samuel Bent; 3rd, Alpheus Cutler; 4th, Isaac Morley; 5th, Shadrach Roundy; 6th, Reynolds Cahoon; 7th, Daniel Spencer; 8th, Peter Haws; 9th, Joseph Fielding; 10th, John D. Parker; 11th, David Fullmer; 12th, Charles Shumway; 13th, Charles C. Rich; 14th, Jedediah M. Grant; 15th, Erastus Snow; 16th, Benjamin F. Johnson; 17th, Andrew H. Perkins; 18th, George Coulson; 19th, David Evans; 20th, Daniel C. Davis; 21st, Jonathan H. Hale; 22nd, George P. Dykes (Ottoway); 23rd, Mephiboseth Sirrine, (Michigan); 24th, Hosea Stout; 25th, Wm. Huntington."—Journal History, under above date; D.H.C., VII, 481-2.

". . . went to . . . the temple at ten o'clock and met with the Council of Fifty. This is the first time which ever I met with that council.

"The subject of our removal west was discussed and . . . well entertained."—"Diary of Hosea Stout," II, under above date.

"A meeting of the captains of Emigrating Companies was held in the attic story of the Temple, to ascertain the number ready and willing to start should necessity compel our instant removal, being aware that evil is intended towards us, and that our safety alone will depend upon our departure from this place, before our enemies shall intercept and prevent our going.

"A general interest in the movement was manifested by the whole council, every man felt willing to yield to the circumstances that surround us, and let their property be used for the purpose of accomplishing the removal and salvation of this people.

"We selected Almon W. Babbitt, Joseph L. Heywood, John S. Fullmer, Henry W. Miller and John M. Bernhisel, a committee to dispose of our property and effects and aid such in emigrating as may have to go, it was agreed that they should have letters of attorney to authorize them to act for us legally."—D.H.C., VII, 569.

". . . I met with the brethren of the twelve Apostles, Bishop Whitney and Miller and others. Bishop Geo. Miller gave his views relative to the Church moving to Texas to the country lying between the Neuces and the Rio Grande. I informed Bishop Miller that his views were wild and visionary, when we moved hence it would be in the Great Basin where the Saints would soon form a nucleus of strength and power sufficient to cope with mobs."—"History of Brigham Young," under above date.

---
Notas:
[^1] Dale Morgan, "The State of Deseret," Utah Historical Quarterly, VIII (April, July, October, 1940), p. 79.
[^2] Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah (Salt Lake City, 1892), I, 389. Bancroft likewise concludes: "Until the year 1849 the Mormons were entirely under the control of their ecclesiastical leaders, regarding the presidency not only as their spiritual head, but as the source of law in temporal things."—History of Utah (San Francisco, 1890), p. 439. More recently Creer described government during this period as "a pure theocracy" in which there was "a complete fusion of church and state—the utilization of one set of institutions for both ecclesiastical and civil affairs."—Leland H. Creer, "The Evolution of Government in Early Utah," Utah Historical Quarterly, January, 1958, p. 27.
[^3] Howard Egan, Pioneering the West (Salt Lake City, 1917), p. 127.
[^4] Journal History, September 6, 1847.
[^5] Ibid., September 9, 1847.
[^6] John Young later became a member, January 20, 1849. See Journal History under that date.
[^7] Journal History, October 3, 1847.
[^8] Ibid., December 9, 1848.
[^9] Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, pp. 80-2.
[^10] Ibid., pp. 82-6.
[^11] Johnson to Gibbs, p. 23.
[^12] Benjamin F. Johnson, My Life's Review (Independence, Mo., 1947), p. 124. (Italics by the writer) Johnson's statement seems to imply that an election of some kind was held—that the General Council did not merely assume the right to organize itself into the Colonial Legislature of Deseret.
[^13] Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, p. 80.
[^14] Part of Lee's diary at this point was lost. It may have contained information vital to this subject.
[^15] Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, pp. 86-7. (Italics added by the writer)
[^16] Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, p. 86. (Italics other than the date added by the writer.) The Journal History report does not give this information, but its record of other items of business considered at the time is in fundamental accord with Lee's record.
[^17] Ibid. (Italics other than the date by the writer.) That this was a meeting of the Council of Fifty is evident from the fact that it adjourned to meet again February 9th. Of the latter meeting, Lee reported: "At 5 the Council of YTFIF met agreeable to adjournment." See ibid., p. 88.
[^18] Ibid., pp. 90-1. (Italics other than the date by the writer.)
[^19] Ibid., pp. 94-6. (Italics other than the date by the writer.)
[^20] Ibid., pp. 97-8. (Italics other than the date by the writer.)
[^21] Journal History, March 9, 1849. (Italics by the writer.)
[^22] Ibid., March 3, 1849; Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, pp. 97-8.
[^23] Johnson to Gibbs, p. 23.
[^24] Journal History, March 16, 1849.
[^25] Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, p. 107.
[^26] Morgan, op. cit., 88.
[^27] Creer erroneously states that "the urgency of ecclesiastical business" led to this decision to relieve the high council of civil responsibilities. See op. cit., p. 30.
[^28] See Journal History, January 6, 7, 1849; Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, p. 86. At a meeting January 20th, "Amasa M. Lyman reported that several of the cattle committee went to Utah Valley and found from 2 1/2 to 4 inches of snow and concluded that G. S. L. Valley was the best place to keep the cattle." Journal History, January 20, 1849.
[^29] See Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, op. cit.
[^30] Journal History, January 6, 20, and February 3, 1849.
[^31] Ibid., January 6, 1849.
[^32] Ibid.; Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, op. cit. The Journal History reports that only one building was to be destroyed, while Lee indicates that there was more than one.
[^33] Journal History, January 20, 1849. Each man present, with the exception of two, donated the sum of $1.00, said John D. Lee. See Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, pp. 87-8. Lee reports this meeting as having been held on February 3rd. Otherwise his report is in general harmony with that given in the Journal History. Lee's date may be in error, as he seems to have recorded the proceedings of this and other meetings held by the council during this period some time afterward.
[^34] Journal History, February 3, 1819.
[^35] Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, op. cit
[^36] Journal History, February 3, 1849. Lee reports this action as having been taken at the February 9th meeting. The name William M. Lemon he gives as Wm. McLemon. See Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, pp. 88-9.
[^37] Ibid., p. 88; Journal History, February 9, 1849. Lee added that they also reported that there were also 1,100 milk cows to 4,000 souls.
[^38] February 9, 1849. The discretionary powers granted to the assessor Lee reports as the right "to pin down upon the rich and percurious [penurious?], and when he comes to a poor man or widow that is honest, instead of taxing them, give them a few 'dollars.'" See Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, op. cit.
[^39] Journal History, under above dates.
[^40] Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, pp. 90-2.
[^41] Journal History, February 17, 1849.
[^42] Ibid., Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, op. cit.
[^43] Idem.
[^44] Ibid.; Journal History, February 17, 1849.
[^45] There is a conflict on the time the February 24th meeting got underway. The Journal History reports that the meeting was scheduled for 10:00 a.m., but since a quorum was not present the council adjourned until 6:00 p.m., when "several of the Twelve and others were present." Lee, however, reports that "a convention of the Legislation council" met at the appointed place at 9:00 a.m., and after offering prayer "proceeded to business." Lee also reported that Brigham Young and others "took supper" and "spent the evening" with him at his home that day, which would seemingly preclude the possibility of the council meeting at 6:00 p.m. Despite this difference of time, both sources are agreed in their report of the major business transactions during the meeting.
