Hyrum L. Andrus, Joseph Smith and World Government ( 1958)

Chapter IV

NEW VIEWS ON THE ORIGIN OF GOVERNMENT IN THE GREAT BASIN

WHEN the origin of political government in Salt Lake Valley and adjacent areas is analyzed in light of the purpose for which the General Council was organized and its later activities, an entirely different picture is presented on this subject from what has been previously seen. Heretofore historians have taken the view that government in Great Salt Lake Valley was merely a "spontaneous government" that grew out of the immediate needs of the settlers, representing "a maximum of practical reality and a minimum of political theory." [^1] Also, it has been assumed that up until the spring of 1849 "the mode of government in Salt Lake Valley was purely an ecclesiastical regime." [^2] These views must now be modified to show a more accurate picture of the formation of government in the Great Basin and the role of the General Council as it acted in these matters.

In August, 1847, Brigham Young left Salt Lake Valley to return to Winter Quarters. Before leaving, however, he commenced effecting an organization to govern and direct those who were to remain in the valley, in their religious as well as in their civil activities. On August 22nd, he declared:

It is the right of the Twelve to nominate the officers and the people to receive them. We wish to know who is coming in the next company. If Uncle John Smith comes, it is our minds that he preside. [^3]

After leaving the valley, the returning group met a westbound company near South Pass, of which John Smith was a member. The following day, September 6th, a meeting was held, at which time there was nominated "a president, a High Council, and a marshal for G.S.L. City." [^4] Three days later Brigham Young addressed an epistle to those in the valley, stating:

It is wisdom that certain officers should exist among you, to preside during our absence, and we would nominate John Smith to be your president, with liberty for him to select his two counselors, and we would suggest the names of Chas. C. Rich and John Young. We would nominate Henry G. Sherwood, Thos. Grover, Levi Jackman, John Murdock, Daniel Spencer, Stephen Abbott, Ira Eldredge, Edison Whipple, Shadrach Roundy, John Vance, Willard Snow, and Abraham O. Smoot for a High Council; whose duty it will be to observe those principles which have been instituted in the Stakes of Zion for the government of the Church, and to pass such laws and ordinances as shall be necessary for the peace and prosperity of the city for the time being. . . . [^5]

It should be noted that John Smith and Charles C. Rich of the newly proposed stake presidency were also members of the General Council. They could, then, act in the dual capacity of civil and ecclesiastical authority. [^6]

At a meeting in the valley on October 3, 1847, the above nominations were ratified by the people. In addition to these officers, Charles C. Rich, who had been the commander of the first artillery company of the pioneers, was elected chief military commander; John Van Cott, marshal; and Albert Carrington, clerk, historian, and deputy postmaster. [^7]

Later, when Brigham Young and others of the General Council were permanently located in the valley, the council took over the direction of the civic affairs of the people throughout the area. On December 9, 1848, Brigham Young reported that, "A council meeting, which was continued all day, was held at Heber C. Kimball's house." [^8] In his Journal, John D. Lee reports that this was a meeting of the Council of Fifty, and that at that time the council "took into consideration" the propriety of petitioning Congress for a territorial government, with officers of their "own nomination." The boundaries of the proposed territory were discussed and probably set. The name the council proposed for the new government was Deseret. Brigham Young was nominated governor; Willard Richards, secretary; Heber C. Kimball, chief judge; Newel K. Whitney and Parley P. Pratt, associate judges; and John M. Bernhisel, marshal. John M. Bernhisel, Daniel H. Wells, and Joseph L. Heywood were appointed a committee to draft a petition to Congress expressing the desires of the people for such a government. John Taylor, Amasa M. Lyman, Daniel H. Wells, John D. Lee, John Fielding, Reynolds Cahoon, Jedediah M. Grant, William W. Phelps, John S. Fullmer, and Charles Shumway were appointed a committee to obtain the signatures of all the inhabitants of the valley and surrounding areas, to be included in the petition to Congress. [^9]

At a meeting of the council, December 16th, Bernhisel, Wells, and Heywood read a draft of the proposed petition to Congress for a territorial government, after which it was discussed. Parley P. Pratt was then added to the committee and the decision was made to have the committee give further consideration to the document. On the following January 6th, the revised petition, along with an outline of the boundaries of the proposed territory, was read by the committee and accepted by the council. Dr. Bernhisel was delegated to carry the petition to Washington and there represent the interests of the people in these matters. [^10]

It was no doubt during the month of December, 1848, that the General Council incorporated itself into the provincial legislature of the State of Deseret. Benjamin F. Johnson later wrote: "This council, as a legislature of the people, did continue under the Presidency of the Church and became the Colonial Council, or Legislature of the State of Deseret." [^11] Said Johnson on another occasion: "The Colonial Council or Legislature of Deseret, I think was organized in December, 1848, to which I was elected and held membership through the colonial period." [^12]

Though these statements were made several years afterward and may be open to question as to their accuracy, existing evidence supports the truth of Johnson's report. When John D. Lee made mention of the Council of Fifty, in December, 1848, he began by explaining that this council was considered as the "Municipal department of the Kingdom of God . . . from which all law emanates, for the rule, government, and control of all nations, kingdoms, and tongues and people under the whole heavens." [^13] Since this was the prevailing view, it would only be logical that law and government in the Great Basin should likewise stem from this body. Why, then, should not the General Council set about incorporating itself into a regularly constituted government at an early date? The fact that Lee mentioned the governmental concept of the political kingdom at this time argues that organizational developments were being carried out to expand the powers of the council consistent with the pattern set by Joseph Smith. [^14]

Probably the most conclusive evidence supporting the above view is the fact that the terminology Lee used in designating the functions of the General Council after December, 1848, sounds much as if it had become a legislative body. Consider the following:

January 6th. A convention of the Council assembled at H. C. Kimball's house at which council the pe[ti]tion and bounds of the Territory or Country pe[ti]tioned for was read by the Committee, and accepted by the House. . . . [^15]

. . . The above took place on the 20th Jany., at a convention of the Council, which dissolved to Feb. 3rd, 1849, at the house of H. C. Kimball. [^16]

Feb. 3rd. '49. At 10 morning the con[v]e[n]tion of the Council met at Elder H. C. Kimball's. The House having been called and duly opened by prayer, the subject of securing the public arm[s] was taken up. . . . [^17]

Sat., Feb. 17, '49. . . 1st business before the House was the reports of the committees. Jos. L. Heywood reported that he had [let] out the building of the bridge over the river Jordan to Elder John Taylor at $700, to be complete within one month. . . .

Second, Daniel H. Spencer, Chairman of the committee of the Big Field fence reported. . . .

3rdly, Albert Carrington, chairman on the committee of weights & measures, reported. . . . [^18]

Sat., Feb. 24th. . . . at 9 a.[m.] convention of the Legislation council met at W. W. Phelp's school room. The House called to order. . . .

The House then proceeded to business. The committee on the fencing of the town lots report[e]d. . . .

3rdly, the committee sel[e]cted to lay out a burying ground reported. . . .

4th, J. D. Lee reported that the committee on fencing for the South Field met. . . .

Met a[t] 30 m. to 2. Voted that any person or persons that shall hereafter be found riding a horse or mule that does not belong to he, she, [sic] or them shall upon conviction before the proper authority be fined not less than 25 dollars for each offense, and all damage, one half to the Public Treasury, the other to the complainant. [^19]

Sat., March 3rd. J. D. Lee met in Legislative capacity with the council of Fifty at the Wm. W. Phelps S[c]hool Room. . . . At 2 p.m. the council was called together and some tall speeches were made relative to the duties and powers of this Council, by E. Snow and others. Repeated the Name of this council (SS) [viz.]: Verily thus saith the Lord, by this name ye shall be called, The Kingdom of God and its laws and justice and judgment in my hands. Signed Ah Man, Christ. . . .

. . . voted that the Marshall should receive his commission from this council, and signed by the chairman, and counter signed by the clerk, and that he have a right to appoint Deputy Marshalls who shall receive theri commissions in like manner. [^20]

That the General Council was acting as a colonial legislature during the winter of 1848-49 is also evident by the report, that on March 9, 1849, "The Legislative Council of the State of Deseret passed the following:"

AN ORDINANCE, ORGANIZING THE NAUVOO LEGION

That a committee of three be appointed to organize, or authorize others to organize, all male inhabitants of the valley of the Great Salt Lake, who are able-bodied men, over fourteen, and under seventy-five years of age, into different companies, the whole to form an entire Military Organization of the people, under the name of the Nauvoo Legion.

Whereupon Amasa M. Lyman, Charles C. Rich and Daniel H. Wells, were appointed said Committee. [^21]

The above was the official announcement of the action of the "Legislative Council." Actually, the decision to organize the legion was made six days before, when the above action was taken in a council meeting specifically identified by John D. Lee as the Council of Fifty. [^22] Here again we have confirmation that this body became, as Johnson stated, the "Colonial Council or Legislature of Deseret." [^23] The fact that they enacted this ordinance several days before the executive officers of the forthcoming government of Deseret were elected and more than three and one-half months before the "State" government began officially to function indicates that the legislative division of that government had been in existence for some time. Furthermore, after Brigham Young commenced attending to the organization of the Nauvoo Legion, on March 16, 1849, [^24] the General Council assisted in the task. In the early part of the following May, Lee reported:

. . . The Council was required to meet the Brethren at the sta. . . . and . . . to organize them into a military body. The band and marsha . . . musick was prepared for the occasion. There was about 10 cos. organized and officers elected over them. [^25]

Finally, proof that the General Council became the legislative branch of the government of Deseret some time before the latter was officially organized lies in the fact that the record is conspicuously silent on the subject of how the General Assembly of the State of Deseret came into being. "It would be interesting to know how members of the General Assembly were selected." Dale Morgan comments. "There is no record of an election." [^26]

During the period between December, 1848, and the formal inauguration of the State of Deseret the following spring, the General Council was busy with the activities of government in the Great Basin. On January 6, 1849, they met at the house of Heber C. Kimball and resolved that "the High Council be relieved from municipal duties." This action officially terminated the fifteen-month period during which the high council directed civil as well as ecclesiastical affairs in the valley. From that time until the organization of the State of Deseret the General Council resumed the functions of government among the Saints. [^27]

During the January 6th meeting, several problems were discussed and acted upon by the General Council. The question of how best to care for the cattle in the basin came up. As a result of the council's deliberations, a committee of ten men was appointed to visit Utah Valley and ascertain its utility as a cattle range at that time of the year. The committee set out the next day and returned January 10th with an unfavorable report. [^28]

Because of existing circumstances, an inflationary trend was developing, particularly in the article of beef. Those who had fat cattle for sale were "grinding the face of the poor." The problem was discussed in the January 6th meeting of the council. Some members of that body were in favor of passing laws to regulate prices in certain areas. But Brigham Young, whose opinion prevailed, suggested that they let trade seek its own level and handle the situation through non-legislative measures. [^29]

Steps were also taken in the above meeting to encourage the development of various industries in the valley. Sheep were to be imported, and fisheries and a tannery were to be established. The council pledged its influence to sustain those who undertook to develop these enterprises. But when a tanner sought for a guaranteed remuneration "the council decided not to do it, but that he should have the business on his own responsibility." [^30] The council also acted to regulate the use to be made of public lands. It then ordained "that the Kirtland bank bills be put into circulation for the accommodation of the people, thus fulfilling the prophecy of Joseph Smith that the Kirtland notes would one day be as good as gold." [^31] Nor did the council fail to recognize that it had the responsibility to promote good morals within the society. It voted to raze some fort buildings in order to suppress the "progress of iniquity" that was developing in those places. [^32]

The first item of business considered in the January 20th meeting was to vote that John Young become a member of the council. The situation of the cattle was then discussed, and the committee, having given a further report on the proposal to move them to Utah Valley, was discharged. The council next discussed the need for an armorer to take charge of public arms; and, accordingly, Thomas Tanner was appointed. It also was "voted that a building be erected forthwith for an armory." Reynolds Cahoon was chosen to supervise its construction and Thomas Bullock was appointed Treasurer. The sum of $32.00 was subscribed by the council towards the expenses of the building. [^33]

The scarcity of foodstuffs among the people was reconsidered in the February 3rd meeting of the General Council, along with the inflationary trends that were then current. The nature of this problem, along with the action of the council in providing a solution, was reported by Brigham Young, as follows:

The winter proving severer than the preceding one, had led the brethren to expect that more sustenance was required by man and animals than was anticipated, and much of the past season's crops, the sole reliance of the colony, was destroyed by crickets. The immigrants, too, who arrived from Winter Quarters the past fall, instead of bringing with them eighteen months provisions, as they had been instructed to do, brought much less, and that limited stock was reduced beyond their anticipation by their enormous appetites, induced by the continuous toil-some journey and the keen mountain air. So by this time many families were destitute of provisions, and it was evident that something must be done for their relief. The council, therefore, resolved that no corn should be made into whiskey, and that if any man was preparing to distill corn into whiskey or alcohol, the corn should be taken and given to the poor; that the Bishops should ascertain the true situation of the people in relation to breadstuffs and what amount each family had per head, and report to the next council. [^34]

John D. Lee reported that in the above meeting the council concluded that there was probably sufficient food in the valley to sustain the people until more could be raised, providing it could be equally distributed. Fear, not genuine scarcity, he reports Parley P. Pratt as suggesting, was the greatest problem. [^35]

Besides the above, the council acted on two other important matters during this meeting. First, it established a standard weight for wheat and corn in the area, the former being set at 60 lbs. a bushel and the latter at 56 lbs. a bushel. Albert Carrington, Joseph L. Heywood, and Philip B. Lewis were also appointed as a committee on weights and measures, with Lewis as "sealer thereof." The next item had to do with the need for fencing certain lands in the area. And Daniel Spencer, Edward Hunter, John Vance, and William M. Lemon were "appointed to superintend and apportion the fencing to be made in the different districts." [^36]

When the "Council of YTFIF met agreeable to adjournment" on February 9th, the "committee on bread stuffs reported that there was in the valley 78/100 of a pound of breadstuffs per head per day for the next five months, corn and wheat being rated at only 50 lbs. per bushel." The council considered this amount to be sufficient. [^37]

They next turned their attention to the need for constructing a bridge across the Jordan River. It was estimated that the project would cost from "$700 to $800, mechanics' wages being rated at $1.50 to $2.00 per day." Concerning the further consideration given to the building and maintenance of roads at this meeting, the Journal History states:

It was resolved that a tax of one per cent per annum be assessed on property, to repair the public highways, bridges, and other works; that Albert Carrington be assessor, collector, and treasurer, with certain discretionary powers in collecting from the poor and widows; that the supervisor draw upon him for funds, and that once a year one or two auditors be appointed to audit his accounts. The clerks of the council were instructed to write eight notices, containing the laws made by the Council, for posting up in different places for the information of the public. [^38]

The council was also confronted with the problem of getting certain ones within the valley to accept the paper currency used as a medium of exchange. On February 3rd, the subject was discussed; and it was proposed that the licensed butchers who refused to accept this currency be required to give up their licenses. But at the February 9th meeting the report was made that "the butchers were willing to accede to the request of the council, respecting the taking of paper money." [^39]

When the General Council met on February 17th, the subject of building a bridge across the Jordan River was again taken up. John D. Lee reports that John Taylor remarked that upon examination, the bed on the river where the bridge was designed to be built would not admit the building of a bridge at that point, because of a twelve-foot layer of quicksand. After some discussion on the subject, John Taylor, Daniel H. Wells, and Jedediah M. Grant were appointed a committee to locate the site for the bridge. [^40] The committee for fencing the Big Field then reported "that the fence would include 291 ten-acre lots, 460 five-acre lots, the Church farm of 800 acres, and 17 acres of fractional lots, the whole requiring 5240 rods of fencing, of which 3217 were recommended to be built of adobies, 633 of adobies and stone, and 1361 of ditch and posts and rails." [^41]

Besides reporting the above action with some deviation on statistics, Lee records that the council considered an item of business in this session not mentioned in the Journal History. It had to do with establishing a system of weights and measures throughout the area. The committee assigned to this responsibility reported that they had examined the different systems in the world and found the "French Standard" to be the most correct and simple. In the discussion that ensued, C. P. Lott declared that he was opposed to adopting the system of any nation, and suggested that they set up a system of their own that could be a pattern to the nations. Brigham Young then gave his view: that he wanted the weights and measures to be arranged upon "the most easy, simple, plain system that could be had." The discussion seems to have concluded at this point. [^42]

During the afternoon session, Daniel Spencer, David Fullmer and Willard Snow were appointed a committee to direct the locating of streets through the city and the fencing of the survey south of the Big Field. Whether this action had anything to do with the following report given by Lee is not clear. He wrote that the council,

Moved and 2nd that a committee of 3 be appointed to take into consideration the interest of the South Farm, to proportion to each man the number of rods of fence to make, to dictate how it shall be made and to inspect it when done. Carried unanimously. Pres. Young said that he would let Bro. A. Lyman nominate that committee: James M. Flake, Wm. Crowsby and John D. Lee, Pres. B. Young said that he had no objection to the men, provided J. D. Lee is chairman of that committee, and further said that when a man was taken out of this council to do business, let that man be the chairman of whatever committee he may belong [to]; thus the chairman can report to the council. [^43]

It may be that the above decision, which is not reported in the Journal History, could have led to a policy of utilizing the services of capable men outside the council in carrying out specific assignments.

Both of the above sources report that during the afternoon session of the February 17th meeting, Brigham Young was appointed "a committee of one" to erect a public bathhouse at the Warm Springs. Lee adds that it was to be erected out of public funds. President Young was also granted the privilege of building a mill in the ravine, "east of Chase's mill, and of taking the water out of the Big Canyon creek to run the mill, except when needed for irrigation."

In addition to the foregoing business, the Journal History reports that "Daniel H. Wells, Joseph L. Heywood and Geo. B. Wallace were appointed a committee to select a suitable place for a burying ground." While Lee does not confirm this action, he reports another item of business not mentioned in the Journal History: that the council voted to open the "9th East Street" and to erect a bridge over Canyon Creek immediately. At 6:00 p.m., the meeting was adjourned, to convene again on Saturday, February 24, 1849. [^44]

The first item of business considered at the meeting of the General Council, February 24, 1849, [^45] was a petition by Robert Crow and others [^46] for "permission for the Presidency and council of the Church to go to the California gold mines, to dig gold under sanction of the authorities of the Church." After some discussion, the group was advised to stay in the valley and raise grain.

Lee's minutes of the meeting includes reports by three committees as the next business of the council. The committee on fencing town lots reported that the city had been divided into wards and that each ward would be fenced separately; [^47] the committee appointed to select a site for a cemetery reported that it had been hampered in accomplishing its task by snow; and, the committee in charge of fencing the South Field reported that they had commenced work.

The council then established fines for driving animals from the range, or using them without the consent of the owner. Lee reports the full action of the council as follows:

Vote that any person or persons that shall hereafter be found riding a horse or mule that does not belong to he, she, [sic] or them shall upon conviction before the proper authority be fined not less than 25 dollars for each offense, and all damage, one half to the Public Treasury, the other to the complainant. Also any person or persons that shall drive off any horses or mules to the Fort or from their range any cattle, shall upon conviction as before be fined 5 dollars for each head. [^48]

The council next turned its attention to a matter of disorderly conduct that had recently occurred, involving some young men who had been with the Mormon Battalion. They were fined $25.00 each. Since their actions violated the moral standards of the community, Lee reports that the council also voted "that they all be cut off from the church." Finally, after appointing Horace S. Eldredge marshal of Great Salt Lake Valley, ordaining that bridges be built across the Cottonwood creeks and other streams as the convenience of the people required, and considering a few other matters of similar importance, the council adjourned to meet again on Saturday, March 3, 1849. [^49]

When "the Council of Fifty" met on March 3rd, it was voted "that Horace S. Eldredge receive a diploma from the council, as marshal of the valley of G. S. L. and that he have the privilege of deputing men to assist him, also that all such documents be signed by the President of the council and countersigned by the clerk." Most of the forenoon was spent deliberating upon the matter of enforcing justice in cases where men had violated the standards of the society to the point where they were considered worthy of the death penalty. It was pointed out that, according to revelation, the very name of the council was, "The Kingdom of God and its laws and justice and judgment in my [God's] hands." This being true, should "the members of this council suffer their sympathy to arise to the extent that mercy will rob justice of its claims, suffering infernals, thieves, murderers, whoremongers" and other such characters to live, "adding sin to sin, crime to crime, corrupting the morals of the people when their blood ought to flow to atone for their crimes[?]" [^50]

In the afternoon session, several matters were considered and passed upon by the council. Petitions for land grants by Daniel Russell and Benjamin F. Johnson were approved. The sum of $100.00 was appropriated to the use of the clerk of the council, for his services. A petition by Reynolds Cahoon for $15.00 from the public treasury was approved for construction of the arsenal he had been commissioned to build. The destruction of predatory animals in the area was considered. Some time prior to this meeting two hunting companies had been organized under the leadership of John Pack and John D. Lee, each company consisting of some one hundred men. On March 1st, it was reported that Pack's men had killed 3,222 more animals and birds than Lee's company. Evidently the complete count was not made at that time, however, since the council voted on March 3rd "that those persons who had not already reported the amount of game they had killed in the late hunt, have the privilege of counting the same on the following Monday at the Council House." [^51]

The next item of business before the council was a report by Daniel H. Wells that the committee responsible for locating a cemetery site had selected a twenty-acre plot northeast of the city. Following Wells' report, the council voted to organize the Nauvoo Legion, as discussed earlier in this chapter. The matter of operating ferries on the North Fork of the Platte and on the Green River was then taken up; and President Young was appointed to take care of this business. Accordingly, he appointed Parley P. Pratt to take a company and proceed to the Green River; and Orrin P. Rockwell, Charles Shumway, and Edmund Ellsworth were chosen to go to the upper ferry on the North Fork of the Platte. [^52] The council then "voted that the public be informed that the mail will start for Winter Quarters on the 20th of March, if possible, or as soon thereafter as practicable." Allen Compton was delegated to take charge of said mail. Finally, the subject of sending teams back to assist the immigrants was discussed. Parley P. Pratt and Daniel H. Wells were appointed to write to the Church Authorities in Iowa, informing them of the circumstances of the Saints in the valley and the "almost impossibility of their sending back any assistance." The council then adjourned to meet again the following day at the home of Heber C. Kimball. [^53]

The meeting of the council March 4, 1849 was a very important one. It was here that further plans for establishing the State of Deseret were made. The Journal History reports:

The council met in Heber C. Kimball's house at 9:30 a.m., and voted that the marshal give notice to the people of the valley of the G.S.L. and vicinity, that a public meeting would be held at the meeting ground in the old Fort, on Monday, the 12th day of March, at 10 o'clock a.m., for the purpose of electing and appointing officers for the government of the people in the valley of G.S.L. and vicinity, until the petition of the people be granted by the United States for a Territorial Government. [^54]

In the afternoon session, the council again turned its attention to the work of organizing the forthcoming government; and "the subject of nominating officers for election for a provisional government was presented." It was then "voted that the names already approved be brought before the people for their ratification." [^55] These names were no doubt those considered by the council for positions in the government of Deseret during the meeting of December 8, 1848. It will be recalled that at that earlier meeting John M. Bernhisel was nominated as marshal. At the March 4th meeting, it was "voted that the name of John M. Bernhisel be substituted by that of Horace S. Eldredge for marshal, for the time being." The Journal History record of this substitution confirms Lee's report that in general the officers of the proposed government had been considered for nomination at the December meeting. In the latter meeting of the council, it was also reported that "Albert Carrington said he wished to resign his office as public treasurer." The council accepted his resignation and "voted that Newel K. Whitney succeed him." [^56] Here again is evidence of a prior nomination of officers by the council.

The appointment of deputy marshals also was considered at the March 4th meeting; and Lewis Robinson, George D. Grant, John Scott, Edward Ellsworth, Charles Shumway, George W. Langley, John Nebeker, Orrin P. Rockwell, Almon L. Fullmer, and Isaac C. Haight were named to fill this office. The council also "voted that the names of Bishops be placed on the list, as magistrates for their respective wards in the city and vicinity." Then, after voting that Daniel Spencer, David Fuller, and Willard Snow be judges of the election, the council appointed a committee of five "to fill out the ticket for the ensuing election" William W. Phelps, Amasa M. Lyman, John Taylor, Parley P. Pratt, and Jedediah M. Grant made up this committee. [^57]

The organization of the government of Deseret presents an interesting and somewhat perplexing picture to the student of history. In implementing the organization of the new state, the Saints were faced with two alternatives: First, they could have followed a procedure that would have been in full harmony with the theory and philosophy of the Kingdom of God; that is, they could have utilized theocratic procedures to accomplish the task. To do so would have made the origin of Deseret unique. And it would no doubt have brought criticism upon the Mormon leaders from unsympathetic sources. Such criticism would have operated against them in their efforts to unite with the Federal Union as a new state. They were aware of this.

In the second alternative, they could have used the popular democratic procedures of the day to effect the birth of Deseret. The natural tendency to utilize these procedures was very strong. There were those among the leading brethren who were college men, indoctrinated in the prevailing views on law and government. It is one thing to conceive a new theory of operation, they might well have argued, and another fully to implement it in fact, particularly where there may be some doubt at the time as to the wisdom of strictly following the new course. Even though the detailed facts surrounding the conflict that arose over these two established procedures are not known, the picture is clear that such a conflict did exist. In the final outcome, the former procedure predominated; but the latter theory was not without its influence.

It has been noted that steps were taken by the General Council as early as December, 1848 to organize the government of Deseret. In these arrangements, men were to be named to political office theocratically. Some credence, however, was later given to the question of utilizing democratic procedures in these matters. On February 1, 1849, a document signed by "many citizens" was made public, which stated: "Notice is hereby given to all the citizens of this portion of Upper California, lying east of the Sierra Nevada Mountains that a convention will be held at the Great Salt Lake City, in said Territory, on Monday, the fifth day of March next, for the purpose of taking into consideration the propriety of organizing a Territorial or State government." [^58]

Whether or not the above action was initiated by the General Council is not clear. But it was a fact that several of the council's leading members were involved in it, as they participated prominently in the convention when it met. Neff notes the democratic overtones of the convention by observing: "By careful design, and thoughtful observance of the calendar, the convention was timed to convene March 5th, the same day that General Zachary Taylor succeeded James K. Polk as president of the United States." [^59]

When the convention met, its actions were strictly democratic. There is no indication of priesthood control as such. Those present first "organized themselves into a Convention, by electing Daniel Spencer, Chairman; William Clayton, Secretary; Thomas Bullock, Assistant Secretary of said Convention; and Horace S. Eldredge, as Marshal." Then, after "several addresses and deliberations," a committee of ten was appointed to draft and report to the convention a constitution, "under which the inhabitants of said Territory may organize and govern themselves, until the Congress of the United States shall otherwise provide by law." Accordingly, the chairman appointed Albert Carrington, Joseph L. Heywood, William W. Phelps, David Fullmer, John S. Fullmer, Charles C. Rich, John Taylor, Parley P. Pratt, John M. Bernhisel, and Erastus Snow members of this committee. [^60] It is to be noted that four of the above men were apostles; and they, with others of the committee, were members of the General Council.

After the above appointments had been made, the convention adjourned until March 8th, at which time it was again in session until the 10th, when the Constitution was adopted. Among other things, it provided that an election for "members of the General Assembly, and other officers under this Constitution, shall be held on the first Monday of May next" (May 7, 1849). [^61] This provision was in direct conflict with the previous decision of the General Council to hold the election March 12, 1849.

It may be that the convention leaders felt that to hold the election according to the prior plans of the General Council would be acting too hastily. Two days is hardly enough time successfully to plan and carry out such an election. But there was more than a conflict of dates involved. The new Constitution called for an election of the General Assembly, along with the executive officers in the new government, while the council was evidently only planning to present the names of those to fill the latter offices to the people for their vote of approval or disapproval. Had the provision of the constitution been followed, it might have disrupted the council in its established authority in the area of government, or at least made it necessary to re-elect officers who might have been previously elected to the legislature. [^62] To avoid such possible eventualities, the General Council maintained its decision to hold the election March 12th.

At its meeting, March 10th, the day the convention completed its business, William W. Phelps of the council's committee on elections, "presented the election ticket" to the General Council. His report was accepted; and two days later the election was held in the Bowery, at which time 674 votes were polled in favor of the following ticket: Governor, Brigham Young; Secretary, Willard Richards; Chief Justice, Heber C. Kimball; Associate Justices, Newel K. Whitney and John Taylor; Marshal, Horace S. Eldredge; Attorney General, Daniel H. Wells; Assessor and Collector, Albert Carrington; Treasurer, Newel K. Whitney; Supervisor of Roads, Joseph L. Heywood. Magistrates also were elected for the several organized wards in the vicinity. [^63]

The question might be asked, Why did the General Council seemingly allow its political position to be challenged by courting the idea that the popular procedures of the day could be reconciled, in the organization of Deseret, with procedural patterns inherent in their ideal of government under the Kingdom of God? Certainly the leading brethren had—or could have had—control over the situation. There is no recorded expression of conflict—no rebuke, no chastisement—only the facts of the situation as recorded in the written record.

This strange phenomenon might at least partially be explained by noting, first, that it was not considered proper for the new government to be established through arbitrary means. Joseph Smith and his associates continually held that the Government of God would rise to prominence and spread its powers abroad only as sufficient people embraced and supported its program. Although they were dedicated to their ideal, the Mormon leaders were not a group of religious fanatics. They were well aware of the popular prejudice that existed against them and their cause. As long as such prejudice continued to exist, they need be in no hurry to emphasize the theocratic aspects of the Government of God.

The second point to keep in mind is the Mormon view that there was a strong possibility that the Government of God would only rise to power after other governments throughout the world had been broken by warfare and reduced to chaos. The period of latter-day warfare had not yet arrived; and even though the Saints often spoke of the anticipated destructions as a possible part of the great drama of the future when the Kingdom of God would rise to world prominence, there was no need of over-anticipating the expected consummation. Here again was reason for not implementing the Government of God in its theocratic aspects. Had not the Lord said by way of revelation: "Wherefore, be subject to the powers that be, until he reigns whose right it is to reign, and subdues all enemies under his feet." [^64] That they were dedicated to such a policy is evident from the fact that they merely sought to establish a government in the valley "until the Congress of the United States should otherwise provide for the Government of the Territory hereinafter named and described, by admitting us into the Union." [^65]

Even though the new constitution made a concession to the world by providing for democratic elections, it conformed to the ideal of the Kingdom of God in other respects, allowing for the fact that the Government of God then consisted of but one state and not a world federation. It was strictly orthodox in its adherence to American political thought. In fact, it was an ideal. Said Bernhisel in a letter from Washington, to President Young, October 2, 1850: "The Constitution of Deseret was much admired by statesmen here, not only as being very ably written, but was regarded as the best Constitution of the Country." [^66]

The State of Deseret was not officially launched until July, 1849. Meantime the General Council continued to function, as it had before the above election. Along with its other duties, the council dealt with the problem of colonizing adjacent areas in the Great Basin. At their meeting on March 10th, they "Voted that a colony of 30 men settle in Utah Valley this spring for the purpose of farming and fishing, and of instructing the Indians in cultivating the earth and of teaching them civilization." It was suggested by the council that the following men be members of this colony: John S. Higbee, William Wadsworth, Dimick B. Huntington, Samuel Ewing, Peter W. Conover, Alexander Williams, Houghton Conover, and John Scott. [^67] At their regular Saturday meeting the following week, the council again acted on this matter. To quote:

The names of a company of thirty-three, who were going to settle in Utah Valley, were read. The company, a few days previously, had chosen John S. Higbee for President and Bishop, Isaac Higbee for first counselor and Dimick B. Huntington second counselor. [^68]

There can be little doubt that the General Council, as the colonial legislature of Deseret, did its work well. When the State of Deseret met in official capacity, it had no immediate need to establish civil laws to govern the people. Said Morgan of the first meeting of the Assembly: "It is noteworthy that no effort was made toward providing civil laws and institutions at this session." [^69] The first session of the new government was primarily concerned with a petition to the Federal Government of the United States for admission into the Union. Deseret had come into being, but the colonial council had done its work so well that the functions of law had already been established when the State commenced its official functions. Few states, if any, can boast of such an orderly and intelligent beginning.

When the law organizing the Territory of Utah was passed by Congress in September, 1850, opposing factors were introduced into the political picture of the Great Basin that eventually made it impossible for the political adjunct of the priesthood to function longer as the primary instrument of government in the area. Nevertheless, it did not cease to exist for some time thereafter—at least until 1870. During this period, the ideal of a future world government under the Kingdom of God burned in the hearts of many of the Saints. It was voiced by Brigham Young in 1863, when he declared: "Joseph Smith organized this government before, in Nauvoo, and he said if we did our duty, we could prevail over all our enemies." [^70]

But neither the Saints nor those not of their faith were disposed to do their part in establishing the millennial government. So far as the Saints were concerned, it was with them as it had been when the Law of Consecration was introduced: they were unwilling to develop the understanding and the obedience necessary to play the role God would have them play in establishing a government capable of eventually coping with the job of establishing world peace. When they came to realize their responsibilities to the world and truly developed the principles of Zion in their lives, Brigham Young argued in 1872, God would see to it that they were given the power to achieve these ends. Said he of their failure to meet the necessary standards:

Will he [God] ever grant power to his Saints on the earth? Yes, they will take the kingdom, and possess it for ever and ever; but in the capacity they are now, in the condition that they now present themselves before God, before the world and before each other? Never, never! until we are sanctified, until we are filled with the wisdom of God, with the knowledge of God, will he bequeath the power that he has in reserve for his Saints; never will the Saints possess it until they are prepared to wield it with all that judgment, discretion, wisdom and forbearance that the Lord Almighty wields in his own capacity, and uses at his pleasure. . . . When we as a people possess the abundance of that patience, that longsuffering and forbearance that we need, to possess the privileges and the power that the Lord has in reserve for his people, we will receive to our utmost satisfaction. We shall not have it now. The Lord says, "I can not give it to you now." . . .

Do we understand anything with regard to the building up of the kingdom? I will say, scarcely. Have we seen it as a people? How long shall we travel, how long shall we live, how long shall God wait for us to sanctify ourselves and become one in the Lord, in our actions and in our ways for the building up of the kingdom of God, that he can bless us? . . .

When are the Latter-day Saints going to be prepared to receive the kingdom? Are we now? Not at all! We are prepared for some things, and we receive just as fast as we prepare ourselves. Well, what can we do, what more can we do? We can do just what we please to do. It is in our power to do just what we please to do with regard to sanctifying ourselves before the Lord, and preparing ourselves to build up his kingdom. [^71]

These sentiments expressed by Brigham Young represent the thinking of Joseph Smith on the subject. According to the Prophet, God limits himself to the framework of man's free agency in dealing with the human family. He commands and revokes as men are willing to obey. [^72] Thus, even though the ideal of the Government of God finally gave way before the practical development of events associated with gaining statehood in the Union, this concession need not be seen as a repudiation of Joseph Smith's prophetic picture of a future world government. To him it meant that if the world rejected God's plan of universal peace, an era of world-wide conflict and warfare would develop and continue to such proportions that the people of the world would one day be willing to turn to God's plan and co-operate in organizing the political powers of the Kingdom of God throughout the earth. In 1879, John Taylor, as President of the Church, spoke of that future day, stating:

We have got this kingdom to build up; and it is not a phantom, but a reality. We have to do it, God expects it at our hands. . . . We have got to go on and progress in these things. We have got to establish a government upon the principle of righteousness, justice, truth and equality and not according to the many false notions that exist among men. And then the day is not far distant when this nation will be shaken from centre to circumference. And now, you may write it down, any of you, and I will prophesy it in the name of God. And then will be fulfilled that prediction to be found in one of the revelations given through the Prophet Joseph Smith. Those who will not take up their sword to fight against their neighbor must needs flee to Zion for safety. And they will come, saying, we do not know anything of the principles of your religion, but we perceive that you are an honest community; you administer justice and righteousness, and we want to live with you and receive the protection of your laws, but as for your religion we will talk about that some other time. Will we protect such people? Yes, all honorable men. When the people shall have torn to shreds the Constitution of the United States the Elders of Israel will be found holding it up to the nations of the earth and proclaiming liberty and equal rights to all men, and extending the hand of fellowship to the oppressed of all nations. This is part of the programme, and as long as we do what is right and fear God, he will help us and stand by us under all circumstances. [^73]

Time is the test of all prophecy; and Joseph Smith's concept of world government was a prophecy. Whether that ideal will materialize in actual fact the future will determine. Meanwhile, we can note the historical role of his concept in Church history. Regardless of what the future may hold, Joseph Smith's ideal of world government under the Kingdom of God has had an illustrious past.

Footnotes

For evidence that the above meeting was held by the General Council, see Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, pp. 80-6, in light of the January 6th meeting he reports.

---
Notas:
[^1] Dale Morgan, "The State of Deseret," Utah Historical Quarterly, VIII (April, July, October, 1940), p. 79.
[^2] Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah (Salt Lake City, 1892), I, 389. Bancroft likewise concludes: "Until the year 1849 the Mormons were entirely under the control of their ecclesiastical leaders, regarding the presidency not only as their spiritual head, but as the source of law in temporal things."—History of Utah (San Francisco, 1890), p. 439. More recently Creer described government during this period as "a pure theocracy" in which there was "a complete fusion of church and state—the utilization of one set of institutions for both ecclesiastical and civil affairs."—Leland H. Creer, "The Evolution of Government in Early Utah," Utah Historical Quarterly, January, 1958, p. 27.
[^3] Howard Egan, Pioneering the West (Salt Lake City, 1917), p. 127.
[^4] Journal History, September 6, 1847.
[^5] Ibid., September 9, 1847.
[^6] John Young later became a member, January 20, 1849. See Journal History under that date.
[^7] Journal History, October 3, 1847.
[^8] Ibid., December 9, 1848.
[^9] Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, pp. 80-2.
[^10] Ibid., pp. 82-6.
[^11] Johnson to Gibbs, p. 23.
[^12] Benjamin F. Johnson, My Life's Review (Independence, Mo., 1947), p. 124. (Italics by the writer) Johnson's statement seems to imply that an election of some kind was held—that the General Council did not merely assume the right to organize itself into the Colonial Legislature of Deseret.
[^13] Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, p. 80.
[^14] Part of Lee's diary at this point was lost. It may have contained information vital to this subject.
[^15] Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, pp. 86-7. (Italics added by the writer)
[^16] Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, p. 86. (Italics other than the date added by the writer.) The Journal History report does not give this information, but its record of other items of business considered at the time is in fundamental accord with Lee's record.
[^17] Ibid. (Italics other than the date by the writer.) That this was a meeting of the Council of Fifty is evident from the fact that it adjourned to meet again February 9th. Of the latter meeting, Lee reported: "At 5 the Council of YTFIF met agreeable to adjournment." See ibid., p. 88.
[^18] Ibid., pp. 90-1. (Italics other than the date by the writer.)
[^19] Ibid., pp. 94-6. (Italics other than the date by the writer.)
[^20] Ibid., pp. 97-8. (Italics other than the date by the writer.)
[^21] Journal History, March 9, 1849. (Italics by the writer.)
[^22] Ibid., March 3, 1849; Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, pp. 97-8.
[^23] Johnson to Gibbs, p. 23.
[^24] Journal History, March 16, 1849.
[^25] Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, p. 107.
[^26] Morgan, op. cit., 88.
[^27] Creer erroneously states that "the urgency of ecclesiastical business" led to this decision to relieve the high council of civil responsibilities. See op. cit., p. 30.
[^28] See Journal History, January 6, 7, 1849; Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, p. 86. At a meeting January 20th, "Amasa M. Lyman reported that several of the cattle committee went to Utah Valley and found from 2 1/2 to 4 inches of snow and concluded that G. S. L. Valley was the best place to keep the cattle." Journal History, January 20, 1849.
[^29] See Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, op. cit.
[^30] Journal History, January 6, 20, and February 3, 1849.
[^31] Ibid., January 6, 1849.
[^32] Ibid.; Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, op. cit. The Journal History reports that only one building was to be destroyed, while Lee indicates that there was more than one.
[^33] Journal History, January 20, 1849. Each man present, with the exception of two, donated the sum of $1.00, said John D. Lee. See Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, pp. 87-8. Lee reports this meeting as having been held on February 3rd. Otherwise his report is in general harmony with that given in the Journal History. Lee's date may be in error, as he seems to have recorded the proceedings of this and other meetings held by the council during this period some time afterward.
[^34] Journal History, February 3, 1819.
[^35] Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, op. cit
[^36] Journal History, February 3, 1849. Lee reports this action as having been taken at the February 9th meeting. The name William M. Lemon he gives as Wm. McLemon. See Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, pp. 88-9.
[^37] Ibid., p. 88; Journal History, February 9, 1849. Lee added that they also reported that there were also 1,100 milk cows to 4,000 souls.
[^38] February 9, 1849. The discretionary powers granted to the assessor Lee reports as the right "to pin down upon the rich and percurious [penurious?], and when he comes to a poor man or widow that is honest, instead of taxing them, give them a few 'dollars.'" See Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, op. cit.
[^39] Journal History, under above dates.
[^40] Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, pp. 90-2.
[^41] Journal History, February 17, 1849.
[^42] Ibid., Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, op. cit.
[^43] Idem.
[^44] Ibid.; Journal History, February 17, 1849.
[^45] There is a conflict on the time the February 24th meeting got underway. The Journal History reports that the meeting was scheduled for 10:00 a.m., but since a quorum was not present the council adjourned until 6:00 p.m., when "several of the Twelve and others were present." Lee, however, reports that "a convention of the Legislation council" met at the appointed place at 9:00 a.m., and after offering prayer "proceeded to business." Lee also reported that Brigham Young and others "took supper" and "spent the evening" with him at his home that day, which would seemingly preclude the possibility of the council meeting at 6:00 p.m. Despite this difference of time, both sources are agreed in their report of the major business transactions during the meeting.
[^46] The Journal History report is that the petition was "signed by himself and seven others," while Lee states that the petition had nine names attached.
[^47] On March 3, 1849, the council "Voted that the president of the stake dictate the fencing of the blocks in the city." Ibid., March 3, 1849.
[^48] Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, pp. 94-6.
[^49] Journal History, February 24, 1849; Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, op. cit. The vote of the General Council that these men be cut off the Church was no doubt in the form of a recommendation.
[^50] Ibid., 97-8. The concept here voiced, known more popularly as the doctrine of blood atonement, laid the foundation for the establishment of capital punishment in Utah for murder. Its basis is theological, asserting that there are certain crimes which the atonement of Christ will not cover, particularly if they be committed after a person has been cleansed from sin through baptism and received the enlightening powers of the Holy Ghost. Since, in the eternal economy of God, justice must be upheld; and since, in such serious cases, men cannot make a mockery of the atonement of Christ and then expect that His atonement will pay the debt of justice in such cases, the individual himself must pay the debt either here or hereafter. Hence, in some cases it was deemed proper to take the life of such persons through the shedding of their blood, that mercy might have claim upon them in the day of redemption.
[^51] Ibid.; Journal History, January 20 and March 1, 1849.
[^52] Lee reports that this item of business was considered at the meeting of March 4, 1849. See Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, pp. 98-100.
[^53] Journal History, March 3, 1849; Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, 97-8.
[^54] Journal History, March 4, 1849. It may be that the General Council was organized much like a regular stake high council. Lee reports that "after several counsellors had spoken on the subject, it was voted that an election be held on the 12th day of March. . . ."—Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, pp. 98-100. See Doctrine and Covenants 102 for the organizational aspects of the high council.
[^55] Journal History, op. cit. (Italics by the writer.)
[^56] Ibid., Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, pp. 98-100.
[^57] Journal History, op. cit.; Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, op. cit.
[^58] Constitution of the State of Deseret, p. 1. Cited in Morgan, op. cit., p. 84. Morgan notes that the "many citizens" are not specified by name or number in this source.
[^59] Andrew Love Neff, History of Utah (Salt Lake City, 1940), pp. 114-5.
[^60] Journal History, March 5, 1849.
[^61] Article 5.
[^62] It has been pointed out elsewhere in this study that an election of the Colonial Legislature, which became the General Assembly, may have been held as early as December 1848.
[^63] Journal History, March 10 and 12, 1849. There were some changes in this final ticket from the revised proposal the council made on March 4th. These further revisions were no doubt the work of the election committee, between the March 4th meeting and the meeting of March 10th, when the final ticket was presented to the council.
[^64] D&C 58:22.
[^65] "Preamble of the Constitution of the State of Deseret."
[^66] Cited in Neff, op. cit., pp. 118-9.
[^67] Journal History, March 10, 1849. See also Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, pp. 100-101.
[^68] Journal History, March 17, 1849
[^69] Morgan, op. cit., p. 89.
[^70] Journal History, January 19, 1863.
[^71] J.D., XV, 2-4.
[^72] D&C 56:4-5; 58:32-3; 124:49-53
[^73] J.D., XXI, 8.
