Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

INTRODUCTION

"Come to Zion" was the gathering call to the Saints in the early days of the Church. And come they did, from England and neighboring European nations, from Nauvoo and Winter Quarters. Some crossed oceans, most journeyed across the plains, and they settled in the Salt Lake Valley and a host of other communities throughout the sprawling territory of Deseret. That pioneer spirit—their belief in the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ and their desire to live it in its fulness—is what brought them together. This gathering shaped a spiritual heritage that is being extended by pioneers around the world today.

Modern-day pioneers do not travel to Zion by wagon trains and ox teams, or endure starvation and bitter weather on the plains of Wyoming. But they face journeys of a lifetime just the same. They are the first members of the Church in their homelands or families; they learn and then teach the gospel in many languages and nations; they are the congregations that stand as one to sing "The Spirit of God" in the dedication of a new temple; they are the faithful who sometimes feel they trudge through daily living, their experiences their own pioneer footprints in the sandy soil of secular society. All are guided by the Lord, who said, "I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion." (Jeremiah 3:14.)

Pioneers are those who walk a difficult trail to distant frontiers. Gospel pioneers are those who break new ground, who press forward into a wilderness believing fervently that they are building the kingdom of God and that God is directing the way.

Brigham Young told the Saints in 1856: "I tell you the person that keeps his eye upon the mark never considers what he passes through . . . whether it be in walking and pulling handcarts or traveling on foot, going without food and shelter, wandering to and fro, to labor for the people." (Journal History, 5 Oct. 1856, LDS Church Historical Department, Salt Lake City, Utah.)

Pioneers do not set out to be heroes. Yet, they become examples to those who follow because they carry on by applying righteous principles. For the most part, they are good people quietly doing their part. Said President Young to those preparing to cross the plains in one of the early companies, "I just do the thing that I know to be right and the Lord blesses me." (Thomas Bullock Journal, 8 Mar. 1847, LDS Church Historical Department.)

Our pioneer heritage is yoked to distinguishing traits that characterize a latter-day Zion people. Those strengths were described by the Lord to Joseph Smith in 1829:

"O ye that embark in the service of God, see that ye serve him with all your heart, might, mind and strength. . . . And faith, hope, charity and love, with an eye single to the glory of God, qualify him for the work. Remember faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, brotherly kindness, godliness, charity, humility, diligence." (D&C 4:2, 5-6.)

It was with faith that William Atkin and his wife approached the Green River with their handcart only to find that the wagon train they were with had already crossed and gone on. Turning to his wife, William said, "We cannot cross this river alone." She responded, "No, but the Lord will help us over."

It was with courage that Stillman Pond struggled on to Winter Quarters in 1846, having lost his wife and all nine of his children to "fever and chills" in the four exhausting months since they had fled Nauvoo in the dead of winter.

It was with patience that handcart pioneer John Jaques wrote in his journal on Thursday, 9 October 1856: "You felt you could almost eat a rusty nail or gnaw a file." (LDS Church Historical Department.)

It was with humility and obedience that 120 men accepted a one-year call made by Elder George A. Smith from the pulpit of the Bowery on the Temple Block on a Sunday morning in 1850. Their pioneer assignment was to leave their wives and families and go south to establish an iron mission—"and to be ready in two weeks." (Ancestry, Biography and Family of George A. Smith [Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1962], 146.)

These pioneer stories and hundreds more that have touched people's hearts for more than a century are being recast throughout the world today. The circumstances and settings are different. The miles that once took months to cross are now traversed in hours. The names, dates, and challenges have changed but the pioneer spirit is the same.

It was with faith that the first Latter-day Saint meetings in Estipac, Mexico, were held. At first the missionaries and their investigators met in an electrical shop. Water was sprinkled on the dirt floor to keep the dust down, and a fifty-gallon oil drum was rolled to the front to serve as a pulpit. A borrowed white tablecloth was draped over the cardboard box sacrament table. Makeshift, yes, but the first pioneers into the Salt Lake Valley met for Sunday services in the field and leaned against wagon wheels for support. Twenty people came that first week in Estipac, but the next Sunday the electrical shop was closed. Brother Nicolas Gonzalez offered, "You may use my house. I have been building two extra rooms. I don't need the rooms. I don't know why I was building them. But now I know. There is space there for the people." The missionaries knew God had prepared a place for them.

It was with charity that Relief Society sisters, led by their president Iby Subowo, cared for each other in Indonesia in 1976, even though they had little to share. Every morning before they began their cooking, each sister would hold back a spoonful of rice. By Sunday each sister had a small bag of rice to take to the meeting. The sisters would pray to know who needed the rice, and then all would go for the visit. The frontier ethic is one of sharing, not hoarding, however scant the supplies.

It was with courage that Russian Andrei Seminov joined the Church. For years he had been an agnostic. "I had looked for truth," he said, "but when I first heard the Latter-day Saint doctrines I was afraid. The standards seemed too high, too impossible to live. Since then I've learned that there is a source of strength to help me live this way."

It was with patience that members in East Germany and other countries behind the Iron Curtain waited for decades to reestablish Church association. For decades their governments limited and often forbade their meeting and their teaching the gospel to others. In the meantime, the members did what they could. They fasted the third Sunday of every month for the return of the missionaries. When the doors were finally opened, a young missionary, one of the first sent into East Germany, exclaimed, "It was a great honor to be the answer to someone's forty-year-old prayers."

Pioneers. Today they are building Zion in Sweden and South Africa, South Carolina and Peru. Diligent gospel pioneers have always led the way, not just in this dispensation but in earlier ones, too. Moses led his people out of Egypt, and they wandered in the wilderness for forty years before finally reaching the promised land. Lehi and his family faced countless unknowns in their journey to their promised land. And the apostle Peter leaped over the side of the Galilean fishing boat to begin his pioneering in the Church by walking on water. Their experiences and those of the pioneers who crossed the plains of North America in the mid-1800s remind us that the most critical journey of all is to come unto Christ. Pioneers—may we be in their company.

I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion. Jeremiah 3:14
