Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

FAITH AND HOPE

Leaving Nauvoo in the winter of 1845, the Saints faced severe weather and untamed countryside as they crossed Iowa heading west. More than a thousand pioneers lost their lives at this early stage of the trek. Caught up in the drama of the experience, William Clayton wrote new words for a traditional English tune. He recorded in his journal, "This morning I composed a new song, 'All is Well.'" Later titled "Come, Come Ye Saints," it was often sung at evening campfires on the plains and has become a hallmark of the pioneer tradition in the Church.

Brother Clayton knew the hardships of coming to Zion, having supervised more than two hundred Saints on an eleven-week voyage from Liverpool, England. When he arrived in Nauvoo in 1840, he wrote to his family about the trip across the Atlantic:

"We have sometimes almost suffocated with heat . . . sometimes almost froze with cold. We have had to sleep on boards instead of feathers, and on boxes which was worse. We have had our clothes wet through without the privilege of drying them or changing them. We have had to sleep out-of-doors in very severe weather. Don't suppose for a moment that all will be peace and ease. . . . These are days of tribulation and we must endure. . . .

"If you will be faithful you have nothing to fear from the journey. The Lord will take care of his saints." (10 Dec. 1840, LDS Church Historical Department.)

Living the Gospel in Mistolar

On the deserts of Paraguay is the small village of Mistolar. This community is distinct: all the villagers are members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

In the early days of the Church, whole congregations were sometimes converted. Wilford Woodruff's prompting to preach in the south of England is one of the best-known examples of the Lord's leading a missionary to a group of people ready to accept the gospel. Similarly, Paraguayan mission president Merle Bair felt prompted to seek out Walter Flores, a native of the deserts of the Chaco in Paraguay, whom he saw in a television interview. It took three years for the missionaries to find Flores, but once he was taught, he readily accepted the gospel. His testimony of Jesus Christ and of his Church was so compelling that several hundred of his fellow Indians were converted as well.

Wanting to gather away from worldly influences to establish a Zion community, as had the Utah pioneers, these new Saints secured a large stretch of land in the desolate and uninhabited area of Paraguay near the Pilcomayo River, which runs between Mistolar and the northern border of neighboring Argentina. For food, the people planted gardens and fished. Their efforts to become self-sufficient were proving successful.

They were isolated and happy, but, like the pioneers in the American West, these Paraguayan Saints were at the mercy of the elements. As the snows melted in the Andes Mountains, the Pilcomayo River overflowed its banks and flooded the small community. The residents were forced to reestablish their settlement about six miles from the river. But the floods came again, this time with greater force and even higher water. Their tiny chapel, homes, gardens, fences—all were washed away or destroyed. They were left with only the clothes they were wearing when the floods came. For more than a month they waded through knee-deep water.

Yet their faith remained strong.

Elder Ted E. Brewerton of the Seventy and a member of the Area Presidency was sent from Argentina to help. Argentine leaders helped prepare supplies for him to take to the Saints in Mistolar.

The relief supplies filled two small trucks. There was a treadle sewing machine, bolts of fabric, and quantities of rice, beans, and salt. They also tucked in a copy of Gospel Principles, recently translated into Nivacle, the dialect of these Indian people.

From Argentina to Mistolar in Paraguay was a hard, two-day trip. The first day the company made good time, traveling nearly three hundred miles on a good road, and arrived in Filadelfia, Paraguay, after seven hours. The next day, they traveled a heavily rutted, sun-baked route. They spent more than nine hours going little more than half the distance traveled the day before. Had there been the slightest rain, the uneven road would have quickly become muddy and impassable.

Elder Brewerton described what they found when they arrived at the village of Mistolar:

"We were warmly welcomed by mostly women and children. I asked where some of the men were and was told they were hunting. When I asked what the men were hunting, the sisters said, 'Anything.'" Some of the men had walked the twelve-mile round trip to the river to fish.

The settlement's surviving livestock were three sheep, a few chickens and goats, and a scrawny dog. That they had little nourishing food or clothing made the 20-degree winter weather of June that much colder. At night, their stick-and-reed homes offered little protection from freezing temperatures.

Their situation was bleak, but smiling villagers greeted the relief team. They had endured extreme hardship for months, and they faced calamity with faith and with no complaints.

That afternoon, the Saints of Mistolar slaughtered one of the remaining sheep to provide their guests a suitable meal. Said Elder Brewerton, "We ate sparingly of the meat, knowing they would use anything we left."

Sympathetic to the circumstances of the people and conscious that the Nivacle Indians are particularly susceptible to disease and early death, Elder Brewerton asked the young president of the Mistolar Branch, "Do you have any sick among your members?"

The young priesthood leader paused, and said, "I don't think so; let me ask the other brethren." A few minutes later he returned. "My brethren told me, 'Of course we have no sick.'" His explanation was simple. "There are thirty-nine of us who hold the Melchizedek Priesthood. We watch over and bless our people."

Elder Brewerton then asked, "Do you have any members who are not quite as active as the rest?" The branch president replied, "Elder Brewerton, of course not. We have accepted the Lord through baptism. We are all true Saints, totally active in our worship of the Lord."

That evening at the branch meeting, a sister offered a prayer Elder Brewerton long remembered: "Father, we have lost our beautiful chapel, we have lost our clothing, we no longer have homes, we have no food to eat, we don't have any materials to build anything, we have to walk ten kilometers to get a drink of dirty river water and don't have a bucket. But we desire to express to thee our gratitude for our good health, for our happiness, and for our Church membership. Father, we want thee to know that under any conditions, we will be true, strong, and faithful to the covenants we made to thee when we were baptized."

The faith and hope of the Saints touched the visitors. Elder Brewerton reported, "During the meeting, we dedicated their land to the Lord. We visited each family's site and saw where they would plant their gardens when the rains would come."

Back in Argentina, Elder Brewerton learned that the rains had not come as the people had anticipated, but the faithful Saints of Mistolar planted their gardens anyway, and the deep moisture from the floods was enough to start a crop.

Finally the rains did come, producing a rich harvest more than sufficient for their needs. Fishing, too, exceeded the hopes of the people.

The next year, the Andes were packed with snow almost twice the previous year's measure that had caused the grave flooding. Concerned, Elder Brewerton inquired about the Pilcomayo River and the condition of the Saints of Mistolar. "Don't worry," they reported, "we will not be flooded this year because our land was dedicated." Twice the floodwaters surged down the river and flowed over the land but receded before reaching Mistolar.

Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel. Matthew 8:10
