Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

When I Say Jump

Missionaries are often called to labor in their own land. They know the culture, the people, the language. When the pioneers first settled the Salt Lake Valley, missionaries quickly were dispatched to India, to Chile, and to other distant regions of the world. But they were also sent to the Indians nearby, to areas where the missionaries themselves had grown up, and to other Latter-day Saint settlements to colonize and bolster communities.

In 1965 when Sela Feinga and her husband Ha'unga of Tonga were sent to the remote island of Fotuha'a to serve a mission, she was overwhelmed. The young couple had sold all their possessions to finance their mission. For their small home and their farm produce they received thirty-six Tongan dollars. Their five-month-old daughter only added to Sela's fears. The baby was sick; the weather was threatening. Yet the mission president promised as he set Sela apart that though they would encounter extreme hardships, the Lord would be with them and strengthen them if they were faithful.

The trip to the island was difficult. Storms and turbulent seas stretched the first part of the journey to two weeks. The baby developed a high temperature, and Sela too became sick.

As they neared their destination, they heard of the horrors of landing at this island whose rocky cliffs were pounded by the ocean. The seas made mooring a boat impossible. They had to switch from a motor launch to an outrigger canoe and then jump into the ocean, swim to a prominent precipice, and drag themselves onto the ledge and safety.

Those unable to swim had an even more harrowing arrival. The person guiding the outrigger paddled to a rocky ledge jutting out into the ocean and the local people gathered on land to catch any baggage—and any nonswimmers. The transfer required perfect timing. The canoe had to be maneuvered just right so as not to smash into the rocks. The one arriving had to jump at just the right moment or fall to the depths below. Those receiving had to be ready.

Sela couldn't swim. And of course, there was the baby. By now the scattering of little pustules all over her body made it clear that she had the measles. But they were on assignment from the Lord, so Sela and her husband resolved to go on as planned.

She described their arrival at the island: "I wrapped our little one in a blanket and boarded the small open boat that would take us to Fotuha'a. There was no shelter. A light drizzle accompanied us all the way. As we approached the island from a distance, I looked longingly for houses and trees or a friendly sandy beach. Only formidable cliffs and rocky coasts loomed in front of us. We circled the island twice. Apparently our captain wanted to see if another landing spot was better than the usual one. The waves around us were huge. As we contemplated the landing point, I think for the first time I sensed fear in my husband. A few of the island citizens had already begun to congregate on the rocky ledge, waiting to receive us and our goods.

"When the canoe came out to get us, we got into it without incident. It was a small outrigger paddled by a young schoolteacher on the island. When we got close to the rock, he said, 'We will count the waves. When one big enough comes in to lift us up even with the top of the ledge, you must jump onto the rock or throw your goods to people standing there. They will give the orders at the precise moment.'

"The rain continued to fall. Ha'unga held our sick baby, still wrapped in her blanket. I was nearly numb with fear. As we got closer to the treacherous landing, the schoolteacher said to my husband, 'Prepare the baby! They will give the orders for her first.'

"The order came to my husband almost instantly from the man on the ledge. 'Hey, you, sir, holding the baby. Take off the blanket and remove all its clothes.'

"'How can that be? The baby is sick with measles. You should not take off her clothes.'"

The paddler spoke sternly to Ha'unga. "You must take off everything, because you are going to have to throw the baby ashore. You can't risk the man dropping it on the rocks or in the ocean because of the blanket or any loose covering."

The command from the ledge came again. "Hurry up. Remove the baby's clothes entirely." But Sela's poor husband simply could not do it. By now he was as terrified as she.

Instantly the young schoolteacher wrenched the baby from Ha'unga's arms. In a second he had removed every stitch of her clothing except her diaper. The voice from the ledge yelled again. "OK, when I say throw, then throw the baby. I'll tell you which is the right wave."

Sela described the tense moments: "In rushed a wave and lifted the canoe but not quite high enough. Down we went out of sight as the ocean retreated. Up again we came on the back of another wave. Not high enough still. Down again out of sight. As we rose on the next wave, I heard the command, 'Throw the baby.' I screamed and then held my breath. I could not bear to see it. The next words were my husband's, 'Worry no more. The baby is safe ashore.'

"I had no time to be grateful.

"'You are next, woman,' shouted the man on the ledge.

"How I was to be transported ashore I had no idea, since I couldn't be thrown. 'You will jump at the exact moment I tell you,' he instructed.

"By now I was hysterical with fear. Four times the 'right' wave came, with the schoolteacher expertly maneuvering the canoe close to the ledge and the man commanding me to jump. I could not do it. I simply clung to my husband trembling. Finally, in anger, the man said, 'Woman, do you want to see your baby again or not? Now when I tell you to jump, jump with all your strength.'

"For a moment then I seemed to have my right mind. I prayed again and said, 'Oh, Lord, please show thy love and help me now for my poor baby's sake.'

"'One, two, three, jump!' shouted the man. With my eyes closed, I jumped as best I could." Her next sensation was that of being pulled up onto the ledge and safety. Her husband followed on the next wave. Their mission had begun.

Be strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest. Joshua 1:9
