Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

No Place for a Temple

When Latter-day Saint Peter Trebilcock was sixteen years old, he was challenged by his Sunday School teacher to invite his school friends to a Sunday evening fireside. Four came. They watched a film, listened to a speaker, and several participated in subsequent activities. Though they never seriously considered joining the Church, they gained an understanding of its values and teachings. Almost twenty years later, that understanding made a difference for the Church in securing property to build the Preston England Temple.

The first missionaries to England in 1837 began their work in Preston, baptizing the first nine converts in the River Ribble on July 30. More than one hundred fifty years later, when the Church announced plans to build a second temple in England, the area near Preston was a natural choice. Peter Trebilcock, now an architect and the bishop of the Preston Ward, was asked to have his architectural firm design the facility. It was not an easy assignment.

The Area Presidency's office in England was charged with finding a fifteen-acre plot in the northwest of England, because in addition to the temple, the Church intended to build a stake center, a missionary training center, a family history center, a distribution facility, and some housing. After considering three possibilities, property in Chorley, near Preston, was selected.

Officials in the Area Presidency's office negotiated for the tract but were told that the land was zoned for business, not for religious or civic use, and there was no chance that the zoning would be changed. Without a change, no permit could be issued and the Church could not build a temple on this land.

The Area Presidency reported the impasse to President Hinckley, who said, nevertheless, "I feel strongly we should buy the site." Elders Kenneth Johnson and Jeffrey R. Holland reiterated the futility of the situation, and President Hinckley again said, "I want you to buy the site."

The architects were now charged with resolving the zoning issues. They went before the city planning department with pictures of existing temples and a presentation outlining their intentions. "They told us to go away," recalls Brother Trebilcock. "They said, 'We don't want a temple on this site, nice as your temple might be.'" A third time the architects went back, with an even more complete presentation. Again they were told that the master plan for the property called for a business park. Any proposal for a church would be refused.

Bishop Trebilcock returned to President Hinckley with the news. He expressed his thanks for the opportunity to work on the proposed temple but was resigned to the temple's being built somewhere else. President Hinckley listened to Bishop Trebilcock's analysis of the opposition and then said, "We have every confidence in you."

Bishop Trebilcock went back to work, remembering the promise of President George Q. Cannon at the dedication of the Logan Temple in 1884: "Every foundation stone that is laid for a temple, and every Temple completed . . . lessens the power of Satan on the earth and increases the power of God and Godli-ness." (Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of George Q. Cannon, 2 vols. in 1, ed. Jerreld L. Newquist [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1987], 366.)

The Church was committed to the Chorley site.

Bishop Trebilcock and his associates identified all the planning and local council officials involved in the decision making. Then they set up a task force of Church members who knew the people critical to changing the zoning.

Bishop Trebilcock spotted the name of an old school friend on his list. He called him on the telephone. "I'd like to talk to you about the planning issues related to building an LDS temple on the site," said Trebilcock. The two then discussed the other council members, who was in favor, who was against. "They want a business park, an office development," his friend reiterated. "They want jobs, not a church."

Bishop Trebilcock then asked, "How do you feel? Can we count on your support?"

"I know what your church stands for," he replied. Then Brother Trebilcock remembered he was one of the friends who at his invitation had attended that missionary fireside years ago. "And you have my full support," said the council member.

The neighbors near the property were also contacted personally. They, too, were adamantly opposed to the proposed temple. They had already organized into an action group and had produced files "two feet thick" to support the ban on building a temple, recalled Bishop Trebilcock.

The architects advertised a meeting in a local hotel to explain the proposal and ask for neighborhood support. After the formal presentation of the plans, the residents started to ask questions.

"Will there be bells ringing regularly?"

"What about a cemetery?"

When the question was asked, "What goes on inside the temple?" Bishop Trebilcock saw an opportunity for the Spirit to help them. "There are marriages for time and all eternity, and there are baptisms and there is instruction, what we call the endowment," he said. "The temple is a place to contemplate and draw closer to God."

"What about raising funds for the seven proposed buildings?" someone asked. "Will this ambitious building project ever really be finished?"

Bishop Trebilcock reassured them. Church officials had told him and his business associates, none of whom were members of the LDS Church, that "whenever a temple is proposed, the Church puts aside one year in advance all the funds for that project. There is no mortgaging or borrowing. Funds are safe and secure."

"How many Mormon pilgrims would visit the site?"

"We believe this is going to be a busy temple," he responded. "We expect fifty thousand members will visit every year to participate in the holy ordinances."

Then someone called out, "What will the quality of the building be like?" At that point the Spirit prompted Bishop Trebilcock to ask if anyone in the audience had visited a Latter-day Saint temple. A sole hand went up at the back of the room.

"I have visited a Mormon temple," the man volunteered as he stood. "I thought it was lovely. The landscaping was superb. The quality was first class, and the feelings I had when I was there were marvelous." Speaking to his neighbors he urged, "I recommend to you that you support this proposal."

The mood shifted. Soon another man stood who had earlier been an outspoken critic. He said, "I think I speak for everyone in this room when I say we have been most impressed with what we have seen and heard and we want to give you our full support. Now, what can we do to help you?"

When a baffled city council received from that body of citizens a petition bearing scores of names in support of the LDS temple in the town of Chorley, their debate took a proprietary turn. One representative said, "We hear that the temple is going to be called the Preston Temple, but it is going to be in Chorley."

"It doesn't matter what this temple is called," responded another council member. "It will be a landmark for Chorley, it will be good for our town, and we should support it."

By unanimous vote the restrictions were lifted.

If God had commanded me to do all things I could do them. If he should command me that I should say unto this water, be thou earth, it should be earth; and if I should say it, it would be done. 1 Nephi 17:50
