Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Without the Most Simple Tools

Elders Larry R. White and Carl Hansen had been in Bangkok, Thailand, less than a month when they began knocking on doors. They had learned a door approach in the Thai language, but beyond that they could not respond to more than two or three basic questions or present discussions. "If we thought that the person we contacted was interested—and our language was such that we weren't always sure—we would take their name and promise to come back when we could speak better," Elder White recalled.

The elders had been transferred from the Southern Far East Mission based in Hong Kong where they had spoken a Chinese dialect based on tones. It was hoped that would provide a base for learning Thai more quickly. They and the four other missionaries had only thirty days of language training at the American University Alumni School in Thailand before beginning full-time proselyting. Like many early missionaries who went to countries without any knowledge of the language, the elders were working "without the most simple tools." Not only could they not speak the language, but they had no tracts, such as "The Joseph Smith Testimony," no excerpts from the Book of Mormon, and no well-prepared lesson plan to teach those who would listen. Many terms such as priesthood, church, and latter days did not easily translate into Thai.

The first elder to visit Thailand had been Elam Luddington, who was sent by President Brigham Young in 1853. He was also the last until 1968, when Elders White and Hansen arrived. Elder Luddington had been limited to working with the Europeans in Thailand, and he baptized a ship's captain and his wife before being called home.

On Wednesday, 20 March 1968, Elders White and Hansen were ringing doorbells in a wealthy part of Bangkok. Elder White recalled:

"We came upon an imposing walled-in residence. We could not see through the gate, but shortly after we rang, a servant answered and motioned for us to enter. We explained who we were in Thai, thinking she might change her mind, but she motioned even more vigorously for us to enter."

The two waited at the front door while the maid ran to the back of the house and then returned to let them in. She seated them comfortably in the living room, and in a few moments, "a rather sick looking lady descended from upstairs. She introduced herself in English as Srilaksaana. I felt a need to tell this woman our message," said Elder White, "and I began to tell her in English of the Book of Mormon. I had no sooner begun than the Spirit fell upon me and told me with great force that this lady would join the Church. This manifestation was so forceful that I was overcome by emotion and unable to continue speaking. I passed the book to Elder Hansen to finish the introduction. He did so ably, and we asked for a return appointment. She refused to make a firm appointment but said we could come back any time."

The missionaries returned with a filmstrip, but she showed little interest. She smoked cigarettes during the entire presentation. They returned to teach her a first discussion. Again she was noncommittal and distant. When they taught her about prayer, "she responded that she already prayed to Abraham, Moses, Buddha, Jesus Christ, her ancestors and all great people." The second discussion went worse than the first, but the missionaries were able to sell her an English language Book of Mormon. Had Elder White not had such a profound spiritual witness when they first met, the missionaries would have abandoned further contact.

For another month they met with her and even got her to attend Church services. She brought her daughters and her sister. And then something changed. One day Srilaksaana sat clutching the Book of Mormon when the missionaries arrived. They did not ask and she did not explain what had happened until twenty-five years later. She had been waiting to go out with some of her friends when she noticed the Book of Mormon on the shelf. Because she had paid ten baht (about fifty cents) for it, she felt that she should at least read a little. She casually took the book off the shelf and opened it at random. As soon as her eyes fell upon the first passage, she began to shake, and she felt something which she had never before felt. Immediately, she knew the book was true.

What Srilaksaana realized, in retrospect, was that the Lord had prepared her to receive the gospel since childhood and that she would be instrumental in spreading the gospel message to her fellow Thais.

Born in Bangkok in 1924, Srilaksaana came from a prominent family. Her father was the physician for the royal princes, and her mother was a friend of Her Majesty Queen Intharasksaji. The queen asked to rear six-year-old Srilaksaana in the palace, and her parents agreed.

Srilaksaana lived with the queen until she was seventeen, sleeping in the royal quarters, dining with the queen, and reading to her at night. Srilaksaana became well educated, schooled by European nuns who taught her English and required her to use it in all her class work. Every day she saw the English Bible in her schoolroom and hoped someday to read it. The nuns did not teach religion, however, and she remained faithful to the Buddhist beliefs dominant in her country.

She continued her education at Chulalongkorn University, expanded her language skills, and eventually went to work for a group of high government officials.

But it was The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints that really needed her expertise. Two young missionaries without language skills or a Thai translation of the Book of Mormon had been led to her door, and she was able to understand their message. She was prepared for the Church, but she faced obstacles. She had to quit smoking, and she had to tell her decision to the Catholic nuns and priests who had trained her and been her friends for so many years. They did not support her.

Nevertheless, in 1968, on her forty-fourth birthday, Srilak-saana Suntarahut was baptized. In the years that followed she assisted with the translation of the Book of Mormon into Thai and was instrumental in translating the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price. She served as mission Relief Society president and was a teacher and friend to countless converts. She was always working with members to instruct them or keep them focused on the truths of the restored gospel.

Said Elder Larry White, who years later returned to Thailand as mission president, "Sister Srilaksaana Suntarahut was a pioneer in her homeland, her help in establishing the Church in Thailand was crucial, and yet a more unlikely convert would be difficult to find. Surely the Church in Thailand would be poorer were it not for her."

It shall come to pass . . . that every man shall hear the fulness of the gospel in his own tongue, and in his own language. Doctrine and Covenants 90:11
