Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

A Better Way

In 1951 not one Korean national was a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Forty-five years later, there were four missions in Korea and more than forty-five thousand members. And a temple blessed the lives of the people.

In 1949, when Kim Ho Jik, a well-respected agricultural specialist who directed a Korean agricultural experimentation station, went to America to further his education, he was dedicated to improving the quality of life for his countrymen. In the process he opened the door for the gospel to be preached in his homeland.

Kim understood hunger. Since his youth he had searched for spiritual truths that would fill his soul. He had studied at a Buddhist monastery, investigated the Church of the Heavenly Way, and even joined a Protestant church. But he had never been filled. Perhaps his education kept him looking for doctrines that made sense. The death of one of his sons only increased his desire to learn a better way.

Desiring to learn the latest theories and discoveries in agriculture, he enrolled in a highly competitive and well-regarded graduate program in nutrition at Cornell University in upstate New York. Kim was guided, though he did not know the source. Before he left for America, he felt prompted to sell his home, his cars, and many other possessions, leaving his wife and children with an ample supply of cash to support them while he was gone. When war broke out in Korea in 1950, his obedience to the promptings took on a new dimension. His former home was destroyed by bombs, and all the cars were confiscated by the military. But Kim's family was secure.

While Kim studied at Cornell, he made the rounds of local churches looking for truth. He didn't need to look that far. He shared an office with Oliver Wayman, a doctoral candidate in physiology and, like Kim, an older professional who had returned for additional schooling. Brother Wayman was a Latter-day Saint who lived true to his religion. He didn't smoke, drink, or use vulgar or profane language. He worked long hours but never Sundays. A cheerful man, weaving ideals of optimism and personal integrity into his life, he was happy.

The two men became friends. They discussed many aspects of life—study, education, and international affairs. Religion never came up until one day, as Brother Wayman prepared to leave the office, Kim asked for information about his church.

Brother Wayman gave Kim a copy of The Articles of Faith, by Elder James E. Talmage. Kim read it in a week and told his friend he believed it. He next read the Book of Mormon and attested it was the word of God, easier to understand and more complete than the Bible. He hoped to see his Protestant church reform some of its teachings in line with those doctrines. He continued to attend his Protestant meetings, but he visited a local LDS branch.

Everything changed on Brother Wayman's last day at Cornell. As he said his good-byes to his associates, he asked Kim Ho Jik why he had come to the United States. Kim replied that he wanted to improve the knowledge of nutrition in his homeland.

Brother Wayman looked at his friend and bore his testimony that the Lord had brought him to America to receive the gospel and take it home to his people in preparation for missionary work. He added that if Kim stepped aside from that responsibility, the Lord would find another to take his place.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints took on a new importance in Kim's life. He continued to study, met with the missionaries, and took the discussions. When he was taught the Word of Wisdom, he broke into sobs. "If only I had known all of this when I came here. My government wanted me to find ways to feed our people properly, and without sufficient grazing lands for cattle, we did not know how to do this. My whole time studying in America has been to find ways to feed our people the grains the Lord has always intended for us to use."

He was baptized in the Susquehanna River, the same river in which Joseph Smith had been baptized 122 years before. When he came up from the water, Brother Kim heard a voice say, "Feed my sheep, feed my sheep." He recorded the experience in the flyleaf of his scriptures with his date of baptism, 29 July 1951: "Words given—feed my sheep."

Brother Kim was the first Korean to join the Church, and when he returned to Korea to his new high government post, his missionary zeal went with him. President Joseph Fielding Smith set him apart as district president in 1955 at the same time his country was dedicated for the preaching of the gospel. For the next three years, while he was vice-minister of education for Korea, President Kim also helped the missionaries in bringing his people to Zion.

His social status and government position contributed directly to establishing the Church in Korea. In 1956 as a member of the Seoul Board of Education, he personally presented the proposal for official government recognition of the Church in Korea. Because of his influence, the proposal was approved. He agreed to act as the financial sponsor and guarantor of the first missionaries into the country.

He honored his sacred responsibilities while serving in his high government post. When Korea's president Syngman Rhee summoned him one Sunday morning, the emissary found President Kim Ho Jik teaching a Sunday School class. Not until he was finished did President Kim leave for the presidential mansion. Meanwhile the president, who was known for fits of anger if kept waiting, waited. When President Kim arrived, President Syngman Rhee demanded an explanation. Calmly, he explained his commitments and priorities: he was teaching a Sunday School class. The president of Korea gazed into Brother Kim's eyes for a long moment and then with resolve said, "You have done well."

President Kim died in 1959. In only eight years he had established, defended, and pioneered Zion in a new land. From his efforts came first-generation members who reared their children in the gospel, read them scriptures, prayed together, and placed value on the Church and its principles. The voice had directed, "Feed my sheep." Brother Kim had found a way.

For behold, the Lord doth grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue to teach his word. Alma 29:8
