Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Why Would I Need That?

When the Soviet bloc broke apart, an imposed lifestyle crumbled with it. Suddenly whole nations of people had choices they had never had before. Marek Vasilkov of Lithuania was one of them.

He first met with the Latter-day Saint missionaries in an apartment in his government housing complex in Vilnius. The elders had a place near his, and he had often seen them on the street. Before long, they were teaching him a second discussion. "I didn't have friends," he recalled. "I had no idea what the future would hold, and I was looking for money to make my life meaningful." So when the missionaries suggested, "Why don't you pray for the Spirit?" he was startled. He wondered, "Why would I need that?"

Much had changed in Lithuania since the break with the Soviet Union. Many people were making money; they could now travel outside the country; they had more opportunities. An economy was growing up around both the industrious and the illegal. Like his peers, Marek wanted some for himself. He wanted a better life than Communism had offered him.

Besides looking for a vocation, he was trying to find meaning and purpose in life. People who had money could buy what they wanted. Was that the answer? People who had intellect could develop expertise to advance themselves. He tried carpentry work but didn't like it. Was education the way to go? He kept asking himself, What is the combination for happiness, for the good life? Money, influence, intellect? Where could he find the answers?

He tried to become a member of a gang whose ties to organized crime appeared to have great influence. Then the leader of the gang was murdered. Another leader was blown up in his car. Not only did these incidents seem senseless but he found that something inside him prevented his joining in any kind of violent or illegal activity.

He next turned to athletics and body building, pursuing a rigorous weight-training program. But the intense effort didn't fill the void he felt. He tried boxing but soon lost interest. He went with a friend on a holiday to the seashore; he found no camaraderie or pleasure in the smoking and drinking that dominated their social activity.

For a time he kept company with a young woman whose family had all the trappings of the new material success. They could buy anything they wanted, yet, to Marek, they didn't seem happy. In fact, they bickered all the time. Their home life reminded him of his own because he was always having arguments with his mother. This was not the lifestyle he was seeking.

At one point he even thought of becoming a monk, although the one thing he wasn't looking for was religion. He had attended the Catholic church a couple of times with his grandmother when he was ten. "I didn't feel a need to go again," he recalled. His grandmother believed and enjoyed the traditions of her faith, but he viewed religion as an exercise for old people. It was not for him. So when his neighbor agreed to meet with Latter-day Saint missionaries and asked Marek to come along, he went grudgingly, as a favor to his neighbor.

The missionary effort in Lithuania had started on the clear spring day of 20 May 1993 with twenty-seven Latter-day Saints gathered on a prominent hill overlooking the city of Vilnius. Said Elder M. Russell Ballard of the Quorum of the Twelve: "From this small beginning, you will see the Church grow and prosper here. There will be many branches and then a district and, in the Lord's due time, there will be stakes. Who knows, if we could look out fifty years, perhaps a small temple. That all depends on us, really, and how diligent we are willing to be, and how wise and prudent we are willing to be as we proceed to establish the kingdom of God in Lithuania.

"The people of this land have a goodness, and many of them have righteousness in their hearts. Let that be touched by the missionaries," prayed Elder Ballard.

In the next six months the missionaries began teaching and baptizing, bringing one of a city, two of a family to Zion. Marek was one of their early investigators.

It was only from a desire to be polite that he agreed to meet for a second discussion. "I didn't like the first one," he admitted honestly. "I was looking for something but not what they offered. I didn't want to get converted to Christianity." His neighbor had declined to return, but Marek was studying English and was interested in the language of the missionaries, if not in their beliefs. After all, he explained, "They lived in a neighboring building, and I could use some friends."

At the second visit, the missionaries talked to him about the Spirit. When Marek asked what it was, "They told me to pray, and God would give me the Spirit."

What happened the next week changed his life. He said: "I was standing in a line in a store, and I noticed an old lady. She pointed to a loaf of bread and asked the clerk how much it cost. It was obvious she couldn't afford to buy it. I thought to myself that I could help her; she needed fifty cents. I gave her the money, and right then something happened. It was like tingles. My skin became loose, and I felt a brilliance inside me I had never felt before. I thought of the missionaries and what they had said about the Spirit. I thought, This is the Spirit. I wanted to jump up high right there in the store. I realized that it was true. It was all true. Everything they said was true. And I had felt the Spirit.

"I went a few yards and immediately the temptations came. Thoughts came that said maybe I didn't feel the Spirit. Maybe I am just confused. But when I told the missionaries of the experience, they assured me that what I had felt was the Spirit. I have learned that every time you feel the Spirit, you are reminded that there is a God."

Baptized on 16 October 1993, Marek Vasilkov, age twenty, became the eighteenth member of the Vilnius Branch of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. "Can I go on a mission?" he asked the elders shortly after his baptism. The Lord called him a year later to serve in the Utah Salt Lake City Mission. He entered the Missionary Training Center in Provo on 30 November 1994.

Said one of his companions, Elder Duncan Calder from Victoria, Canada, who served with him, "Elder Vasilkov has taught me to understand Helaman 15:6:

"'Yea, I say unto you, that . . . they are striving with unwearied diligence that they may bring the remainder of their brethren to the knowledge of the truth; therefore there are many who do add to their numbers daily.'

"Every time we ride our bikes up a hill, I see him in front of me with unwearied diligence, so happy in the work, so willing to do whatever he has to so that the word of the Lord can be spread, and I know I can do it, too."

There is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding. Job 32:8
