Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Seven Times the Note Said Yes

Those who have lived in Bulgaria speak of the stunning countryside, the grand Balkan Mountains, and the choice resorts edging the Black Sea. Picturesque though it is, however, the dramatic scenery did not make bearable the oppressive social and political conditions imposed by the Communist government. Bulgarians feared the government, their associates, and even their "friends." Yet getting out of the country was virtually impossible. To do so would take a miracle.

Kiril and Nevenka Kiriakov, a young dental technician and his wife, had long been praying for a way to leave Bulgaria to rear their children in freedom. A slim chance came in 1963 when Algeria became independent of France. The new country approached the Bulgarian government for assistance in restructuring its economy. The state laboratory was asked to furnish one dental technician for a two-year assignment. Kiril, like each of his six colleagues, hoped to be chosen. He later wrote in his personal history, "My chances were not good. Most of my colleagues had a contact or a relative who held a high position in the government, someone they could rely on for help. I knew of no one who could help me, so I put my entire faith and hope in our Heavenly Father. My wife and I decided that only our fervent prayers to the Lord could open the door to the free world."

Everyone at the lab recognized that the position in Algeria was a passport to freedom. When the day of the selection came, "one of my colleagues proposed that we decide the matter by drawing lots, placing seven folded pieces of paper in a hat, six of which would have no written on them and one would contain the word yes."

This seemed fair, and all agreed. The slips of paper were prepared and placed in the hat. Kiril drew his and opened it. "I could not believe my eyes," he said, "the piece of paper I had drawn had yes written on it."

Immediately his associates protested the outcome because he had been in the laboratory only eight months, and many of them had worked there for a lifetime. They insisted on another drawing. A second time Kiril drew the yes. Again they refused to accept the results. He returned the slip and drew another time but with the same astonishing result. Four more times the group drew from the hat. Each time, Kiril opened his slip of paper to find the yes. Finally, instead of objecting, the amazed group gathered around him. Although the Bulgarian government had outlawed all religious conviction, his associates agreed that the only way he could have drawn the yes slip seven times in a row was with the help of God. They had witnessed a miracle.

The Kiriakov family spent the next two years in Algeria. For them it was "like living in paradise." At the end of their assignment, when Kiril was expected to return with his family to Bulgaria, he petitioned his government to return by way of France. Usually the procedure was to force the family to return separately to limit the possibility of defection. Kiril recalled, "The idea presented itself to add the words 'and family' on my exit permit and we were successful in obtaining tourist visas to France for the entire family." The Kiriakovs defected in France.

Fifteen days later a bloody coup d'etat toppled the Communist government in Algeria, and all Bulgarians were rounded up and flown home en masse. But the Kiriakov family was safe in Marseilles.

About two years later, this Bulgarian family learned the reason the Lord had said yes to their leaving their homeland. Two missionaries of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints knocked on their door, "something that never would have happened in Bulgaria." The Lord had opened the way for them to come to Zion.

In their affliction they will seek me early. Hosea 5:15
