Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

A Small Favor

When ear, nose, and throat surgeon Gedeon Kereszti watched a documentary about The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on Hungarian national television, he was intrigued with the beliefs. Most appealing was the concept that families could be together in the eternities. A religion including that premise was what the Keresztis very much wanted. But Hungary, a country under Communist control, had been closed to religious teachings for decades.

On the other side of the world, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the family of Kim Davis, also an ear, nose, and throat specialist, had been praying to find a family to introduce to the gospel. They had set a goal to find a family within six months.

This was not unusual for the Davis family. The six Davis children and their parents had been acquainting people with the gospel for years during the time they had lived in Boston and Washington, D.C. Now, settled in Salt Lake City, they had fasted and prayed, but so far they had found no one. Their six months had almost passed.

Then Dr. Davis got a letter from a physician in Hungary. The return address was no surprise to him because he had written several articles for international medical journals detailing his research and findings. Professionals from foreign countries often corresponded with him about his research. But this letter was more than a query for information: it was an answer to prayer.

Dr. Kereszti in Ajka, Hungary, wrote asking for more information about a church he had seen profiled on television—The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, based in Salt Lake City, Utah, USA. He and his son had pored over medical journals until they found an address in Utah. It belonged to Dr. Kim Davis. Their request was simple: Would the doctor forward his letter to some information center that could supply him with material about this church?

The Davis family headed for the Church Distribution Center and scooped up pictures and other materials about the Church. They packed a box for their new investigator family. They wrote their testimonies, copied a family picture, and sent everything off with the official materials.

No doubt the Keresztis had hoped for some sort of information packet. They got much more. They got a personal witness from each member of the Davis family. The testimonies borne by the children and the parents spoke of their love for the gospel and their love for each other.

The two families began exchanging letters and pictures, and the Davises contacted the president of the Vienna Austria East Mission, whose area of responsibility included Hungary.

In February 1986 the mission president met with the Keresztis to teach them the gospel, answer their questions, and broaden their understanding. Later that month the three were baptized in Vienna. A picture taken at the event was sent straight to the Davises.

Their baptism was just a beginning. Dr. Kereszti pioneered establishing the Church in Hungary. One year later, in April 1987, Elder Russell M. Nelson of the Quorum of the Twelve dedicated Hungary for the preaching of the gospel. Missionary work began officially in June 1988 when legal recognition was granted to the Church. On 24 June Elder Nelson, representing the Church, received that formal declaration in Budapest. He was accompanied by Elder Hans B. Ringger of the First Quorum of the Seventy, Dennis B. Neuenschwander, president of the Austria Vienna East Mission, Dr. Gedeon Kereszti, president of the Hungarian District, and his counselor Dr. Peter Paul Vargas.

I shall lengthen out mine arm unto them. 2 Nephi 28:32
