Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

"I Have Only One Wishes"

When Stanley and Mavis Steadman and James and Helen Bateman arrived in Hanoi, Vietnam, in 1993 as English teachers from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, they were entering what they learned to call "the promised land."

The Vietnamese were curious about these teachers. Their arrival was announced in the press and on national television. In a few short months the results they were having were so impressive that the Communist government asked the Church to send more couples, even offering to provide their housing and other expenses. Today the Traditional Hall, a memorial in Hanoi, features a display dedicated to the Church and the service given by its members.

The Steadmans and Batemans opened the door to the gospel through service. Vietnam was very different from their homeland of America and from Australia, where they had served together as missionaries. Yet they worked at feeling at home. They lived on rice and vegetables and hung their clothes on a line strung from the rooftop of their apartment building. The sisters cut each other's hair, though Stan once, just once, made the mistake of getting his hair cut by the barbers on the street for a dollar. Not only was his haircut peculiar but, Sister Steadman reported, "Our doctor friends said he paid too much—should have been only thirty cents."

Their reports home showed how quickly they became at ease in the country. "What boggled our minds the first week or so is now commonplace: the women, barefoot and selling their produce in huge baskets hanging from a bamboo pole balanced on their shoulders; or buying a loaf of bread from an old black-toothed woman who squats all day in front of our apartment.

"The streets are filled with hundreds of bicycles. There are no cars, and our biggest challenge is to cross safely. . . . The homes are humble. A plastic surgeon makes forty dollars a month. A teacher makes fourteen dollars. These people are choice spirits of God, and their day will come."

The Steadmans and the Batemans had come to teach English and to open doors for the Church. They found eager students. Soon there was a waiting list to get into their classes. Sister Steadman related: "We are teaching 160 children at the school and 200 doctors, ministers of the Cabinet, engineers, and selected teachers from all the schools and University of Hanoi. We were promised only 20 students to a class. We have more than 40. They are hanging out the windows, sitting in the halls, on the floor, and crowded together with five on a bench that only holds three.

"At the school where we teach the children (ages seven to thirteen), the door to the street is always open, and there is always a crowd of onlookers, children, parents, other teachers, and just curious passersby. There are usually even more outside than inside our crowded rooms."

The setting was not exactly ideal, but they improvised: "The classrooms are stark and bare with the benches in regimented rows." The first thing Sister Steadman did was rearrange them into a more informal seating. The first thing the kids did was put them back the way they were. It was hard to break with tradition.

The teachers had no teaching materials—colored paper and other supplies did not exist. They made bulletin boards out of the cardboard boxes their own belongings came in and decorated them with packing material. Sister Steadman wrote, "This will be a struggle, but I am learning what a privilege it is to sacrifice."

They put up a sign in the classroom announcing "ONLY ENGLISH WILL BE TAUGHT IN THIS ROOM." Said Sister Steadman, "We have no interpreter—just the Lord!"

Although at first they were not allowed to speak of the Church or invite anyone to their meetings, their mission began with a "thrilling experience." Sister Steadman recorded: "The four of us held the first sacrament meeting ever in Hanoi, Vietnam. We bought a small silver tea set, a loaf of bread from a woman on the street, boiled water, and covered all with a white lace handkerchief. We felt the ceiling open and the glory of the Lord pour out upon us."

That glory quickly became apparent in their work.

They always began the children's class with a song. Wrote Sister Steadman: "Stan teaches them a new one every day. They sing with all their hearts and souls. They are so innocent. I accompany them on a keyboard we brought with us. Can you imagine the thrill we had when Stan taught them 'Give Said the Little Stream'? They just belted it out with unbounded enthusiasm. I couldn't even play because the tears were streaming down my face."

Not everything the Steadmans and Batemans did was in the classroom or one-on-one. They planned a bold cultural event for the community, miraculously presenting Handel's Messiah, complete with orchestra and chorus. The performers received standing ovations for their professional performances, and the image of the Church was enhanced by the production.

Every day Sister Steadman identified a "courage-to-go-on incident," pioneering moments like those of the early Saints who, too, had left their homes to build the kingdom of God in a foreign land. She writes of the first: "Yesterday a woman doctor stopped me after class. She had a gift in her hand and she said, 'I buy this at Laos-China border. I like you, Mrs. Mavis. I like you teach. I like you dress. I like you have this.' She gave me a small bone-carved fan. I cried. It will be one of my treasures."

The second clearly reflected the influence these first missionaries had as they shared the Spirit of the Lord in their teaching assignment: "Two days ago I read a fairy tale called 'Three Wishes' to the classes and followed it up for conversation practice by asking each one to give their three wishes if they could have them. One dear old doctor, still in the square white cap and white operating gown that they come to class in, said, 'I have only one wishes. I wish you be Vietnamese so you stay with us alway.'

"We love these dear people," wrote Sister Steadman to her friends at home. "They will be ready when the time comes for the missionaries. This whole country will be."

Hope for a better world . . . which hope cometh of faith. Ether 12:4
