Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

COURAGE AND DILIGENCE

In May 1848 nearly two thousand Saints were making ready for their journey across the plains. "Every exertion," wrote a member of the company, "is making to go West."

Nearing the end of the trail, these wearied pioneers encountered the roughest going of all. The year before, in the vanguard journey, Orson Pratt had written that near the end of the journey "the country exhibited a broken succession of hills piled on hills, and mountains on mountains in every direction." They were the last barriers to Zion.

When the company arrived in the Salt Lake Valley, pioneer Hosea Stout wrote of a welcome but grueling victory over time and conditions: "Thus ends this long and tedious journey from the land of our enemies, & I feel free and happy that I have escaped from their midst. But there is many a desolate & sandy plain to cross. Many a rugged sage bed to break through. Many a hill and hollow to tug over and many a mountain to pass. And many frosty nights to endure in mid-summer."

With courage and diligence, modern-day pioneers face "hills piled on hills," "desolate plains," and "frosty nights in mid-summer." (Juanita Brooks, On the Mormon Frontier: The Diary of Hosea Stout [Salt Lake City: Utah State Historical Society, 1964], 1:327; entry for 24 Sept. 1848.)

I'll Take Care of This

The plane rushed David Horne from Armenia to France. Meanwhile industrialist Jon M. Huntsman in Salt Lake City collected a team of burn specialists from the University of Utah hospital and flew with them in his private jet to France to rescue his friend. The day before, on 14 January 1996, a freak propane explosion at his apartment in Yerevan had burned Brother Horne over more than 85 percent of his body. When Jon reached France, his severely injured friend, struggling to speak, looked up at the face he knew so well and said, "Go home, Jon. I'll take care of this." Then he passed out. He died three days later.

David Horne spent the last six years of his life helping the people of Armenia. What began as an effort to help rebuild this Soviet satellite after a devastating earthquake in December 1988 became the primary focus of Brother Horne's life.

Jon Huntsman had brought him into the effort to improve construction techniques and upgrade materials to rebuild Armenian homes and businesses. Brother Horne, as director of Armenian Projects for Huntsman Chemical Company, supervised the construction of a cement plant to provide building supplies for the people.

In the course of his work, David Horne made many friends for the Church in the community; indeed, the Armenians knew him as their friend. When news of his accident spread through the town, the streets to the airport were lined with hundreds whose lives had been changed by him. At his funeral service, letters of tribute were presented from friends and business and government leaders in Armenia.

What had taken this successful building contractor from his Salt Lake City home to a foreign country halfway around the world? He had responded to a mission call from the Church to donate his time and skills to help build safe homes for earthquake victims. He was to supervise the construction of a precast concrete fabrication plant that would produce enough units to build 6,500 apartments and provide housing for 25,000 people annually. The plant was dedicated in Yerevan, Armenia, on 24 June 1991.

At that time, in gratitude for the relief efforts extended to the Armenian people by the Church and such individuals as Brother Horne and philanthropist Jon Huntsman and his family, the Republic of Armenia donated land to the Church for a building in the capital city of Yerevan. The four-story, marble-faced, multipurpose building would be used as a meetinghouse, offices, and residences for Church volunteers assisting in managing the concrete plant operated jointly by Huntsman Chemical and the Armenian government. Elder Russell M. Nelson, in accepting the gift of land, pledged "to use the building on this site to teach of the Fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man."

David Horne had done just that.

As a dedicated Church leader, he helped establish a branch of the Church that expanded under his guidance to 450 members. Missionaries were called from the Armenian branch to serve in parts of Russia. Brother Horne's wife, Jeanne, who joined him as a Church humanitarian service missionary for three years, helped translate the hymnbook into Armenian. His last service to Armenia was to distribute hundreds of pairs of eyeglasses he had collected in the United States for the people in Armenia.

On 24 June 1991, in his prayer dedicating Armenia for the preaching of the gospel, Elder Dallin H. Oaks petitioned that the land's inhabitants, as they tried to overcome the difficulties of the past and go forward, might realize "the benefit of their righteous labors" and feel the "cool breeze of freedom." As a pioneer building Zion in another land, David Horne had given that "righteous labor" and had helped sound "the song of liberty, the song of freedom."

But charity is the pure love of Christ, and it endureth forever; and whoso is found possessed of it at the last day, it shall be well with him. Moroni 7:47
