Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Inside the Front Cover

When ward mission leader Victor Brown donated a copy of the Book of Mormon to the public library in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, it was an act of faith. He hoped that people would read the book and be converted. Three times he returned to the library to update his address and phone number on the sheet he had carefully placed in the front with the bold notation, "For more information." That was thirty years before, and not one person had called.

And then Kenneth Evans, seeking to find truths about life and death, checked out the Book of Mormon from the Hamilton library. He read it that night and all the next day. He called Victor Brown.

Kenneth and his wife had been sincerely searching for several years. His daughter recalls: "They had attended neighborhood churches, Bible seminars, and engaged in earnest prayer. I would sometimes awaken from my sleep to see my dad praying. I asked him once what he was praying about and he said, 'I'm praying that I can somehow teach you kids the right things about God, but I'm not sure what those things are yet.'"

Two years into their quest, "my mom answered the door and found two well-dressed young men standing there. She'd had a lot of door-to-door salesmen lately. As soon as one of the young men began to speak of a certain church with a long name she quickly said, 'We have our own church, thank you,' and shut the door."

But when their minister announced a new policy of meeting an hour earlier to give families more time for recreation on Sunday, the Evanses felt it was time to look in earnest for another church. They wanted greater spirituality and truth, not more time for recreation on Sunday.

Kenneth had always been interested in the ancient ruins of Mexico and Central and South America. He and an associate at work, Ray, had often talked of the mysteries and splendor of those civilizations. Ray mentioned that while he had been living in England, he had heard from two young men in a series of discussions the unbelievable story of a young man named Joseph Smith who had dug up a book about the ancient ruins and the societies that had built them. The missionaries had not interested Ray in the Church, but he did remember that the book was called the Book of Mormon.

That week the Evans family visited the public library, where Kenneth searched the files for the Book of Mormon. It was not listed. But by looking for works relating to "Mormons," he found What of the Mormons? by Gordon B. Hinckley, and he checked it out. He read the book that night and announced to his family, "This sounds like just the church we've been looking for! Now, we need to find a Book of Mormon."

They checked with the local bookstore only to be told rather curtly that they carried no such book. That Saturday Kenneth called the main public library downtown and asked the clerk to check the listings for a copy of the Book of Mormon. There was one. Kenneth asked her to hold it for him; he'd be right there.

He and his wife read the book all day and into the evening. They were interested in all they read. Maybe this was what they were seeking!

Inside the front cover of the book, a typed page fastened there by a Victor Brown gave a date thirty years old. In case more information was desired, Victor Brown had returned to the library to change his address and telephone number after each of three moves over the years. But he had moved a fourth time, and he hadn't made it back to make that change.

When Kenneth tried calling the last number listed, he found no one there by the name of Brown. The phone book listed several pages of Browns but no Victor and only one with the initial "V"—a V.E.F. Brown.

He called.

Kenneth abruptly opened the conversation with, "I'd like you to tell me more about your church." Victor Brown thought someone, maybe another ward member, was playing a practical joke. But when Kenneth mentioned the book in the library, Brother Brown recognized the questioner was absolutely sincere.

"I know it's true. I know it's true," Brother Brown answered his caller in a voice full of emotion. Alice Brown, overhearing her husband's conversation, whispered to him, "Invite them to the missionary open house this Saturday."

The Evans family came. Many people were milling about between the booths and exhibits, watching the filmstrips and talking in groups. Kenneth and his family felt inconspicuous and comfortable among so many people who, too, showed interest. The Evanses didn't know they were the only investigators in attendance. And their hearts were touched. Their youngest son pleaded with his parents to come back to this place that felt so good.

The elders began visiting their home and teaching them the discussions. Friends, including their former pastor, cautioned them about involvement with the Mormons. But to no avail. On Christmas night, 1967, the Evans family was baptized. "What better way to honor him on this day when we celebrate his birth," their daughter Christine wrote of that poignant memory.

And in gratitude she added, "I often think of Brother Brown, who found his calling as a district missionary challenging but who followed a prompting of the Spirit to place that Book of Mormon in the library, where it waited all those years to be discovered. I think, too, of the missionaries in England, many years ago, who must have spent long hours teaching Ray all those discussions and of how discouraged they must have been when he still rejected their message. Yet he retained just enough knowledge of the Book of Mormon to be the spark my father needed to find out more."

Thus saith the Lord God; behold, I, even I, will both search my sheep, and seek them out . . . and will deliver them out of all places where they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day. Ezekiel 34:11-12
