Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Nine in the Car

At nearly midnight on 16 July 1990, a small, four-passenger Toyota Corolla pulled up in front of the mission home in Freetown, Sierra Leone, West Africa. Nine young elders crawled out of the car and wakened their mission president, Miles Cunningham. The last leg of their harrowing escape from war-torn Monrovia, Liberia, had taken thirty-four hours. They were hungry, stiff, shaken, and exhausted, but they were alive.

Civil war had been raging for six months. Rebels wanted to unseat the president, Samuel Kenyo Doe, who ten years earlier had seized power in a similar war. Tribes had taken sides, and hostilities raged everywhere.

President Cunningham had left Monrovia several months before when the fighting reached the city's borders. The couple missionaries had left with the president.

Before the president departed, he told the remaining elders, who were local missionaries, to stop proselyting, remove their missionary name badges, stay in their quarters, and, if the fighting continued, return to their homes. He left money, food, and a car with the branch counselor.

The fighting intensified. The airport was seized, and water, electricity, and telephones were cut off. The elders were on their own. Lodged in different parts of the city, they tried to visit the Saints, hold meetings, and even continue teaching the Church Education classes at which the couple missionaries had been so effective. Sunday services continued, though the only way to get to church was to walk.

But the war moved into the center of the city. All order collapsed. Looters, hungry government troops, and rebel battalions ransacked stores and homes. If the people resisted, they were shot. Soldiers stormed through the streets, and the residents were at their mercy.

Determined to complete their missionary service, the zone leaders, Elders Marcus Menti and Joseph Myers, devised a plan to have Brother Philip Abubkar drive to Sierra Leone with them and any of the six other local missionaries who wanted to go. Once in Sierra Leone, they could serve the last year of their mission. They faced two obstacles: they had to find the other missionaries in the area, and then they had to get out of the city.

Locating the other missionaries was not going to be easy. They were on foot, and many of the streets were strewn with dead bodies and abandoned loot. Snipers lurked in shadows, and bands of trigger-happy soldiers seemed to be everywhere.

Staying in the middle of the streets to show that they were peaceful civilians, not snipers, looters, or soldiers, they walked six miles of the main highway to the former residence of the couple missionaries. There they found four of the missing elders, who had taken refuge in the abandoned apartment. Elders Selli and Forkpah and Elders Chanipo and Gonquoi had been keeping a low profile in their own area while still visiting the members. But when the rebels ordered everyone out of the area, the missionaries had fled to the couples' apartment in what was then a safer area. The couple missionaries had left their cupboards stocked with food, which the missionaries had shared with the members.

Reunited, the six returned to the mission home, walking again in the center of the road, avoiding side streets, and keeping a steady pace so as not to call attention to themselves.

Two elders were still missing. Three local sisters volunteered to use the rebel's cease-fire break each afternoon, which allowed people to search for food, to look for the missing missionaries. Each afternoon they scouted around the pockets of heavy fighting, checking the elders' apartment and other possible hiding places. No missionaries.

At the mission home, the six missionaries, the driver, and the car, were ready to go. But the missionaries didn't know what to do about their companions.

The missing elders had been caught in the middle of the war several weeks before. They had been out doing their shopping and laundry on preparation day when gunfire erupted all around them. They rushed to their house and threw themselves to the floor. For seven hours the shooting continued. Electric power and all means of communication had been shut off by the rebels.

For a week they had stayed out of sight, bullets flying everywhere. One night during evening prayer, they heard and felt a massive explosion, followed by their neighbors calling, "Missionaries, missionaries, everyone is leaving, hurry!" They joined the throng in the street. They hadn't gone far when the rebels had stopped them to identify members of enemy tribes.

Elder Nyanforth was in no serious danger; his tribe was not at odds with the interrogators. But Elder Gaye was from a tribe considered by these rebels to be the enemy. The leaders forced everyone to squat until daylight, when identification would be easier. All night long the two elders prayed for help. Daylight came. "Though I was in an inextricable plight, I was confident of the Lord's help," Elder Gaye recalled. "What frightened us was when a man was shot by the rebels because he was Krahn. I really became fidgety and nearly collapsed." Elder Gaye was a Krahn.

Just one more person remained ahead of him in the interrogation line. For Elder Gaye, those minutes are unforgettable. "I nodded my head and began to imagine paradise. Suddenly I felt a palm on my shoulder. I dreadfully raised my head and saw that he was a Saint the Lord had sent to rescue me. He was a member of the Church who was fighting with the rebels. He knew that I was one of those being sought, but he concealed my identity from his colleagues. He forthwith told the commander that my companion and I should be released."

The rebels took the two to their refugee camp about thirteen miles from Monrovia. For a week they lived in deplorable conditions. "We fasted and prayed frequently, and we were both prompted by the Spirit to leave for Monrovia. After fervent prayer we decided to leave early Sunday morning, taking the bush road because we would now be escapees. Even though we did not know the way to town, we trusted in the Lord's help and arrived there after walking for eight hours."

In town they heard from some members that the other elders were leaving, perhaps had already left, for Sierra Leone. Weary but hopeful, the two headed for the mission home. "We arrived after a two-hour walk just as they were putting their last bags into the boot of the car, having decided they could wait no longer for us."

The challenge now, according to Elder Gaye, was "to get nine grown men and their scant luggage into the small Toyota.

"After many stoppings, harassings, and violent threats at gunpoint," the group arrived at the border. They had one passport—from Nigeria—to get all nine of them out of Liberia. They had no papers for the car, and their plight drew unwanted attention. They were ordered out of the car by officials who intended to confiscate the vehicle and force the group to return to Monrovia. But they remained calm.

The officials hurled insults at the missionaries and accused them of causing many of the country's political problems. Finally, one senior officer unexpectedly said, "This car belongs to a church, and these missionaries are gentlemen. Let them go."

Not out of trouble yet, the missionaries next had to barter for gas with only a small amount of cash. Again, recognizing them as missionaries, a man selling gasoline for thirty dollars a gallon dropped his price and sold them five gallons. Not enough, but it would have to do.

At times the roads deteriorated to muddy paths, but the elders forged on, sometimes running alongside the car to lighten the load and make it possible to keep going. At Kenema, Sierra Leone, they got enough fuel for the last stretch of their flight to freedom.

Just before midnight they rang the bell at the mission home. Standing on the steps before the president and his wife, Stella Rose, was a ragged band of elders who had come to labor for Zion. With food, a bath, and a good night's sleep, they were ready to go to work in their new area.

And they were all young men, and they were exceedingly valiant for courage, and also for strength and activity; but behold, this was not all—they were men who were true at all times. Alma 53:20
