Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Called to Serve

At the laying of the cornerstone for the São Paulo Temple in March 1977, President Spencer W. Kimball invited Helvécio Martins to the podium. Brother Martins was a prominent Brazilian member of the Church, though he held no priesthood position. President Kimball counseled his friend: "What is necessary for you is faithfulness. Remain faithful, and you will enjoy all the blessings of the Church."

What could that mean for him and his family? What did it mean for Brazil? Brother Martins asked himself.

For many years, missionaries had been preaching to Brazilians. The first elders entered the country in 1927, and over the next twenty years, 976 people joined the Church. During the 1940s, Elder Spencer W. Kimball visited Brazil often as an ecclesiastical administrator and as a mission and stake conference visitor. And now, in the late 1970s, he was presiding at the greatest event yet: the beginning of the building of a temple.

Unlike many who had joined the Church in Brazil, Brother Martins and his family were neither poor nor uneducated. He had joined the Church in Rio de Janeiro. He had taken advanced studies in economics, worked in upper management for Petrobras, the largest corporation in Brazil, and taught economics at one of Brazil's most important universities. Most of his associates and friends were baffled by his dedication to the Latter-day Saint faith. They saw his church as discriminating against blacks.

Brother Martins saw it as God's church. He gave interviews to the press and worked to familiarize his countrymen with Latter-day Saint beliefs. He worked diligently in the Lord's service, even though he was not allowed to hold the priesthood. He and his wife, Ruda, the stake Primary president, spent long hours contributing to the construction of the temple, although they never expected to enter the building.

And then came the revelation, Official Declaration 2 in the Doctrine and Covenants, "extending priesthood and temple blessings to all worthy male members of the Church."

In Brazil, where forty percent of the population is black or part black, the revelation held great significance. In the Martins family, the revelation changed everything.

Brother Martins's son Marcus was nineteen years old when President Kimball announced the change on 9 June 1978. Holding the priesthood had been a dream he had never expected to realize in this life. He had not anticipated serving a mission or being married in the temple. He had joined the Church with his family on 2 July 1972 because he had believed.

Now he was engaged to a young woman who had served a mission for the Church. The invitations had been mailed for an August wedding. He was working and pursuing an engineering degree in school in Rio de Janeiro. But with the new revelation his life was transformed. On 18 June he was ordained a priest. On 25 June, an elder. And then the stake president challenged him to accept a mission call. Marcus explained his marriage plans, but the stake president didn't give in. Then the regional representative urged him to serve a mission. Marcus wrestled with the decision. His testimony was firm but so were his plans.

After much soul-searching, Marcus said yes. He was told his call would come by 22 September. But he, like the early missionaries to England who began the great pioneer migration west, felt the fire. Rather than wait for his call, he entered the missionary training center in Brazil on 5 August. The mission officials contacted Church headquarters by telephone, and he was assigned to São Paulo three days later. Marcus Martins was the first black male full-time missionary in the Church. His formal call did not come through until weeks later.

In later years, the Lord called the Martins family to significant service in his kingdom. Helvécio Martins was the first black Latter-day Saint called as a mission president, serving from 1987 to 1990 in the Brazil Fortaleza Mission. He was called as a member of the Second Quorum of Seventy in 1990. Speaking in general conference, Elder Martins spoke of his journey: "Through [our] obedience to the laws of the gospel, fasting, and service, our Heavenly Father blessed us with the power to overcome fear, challenges, and eventual adversities." (Ensign, Nov. 1990, 26.)

Marcus filled his mission and returned to marry his sweetheart. He enrolled at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah, to further his academic studies and then to teach.

Today Brazil is a stronghold for the Church in South America. The pioneer spirit of the people is real, and it reaches those who are seeking the truth, as were Elder Martins and his family: "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints [is] the Lord's kingdom on earth, the road back to the celestial mansion of our Eternal Father." (Ensign, Nov. 1990, 27.)

For we walk by faith, not by sight. 2 Corinthians 5:7
