Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Swim for the Boat

Not all the Saints who set out to cross the plains of North America reached their Zion in Utah. Those who did reach the Valley paid tribute to their dead by honoring the cause that united them, loving the Lord, and willingly serving him—come what may.

Louis Palmer had lived on the tiny island of Taaroa, French Polynesia, for only a year when he and his cousin, Tahiarii Tamarono, went out for an afternoon of fishing. It was about 4:30 when the two set off in the diesel-powered boat. The fishing was good, and in less than two hours they had a good catch. They turned toward home.

Often in the waters of the Pacific storms brew quickly. So it was that day. Waves crashed against the little boat with such force that the two fishermen were thrown into the water. The boat sputtered on without them. Brother Palmer described what happened next: "The engine was running, so we started swimming after it, hoping it would run out of diesel. After about an hour of swimming my cousin wasn't doing well. I swam back to him and said, 'We can't swim to the island. We're too far away, and it is getting dark. If you want me to stay here with you, I will.'"

His cousin replied, "No. You swim for the boat and then come back for me."

Both recognized it was their only choice. So Louis set off in the direction of the boat, deliberately pacing his strokes to conserve his strength. He said, "I don't know how long I swam. It was pitch dark, but I could hear the engine running."

He prayed as he stroked and rested. He felt he had been swimming in the ocean forever. The noise of the boat seemed to indicate it was circling, but eventually the engine ran out of diesel and stopped. Louis heard the last sputters and swam in that direction, finally reaching the silent craft. He pulled himself aboard, recognizing that he was alive through the hand of God. He took stock of the situation.

When a diesel engine runs out of fuel, recharging the fuel lines requires certain supplies. He had none. There he sat in the boat, in the dark, with a spare tank of diesel and no means to hook it up. "I just asked the Lord to bless the engine that it would start," he explained. "The first time I tried, it wouldn't start. I prayed again, and the second time, it started."

Louis went searching for his cousin. For hours he retraced his way to where he thought they had parted. He searched with no success. Getting closer and closer to the island, he finally went ashore to find help. "Many people were on the dock waiting. They were worried about us. The police came back and started searching about 2 a.m., and then at 5 a.m. another search started. They never found him."

The tragedy drew the islanders to each other and to their Father in Heaven. The next day, Sunday, the Saints gathered for a reorganization of their branch. Louis Palmer was called as the new president.

. . . but I must cry unto my God: Thy ways are just. 2 Nephi 26:7
