Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

"When Ye Are Learned"

At first, Fan Hsieh listened to the Latter-day Saint missionaries because he was curious. And he was polite. He invited them back after finding that he enjoyed their conversations. One day he asked the elders why their church didn't have crosses or crucifixes. They replied, "Because Christ is risen; Christ lives. If one of your friends or parents dies, do you take out a photograph of them dead and show it to everyone?" This wisdom caught Hsieh off guard, and he determined to learn more.

Diligently advancing in knowledge was the essence of his life. As a child in the rural farming community of Tayeh, China, Hsieh did not attend school until he was ten. At age fourteen, he enrolled in a Catholic school where, in addition to academic subjects, he was taught of Jesus Christ and was soon baptized a Catholic. "I saw the example of many good Catholic missionaries," he later said, "and I thought maybe China needed more of them to teach the people about Jesus Christ."

Hsieh decided to become a priest. His advanced studies took him to the Catholic seminary in Wuhan for four years and then to the Catholic University in Beijing. When the Communists overran the city in 1949, he fled to Shanghai and became a student at Aurora Jesuit University. The Communist march continued, and Hsieh transferred to the Catholic seminary in Hong Kong, which relocated to Macao. There Hsieh was ordained a priest.

His service was called for in Rome, where he studied Italian, Latin, and law for four years. He moved to Paris and continued his study of languages: French, Greek, Hebrew, English, Spanish, and German. His goal was to learn more of Jesus Christ through reading original sources and texts.

The next logical step came in 1967, when he was appointed a member of the faculty at the Fu Jen Catholic University of Taipei as a teacher of philosophy and French. This was a setting where he could share his belief and testimony of Jesus Christ.

But Hsieh was uneasy about his direction. Though he valued the process of learning, some of his knowledge caused him concern. "I spent eighteen years teaching and fulfilling my responsibilities as a priest," he said. "I was very busy, but I wasn't happy. I had the opportunity to study in Europe; I had been a teacher, a student, a professor, a chaplain, a seminary director—my life was colorful—but there was a spiritual void."

To him, some Catholic customs seemed flawed. The pursuit of knowledge, for instance, was hampered by a ban on certain books. Hsieh's need for companionship seemed reinforced by the scripture in Genesis 2:18: "It is not good that the man should be alone." Indeed, Hsieh believed that caution. "This scripture became a vivid reality for me. Once when I was seriously sick and there was no one close to take care of me, I felt very alone. I realized the need for a companion to share my life. I decided then that being alone forever wasn't right."

Hsieh recognized that he either had to continue to ignore his feelings or find another path for his life. He chose the latter. In 1973 he left the Catholic priesthood and resigned his post at Fu Jen University. He was immediately put on the faculty at the national Cheng Chi University in Taipei. He started looking for a wife and married one of his university assistants.

Three years later the Latter-day Saint missionaries knocked on his door. He had no time for them, but something prompted him to go to his balcony and wave them back. They set up an appointment, which prompted Hsieh's wife to caution her husband, "beware of false prophets." (Matthew 7:15.)

But the door was open and Hsieh was prepared for the true gospel. He met often with the elders and was interested in the simplicity of their beliefs and their answers to his questions. They lent him books by Church authorities, which he studied carefully. When they spoke of their priesthood, he saw an opportunity to be part of the true priesthood of God.

Hsieh and his wife investigated the Church together, and they were baptized together in December 1977. "We've always tried to use every opportunity and every talent he has given us to help build up the kingdom of God on the earth and to share the gospel message."

Brother Hsieh's contributions are legion. He lectured seven times at the International Conference for Christian Professors, bearing his testimony to scholars. He served in the Taipei Taiwan Temple presidency and on the high council of the Taipei Taiwan West Stake. His language skills have been put to good use in helping with a second Chinese translation of the Book of Mormon.

As one who had spent his life in search of knowledge and truth, Brother Hsieh had finally found it: "What we do, we do for the glory of God and the salvation of souls. Friendship is the method by which we share the gospel. The final goal for all is salvation and exaltation."

Put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him. Colossians 3:10
