Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Jailed for Proselyting

Four sister missionaries and the president of the Greece Athens Mission were traveling north to cross the border into Macedonia (Yugoslavia). It was 2 June 1993, and the missionaries needed new visas. The missionaries had been denied an extension of their residence permits, and this was the only feasible way to remain in Greece. So they planned to travel out of the country and back in again, picking up their new visas the next day as they reentered Greece.

This time, the party leaving the country was to be joined by the four missionaries serving in Thessaloniki. They, too, needed new permits. The plans were well detailed, but the mission president didn't count on the four elders in Thessaloniki being arrested and thrown in jail for "street boarding." Since its beginnings, the Church has faced persecution, its members and its missionaries sometimes being threatened with violence and imprisonment.

This was not the first time missionaries had been charged by the police with proselyting, a criminal offense, since the Greece Athens Mission was opened on 1 July 1990. Usually the arrests were the results of misunderstandings that took long hours to work out, but they had always been resolved at the station.

President R. Douglas Phillips recalled an incident when two elders were out knocking on doors. A deacon of the Greek Orthodox Church approached them and said, "Go to Africa. Go to America. Don't teach here, for we have a religion. Leave our country." In a few minutes, police officers arrived and the elders were arrested and charged with proselyting.

Several hours later, after the authorities had shuttled between the clerics of the Greek Orthodox Church and the missionaries, they determined that the proselyting law had not been violated. But the missionaries were not free to leave. The police wanted to see that all the foreign missionaries' papers were in order, and the process dragged late into the night. Eventually they were released and reminded not to proselyte.

But the incident with the four elders in Thessaloniki was the first in three years to go to court.

President Phillips and the district leader found the four missionaries at the police station. The police had charged them with proselyting, claiming that numerous individuals had complained. The missionaries explained that they had been arrested after being approached by persons who turned out to be plainclothes police. The head of the department was one of them, and he was firm about keeping the missionaries in jail.

When the mission president asked to use the phone to call an attorney, he was told the police phone did not allow long-distance calls and he was sent outside to a kiosk to phone the Athens attorney the mission had used. The United States consul for Thessaloniki, Frank Collins, went to the station to meet with the police, but the mission president was excluded from the conversations.

Then it was announced that a hearing would be held that evening at 6 p.m. at the main courthouse. The missionaries were to present their passports at that time. The afternoon was filled with taking taxis around the city to gather the passports from the missionaries' apartments.

Present at the pretrial hearing was the mission president, the district leader, and Mr. Katsios, an associate of the Athens counsel, Mr. Mavros. President Phillips described what happened:

"The four missionaries were brought by four plainclothes police from the hall where they had been photographed and fingerprinted. After some time, Mr. Katsios went into the office of a judge. . . . After about fifteen minutes, I was invited in and asked if we should have an immediate trial the next day or postpone the trial for two months. Since Mr. Mavros, our attorney, had already made arrangements to fly to Thessaloniki that evening, I felt it advisable to proceed immediately with the trial. Furthermore, since I was scheduled to be released from my assignment within a month, I did not wish to leave the case unresolved for the new mission president."

Arriving at the courthouse the next morning were Mr. Katsios's assistant, Elder and Sister Thorn, a missionary couple, the four sister missionaries, Rosa, a Church member who had brought food to the imprisoned elders, and a new convert, Despoina Hatzopoulou. Her presence was fortuitous because she, being a physician and therefore a professional, was allowed to translate at the trial.

The trial began at 2:30 p.m. with the police testifying first. Then President Phillips was called to the stand and, after being asked to swear on the Bible, was informed he could make his statement.

"I explained that first of all I was not a professional cleric but a professor of Greek and Latin at an American university and was assigned for three years as a mission president. I also informed the court that the missionaries were not professional ministers but that most were college students who are called for two years. I emphasized that they come to Greece voluntarily, that they love the Greek people, and that when they return to the United States they become unofficial ambassadors for Greece.

"I then testified that we were desirous of obeying the law and that, according to the information we had, we were not in violation. I recounted that we were informed by a security policeman from the Ambelokipi police station in Athens, who had visited me more than two years before, that proselytizing was to deceive, manipulate, pressure, or bribe someone in an attempt to persuade them to change their religion and that missionaries do not employ these practices or tactics."

President Phillips gave some background on the Church represented by the missionaries, explaining that its millions ofmembers lived in almost every country in the world, except Muslim countries. He also explained that fifty thousand missionaries, like the four on trial, serve for two years at their own expense. One of the prosecutors asked, "How would you feel if Greek Orthodox missionaries went to your homeland?" The president answered, "They would be free to come and would be welcomed."

When it was the missionaries' turn to testify, they explained what they were doing when they were arrested.

The judge deliberated very briefly with his associates and then announced his verdict: Not guilty.

We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed. 2 Corinthians 4:8-9
