Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Remembering Hot Dogs and Sauerkraut

War teaches many lessons: some on the battlefront, some in the heart. Twenty-year-old private A. C. Christensen saw six months of combat in World War II before being captured and sent to a Japanese prison camp. Early in his captivity he was forced to relinquish almost all of his few possessions. When a guard eyed his watch, about the only thing he had left, he understood the signal. He removed the watch from his wrist and handed it over.

He spent the next three years in a daily routine of endless beatings, exhaustion, disease, and death. Hunger was his constant companion; he struggled to remember even the most simple meals of hot dogs and sauerkraut on board ship.

Like those pioneers who pushed and pulled when their feet were bare and their strength gone, their companions lost to death and disease, somehow he carried on.

But eventually that strength began to wane, and finally he found himself slipping toward death as so many of his fellow soldiers had done. "They weren't necessarily the sickest among us," he recalled, "but they would lie in their beds in a semifetal position and stare at nothing." At morning bed check they were dead.

"Death began to seem more and more like my only release. One day I put down my hammer and told the guard I would not work any longer. I didn't care what he did to me. I wanted to die. He beat me, and afterwards, as I lay in my bed waiting for the end to come, I took out the two precious pieces of paper I had managed to keep concealed for three years: one was a picture of my parents, the other was my patriarchal blessing.

"As I read my blessing, I thought of my grandfather, the patriarch who had given me the blessing, and my dear mother, who had patiently taken down every word. The words softened me. Maybe there was a future for me after all. Then I studied my parents' faces in the picture. I began to recall my childhood, our farm, my brother Max, and the times we had spent riding our horses.

"I started to pray. Somehow I began to feel strengthened. I remembered that Helaman's army of two thousand had been strengthened by their mothers' teachings. I remembered my mother's words to me and my brother, both still in our late teens. She promised us that if we would always live the Word of Wisdom, the Lord would bless us.

"As I lay there thinking about what my mother had said, I weighed only eighty-five pounds. I didn't feel that I could run and not be weary, but maybe I could walk and not faint. That day my spirits lifted, and I determined that I would hang on.

"I had beaten my enemy."

Be patient in afflictions, for thou shalt have many; but endure them, for, lo, I am with thee. Doctrine and Covenants 24:8
