Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Whatever Is Needed

Establishing an official Church presence in Czechoslovakia had been impossible. The government officials responsible for such decisions were cold, not interested, and not attentive. For many years the request for official recognition was studied. And later, "still being studied." Then in February 1990, the key unyielding official was removed, and his successor "had ears to hear."

Elder Russell M. Nelson had for many years tried to open a dialogue with government officials in Czechoslovakia. He told of finally arriving at a time when a receptive official "heard our complete story. He said, 'Your request for recognition will be approved this very month. Your people may again worship in full dignity. Your missionaries may again return to this country.'" Official recognition was granted 21 February and became effective 1 March 1990.

The courageous efforts of the district president in Czechoslovakia, Jiri Snederfler, whom Elder Nelson called "the real hero of the story," were vital in the Church's obtaining official recognition. He explained:

"Some two and one-half years earlier, Elder Ringger and I had learned that recognition could be formally requested only by a Czechoslovakian member of the Church. So we went to the home of Brother and Sister Snederfler. We explained that we had just received that information from the chairman of the Council of Religious Affairs. Knowing that other Czechoslovakian leaders and thinkers had been imprisoned or put to death for religious or dissident belief, we told Brother Snederfler that we, as his Church leaders, could not and would not make that request of him. After contemplating only a brief moment, Brother Snederfler humbly said, 'I will go! I will do it!' As he spoke, his wife, Olga, shed a tear. They embraced and said, 'We will do whatever is needed. This is for our Lord, and His work is more important than our freedom or life.'

"Some months later, when the papers were properly prepared, Brother Snederfler submitted the personally. He and other members were subjected to strict surveillance. The Saints continued in courage and faith. Ultimately, after periodic fasting and prayer and complete compliance with all requirements, they received that glorious announcement of recognition. How I admire the Snederflers and all those stalwart members who endured so much interrogation and risk."

Brother and Sister Snederfler did not rest. Brother Snederfler was called to preside over the Freiberg Germany Temple, beginning 1 September 1991, and Sister Snederfler was called as the temple matron.

No one can assist in this work except he shall be humble and full of love, having faith, hope, and charity, being temperate in all things, whatsoever shall be entrusted to his care. Doctrine and Covenants 12:8
