Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

You Don't Change Your Religion

Every year the parents of Vadakke Madu Harihara Subramoniam Iyer (Ganesh) acknowledge their eldest son at a death anniversary rite. Ganesh, reared in an orthodox Hindu family with priestly Brahman lineage, is dead to his family because he joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Ganesh is not alone. Young converts in India are frequently disowned and expelled from their homes. Changing religion is an extraordinary breach with culture and family practices. India Bangalore Mission president Gurcharan Singh Gill explained: "The concept that you don't change your religion is so prevalent in this society that when young people join the Church, they often lose the respect and association of their parents and their portion of the family inheritance."

The LDS Church in India and neighboring Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka is at about the stage where the Church was forty or fifty years ago in South America. Religious culture is so much a part of the lifestyle that it is difficult for a person to adopt another religion. That families are still a primary force in that region strengthens the Church's effort but also makes it difficult for those converted to break with the family's religious tradition. So it was for Ganesh.

In 1986 in Goa, a town overlooking India's west coast and the Arabian Sea, Ganesh and a group of his friends were working to have India declared a religious state. Ganesh was assigned to collect material about the LDS Church and to dissuade LDS missionaries from actively promoting their religion. That's how he met Laurel and Nathel Hill from Ogden, Utah. The Hills were holding discussions in their home to introduce the Church and its principles to those who were interested. At that time open proselyting in India was against the law.

Meeting with the missionaries did not go as Ganesh expected. "I loved Christians," he explained, "but I hated them for the work they were doing. We felt that they were polluting India, and we wanted to stop conversions to Christianity."

In his first few meetings, Ganesh talked with the Hills about a wide range of subjects. He found himself intrigued with their knowledge, their openness, their sincerity. "Each time we spoke I forgot what I went to talk to them about," he recalled. After three visits he abandoned his opposition and began earnestly to learn from them. In one of those visits the Hills gave Ganesh a copy of the Book of Mormon and then taught him to pray. Soon after, while on a three-month assignment for his work, Ganesh became quite ill. He decided to pray for help in regaining his health, and he turned to the Lord. He got better.

When he returned to Goa, he began taking the missionary discussions. So intrigued was he that his after-work discussions stretched late into the night as he probed the truths of the gospel. After the fifth discussion, Brother Hill challenged Ganesh to be baptized, and he accepted. "We both wept," Ganesh said.

The news of his conversion was not well received. His friends who had set out with him to rid the country of other religions were stunned. "I told them I was not happy with the work I was doing earlier, but that I was happy now," says Ganesh. "And then I got the same treatment that I had caused others to get, which means I got beaten up on the road, twice, very nicely."

That was just the beginning. Ganesh was fired from his job and forced to move from his apartment. His parents disowned him and stripped him of all rights in the family. They said, "We don't want you to be a member of our family. You became a Christian missionary. We can never forgive you for that."

Though the family attempted to sever all ties, Ganesh tried to maintain some contact. A serious illness that hospitalized his mother opened a way for him to share his faith and religion. The family posted a guard outside her hospital room to keep Ganesh from seeing her. Ganesh, however, walked unrecognized into his mother's room and asked her if she would like a blessing.

"You bless me?" she asked, because in Hinduism, only the elders bless those younger. Ganesh explained the purpose of priesthood blessings, and his mother consented. He felt prompted to bless her with renewed health, and within days she was released from the hospital.

"She appreciated what I had done. She told me, 'I know that you are in the right place for you.' That's enough for me." When Ganesh got married, she wanted to go to the wedding. In fact, she approved of his wife, but no one else did. And no one from his family attended his wedding.

Ganesh's father believed that if God had wanted Ganesh to be a member of the LDS Church, his son would have been born into the Church. So many hopes were tied up in this eldest son. Ganesh said his father "thought I would take care of and bring up the family's name, I being the first son. As per his calculation, I am not doing that. But I told him I believe that God has a purpose for me: to put me where I was and to put me where I am now. I know, because of my patriarchal blessing, that my ancestors will be grateful for the work I will do for them.

"I will be forever grateful to my Heavenly Father because, to use my earthly father's words, 'I am what I am and not what I was.'"

Watch ye, stand fast in the faith . . . be strong. 1 Corinthians 16:13
