Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

PATIENCE AND CHARITY

Maintaining life and adapting to the frontier consumed much of the pioneers' energies during their first years in Zion. From their own struggles they learned patience; from the trials of others they learned to share what little they had.

In general conference in 1856 word came that handcart pioneers were stranded on the trail, freezing in the early winter storms. The members responded. "The sisters stripped of their Peticoats stockings and every thing they could spare, right there in the Tabernacle, and piled [them] into the wagons to send to the Saints in the Mountains." (Lucy Meserve Smith, in Jill Mulvay Derr, Janath Russell Cannon, and Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, Women of Covenant: The Story of Relief Society [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992], 77.)

President Brigham Young called for men, wagons, and relief supplies. (See Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86], 4:112-19.) Twenty-seven young men with 16 four-mule teams set out almost immediately to rescue the incoming Saints. By the end of the month, 250 teams were on the trail, carrying the clothing, quilts, blankets, flour, vegetables, and fruit that were desperately needed by the westering companies delayed by early snowfall.

With patience and charity, modern-day pioneers too are called to sacrifice, set their faces to the wind, and carry on. They make do with what they have, sharing not only their resources but their energy and commitment with each other. And in the process, they too come to Zion.

Nurse This Little Plot

In August 1995, Julia Mavimbela of Soweto, South Africa, was honored by Brigham Young University at its commencement exercises. Her citation was for "outstanding contribution to a profession, a community, a religion." Sister Mavimbela was indeed qualified for such a tribute.

Julia Mavimbela had earned a teaching certificate in the late 1930s when educational opportunities for black women in South Africa were severely limited. She had supported herself and her mother on her small salary of five pounds every three months. She took seriously her charge to educate her students, and her efforts reached beyond the classroom. Unknown to her supervisors, she taught a class of forty students who were too poor to attend her school. She was a capable administrator as well as teacher and became one of the first women principals in her country. In addition, she established soup kitchens for parents and a community thrift program called Waste Not, Want Not, decades before such programs became popular.

In 1976, while grieving over the death of her husband in an accident caused by a drunken driver, Julia was dismayed by the riots that ripped at the core of her country. Schools were closed, students took to the streets, and buildings were being burned.

She developed a plan "to try to engage the hand, to engage the mind" of the youngsters who would otherwise be caught up in the violence. Working mainly with children aged four to ten, Julia created a garden on an abandoned and garbage-strewn lot. Like the early pioneers in Utah, she understood that working with the soil not only produces harvests but heals souls. She put the children to work preparing the ground for planting. "See what good things you can grow if you nurse this little plot," she said. Her ideas were planted in other hearts, and soon little gardens, some as small as closets, were popping up all over the community.

As Julia and the youngsters cleared the weeds, she taught them about the value of work, the beauty of nature, the law of the harvest—and in between she taught them to read. She started with the seed packages. From carrots came two words. On an abandoned car on the premises she painted the word car, and on the compost heap she placed a sign labeled rot. Her homegrown vocabulary lessons sprouted alongside the carrots and beans in the abandoned lot.

Water for the garden was kitchen waste water, and when that supply was insufficient, she would turn to her students and say, "Come. Let's go home. Let's all pray—we'll surely see something happen." Often it did. The next morning she would come to the patch, and a good rain would have soaked the ground overnight. She said, "I can't tell you of the excitement I saw in those beautiful little faces, all convinced that surely there was someone interested in and caring for the work they were doing."

Her efforts did not go unnoticed. A South African publication paid tribute to the gardens: "Mrs. Mavimbela dreams and schemes to get the youth involved in making Soweto greener . . . to make them feel that their surroundings belong to them and that they are responsible for them—and therefore will not destroy them. She wishes to repair not only the physical damage of the recent riots, but also the mental and moral damage, and her message to youth is, 'Where there was a bloodstain, a beautiful flower must grow.'"

In 1981 her consuming drive to improve the lives of children and families brought her face to face with two American elders who had a message to share.

Because of her prominence in many causes in the community, some Anglican women had approached Julia to "clean up the Dube Boys' Club which was in terrible shape." She wasn't persuaded. Their interest in the boys and their claim to need her help didn't ring true, and she refused. But the next morning she had a change of heart and stopped by to check on the club for herself. "I noticed two white boys (as I called them), greeted them, and asked them what they were doing. They said they were helping, and I asked, Why? Where do you come from?"

"From America," they explained and then followed her about in her business of assessing the situation at the club. When they proposed visiting her in her home, she was surprised. "At that time in Soweto whoever admitted a white into his home was considered a traitor." Intending to put them off, she said, "Give me three days to go and clean my little house. I'm a woman who is always on the street, and cobwebs are hanging."

The missionaries were not dissuaded. Three days later they appeared at her door and Julia let them in. When she read Elder on the name tags, she shivered, for in her church "an elder was an untouchable" and she had just let two into her house. They presented the first discussion; she was not impressed, dismissing their message as "just from another one of those groups that come to preach to us." The second discussion, the next week, was the same. That she even was continuing to talk to them surprised her, but she felt something in her heart for the young men and allowed them back a third time.

That time, "they looked on the wall at the wedding photo of my husband and me. They wanted to know where he was, and I told them that he had died. This time they kindled a spark of interest in me. They asked, 'Did you know that you can have someone be baptized for him?' I want to tell you, my eyes opened wide because I had been taught that it was improper even to speak of someone who had died," Julia replied. "It is strange to hear you whites talk about the dead as if they were alive."

She asked to learn more of their doctrine. Two months later she was baptized on the anniversary of the day her father had died, a date set before she recognized its family significance. Later she not only had the baptismal work done for her husband but she was sealed to him in the Johannesburg South Africa Temple.

Joining the Church did not bring great change into her lifestyle. But how it extended her reach and put all her efforts into a new perspective! This gracious yet forceful white-haired grandmother, fluent in seven languages, explained her now-broadened perspective: "My message is the whole world was given by Heavenly Father for us to live in peace. Color is not a criterion. We're all children of God, and if we recognize the scriptures and the plan of salvation, then we'll know what it means to love our brothers as ourselves."

Sister Mavimbela, who has served in the Soweto Branch as the Relief Society president and as a Gospel Doctrine teacher, has been on the frontier of change for years. She has served as vice-president of the National Council of Women of South Africa, the first black woman elected to that post, and she has maintained her commitment to the Women for Peace movement she helped found and direct for many years. She has sponsored literacy programs and homemaking clubs, lobbied officials for changes in laws and, as progress came, kept on lobbying. She has been a peaceful force for change in a country where many issues are fought in the streets.

Sister Mavimbela has worked side by side with both black women and white women to improve lives, of children in particular, and to revive hope. To a huge audience of women at the Brigham Young University Women's Conference in 1990 she said, "I give thanks to God that he has made me a woman. I give thanks to my creator that he has made me black; that he has fashioned me as I am, with hands, heart, head to serve my people. It can, it should, be a glorious thing to be a woman. It is important for women to be aware of their common lot. It is important for women to stand together and rise together to meet our common enemies—illiteracy, poverty, crime, disease, and stupid, unjust laws that have women feel so helpless as to be hopeless."

Others see Sister Mavimbela as a leader of hearts and minds, a teacher with great purpose and perspective, an example to everyone who is touched by her hand. She sees herself as a child of God.

Wherefore, I love little children with a perfect love. Moroni 8:17
