Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

With the Lord Nothing Is Impossible

The two Hungarian women, a mother and daughter, were ready for baptism. When the missionaries asked if they would commit to become members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the mother answered, "Yes, I suppose I know I must." Without a word, her thirty-year-old daughter nodded her agreement.

Only a few months before, the Hungarian government had not allowed baptisms. The missionaries recalled the controversy with officials when they had tried to use the swimming pool at the hotel. But those restrictions had been lifted, and now they could take converts into the waters of baptism.

If they had a font.

Much of missionary work is simply having faith and taking the next step. So the two missionaries set a date a little more than two weeks off and then began to look for a place to baptize their investigators.

The Church in Hungary was just getting started. For several months, the ten members in the Budapest Branch, the only Saints among the 2.5 million residents of the Hungarian capital, had met in the missionaries' tiny apartment. But they had outgrown their small quarters, and the mission president was looking for a permanent place for Church meetings.

Although being baptized in a lake, river, pond, or even the ocean would place the new converts squarely in the tradition of Saints and pioneers the world over, that wasn't an option for these two Hungarian women. The Danube River, at its peak and with fierce currents, was far too risky for the sixty-year-old mother, and the weather had turned bitter cold. The indoor pool the missionaries had used before had been drained and covered. So the missionaries talked with their mission president and followed his advice: they prayed.

The baptism day drew closer. Still no appropriate pool had been located, though the search for a meetinghouse had been successful. Elder Christopher J. H. Jones recalled, "The Church bought a large house in the hills of Budapest, large enough for Church meetings. Now we had the building, but we still had no font."

The elders discussed the problem with the two investigators, but the women seemed undaunted. They were committed to baptism and had faith the Lord would provide a way. Each time the missionaries uneasily brought up the question of the font, the daughter told them, "We Hungarians keep our commitments. God will keep his."

He did.

Only days before the scheduled service, the mission president telephoned the elders. "I am coming to see you. And I am bringing your font."

He arrived with a portable font loaded in the back of his car. Found in a basement in Germany, the font had been driven in relays to Budapest. "It took two days to transport it, two hours to set it up, and fifteen hours to fill it with water. But it was a font," wrote Elder Jones.

The baptism, the first function in the new meetinghouse of the Church in Budapest, was held on schedule. The water in the font was tinged with rust from the pipes. A wobbly chair draped with a sheet was used for the women to sit on while being confirmed. The guests sat on the stairs. Because the building had not been used recently, there was no electricity. Candles lighted the room, and the guests sang familiar hymns—"Praise God from Whom All Blessings Flow" and "A Mighty Fortress Is Our God." They sang without accompaniment when the batteries of the small cassette recorder failed early in the service. It didn't matter.

Elder Jones said, "It was a moment none of us will ever forget," a moment only those who "lay aside the things of this world, and seek for the things of a better" will ever know. (D&C 25:10.)

And this because of their exceeding faith, and their patience in their tribulations. Alma 60:26
