Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

"A Premeditated Apostate"

Mary Barton planned to marry in the temple and rear her family in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. A former Quaker, then convert, then LDS missionary, she was firm in that resolve until she received the strong impression that she should marry Jim Kirk, a friend from Quaker boarding school. He had written to her while she was serving her mission in Montreal, "I hear you are pretty badly brainwashed, and I am going to have to come and save you from this terrible thing."

After her mission she took a job near the boarding school in Ohio. Jim's farm was not far away. Both of them loved the farm and were well suited to the long hours and hard work a successful farm required. So for many months Mary worked at the hardware store in town and helped Jim with the garden, even baling hay in her free time. She understood his passion for the farm; it reminded her of her feelings for the gospel. He said to her one night, "Sometimes I wish I could just hug the whole farm at once."

Mary worried that she was "becoming a premeditated apostate," but "we went so well together. It's like we were already one; the paperwork just hadn't been done." But she had so many questions: How could she be feeling right about doing something that would take her away from the Church she had embraced so fully? In studying Church teachings and Church history, she recognized the power of a husband and wife coming into the Church together. Many of the early pioneers had left their families and their religious roots to follow the teachings of latter-day prophets. But most of the stories she had heard were of the partners being committed to the Church—together.

"Jim wasn't hot on the idea of becoming a member," Mary wrote in her journal. In fact, he told her bluntly he had no interest in the Church. Yet when she prayed for guidance, she felt impressed that marrying Jim was right and that things would work out. "The Lord had told me on my mission that I would marry Jim Kirk, and we would have the blessings of the Church," she said. After many long nights of pouring out her soul to God, asking how and why and when, her answer was only, "He will join." Mary realized she was going to have to be patient "to see how his conversion story was going to come about."

With faith she married Jim in an outdoor Quaker ceremony on his farm. More than three hundred of their friends and relatives came for the wedding, though Jim's devout Quaker family was skeptical of Mary's new religious ties. Her family was more tolerant, though none of them understood how she could be so deluded.

There were no signs that Jim would be one of those quick and miraculous conversions. It was hard for Mary to consistently attend meetings when the farm was so far from the meetinghouse and she was traveling alone. She found herself missing meetings sometimes. Jim came with her occasionally, but "he found it hard to justify missing all the work on the farm that day. I stuck to my guns about observing the Sabbath."

Weeks stretched into months and then years as Mary waited on the Lord. She worked at her definition of a homemaker—"smiling, wise, radiant, hard-working, and faithful." But the Kirks faced difficulties making ends meet. They eventually sold the farm and all the machinery at auction and moved to a smaller place. They hoped to have children, but that blessing didn't come quickly. What did come amid the trials they faced was an easing of the tension between them about the gospel.

Little by little Jim's interest grew. And then after two and a half years of marriage Mary wrote in her journal: "Tonight at 7 p.m. my husband was baptized and confirmed a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. What a tremendous blessing and joy it was. Exactly six years ago today I went to the Provo Temple for my own endowment. I have waited so long for this moment and prayed for its accomplishment. The Lord promised me that it would come to pass, but I didn't know when. I am so pleased it was so soon. We have been married just two years and a half, and Jim has been taught so quickly and so fully by the Spirit of the Lord. He has had his mind opened and his hunger for truth satisfied, and he has taken that first great step. And now we talk of temple marriage and of having our baby sealed to us and of the work and service and doing whatever the Lord calls us to do."

Call the Kirks he did. Jim was soon branch president, and Mary the Relief Society president. Their family grew, and their Church responsibilities grew, too. Jim was called to a stake presidency, and Mary served in every auxiliary—sometimes in several callings at once—from Sunday School to Primary, Young Women, and Relief Society. They built upon each other's faith and found comfort and strength in their joint commitment to the Son of God.

Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God. Ephesians 4:13
