Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

It All Began with Teakwood Chairs

Ng Kat Hing stood in the furniture store ready to receive customers. The group of Americans in dark suits caught his attention, but what really interested him was how they addressed him.

"Brother Ng," one of them said. When Ng Kat Hing looked puzzled, the man asked, "Do you not believe there is one Father in Heaven?"

Ng Kat Hing pondered the question as he considered the man who had posed it. His nametag identified him as President Heaton. When Ng Kat Hing nodded yes in answer to the question, the president continued, "So we are brothers, and I will call you that."

Brothers. President. Ng Kat Hing was intrigued. "I was touched and I was moved," he explained later. "In that moment, a little bit of the restored gospel was manifest to me. I wondered about it all that day and through the night. Four days later when the man called back to confirm the furniture order, I knew I wanted to know more."

Indeed there was more to learn. President Grant Heaton, the newly called president of the Southern Far East Mission, headquartered in Hong Kong, was happy to satisfy Ng Kat Hing's curiosity as well as order teakwood furniture from him. The twenty-five-year-old Hong Kong native was soon a language teacher for a host of missionaries and then a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. His roles eventually included branch president, district president, stake president, stake patriarch, counselor to the mission president, and regional representative. He and his wife served a mission to the Taipei Taiwan Temple, and he was called as president of the Hong Kong Temple, which opened in May 1996. It all began with teakwood desks and chairs.

That first encounter with the mission president and the missionaries started him thinking. He had been reared with a yearning for truth instilled in him as a child by his grandmother. "I was looking for a God who was different from the one I'd been taught about while growing up," Brother Ng said. His grandmother, a practicing Buddhist, had begun attending Christian churches shortly before her death. He had accompanied her. "But the pastors and preachers at those meetings were difficult to approach, and they were more concerned with donations than answering my questions."

Then President Heaton asked him to help find someone who could tutor the missionaries in Cantonese. Ng Kat Hing spoke to a few friends he considered well qualified for the job. But when they showed no interest, he suggested himself for the position. He was not without credentials. He had studied at the Pooi Sun English College and the World Electrical Engineering College. That the new post came with a lower salary than his sales position at the furniture store was not an obstacle. "I learned the truth," he said. "That was a good deal, right? Nothing is more important than that."

His spiritual conversion came as he taught the missionaries basic Cantonese and they taught him the gospel. He worked with several teams of missionaries before hearing all the prescribed lessons. "It took quite a while, but by the time I was baptized all my questions were answered. I had a strong foundation and a strong testimony."

On 31 May 1956 Ng Kat Hing was baptized in the swimming-pool-turned-baptismal-font at the mission home, now the site of the Hong Kong Temple. He was one of the first in Hong Kong to join the Church.

Brother Ng's testimony has made a difference in many lives. "My wife told me I was entirely different after joining the Church. My temper was smooth. I became a gentleman. The managing of my finances went better because I paid my tenth to the Lord. I did not worry about food or shelter because I kept the commandments. A happy life followed."

The missionaries' talk of God first touched his heart. "From the beginning, I learned about our Father in Heaven and his son, Jesus Christ. The missionaries taught of our relationship to these beings. And they continually talked of being children of God."

Acknowledging that in Hong Kong there is much pressure and stress in life, Brother Ng said, "Everyone is working so hard for money. We often spend so much time worrying about temporal things. The gospel brings a balance."

That balance has been a hallmark of his home. He and his wife, Ng Pang Lai, established priorities in rearing their seven children. "We made time for our children, for each other, and for our Church callings." Brother Ng gained a testimony of serving the Lord wherever and whenever.

"People say they have no time, but that is just an excuse," said Brother Ng. "They have the time for the things that are important in their lives."

His focus is clear. "We are all brothers and sisters. We need to share that knowledge with others."

Teach the children of men the things which I have put into your hands by the power of my Spirit. Doctrine and Covenants 43:15
