Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Something Changed Rosa

Rosa lived alone in a small rented room in the pueblo of Tiquisante, Guatemala. Her next-door neighbor Jose had agreed to hear the lessons taught by the missionaries of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. On their first visit to teach Jose, the sister missionaries found him waiting for them outside in his hammock. Two weeks later Jose was baptized. His first Sunday at church he was asked to greet all the members and visitors at the door. He was delighted with the assignment.

All the time he listened to the sisters he wished his good friend Rosa would hear the gospel message. The missionaries tried to teach Rosa, but she had too many doubts, too many questions about doctrines that were contrary to those she had been taught as a child.

After Jose's baptism the sisters offered to teach him and Rosa to read. In December 1992, the First Presidency had announced a churchwide gospel literacy effort that President Gordon B. Hinckley described as "a great project." He promised: "Its consequences will go on and on and be felt in the lives of generations yet to come. It is a program . . . designed to bring light into the lives of those who can neither read nor write." ("Ambitious to Do Good," Ensign, Mar. 1992, 6.)

So the sisters, on Wednesday and Sunday afternoons, began teaching Rosa and Jose from the Church's literacy manuals that used scriptures as the text. Rosa wore thick, black-rimmed glasses held together with yarn and an elastic strap stretched around her head. She took the classes seriously, preparing a place for her teacher to sit by spreading her few extra clothes on the hot cement floor. Jose offered his tutor his prized wooden chair. The two were willing and diligent students.

At the end of each lesson, the missionaries asked one of the two to pray. Sister Jana Seiter, one of the missionaries, wrote: "I wish you could hear them pray when they ask God to please help them to learn to read his holy word. They also pray for us, thanking God for our health, our safety, our testimonies, our love, and asking him to continue blessing us in our missionary work."

In the middle of the reading lessons, Rosa's attitude changed. One day she was reticent; the next day she was eager. Something had happened.

The night before, the missionaries had asked her again if she would like to take the discussions because they were so encouraged by Rosa's progress in learning to read. After the sisters left, Rosa went into her room to get ready for bed. She had felt such a good spirit when the missionaries were there. When they left, she felt as if the light in her heart had gone out. Then horrible blackness surrounded her, and her faith failed her. Rosa tried praying, but the peace she wanted so badly did not come. Then she saw the Church literacy manual and picked it up. As Rosa paged through the book and read what little she could, she felt a peace, a beautiful calm. She realized that the book contained the word of God. She knew it. Those simple, single-syllable words filled her soul.

"It is different now," wrote Sister Seiter. "There is no objection that the Book of Mormon is adding to or taking away from the Bible. Now there is no doctrinal dispute. Now there is no tension. There is only love, trust, and sisterhood."

God gave them knowledge and skill in all learning. Daniel 1:17
