Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Why Not Us?

Naji Al-Jezrawi lived in Baghdad with his wife, Nawal, and their three daughters. Naji, fluent in several languages, worked there for the United Nations. But the family was Christian in a Muslim world. When the Gulf War began in 1991, Naji and his family fled the country.

At first they intended to relocate in India. Many of his countrymen had gone there. But a friend from Germany suggested, "Go to Spain. It is much better, because the Catholic Refugee Commission there is very active." The family went to Spain, not knowing then that their Heavenly Father was guiding them to his Church. Arriving in July 1991, Naji immediately applied through the Catholic Commission to emigrate to the United States. Two months later they were interviewed along with many other Iraqi families.

Though all the other Iraqi families were given permission to enter the United States, the Al-Jezrawi family was denied. Naji was stunned. Every applicant was allowed to appeal three times, and he immediately did so. Their first and second appeals were rejected with no explanation.

Naji and his family asked, "Why only us?" They applied again. During the four months they waited for the official, final decision, Naji was introduced to the Church in the community of Mosteles, a suburb of Madrid, Spain.

One day, Latter-day Saint missionaries were making street contacts near the train station. Naji asked the blond young man, obviously an American, for directions. Stumbling in his Spanish, the young man turned to his companion, and the two began to sort out an answer in English. Naji heard their English and immediately asked them in English why they were in Spain.

They replied that they were missionaries for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, a Christian church. That appealed to him, and he asked to hear more. The elders gave him the first discussion and a Book of Mormon right there at the train station. They set up an appointment to meet with his family the next week.

Naji prepared his wife and children for the visit, and when the elders arrived he had read the book. The elders gave the family a second discussion and asked for a baptismal commitment. Naji and his family agreed. Elders from the mission office and sister missionaries taught this "golden" family. They spent time together playing games, eating dinner, and reading and talking about the gospel. The missionaries introduced the five to the English-speaking Madrid Fifth Ward.

The baptism date was set for 8 July 1992, Naji's birthday. But he retreated from the decision, suggesting a later date. "Once Elder Bay heard that, a drop of tears fell down from his eyes. I asked him what was the matter, and he said that every time a date is fixed for baptism, Satan interferes and creates problems to cancel the baptism." Naji responded, "I want to challenge Satan. We'll move the date up to July 3." They did, and the family was baptized on that date by the mission president.

Naji recalled: "We were the luckiest Iraqi family even if we had been left behind. Now we were members of his Church. So, definitely our third appeal would be approved." But it was denied.

"We didn't know what to say or how to explain it. We kept asking ourselves, if we are members of his Church, why doesn't Heavenly Father help us? Why did he help other Iraqi families who are not even members? Why? Why? But we got no answer.

"Thank God our faith kept strong and we kept praying in order to be close to him. Then we said, It seems our Heavenly Father doesn't want us to go to the States. Let us try Canada."

Again the family went through the process of applying and being interviewed with other Iraqi families. Again, all the families were approved—except the Al-Jezrawis. The Canadian authorities explained that because Naji had worked with the United Nations, he had to be interviewed by special security representatives. "Here we said it was enough! We can't bear it anymore! Why only us, but there was no answer." Their faith began to waver. "But thank God, two things kept us strong. First our background in Christianity and second, the support of the members of the Madrid Fifth Ward."

The Saints came out in force. Their letters, visits, encouragement, suggestions, and faith in the Lord supported the new converts. One brother wrote to Naji, saying, "Life is more like a game of ask and answer. We ask for inspiration and direction to know his will for us, and he answers, always. The answers sometimes come quickly and clear and are immediately comprehensive to us; or they may come much slower or unexpectedly and in ways not apparent to our understanding."

This brother was inspired. They all were. Two months later Naji had a second interview with the Canadian embassy, and they promised an answer within six weeks.

"While we were waiting for the reply, unexpected developments confirmed to us, first, there is nothing impossible to our Heavenly Father. Second, his inspiration can come through others, and third, when the time is right, Heavenly Father opens all the doors."

In this case the Lord worked through the mission president and his wife, who had become close friends with the Al-Jezrawi family. President and Sister Nelson asked the Lord why this faithful family was facing such a struggle. Naji recorded: "Our Heavenly Father's reply came to them that there was a possibility for Naji's family to proceed to the States. When they asked how, they got an answer on the spot saying, through the United Nations, because I had service in that organization."

Immediately Sister Nelson called the United Nations headquarters in New York, who referred her to the United Nations in Geneva, who referred her to the United Nations High Commission for Refugees in Madrid. They were willing to help. First they needed a copy of the original papers. Upon review they discovered that the Catholic Commission had filled out the papers incorrectly. The papers stated that Naji had never received persecution and that the family was in no danger. "All this time my family and I were suffering for the mistakes of man," said Naji, "not Heavenly Father forgetting us."

The United Nations office asked the International Rescue Mission to reconsider the case, though rarely are such requests granted. The interviews that followed were encouraging, and then the International office asked for evidence of persecution. They wanted affidavits in writing from individuals who had witnessed the abuse.

Finding former associates seemed an insurmountable task. The family had been gone from Baghdad for more than two years.

Naji knew someone who could vouch for his case who was now serving in Somalia. He knew another in Prague. Sister Nelson made the contacts, and in less than an hour and after a host of phone calls, a fax came from Somalia.

One to go. Simply finding the telephone listing in Prague seemed impossible until Sister Nelson called the Church mission office there. They got her the number, and Naji's associate answered. But he was retired, and the commission would accept only letters on official stationery. After many more phone calls explaining the problem, Sister Nelson arranged for the associate in Prague to take his statement to the American embassy. They attached it to their official stationery and faxed it on. The packet was complete. At last everything could be forwarded to the International office in Rome.

Within the next few days, visas came from Canada with a deadline attached. Naji was faced with making a decision without hearing if America was an option. He fasted and prayed. Would Heavenly Father want him to spend twenty-five hundred dollars for tickets to Canada if entry to America was an option? Out of time, Naji bought the tickets.

Late that evening news came from Rome: America had accepted the Al-Jezrawi family.

Recalled Naji: "It was such a joy to see the relief and excitement that we had after waiting for two years and three months. We cried from our happiness and kept asking, Do we deserve such blessings from our Heavenly Father? How easy he opened the doors to us and how he guided us to our ultimate goal. Whatever I do I will not be able to repay him for what he did for us. But I promise, and it is a promise, that I will serve his Church and his gospel with my utmost ability."

Be thou humble; and the Lord thy God shall lead thee by the hand, and give thee answer to thy prayers. Doctrine and Covenants 112:10
