Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Waiting on the Lord

The story has been the same in so many countries. The gospel is planted in the hearts of those prepared. They wait weeks, months, even years, to be baptized and to see the Church established in their homelands. For Cyril West and his family, natives of Pakistan, it took nearly a decade.

In 1983 the Wests attended a meeting of the Latter-day Saints at the home of Church member Max Williams in Lahore, Pakistan, a meeting described by those present as "impressive" and "peaceful."

The Wests were converted by the love of Christ shown by the members. "This love was converted into a regular association with those families while we attended the Church meetings weekly for nearly five years. During this time our family became quite strong in church studies. Our meetings, which were like sacrament meetings, had between twenty and twenty-five people attending. Visitors came frequently, even Muslim visitors. I was most impressed by the teaching about free agency to choose the right way to live. Several times Brother Williams assured us that one day The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints would be established in Pakistan. Knowing that gave us harmony and made us realize the importance of being obedient and worthy to be members."

Obedience became an important principle to the West family in the years ahead. Cyril wrote the Church News to ask that his story be published so that Church authorities would send someone to baptize him and his family. Elder Jack H. Goaslind, then a counselor in the International Mission, responded, urging Cyril and his family to continue their studies and meetings and to be patient. The Church would someday be established in Pakistan.

In the meantime, the investigators and the members continued to meet. Their number was sometimes increased by Church members from United States government agencies assigned to Pakistan. Then they heard of the appointment of Niels Martin as branch president in Islamabad.

Cyril wasted no time in getting in touch with President Martin. His plea was simple: "We want to join." President Martin sent his two counselors, Brothers Douglas Bradford and Robert Simmons, to Lahore to baptize those patient investigators. Cyril and his wife, their daughter Loreen and sons Jerry and Anil; Cyril's father, Samuel; and Cyril's brother Earl and Earl's wife Virginia were all baptized.

Six months later the Saints in Lahore went to hear Elders John Carmack and Monte Brough from the Area Presidency speak at a meeting in Islamabad. The trip took them fourteen hours round trip in a public van. Brother West was firm: "We felt very blessed to be in the presence of such great men."

In July a missionary couple was assigned to help the dozen Saints in Lahore. On 2 October 1992 the Lahore Branch was organized under the direction of the Singapore Mission president and with the assistance of the Islamabad Branch presidency. Cyril West was called as branch president.

The Church had a place in the hearts and homeland of these believers.

Establish my word; yet ye shall be patient in long-suffering and afflictions, that ye may show forth good examples unto them in me, and I will make an instrument of thee in my hands unto the salvation of many souls. Alma 17:11
