Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

A Promise of Temple Blessings

Johann Denndorfer's visit to the Swiss Temple in January 1974 was the end of a long and devoted journey. A member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints since 1913, he had been imprisoned for his beliefs, his Church books had been confiscated, and his requests for a visa to visit the temple had been rejected time after time by the Communist government of his native Hungary. He had collected his own tithing in a special account, hoping some day to turn it over to a proper Church authority. Through the persecution and the isolation, he had remained faithful to the covenants he made at baptism.

Then, at age eighty-one, he received his own endowment, was sealed to his wife, and did the temple work for many of his ancestors. He had been blessed.

Johann's life had been one of commitment and endurance. And life had been hard. He remembered the night when as a young man he had been arrested and thrown in jail and then banished from Germany for preaching. That was 1913, and Europe hovered on the brink of war. A small group of Saints were meeting weekly to discuss the Bible, and Johann, then working in a coal mine, had joined their group. One night he had been asked to fill in for the regular teacher who had been detained at work. A new convert, Johann was uncertain of his ability to lead the discussion and suggested others were more qualified. But he was chosen, and with a faint heart he did his best.

The group was supportive and friendly. They viewed being together as Saints as an important part of their lives. At the end of the lively discussion, the song, and the prayer, Johann and one of the sisters began closing up the meeting place to go home when a hand reached out and gripped Johann's arm. "In the name of the law," the heavy Prussian voice said, "you are under arrest."

Johann spent the night in jail. The Prussian police had falsely identified him as an American missionary. That he was from Hungary (then Transylvania) was his good fortune: he was not prosecuted but simply deported. As he waited for the police to take action, he pondered what had happened to him since he had joined the LDS Church. He hadn't been seeking religion when he came to Germany but had been introduced to the gospel by his landlords. They had answers to questions that had always troubled him. And now he was losing his job and being expelled from Germany.

Soberly, he recognized that perhaps the hand of God was in the situation. The other men at the meeting were native Germans; they had families to support and needed their jobs. He was a foreigner, single, and better able to rebound. His spirits lifted, and he found himself sharing his testimony with the jailer, who, impressed by his sincerity and sense of purpose, warned others in the cell not to harm him.

Johann was deported to Switzerland, where he immediately contacted the mission president and began assisting the missionaries by passing out tracts and bearing his testimony. He was soon ordained a deacon. He later described this period as "the most wonderful time of my life."

He didn't stay long in Switzerland and soon returned to Hungary and his family. There he enlisted in the military and was sent to the Russian front. War took its toll, and Johann was wounded. He spent eleven months in a Budapest hospital.

The Communist takeover of Hungary stranded Johann for forty years. He was separated from most Church members and from Church meetings. He kept up correspondence with his Church friends in Switzerland and Germany, subscribed to the Church's German publication, Der Stern, and studied the scriptures. Most important, Johann kept in touch with God.

He married and reared a family, moved several times, and changed jobs, but he stayed faithful to his beliefs.

In 1955 at age sixty-one Johann was ordained an elder. President Herold Gregory of the German mission sent Elder Richard Ranglack to Hungary to interview Johann and give him the Melchizedek Priesthood.

The Lord soon gave him an opportunity to use his priesthood. A sister whom he called on as a home teacher turned to him for a blessing. She was suffering from a high fever that had exhausted her. They prayed together and then he left, promising to return with consecrated oil to give her a blessing. He described the experience:

"It was my first opportunity to use the power of God. Just imagine, in the scriptures it says for us to call upon the elders, but I was alone. From that time on I began to fast, went upon my knees, and asked the Lord for his support in my fear and trembling. . . .

"During the night I didn't sleep much, but prayed a lot. . . . The next morning I tried to buy olive oil, but finding none, I got some cooking oil. In the afternoon when I went to visit Sister Toth again, she still had a high fever. I anointed her and then in a little while sealed the anointing on her head. I then read out of the Doctrine and Covenants about blessing the sick; when I looked over, she had fallen asleep. I felt her hand; the fever seemed to have lessened. I asked her mother-in-law to let her sleep until she woke, and then left the apartment.

"To my amazement, I found her [two days later] out by the front gate looking into the street. I asked her how she was and she said she had been able to get out of bed the day before. She said it was very good that I had come, because she had already been in bed for over a week."

At one point, Johann was accused by the Hungarian secret police of being an "American spy," and his Church materials so carefully kept for many years were seized. He was crushed but remained faithful. He applied for a visa to visit East Germany, where he knew Saints were joining in a conference. His application was denied, and his subsequent applications were dismissed as well.

His health began to fail, yet he held out hope that he would be reunited with a body of Saints. His chances dimmed when he was admitted to the hospital with a serious liver ailment and skin disease that kept him there for more than a month.

This time his home teacher, Walter Krause, patriarch for many years behind the Iron Curtain, gave him a patriarchal blessing.

Brother Krause, who with his wife, Edith, lived in Dresden, East Germany, had been Johann's lifeline to the Church for years. Brother Krause and his wife were Johann's home teachers, traveling to Hungary at least once a year for a visit. President Thomas S. Monson has told the story of Brother Krause calling a young companion and asking, "Would you like to go with me to do some home teaching?" The young man said he would and then asked, "Where are we going?" Brother Krause replied, "Hungary." And off they went to visit Johann Denndorfer.

One of the first patriarchal blessings Brother Krause ever gave—among the 1,650 blessings to members behind the Iron Curtain—was to Johann. Brother Krause promised Johann that he would go to the temple. Still, health, age, and government restrictions seemed to stand in the way—not to mention that he had no way to do his family history research because getting out of Hungary was impossible for him. So, Sister Krause researched his family lines back ten generations and cleared 1,420 names for temple work.

Brother Denndorfer continued to apply for permission to go to Switzerland. He was refused, again and again. Brother Krause encouraged him to try one more time.

This time permission came. Johann's passport was approved, and he was allowed to travel to Switzerland, where he was going not to a conference but to the temple. There he spent two weeks doing work for the family members whose names Sister Krause had helped him find. At the end of those two weeks, he sent the rest of the names to the Freiberg Germany Temple, where his fellow Saints finished the work he had started.

I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. 2 Timothy 4:7
