Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Tender Apples

Whang Kuen-Ok always wanted to do something for God. Reared a devout Presbyterian on a farm in Japanese-occupied Korea before World War II, she prayed as a child for the opportunity to go to school so she could devote her efforts to God. Recognizing the lack of health care for her people, she hoped to study medicine, even though Korean society viewed women as having a subordinate role and medical training seemed out of reach.

Her prayers were answered when an opportunity came for her to attend junior high school. There she distinguished herself as an honor student while working to pay her school expenses. Her performance qualified her to apply to nursing school.

Ironically, the same passion that she applied to her studies caused her to be expelled from school for refusing to worship the Japanese emperor. It was a difficult time in Korea. Poverty plagued the country; people everywhere were suffering.

When the Allied forces liberated Korea on 15 August 1945, she described the momentous occasion this way: "Every creature, even trees and mountains, seemed to joy for the freedom that we had fought for a long time." Whang and many of her friends determined to lift those so ravaged by persecution and war, children in particular. But their joy was short-lived, for the Communists divided the country. Whang escaped to the south "just as the fences went up between what would be North and South Korea." She left behind her family and her childhood friends.

Immediately she began working in refugee camps, trying to make a difference amid cold, hunger, anger, and disappointment. She continued to pray for her "solemn mission." She said, "I knew I wanted to help as many poor people as possible, even though I didn't think I had the ability, skill, or power. In order to do that, I knew that I would have to sacrifice worldly possessions, and I knew that I must always fortify myself spiritually."

For six years teaching in the camps was both her vocation and her avocation. In November 1958, prompted by her minister, she was accepted to an exchange program at the University of California at Berkeley. Arriving at the campus, she soon developed a friendship with two other Korean students from Brigham Young University who were spending the summer at Berkeley. Less than a year later she visited BYU and fell in love with the mountains. The faith of the Latter-day Saint students touched her soul; she felt comfortable with them.

For the next three years she studied social work at BYU, returning to Korea in 1962. In her homeland she asked for the missionary discussions and joined the Church.

Her next years were successful. She ran an orphanage. In the process she brought attention to the plight of the children and built support for their cause. She did it with dignity, dedication, and grace. An American serviceman helped her launch a highly successful effort to create a children's choir, and he marveled at the magic she brought to what would otherwise have been a bleak setting. But when the owners of her school learned she was a Latter-day Saint, they demanded she convert to their religion or be dismissed.

Sister Whang resolved the problem quickly. She started an orphanage of her own where she was free to teach gospel prin-ciples, hold family home evening, and acquaint the children with Jesus Christ. The Tender Apples Home started each morning with hymn singing, prayer, and scripture study at 6 a.m. Sister Whang was up before the girls so that she could pray and study the scriptures on her own, stoke the fires, and set things in order.

Korean Mission President Eugene Till paid tribute to Sister Whang: "She would tell you what she needed, and she would accept nothing less than total fulfillment. She never took her eye off a goal until it was accomplished. You can understand that kind of determination when a person is going to gain something from her work. But when the results of Sister Whang's efforts came—clothing, money, food—she didn't keep any of it for herself."

Her girls were influential in spreading the gospel. A singing group of elders from the mission and the Tender Apples Choir performed frequently, raising awareness of the Church's name throughout the country.

Sister Whang served as a district and stake Relief Society president and as a temple worker in the Seoul Korea Temple from its opening in 1985. Typical of her dedication, she worked two days a week in the temple instead of the usual one.

Sister Whang placed many of her girls with Latter-day Saint families. Over a period of twenty years she cared for eighty-four children. Many went to live with LDS families in the United States. Twelve were married in the temple; nine served full-time missions. Her life was a mission of its own.

As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. Joshua 24:15
