Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

They Broke Down and Cried

In 1994, disaster struck the southern United States. Rains, hurricanes, and floods pounded one community after another. In a particularly hard-hit area, the stake Relief Society president was asked to assess the damage done to homes in her stake. Every home she visited was badly damaged. She went into one kitchen, sloshing through mud above her ankles, and opened a cupboard to see if any dishes or food supplies had survived the flooding. Inside was coiled a water moccasin snake. She quickly shut the door and tried another cupboard, where she came eye-to-eye with yet another snake. In consternation she ran up the stairs to the second floor. There she encountered an alligator!

The Chattanooga Tennessee Stake decided to cancel the annual Pioneer Day celebrations to help their neighbors in Georgia clean up. One group was assigned to an area where the homes had been covered with water. They were to help owners get their houses prepared for reconstruction.

On July 17 a crew of fifteen finished stripping one home back to the plasterboard on the walls and moved to the next one on the block. Danny Wolfe, a volunteer from the stake, described the scene: "The owner had been working with his two friends when we arrived. You can imagine the relief of seeing fifteen men pull up with eight wheelbarrows, shovels, hammers, and other tools. We went right to work. The Lord blessed us. As we finished, one member of our group overheard the owner saying to his friend, 'I can't believe it. They have accomplished more in one hour than we accomplished in three days.'"

Jane and Mike McDonald, a young couple in Leesburg, wrote a letter of thanks to the members of the Chattanooga stake. "We want to thank you and your crew so much for the help you gave us in clearing out our house after the flood. You saved my husband and me many hours of work. We will always remember your help."

The McDonalds weren't members of the Church. When the workers from the Chattanooga stake finished cleaning out the McDonalds' house, one of the brethren, not knowing the family was of another religion and trying to encourage them, asked if they had been to the temple yet. They responded, "No, we are not members of your faith." The brother just put his arms around the man's shoulder and asked him to consider learning more about the LDS Church. Wrote the stake president: "A wonderful feeling of brotherhood prevailed in those few moments together. No promises were made, but these brethren on the work crew knew they had left a favorable impression upon the souls of this young couple."

Rick Youngblood of the Hixson Tennessee Ward related his experience in helping clean up: "During our visit on the first weekend we went to Albany, our group was preparing to leave after a full day's work. The tools and crews were loaded in the trucks, and the workers were tired and hungry. As we were preparing to leave, it came to my attention that a retired widower was struggling to recover from his entire home being destroyed. He was extremely distraught and confused about where to begin."

Brother Youngblood described the scene: "Our group knew that this nonmember needed help. The first few men in the home found him sitting in the main room crying. Shovels, rakes, hammers, brooms, wheelbarrows were unloaded and with tools in hand about thirty men converged upon the house. The change in the brother's countenance was incredible. Where a few minutes before he had been despondent, he was now excited and rejuvenated. In about thirty minutes, the inside of the home was completely gutted down to the stud walls. As the last wheelbarrow was loaded into the truck, the last thank-you's graciously expressed, a feeling of great joy and satisfaction settled into the hearts of those who were there."

The flooding was particularly devastating in the city of Albany and its surrounding area. Some twenty-three square miles were under water, and more than a third of the residents were without homes and food.

Coordinating some of the flood relief efforts was Ritchey M. Marbury, who described just one of many miracles: "As soon as I recognized there was going to be an immediate need for food, clothing, and cleaning supplies, I contacted the bishops storehouse in Atlanta, Georgia. Within five hours a tractor trailer loaded with every requested item pulled into the parking lot of the LDS church.

"The next day I was attending a county commission meeting in Lee County when they spoke of a severe shortage of food and supplies there. The pastor of the Leesburg United Methodist Church indicated they were serving as a storehouse for food and clothing. Lee Country was not yet receiving help from any of the other agencies and was in desperate need of additional food."

A forty-eight-foot tractor-trailer leaving the Albany bishops storehouse was sent to the Leesburg Methodist church. The truck arrived fifteen minutes after all available food supplies had been given out. Some of the Methodist church members reported that when they saw the huge truck, loaded with food and other supplies from the LDS Church, arrive in their parking lot, they simply broke down and cried.

They did walk uprightly before God, imparting to oneanother both temporally and spiritually according to their needs. Mosiah 18:29
