Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Come, Listen to a Prophet's Voice

More than fifty people stood in the Tahiti Papeete Mission office. They had come to see the prophet, Spencer W. Kimball, who was holding an area conference for the members in this part of French Polynesia.

The mission president looked at the crowd gathered around him. Not recognizing a single face, he assumed they were nonmembers interested in attending the conference.

He was stunned when they introduced themselves. They were members of the Church from the tiny island of Taenga, located in the Tuamotu Archipelago. He quickly learned that nearly all the people on the island were members of the Church, and they had made the three-day voyage in a schooner to be with their prophet and Church leader.

It was a surprise to hear there were members of the Church on the island, but to hear that all but a few of the seventy-six residents were Latter-day Saints was incredible news. Somehow in the transmission of mission and Church records through World War II, the entire "island" had been misplaced. But communication from Church leaders in Tahiti had always been difficult at best. There are 110 islands in French Polynesia, scattered over more than a million square miles of the Pacific Ocean.

That Church membership records had been lost was a startling realization. That the members weren't lost at all was a testimony of their faith to carry on. Somehow, Taenga had been missed as the Latter-day Saint stronghold it was.

Taenga, an atoll about four hundred miles east of Tahiti, had limited communication with other islands. There was no airstrip. The route to get there entailed flying to Makemo on a small plane and then traveling by motorboat at least three hours on the open sea. If weather is bad, the boat ride can take six hours. But the island boasts solar-generated power for every household, one of the few modern additions to a fairly simple style of life.

In 1844, when the Prophet Joseph Smith dispatched missionaries to the Sandwich Islands, they ended up in what is now known as French Polynesia. It is recognized as the first foreign-language mission of the Church. The early missionaries had success. Benjamin Grouard landed on the island of Tuamotus and in May 1845 went to Anaa, an island not far from the small island of Taenga. He baptized more than six hundred people in five months and organized several branches.

In 1852 the missionaries were expelled by the French government, and for twenty years no elders were allowed to proselyte in the area. It was another twenty years before any missionaries were assigned to the islands, but the members carried the gospel message to their friends and neighbors on surrounding islands. Many were converted, including residents of Taenga. Though official contact with the Church leaders in Tahiti was erratic, Taenga's members continued faithful.

In 1931 the Church acquired a forty-foot-by-forty-five-foot tract of land on Taenga for a chapel. After that time, the twenty-foot-by-thirty-foot building helped keep the members strong. In later years, they remembered the last official visit by a mission president to have been in the late 1950s.

Though the Saints in Taenga had not been in contact with Church officials, they knew they had a prophet of God and they had come to see him. Their faith was strong and their commitment to God vibrant.

"We always lived the gospel as best we could," said Sister Teuruhai Buchin, who later worked in the Papeete Tahiti Temple.

So sure were the islanders of their place in the kingdom of God that one of them, Kaheke Temanu, built a small residence to be used exclusively by the mission president should he come to visit the island. Brother Temanu was later called as the island's branch president.

Somehow these steadfast members learned by word of mouth that the prophet of the Lord was coming to Tahiti. Three prophets—David O. McKay, Joseph Fielding Smith, and Harold B. Lee—had served since the islanders had had any official contact with the Church. They brought with them handcrafted gifts for their prophet.

And they received a gift in return. President Kimball spoke of gathering as a people: "The Saints were driven across the country to the Salt Lake Valley, which was a dry, forbidding country. Since that time, the members of the Church from all lands have been rushing to Salt Lake City. For many years there has been the cry, 'Come to Zion, Come to Zion!' But the last few years we have been saying to the Saints, 'Stay in Zion, for Zion is wherever you are.'" (In Tahiti Area Conference Report, Mar. 1976, 36.)

Wherefore, we search the prophets, and we have many revelations and the spirit of prophecy; and having all these witnesses we obtain a hope, and our faith becometh unshaken, insomuch that we truly can command in the name of Jesus and the very trees obey us, or the mountains, or the waves of the sea. Jacob 4:6
