Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Filling in the Footings

When the pioneers arrived in the Salt Lake Valley, they immediately began building Zion. Said Brigham Young, "This is a good place to make Saints." (Journal of Discourses, 4:32.) Cabins, meetinghouses, and other buildings went up in a hurry to house the rapidly expanding Church. Today, building Zion in countries around the world has required permits and permissions and given plenty of opportunity for opposition.

The construction of the first chapel in Hungary faced such problems. Just as the nineteenth-century Church pioneers had encountered mobs who tarred and feathered them to discourage their religious activity, so in the early 1990s the Hungarian Saints faced closed doors, bureaucratic red tape, and philosophical collapse. Confusion reigned.

In 1993 Hanno Luschin, area architect for the Church in Europe, visited Szombathely, Hungary, to look at a possible location for a chapel. He well knew the process of working with government entities, having directed the building of the Freiberg Germany Temple and several chapels in Europe, including Russia.

The local architect drove with Brother Luschin the three hours from Budapest to the community whose growing branch activity could support a new chapel. "We arrived in the city and tried to locate the proposed site," Brother Luschin remembered. "On the way there, we drove by a piece of property that caught my attention.

"'Now that looks like a good place to build a church!' I said. But it was not the site that had been selected, and we drove on, finally stopping at a different lot."

When the two began to walk the ground, "I could not help but feel disappointment," Brother Luschin recalled. "I had felt so much better about the other location."

But the city officials were firm in their decision that this was the only available land, and so the Church proceeded. The plans were drawn up, and construction began that fall. The site was excavated, and the concrete footings poured.

When word came from Hungarian officials that "we were to stop construction because there were objections from a local church whose cemetery was located close by," Brother Luschin was not surprised. He had had plenty of firsthand experience with disappointments and delays.

What happened next was reminiscent of the experience of the early Saints, who had buried the newly completed foundation of the Salt Lake Temple just before the arrival of Johnston's Army in 1858. In Hungary, Brother Luschin's workers covered the concrete footings with soil and abandoned the project.

Brother Luschin had encountered similar difficulties only three years before in Vyborg, Russia, where he had gone in 1990 to purchase property to build the first Latter-day Saint meetinghouse in that country. "Finding a piece of property suitable for the construction of a meetinghouse proved to be a most humbling experience, one far more difficult than I had ever imagined," Brother Luschin recalled. Despite the easing of government restrictions and the dramatic shift to a more open economy, Brother Luschin was told by officials, "Russian land is not for sale. It belongs to all the people of Russia." The collapse of Communism had not reshaped everyone's thinking. Nevertheless, after countless negotiations over many months, the Church was able to lease some property, and a ground-breaking ceremony was set. On the morning that Presiding Bishop Merrill Bateman and local priesthood leaders had planned to conduct the ceremony, the lease was rescinded by officials. It was 1996 before an LDS chapel in Vyborg was built and dedicated.

In Hungary, Brother Luschin saw the difficulty of finding property being repeated. He began the search for a new site by suggesting the property he had been drawn to when he first entered the city a year before. Permission eventually was granted to purchase that land. Construction began again, and in November 1995 the Szombathely chapel, the first meetinghouse built by the Church in Hungary, was dedicated.

For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things. 2 Nephi 2:11
