Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

HUMILITY AND OBEDIENCE

The pioneers struggled and suffered on the plains, and they continued to be tested as they began to build Zion. To their faith and dedication, they added the power that humility and obedience brought to their lives.

Pioner Ephraim Hanks was at work one morning building an adobe house in Salt Lake City. The basement was nearly completed and he was preparing to lay the sun-dried brick when Brigham Young drove up in his carriage. "Ephraim, how thick is that rock wall?" he asked.

Ephraim answered, "Eight inches." Said President Young, "Tear it all down and build it twice as thick." For several days Ephraim had hauled the rock from Ensign Peak. He had paid a mason a good price to lay it in lime mortar. Now, Brigham Young was advising him to do it again.

The mason spoke up: "Brigham Young may be a saint, but he's no kind of prophet about building stone walls." Hanks nevertheless set about to double the walls of his home.

A month later a storm raged through the area, just as they completed the sixteen-inch wall. Rain fell in torrents, flooding the basement of the new home. But the thick walls stood firm. When the water drained, Hanks finished placing the rafters of his sturdy home, one he knew would shelter his family for many years.

Modern-day pioneers have found that humility and obedience are essential to building homes that will withstand the storms of latter-day secularism.

Three Sacks of Potatoes

Phebe and Parley P. Pratt and Rufus C. Allen were the first Latter-day Saint missionaries to Chile, in 1851, but the language barrier and civil disturbances stymied their five-month missionary effort. More than a century later, on 23 June 1956, LDS missionary work began again. This time the results have been phenomenal. Chile now has more than seventy stakes, six missions, a temple, and its own Area Presidency.

Large congregations are one measure of Zion's growth in Chile, but the real strength of the gospel lies in the hearts and testimonies of the individual members. Jose and Juana Yefi are a prime example. The Yefis live in the Estacion Ward of the Puerto Montt Stake. To get to church they have to ride two hours by horse, three hours by boat, and another hour and a half by bus—each way.

The Yefi parents and their seven children live in the remote mountain valley of El Callao. Thick forests of coigue, laurel, tepu, and ulmo trees separate them from the bustle of the nearest city, Puerto Varas. But they are certainly not alone. They are united in their goal, displayed on a plaque in the dining room: "To Build an Eternal Family."

No missionaries knocked on their door to introduce them to the gospel. Jose Yefi had gone to see a doctor in Puerto Varas to get treatment for serious nosebleeds he had suffered since childhood—some so severe that he fainted. Those recurrent nosebleeds led to his conversion.

"I was at a friend's house. He told me that two young men lived nearby who 'cured' people in the name of the Lord. Since I have always been a faithful man, I went to see them and asked them how much they charged for a blessing. The young men, who stood out because of their white shirts, told me, 'We don't charge money to bless one of our brethren. If you have faith that you will be healed with the blessing we give you, it will be the Lord who will really cure you.'

"Then they invited me to sit down, but I told them, 'I don't feel comfortable when I'm sitting down. I would feel better kneeling.' The missionaries put their hands on my head and gave me a blessing. The experience was marvelous. I felt warm all over my body, and I had no doubt that it was God's power curing me. Never again did I have a nosebleed.

"After this experience, I asked the missionaries what I had to do to become a member of their church. They asked me if I was married. I told them, yes, and we made an appointment to meet together with my wife the following Sunday. The missionaries presented the first discussion. They asked us to return the next week for the second discussion, but I told them that because of the distance involved, I wanted them to baptize us then. So we received all the discussions and were baptized the same day, September 28, 1979."

The Yefi family was dedicated to the Lord and his Church. The long distance between their home and the nearest congregation made attendance difficult, but they went as often as possible. On one of those visits Brother Yefi was ordained to the Aaronic Priesthood.

At that time, Julio Otay was the branch president in Puerto Varas. He challenged Brother Yefi to increase his commitment to the Lord and the gospel by paying his tithing and by preparing himself to receive the Melchizedek Priesthood.

Jose Yefi committed to do what he was asked. Not many months passed before he appeared at the branch president's office. It was a rainy, cold day, not particularly good traveling weather, and Brother Yefi, undeterred by the constant drizzle, was soaked. He asked to speak with President Otay about his tithing outside. There, propped against the building, were three sacks of potatoes. He had brought them by horseback, boat, and bus to be given to the Lord.

In Brother Yefi's determination to do all that the Lord has asked, he has become a remarkable missionary. His father, his brother, and seven other members of the extended family have been drawn to the Church by the Yefi family's example. All were taught the gospel by Brother Yefi before they made the trip to Puerto Varas to be interviewed by the full-time missionaries so Brother Yefi could baptize them.

The Yefis have been sealed in the Santiago Chile Temple, and they testify to their fellow Church members of that wonderful opportunity.

Every Sunday in that remote mountain hamlet, eighteen faithful Saints gather. Occasionally others who have been touched by the pioneer spirit of this remarkable family meet with them. Their priesthood leaders have authorized them to hold Church services in the Yefis' modest front room.

When Brother Yefi was baptized, he and his family struggled to survive on very little—a team of oxen that he used to plow his fields, a horse, and several goats and sheep. But times have changed. Brother Yefi explained: "We have been greatly blessed. I have horses, goats, sheep and nine milking cows that give us enough milk to feed our children and to make cheese to sell. And we sow and harvest our own wheat. We are very blessed."

Said Elder Benigno Pantoja, who served as regional representative in that area and visited the Yefis in their home, "As I told the Yefi family good-by, I thought about the lessons I had learned from them. I learned about being faithful to the Lord in every circumstance. I learned that although a great distance separated the Yefis from the church meetinghouse, there was no distance between them and the Lord."

Hath not God chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised to them that love him? James 2:5
