Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

I Sang to Myself

Robert Israel Muhile was one of the first from Tanzania to accept the gospel. He was converted while working and studying in Cairo, Egypt. He observed that the couple who taught him the gospel were "very kind people. I liked them so much, they made me want to change my life." And he did. His decision to join the Church brought him "great joy and peace."

A year later Robert, by then an elder, returned to his home in Tanzania with the strong desire to convert his family. Like so many of the early pioneers who were disappointed in their efforts to share the truth with their families, he was unsuccessful. His family had no interest in his newfound religion. He was isolated from other Church members, for his home in Dar es Salaam was six hundred miles, three days by bus, from the nearest branch of the Church.

Seeking spiritual guidance, wanting to recommit to his baptismal covenants and share in the blessings of partaking of the sacrament, Robert went to the mission president, Larry Brown, in Nairobi, Kenya, and sought permission to administer the sacrament to himself each Sunday. His earnest request was granted.

Again in Dar es Salaam, Robert invited his family to come to his worship service. They declined, and so he held his meeting alone. He describes how he conducted these poignantly solitary Sunday meetings:

"I prepared water and bread. I also had more water to clean my hands and a small towel. I sang a song to myself out loud. I had my hymnbook. After that I offered an opening prayer. Because I was alone, I didn't have any business to do, so I sang the sacrament hymn and prepared the sacrament. Then I knelt and blessed it and took it. After the sacrament I covered it, as we respect it always. I offered myself a talk—my testimony. Then I sang as we did in Sunday School and then read from Gospel Principles. I finished with a prayer. I then attended priesthood meeting. After singing a hymn, I said a prayer and then read a lesson from the priesthood manual. After that, I finished by singing and then offered the closing prayer. Each Sunday I had all three meetings. When I partook of the emblems it helped me to be more worthy."

Grace and peace be multiplied unto you . . . through the knowledge of him that hath called us to glory and virtue. 2 Peter 1:2-3
