Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

What Have I Come To?

"What have I come to?" Kate Marshall wondered as she looked out the train window at the unfamiliar countryside speeding by. The scenes outside were so different from home. Tunnels of snow, drifts in every direction, open, rugged countryside. "What have I come to?" she mused again and again.

This gentle woman had left her home and friends in Worthing, on the south coast of England, to travel with her husband to join their war-bride daughter and young family in Orillia, Ontario, Canada. It was 1948.

Resilient and determined, she quickly became part of the community. If Canada was to be her home, she would make herself comfortable with the people, their traditions, and their way of doing things. That attitude eventually led her to read the Book of Mormon given her by friends two years earlier. When the missionaries knocked on her door, she was ready to be baptized. "I knew the Book of Mormon had to be of God," she testified. "A young boy like Joseph Smith could not have made it up."

Her exuberance for the gospel was not shared by her husband, however. A full eight years passed before he joined the Church.

The Church had little visibility in the community at that time. The few converts met in the members' homes, and Sister Marshall always reveled in "the strong spirit there." By 1957 the Orillia Branch was organized, and for years they rented the hall of an athletic club for their meetings. Sister Marshall went early to empty ashtrays and air out the rooms. In the summer months, she brought fresh flowers from her garden to add some color to the otherwise dim setting.

Sister Marshall was always doing what needed to be done. When the branch held bake sales, her chocolate cake was one of the first to go. At a branch rummage sale, she had to rescue her coat from the hands of an interested buyer.

As a visiting teacher, Sister Marshall was a legend. She walked many miles to the homes of sisters, usually alone. Many times she and others laughed "that only Mormons or the English would be out on a day like this." At age eighty, she climbed ladders to see the renovations in progress at the homes of those she visited. In her nineties, she still did her visiting teaching with precision and a strong sense of purpose. Not until she was ninety-nine and in a wheelchair did she accept the idea that her role as a visiting teacher was now to encourage others and looking forward to their visiting her.

She never lost her love for England, nor did she lose touch with her family and friends who were there. Her brother and his wife joined the Church through her influence. She and her husband were sealed in the London England Temple. Later she attended the Toronto Canada Temple, the temple of her adopted home. For it was in Canada that she found the gospel. "What have I come to?" she often asked, and then she answered herself, "I have come to Zion."

Thou hast with unwearyingness declared the word, which I have given unto thee. Helaman 10:4
