Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Ten Miles over the Welsh Hills

On Sunday, 12 September 1993, the Thanet Branch of the Maidstone England Stake met at the Broadstairs Nursing Home to celebrate the eighty-ninth birthday of Agnes Griffiths Giles. A widow for twenty-five years, she had been "a stalwart. Her testimony is unshakable, and she has been an outstanding example of dedication and endurance for nearly a century," said the high priests group leader who led the celebration.

Agnes had learned early in her life to prize the gospel. The members of the Griffiths family were the only Latter-day Saints in Abercarn, Monmouthshire, Wales, so Agnes attended church meetings in her family's small home, which was owned by the city council. Others who were interested in the gospel sometimes attended the meetings. But when the daughter of a prominent member of another church in the village seriously began investigating the LDS Church, persecution was poured out on the family. Articles filled with untruths were published in the newspaper. Rumors were rampant. The council, persuaded that the Mormons were evil, ordered the family to halt church services in their home or be evicted. Though the Griffiths family valued their Sunday worship, they also felt their responsibility to obey, honor, and sustain the law. (See Article of Faith 12.)

The nearest branch was in Varteg, ten miles over the Welsh hills. If they wanted to attend church, they'd have to go there. So, very early the next Sunday, the Griffiths family walked to the top of Llanuack Mountain, down to the Nafodrynys Valley, back up Pontypool Mountain, and finally into Varteg.

To keep up their spirits and their pace, the family sang and recited scriptures. Often it rained, and they arrived at church soaked to the skin. The Saints in Varteg dressed them in dry clothes while theirs were hung up to dry.

For many months the family made their trek to church, much like earlier pioneers who also had to leave their homes to practice their religion. Then one day a letter to the city council arrived from Salt Lake City:

"On my desk is a clipping from the South Wales Argus which conveys the information that recently your honorable body took action against one of your fellow townsmen, depriving him of the right to hold religious services in his home. The only reason for such arbitrary action was that 'He is a Mormon.'

". . . But have you gone far enough? Are you now aware of the fact that the gentleman in question is still offering prayers in his home? Have you not been informed by the 'society for the promulgation of slander,' or whatever that certain organization is called that the tenant and his children against whom you are passing a special ordinance are rendering thanks to their God every night and morning?

"Why not complete your work by demanding that such prayers be not offered in a house that belongs to a Christian city council? If you have the right to prevent his singing hymns and of speaking in the presence of his family, and of friends, of the grace and goodness of God, you also have the right to order him to cease his prayers 'because he is a Mormon.' Therefore, he must be deprived of the most cherished of traditional privileges."

Elder David O. McKay, author of the letter, closed with, "To judge either a man or a people so unjustly is unbecoming a body of intelligent men."

The council tabled the letter, but it was published in the local newspaper, and the community responded. A women's club invited Brother Griffiths to speak to their meeting, and his testimony prompted them to support the right of the Griffiths family to hold worship services in their home. The city council rescinded their action, and the Griffiths family began again to hold their meetings at home.

Just as persecution had solidified the testimonies of many early pioneers, the experience of the Griffiths family proved a blessing for them as well. Agnes never questioned her testimony, always sharing with others the truths she had learned so well as a child.

For where two or three are gathered in my name, there am I in the midst of them. Matthew 18:2
