Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Called to Be the Bishop

The years after World War II were difficult in Germany. It was 1948, and fourteen-year-old Peter Boehme added to his family's income by carrying suitcases and bags from the railroad station to travelers' homes. Peter and his family had survived the war, though they lived in Dresden, which had been heavily bombed by the Allied forces.

On this day, he picked up the bags of two men dressed in suits and asked their destination. They explained to Peter that they had traveled from Cottbus to conduct a conference for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and they had no overnight accommodations arranged. Peter took them home to stay in his family's spare room, and the two men, district president Fritz Lehnig and Otto Sasse, converted the whole family. Peter, his parents, his brother, Lutz, and his two sisters, Ingrid and Helgard, were baptized in a Dresden stream.

Three years later, at age seventeen, Peter fled to West Germany when the tensions between East and West intensified. Wanting to start a new life, he emigrated to Australia and lived for some time in the outback of Queensland before contacting Church members in Brisbane. In 1956 he accepted a call to serve a building mission in that area.

Then he married. He and his wife, Ann, began looking for property where they could build a home. One day, as they headed for the Gold Coast hinterland, a fierce storm forced them to stop in the town of Beenleigh. Waiting for the weather to clear, or at least improve, they decided to look around at property for a home. Peter and Ann put down a deposit to secure a plot they liked. They intended to go home and pray about whether they should purchase the property.

That night Peter dreamed that he was called as bishop of Beenleigh Ward. In the morning he told Ann of his dream. She teased him that it was probably more an aspiration than an inspiration—after all, only three LDS families lived in Beenleigh. They themselves attended the Eight Mile Plains Ward, about a fifteen-minute drive from Beenleigh.

But the next night, Peter had the same dream again. This time, the dream included a congregation of members and a chapel being built in the area of Beenleigh. The third night, he again dreamed of serving as bishop of the Beenleigh Ward. This time the Beenleigh Ward was so large that members were being moved from that ward to form yet another.

Peter and Ann could no longer make light of the dreams. They obeyed the prompting and agreed to purchase the property. When they applied for a loan, they could show only a few dollars in their account, and the bank manager doubted that the loan would go through. Nevertheless, three hours later, they had received a loan. The land was theirs.

A year later, on 18 December 1978, the Church created the Beenleigh Branch, and Peter Boehme was called to serve as the branch president. There were 29 active members. Five years later, the branch had grown to 245 members, and on 27 November 1983, the Beenleigh Branch was made into a ward. Franz Herman Peter Boehme was called as bishop. The following year, on 14 October 1984, the ward dedicated a newly built chapel.

Church membership in the area continued to grow, and by 1986 the Marsden Ward was formed from the Beenleigh and Eight Mile Plains First and Second Wards. The new ward met in the Beenleigh Chapel until its own chapel was completed in 1988.

The prophetic dreams of Peter Boehme had been fulfilled in only a little more than ten years.

I did obey the voice of the Spirit. 1 Nephi 4:18
