Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Did You Say Outer Mongolia?

The stake president of Dr. C. DuWayne and Alice Cannon Schmidt smiled at the two of them as they walked into his office. "Will you accept a call to serve in Outer Mongolia?" he asked. "Of course," the Schmidts replied, "if the Lord has called us, we will serve. But tell us, where are we really going?" The president's answer was sobering: "You're going to Mongolia."

Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have been called to missions in distant lands since missionary work began in the late 1830s. The pioneers who crossed the plains came from foreign lands to settle a Zion they had only heard of and no one had ever seen. They came with faith, courage, patience, and humility.

To the Schmidts, as to most in the Western world, Mongolia was the last stop before outer darkness. Landlocked between Siberia on the north and China on the south, Mongolia is an enigma. Genghis Khan, rampaging Mongols, and frigid winters on the stark plains were all the Schmidts could picture. They were not alone in their bleak views. For decades, Mongolia has not been involved in international markets or in academia. Cultural treasures have not been exhibited, nor have they fielded strong Olympic teams. In fact, Mongolia had been a vassal state until the collapse of the Soviet empire. Now Mongolians were free to choose, and they were choosing to change.

They needed help. Church officials in Asia approached Mon-golian government officials, offering to provide couples whose professional training could be used to redirect the Mongolian higher education system and certain specialty areas, medicine in particular. Mongolia opened its doors to six couples, the first missionaries to Mongolia from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as far as any records show.

In September 1992 Kenneth H. Beesley and his wife, Donna, received the first call to serve in Mongolia. He was formerly president of LDS Business College in Salt Lake City. Joining the Beesleys were Richard and Anna Harper, Stanley and Marjorie Smith, Royce and Jane Flandro, Gary and Barbara Carlson, and DuWayne and Alice Schmidt. Within six months they were joined by six young elders and then six more.

They learned that Mongolia is a sparsely populated country with about 2.2 million people in an area about the size of Alaska. More than one-fourth of the people live in the city Ulaanbaatar, where the Church-service couples were placed. There are only two other cities of any size, Darhan and Erdenet. More than two-thirds of the people move about the countryside, just as their ancestors did, with their camels, sheep, goats, yaks, horses, and cows. In fact, animals outnumber the people twelve to one. Their homes, called yurts, are portable felt tents with a stove in the middle for heating and cooking. Yet government figures report a literacy rate in Mongolia of 90 percent, extremely high for such an otherwise underdeveloped country. Half the people still dress in their native clothing, although many in the city have adopted western styles. Animals of all kinds—elk, cows, pigs, and goats— roam city streets, and neighborhoods offer a mixture of yurts and the stark concrete apartments built by the Russians.

The experience in Mongolia was pioneering in every way. Brother Schmidt described it like this:

"We arrived in the middle of a Mongolian winter on February 19, 1993, joining three other pioneering couples. Elder Beesley greeted us at the Ulaanbaatar airport and drove us through the snowy city to our adequate, but cool, third-floor apartment. Our flat had a basic kitchen, bathroom, living room, dressing room and two bedrooms, one of which we used as a study and examination room. The furniture was limited to essentials, and the bare, orange painted floors projected a Chinese mood."

The missionary couples were aided in their efforts by Church General Authorities. On 15 April 1993, Elder Neal A. Maxwell of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles dedicated the country for the preaching of the gospel. He asked the Lord to bless the nation and people of Mongolia that they might be able to maintain their independence and find ways to better their economy.

The missionaries were needed and welcomed. Elder John Carmack of the Area Presidency reported, "It is to the point where the government is asking if there is any way we can send more missionaries." The couples assisted government leaders and educators in the transition from a Russian way of doing things to a western style. They worked in consolidating the university structure, planning curriculum and teaching English.

Dr. Schmidt worked in the medical school. It was not at all like home. "The environment, with the limited and primitive resources of the only medical school in Mongolia, was depressing and challenging. However, we found the faculty anxious to learn and grateful for anything we did for them."

He rewrote the Mongolian text on pulmonary medicine, presented a gift of essential medical textbooks, established ties with the American College of Physicians and other medical associations and such world-health organizations as the Red Cross, and prepared weekly lectures for medical school faculty and students. Sister Schmidt taught English.

These missionaries were allowed to talk openly about their religion and hold services. Dr. Schmidt explained how the door was opened for the people of Mongolia to learn of Jesus Christ and his Church:

"When we arrived in Mongolia, Togtohyn Enkhtuvshin, associate professor in the Mongolian National University of Arts, was studying at a university in East Germany. There he met James K. Lyon, Ph.D., who was on sabbatical leave from a university in San Diego. A relationship of trust was established. Enkhtuvshin was taught the gospel and baptized while in Eastern Europe. Upon his return to Ulaanbaatar, Enkhtuvshin assumed he would be the only member of the Church in his country; however, two days after returning to Mongolia, his eyes fixed on two young men who looked like Mormon elders. Enkhtuvshin called out to the elders in German. They responded because Elder Hansen spoke German. At that time none of the elders had learned Mongolian and Elder Hansen was the only missionary who could speak German. They spontaneously felt the joy of finding each other and the brotherhood of the gospel. It is our conviction that the Lord inspired these meetings. Since that time Enkhtuvshin's wife and five children have joined the Church. He is now first counselor in the Ulaanbaatar Branch, and it is growing."

When the Schmidts were released in July 1994, 114 people had joined the Church in Mongolia. Six months later that number had jumped to 240. The Schmidts left their Mongolian service with strong testimonies: "We repeatedly witnessed the hand of the Lord assisting us to reach our righteous objectives. We were often guided in teaching medicine and English and sharing the gospel. Alice and I felt that we accomplished more good for more people in those eighteen months than I probably achieved during my entire thirty-two years of medical practice."

Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for I am God, and there is none else. Isaiah 45:22
