Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Give Me till Midnight

For many years George Boyd worked for the LDSChurch Building Department in Canada. His service in the London Ontario Stake was "full of spiritual experiences" that he recorded in his journal "because of what I consider the tendency to believe that miracles are a thing of the past."

He would not have described himself as a pioneer, and yet his reliance on the Lord reflected the qualities of humility and obedience that helped the early Saints settle remote areas and build their temples with simple tools. For most, their efforts were quiet contributions; they were faithful and obedient members doing their part.

Meeting with others who also had responsibility for the building of the Church in their communities, Brother Boyd discovered that many of their needs were the same—to be blessed personally and "to control the weather."

Brother Boyd wrote in his journal: "When helping at the Etobikoke Stake Centre in Toronto my family was called to fill a building mission. We received $250 a month living allowance to buy food and clothes etc., so we decided to sell our home. The ward pitched in with their paintbrushes on the exterior of the house during the weekend, and Monday morning early I left for my work in Toronto. Joyce walked over to the local hardware store to buy a 'For Sale' sign to put in the window of the house. On the bridge coming home a neighbor stopped her and said, 'I hear your house is for sale. I'll buy it.' So the sign never got put in the window.

"We went out the next week and bought a used three-bedroom house-trailer and had it towed to our first mission project, a chapel to build in Barrie, Ontario [Canada].

"We had started late in the season so I had some catching up to do. We needed good weather. We had a drought in Ontario that year so we were able to press ahead. We got to the stage where we were readying to pour the floor of the building. As I was in my little shack studying the blueprints the radio was on and they announced that the farmers were going to hold a special prayer service for rain. There I was praying for continued good weather, and the farmers needed rain. I gave it some thought and then prayed, 'If Thou wilt give me till midnight on Monday, then the rain can come.'

"We poured the concrete and machine trowelled it and then everybody went home exhausted. I stayed to hand finish. By midnight it was still not quite finished, and a fine mist started to fall. By one o'clock the rain was full and steady, but the floor was good and the rain was a good curing agent. I was soaked and aching, but happy. I went home, took a hot bath, and went to bed.

"The next day the farmers acknowledged the answer to their prayers, and I acknowledged the answer to mine."

And the prayers of the faithful shall be heard. 2 Nephi 26:15
