Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Angels in the Mural

Russia, as a country, has always had a place in the kingdom of God. In June 1843 the Prophet Joseph Smith called Orson Hyde and George J. Adams to serve in Russia. That, he said, would bring about "some of the most important things concerning the advancement and building up of the kingdom of God in the last days, which cannot be explained at this time." (Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 6:41.)

Though Elders Hyde and Adams never served in "the vast empire" of Russia, the Prophet Joseph's intent and the Lord's will was clear. The gospel was to be preached to the Russian people.

Nearly 150 years later a missionary force finally entered that nation. For half of the twentieth century Russia had been closed to the rest of the world. Belief in religion, even the traditional Russian Orthodox Church, was considered subversive by the Communist government. But in 1985 the Russian government began to remove some barriers. Five years later, in July 1990, Dr. Gary Browning, a professor of Russian language and literature at Brigham Young University, and his wife, Joan, were called to direct the Finland Helsinki East Mission, which had responsibility for Russia and several of its neighbors. The Brownings were joined by their three children: Betsy, Katie, and Jon. By this time, several branches were flourishing in Russia, and several hundred Russian citizens had joined the Church.

Missionaries faced obvious obstacles, among them the rich heritage of the Russian Orthodox Church on one hand and seven decades of state-mandated atheism on the other. But the Spirit had prepared people to hear the gospel, and the work began in earnest. President Browning came to fully understand the words of Brigham Young, who said, as he surveyed the efforts of the pioneers in the Salt Lake Valley: "We have accomplished more than we expected . . . the blessings of the Lord have been with us." (Thomas Bullock Journal, 8 Oct. 1847, LDS Church Historical Department.)

When he returned to BYU in 1993, Dr. Browning described a singular moment for him, one in which he saw clearly the power of obedience in furthering the work of the Lord. That moment had come in a meeting on 23 February 1991:

"It had been a considerable trek from Moscow member-missionary work by Americans in early 1990 to the arrival of the first six full-time missionaries in October of 1990 to the organization of the first official Russian Moscow branch in March of 1991, to the establishment of fifteen Russian-speaking branches that February. On February 21, 1993, more than five hundred members and friends were seated comfortably in the newspaper-publishing house Izvestia Building in downtown Moscow across the street on one side from the famous statue of Pushkin, Russia's most beloved poet, and on the other from McDonald's, a must-visit cultural mecca for Western tourists.

"The fifteen branches had just been organized and their presidents sustained. Now the ten new branch presidents were bearing brief testimonies. Most of us were enjoying a particularly delectable spiritual feast. When the eighth or ninth president began speaking, I started to review in my mind the main points of my talk, which would conclude the conference.

"I was prepared to speak on the blessings of attending a large established ward of the Church, as I had done as a youngster living in what was for me the comparative metropolis of Pocatello, Idaho. I would recall our full Church program and lovely meetinghouse, like our Pocatello building with that inspiring mural on the wall behind the podium. The mural depicted heroic pioneers crossing the plains, struggling and, on occasion, disheartened but attended always on the journey by unseen angels. Maybe these pioneers could not see the angels, but every week I and others saw them plainly about the pioneers' heads, and I learned well the lesson that a loving Heavenly Father is aware of our burdens and strengthens us just enough to bear them. And I would draw a parallel to the Moscow pioneers crossing to their eagerly anticipated spiritual Zion.

"Then I wanted to emphasize how much I learned and benefitted in other ways from living during my junior and senior high school years in the small northern Idaho town of St. Maries, where our fledgling branch of the Church met in a humble, two-room Grange hall, similar to the facilities of many of the new Moscow branches. As a teenager there, I had the opportunity to serve with Weldon and David Tovey, two other very young men, in the Sunday School presidency and to grow through the warm encouragement of humble, generous Saints who overlooked our inadequacies and loved us for what we were and what they believed we could become.

"As I was mentally reviewing these and other points, suddenly and unexpectedly I received an intimation, as though a sensation filled my consciousness and in an instant encompassed my whole being. I no longer thought about my talk or listened to the speaker.

"I felt a distinct and powerful impression that the spirit of the Prophet Joseph Smith was with us in this historic meeting. I believe for a moment my spirit felt his spirit of youthful buoyancy, joyful enthusiasm, and expansive vision. As I reflected on this feeling, I realized that, in 1993, 150 years had passed from the 1843 appointment of the first missionaries to Russia and that this day of fulfillment must be an occasion for heavenly rejoicing and grateful recognition of the efforts of so many who over fifteen decades made the emergence of the Church out of obscurity a reality in Russia."

Teach one another . . . and practise virtue and holiness before me. Doctrine and Covenants 38:23-24
