Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

Only When It Is Convenient?

Hidemasa Yatabe knew something about making lonely, difficult decisions. The only member in his family, Hidemasa had joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints while he was a young boy. He was an accomplished gymnast, a member of the elite All-Japan gymnastics team, and had the opportunity to compete in his sport at the highest levels in national and international competitions. Hidemasa had prepared for that opportunity his whole life.

But he had also prepared himself to serve the Lord. He had been blessed with a testimony. He had had the great honor of having Elder Dallin Oaks of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles visit him in his home. Elder Oaks had blessed Hidemasa that he would serve a mission.

Now, two years later, Hidemasa sat in a stake conference meeting for all the young men of the Tokyo Japan East Stake to hear a special challenge. Hidemasa will never forget that day, 5 February 1989. "Every worthy priesthood bearer should go on a mission," Elder Oaks said firmly. "It is his responsibility."

The words had great significance to Hidemasa. He had heard that challenge given to him personally two years before. But how could he go? To go would be to abandon his future in gymnastics. To serve a mission would mean giving up his place on the gymnastics team. And this wasn't just a local club; this was his country's premier team. He had worked his whole life to have such opportunities.

His thoughts were not only for himself. "The university had only a few gymnasts and our success was based on team members dedicating a great deal of time practicing together. We even ate together. We became as one technically, mentally, and emotionally. The loss of even one member of a team like that disrupts the entire team. So although I always wanted to go on a mission, I wasn't sure how I could leave the team," he reasoned.

But Hidemasa did not reject the apostle's counsel. He simply set it aside for about six months as he became consumed with his studies and his gymnastics. He was focused on earning the chance to attend the All-Japan Gymnastics Championship.

During that time, though he was committed to his sport, Hidemasa was distracted. The words of Elder Oaks rang in his ears.

"As I began to prepare mentally and physically for a future world-class competition, my desire to serve a mission became stronger and stronger. After the student championship, I was interviewed by my bishop and stake president."

In the interview the stake president spoke frankly. "If you plan to go on a mission only when it is convenient for you, perhaps the Lord might bless you only when it is convenient for him."

Hidemasa determined to send in his missionary papers right away.

But how to tell his team? How to explain he had a spiritual witness that was stronger than a perfect 10? Gymnastics, with all its personal effort and performance, is a team sport. He knew they, too, were counting on him. Announcing his decision was one of the most difficult moments of his life. An outcry went up from his teammates. How could he even consider abandoning their efforts at this time? This event would be for his teammates the culmination of their years of effort, too! And he was leaving!

Some teammates accused him of hurting their chances to win; they scorned his decision as selfish and one-sided. "Religion should make people happy," they said, "so why are you making us suffer?"

"I was grateful for the support the team members had given me in my athletic career," Hidemasa said. "I didn't want to disappoint them. Without their help, I would not have achieved what I did. For me to leave for a mission meant that I would destroy all that we had worked together to build. I knew exactly how they felt. It was painful."

But Hidemasa stood firm.

He looked to then-prophet Ezra Taft Benson for guidance, and he found it in a general conference address: "One of the most difficult tests of all is when you have to choose between pleasing God or pleasing someone you love or respect. . . .

"We should give God, the Father of our spirits, an exclusive preeminence in our lives. . . . "

"The great test of life is obedience to God." (In Conference Report, Apr. 1988, 4-5.)

Hidemasa knew he was right. He yearned to share his testimony of the gospel and his understanding of serving God first, but his teammates were in no frame of mind to listen.

He returned to the gym for his last day of practice, only to be humiliated by the coach: "This is a training area for athletes and not a place for you. Gather up all your belongings and get out."

As he walked out of the gym that last time he received a special witness from the Lord. He wrote in his journal: "My life as an athlete is finished. I will never again step into the gymnasium as a competitor. At that moment, I realized that everything I had worked toward had ended, and I could not help but cry. Every-thing, all the gymnastic life that I had worked so hard to build for the past ten years, including the inter-high school championship and the All-Japan championship, had come to an end.

"With that very poignant realization, I glanced back at the gymnasium. I felt that nothing remained for me there but an empty darkness. Suddenly, tears flowed freely as if to cleanse me. They were not tears of sorrow, but rather tears of gratitude. I felt the deepest gratitude for the many people who had supported, helped, and encouraged me for the last ten years. And I was sincerely grateful to Jesus Christ for his unequaled love and mercy. I rejoiced in the opportunity to demonstrate my love for him."

Hidemasa's decision was again ratified by the Lord when he went to the Tokyo Japan Temple to receive his endowment before leaving for the mission field. "As I entered the celestial room, I felt a great spiritual awakening, and I understood the magnitude of the blessings our Father in Heaven has in store for us. I realized that, eternally, serving a mission was the best thing for me—and for my family, and for my former teammates."

He doth require that ye should do as he hath commanded you; for which if ye do, he doth immediately bless you. Mosiah 2:24
