Heidi S. Swinton, Pioneer Spirit: Modern-Day Stories of Courage and Conviction ( 1996)

May Thy House Bring Blessings

When the Johannesburg South Africa Temple was dedicated on 24 August 1985, President Gordon B. Hinckley prayed, "May the presence of thy house . . . bring blessings." He also prayed that the temple would be "a place of holiness, a haven of peace, a sanctuary from the storms of life." (Church News, Sept. 1980, 5.) Seven years later those pleas were answered for a humble branch president from Zimbabwe.

Late one Wednesday night Reed J. Webster, a counselor in the temple presidency, received a call from Ben De Wet, the other counselor, who was just closing up the building. President De Wet reported that the police had just called from their office at the train station to ask that someone from the temple come immediately. A Church member from Zimbabwe who had been traveling thirty-six hours by train had just arrived and was seeking assistance in finding the Mormon temple. The police couldn't understand his dialect except for the words, "Johannesburg temple."

Going out at night, especially to the train station, which was in a particularly volatile part of town, was not recommended. But President Webster contacted another temple missionary, a former president of the South Africa Mission, Maurice Bateman, and the two went to the station. Only the night before those same streets had been the setting for angry demonstrations and violence. As the two drove to the station, they saw police officers, dog patrols, and flashing lights everywhere.

President Webster described what happened when they arrived at the station:

"We parked our car at one entrance to the train station, chained up the steering wheel—regular procedure—and wished we could have chained the car itself to the nearby lamp post. After wandering through the huge dismal building, we finally came upon the police station marked by a single light over the doorway down a dimly lit hall. We gave them the name of the person we thought we were to pick up, and out stepped a young, stern-faced man in uniform."

President Webster and Brother Bateman explained they had come in response to a call from someone at the police station. The officer's stern face relaxed as he announced that he had made the call. He had been in a quandary about what to do. It wasn't safe to let the man leave the station, yet the language barrier made it difficult to help him find a place to stay. They had offered to take him to his destination, but the late hour suggested no one would be there. That's why they made the call to the temple.

Then Sandalamu Milikafu Chisembe entered the room. A small black man about five feet tall, he radiated a calm that was felt by everyone in the room. He had with him a huge suitcase, which Brother Bateman carried to the car.

President Webster stayed behind for a few minutes to talk to the officer and see that all was in order. "The young policeman began asking questions about our temple and said he would like to visit it. The hustle and bustle of the police station was not too conducive to explaining the gospel and the temple. However, I was able to tell him about a book that I would get to him, which, if he read with pure intent, would teach him more about the Church and the function of temples better than I could at the time. We parted with the typical South African handshake, each feeling he had gained a friend."

Like the pioneers who took newly arrived emigrants into their homes after their trek across the plains, President Webster took Brother Chisembe home to his apartment. As they drove he tried to learn about this gentle man. The two temple workers couldn't understand a word of Brother Chisembe's language, but they could feel his spirit.

Arriving home safely, President Webster began to sort through all the papers that Brother Chisembe had brought with him. In a large manila envelope he had documents of baptism, ordinations, and other Church records for himself and for his family, whom he had left in Zimbabwe. In the packet was a letter in English that he had obviously had someone prepare for him. It explained that he was the branch president of the Mufakose Branch, Harare, Zimbabwe. It also described his journey to the Johannesburg South Africa Temple.

"I have come to the temple to seek for spiritual power, for preaching, teaching, and doing all the Lord's work. This is the only way I can communicate with you, because I only talk Chew and I can hardly hear English. I know that there's no other place to get spiritual power other than the temple.

"There are seven townships meeting at Mufakose branch for sacrament meeting. Our number of attendance sometimes goes up but sometimes drops. But I am aware of the problem. When missionaries teach the new members. It is our duties to do home teaching.

"We, the branch president, first counselor and all priesthood find it very difficult to go to members who are far away. Our buses are very unreliable. That's why I have come here to seek for solutions to this problem I am facing at this branch.

"I had only a few dollars but through asking from the Heavenly Father I have managed to come here. From here I will go to Malawi and see two brothers and my daughter because I have sent a Book of Mormon. They also want me to explain about the book so that they can join us.

"(Signed) S. M. Chisembe"

President Webster, a native of Utah, was serving his second assignment in the Johannesburg South Africa Temple. He had seen many faithful Saints sacrifice to attend the temple. But President Chisembe brought new meaning to the scripture "seek ye first the kingdom of God." He spent two days in the temple.

When President Chisembe prepared to leave on the bus, he spoke with a young man who understood his language and was able to fill in other pieces of the story. President Webster learned that Brother Chisembe and his family had sold many of their possessions and skimped on food and other essentials to make it possible for him to go to the temple. He hoped someday to bring his wife and family for the sacred sealing ordinance. And then he bore his testimony, which was full of love and appreciation for the Savior. He concluded with this statement: "So many big businessmen around the building where I work, but Heavenly Father chose me."

For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened. Luke 11:10
