Various authors, Testimonies of Book of Mormon Witnesses

Last Testimonies of Oliver Cowdery

ONE OF THE LAST TESTIMONIES OF OLIVER COWDERY

Source: Samuel W. Richards, "Oliver Cowdery," Improvement Era 2 (Dec 1898):90-96.

In 1848, a yearning which Oliver Cowdery had for the society of those with whom he had once been so familiar, caused him to visit Kanesville, Iowa, where Orson Hyde, then president of the Twelve Apostles, was residing, and make application for a reunion with the Church, which was granted by his being baptized and duly admitted into the Church by Elder Hyde officiating.

Soon after this, with the view of joining the Saints in Salt Lake valley the next season, he, with his wife, desired first to visit her brother, David Whitmer, then living in Richmond, Missouri. For this purpose, in the month of January (1849), they started on the journey by team, but were overtaken by a severe snowstorm which compelled them to seek shelter, which they obtained with the writer of this article, [Samuel W. Richards] then temporarily residing in the upper part of that state. Here they found it necessary to remain some length of time on account of the great amount of snow which had fallen, completely blockading the road, and for a time preventing travel by teams.

This detention of nearly two weeks time was extremely interesting, and made very enjoyable to both parties participating in the social and intellectual feast so unexpectedly provided.

I had but the fall before returned from my first mission to the British Isles, and was in the spirit of inquiry as to all matters of early history and experiences in the Church, and soon found there was no reserve on the part of Oliver in answering my many questions. In doing so his mind seemed as fresh in the recollection of events, which occurred more than a score of years before, as though they were but of yesterday.

Upon carefully inquiring as to his long absence from the body of the Church, he stated that he had never met the Prophet Joseph, after his expulsion from the Church, while he lived, apparently feeling that the Prophet could, with equal propriety, enquire after him, as for him to visit the Prophet, and as his pride would seemingly not allow him to become a suppliant without that, it was never made; while he felt quite sure that had he ever met the Prophet there would have been no difficulty in affecting a reconciliation, as a feeling of jealousy towards him, on the part of his accusers, had entered largely into their purpose of having him removed, which he thought Joseph must have discovered after going to Missouri.

In what had now transpired with him he felt to acknowledge the hand of God, in that he had been preserved; for if he had been with the Church he would have undoubtedly been with Joseph in his days of trial and shared a like fate with him; but being spared, he now desired to go to the nations and bear a testimony of this work which no other living man could bear; and he decided to go to the presidency of the Church and offer his services for that purpose.

This indeed seemed to be his only ambition, and he was now going to visit his wife's brother, David Whitmer, and prepare to go to the mountains and join the body of the Church the following summer and unite with them. For some cause this was not permitted, and he died in Missouri among relatives before realizing the intent and purpose he had cherished of again testifying of the great work and dispensation, which he had been instrumental, with the Prophet, in opening up to the world.

To hear him describe, in his pleasant but earnest manner, the personality of those * heavenly messengers, with whom he and the Prophet had so freely held converse, was enchanting to my soul. Their heavenly appearance, clothed in robes of purity; the influence of their presence, so lovely and serene; their eyes, that seemed to penetrate to the very depths of the soul, together with the color of the eyes that gazed upon them, were all so beautifully related as to almost make one feel that they were then present; and as I placed my hands upon his head where these angels had placed theirs, a divine influence filled the soul to that degree that one could truly feel to be in the presence of something that was more than earthly . . .

Before taking his departure he wrote and left with the writer of this, the following statement, which we believe to be his last living testimony, though oft repeated, of the wonderful manifestations which brought the authority of God to men on the earth: [The following statement included in this article is in the Samuel Whitney Richards Collection, Church Archives]

TESTIMONY

"While darkness covered the earth and gross darkness the people; long after the authority to administer in holy things had been taken away, the Lord opened the heavens and sent forth His word for the salvation of Israel. In fulfillment of the sacred scriptures, the everlasting gospel was proclaimed by the mighty angel (Moroni) who, clothed with the authority of his mission, gave glory to God in the highest. This # gospel is the `stone taken from the mountain without hands.' John the Baptist, holding the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood; Peter, James and John, holding the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood, have also ministered for those who shall be heirs of salvation, and with these administrations, ordained men to the same priesthoods. These priesthoods, with their authority, are now, and must continue to be, in the body of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Blessed is the elder who has received the same, and thrice blessed and holy is he who shall endure to the end.

"Accept assurances, dear brother, of the unfeigned prayer of him who, in connection with Joseph the Seer, was blessed with the above ministrations, and who earnestly and devoutly hopes to meet you in the celestial glory." Oliver Cowdery. To Samuel W. Richards, January 13, 1849.

Thus, by the foregoing testimony which he bears, as his last written, and virtually his dying testimony, is secured the promise made to him by the Lord in the early part of his career, that "the gates of hell should not prevail against him; and he should be lifted up at the last day."

OLIVER'S LAST TESTIMONY

Source: Andrew Jenson, Biographical Encyclopedia, 1:251.

Elder Phineas H. Young, who was present at his [Oliver Cowdery's] death [at Richmond, Missouri, March 3, 1850] says, "His last moments were spent in bearing testimony of the truth of the Gospel revealed through Joseph Smith, and the power of the holy priesthood which he had received through his administrations." [See MS 21 (1859):545.]

Oliver Cowdery's half-sister, Lucy P. Young, widow of Phineas H. Young, relates that Oliver Cowdery just before breathing his last asked his attendants to raise him up in bed that he might talk to the family and his friends who were present. He then told them to live according to the teachings contained in the Book of Mormon, and promised them if they would do this that they would meet him in heaven. He then said, "Lay me down and let me fall asleep." A few moments later he died, without a struggle.

David Whitmer testified to Apostles Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith in 1878, as follows: "Oliver died the happiest man I ever saw. After shaking hands with the family and kissing his wife and daughter, he said, "Now I lay me down for the last time: I am going to my Savior;" and he died immediately with a smile on his face. [See MS 40 (1880):774.]

Oliver Cowdery True to His Testimony to the End

Source: David Whitmer, Address to All Believers In Christ (Richmond: David Whitmer, 1887), p. 8.

I [David Whitmer] also testify to the world, that neither Oliver Cowdery or Martin Harris ever at any time denied their testimony. They both died reaffirming the truth of the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon. I was present at the death bed of Oliver Cowdery, and his last words were, "Brother David, be true to your testimony to the Book of Mormon." He died here in Richmond, Mo., on March 3d, 1850. Many witnesses yet live in Richmond, who will testify to the truth of these facts, as well as to the good character of Oliver Cowdery.

David Whitmer to E. R. Kelley, 3 March 1884, RLDS Archives., p.8

Source: David Whitmer to E. R. Kelley, 3 Mar 1884, RLDS Archives.

"Oliver Cowdery * never to my [David Whitmer's] knowledge denied any part of his testimony [as written in the Book of Mormon]; on the contrary, as I have done protested against every fabrication made by designing persons and parties . . . until death which occurred in this place."

A LETTER FROM O. COWDERY'S WIFE

Source: Elizabeth Cowdery to David Whitmer, 8 Mar 1887, in The Return 3 (Dec 1892):7.

Southwest City, Mo., March 8th, '87.

Dear Brother David:—I, Elizabeth Cowdery, wife of Oliver Cowdery, do make the following statements: That my husband, Oliver Cowdery, bore his testimony to the truth and divine origin of the Book of Mormon, as one of the three witnesses of the Book of Mormon; as to his standing on doctrine he stood where he did when he preached the first sermon; that was preached in the last days in the Church of Christ in 1829, when the Bible and the Book of Mormon alone were the guide to the faith of the church. From the hour when the glorious * vision of the Holy Messenger revealed to mortal eyes the hidden prophecies which God had promised his faithful followers should come forth in due time, until the moment when he passed away from earth. He always without one doubt or shudder of turning affirmed the divinity and truth of the Book of Mormon. "God's promises never fail."

From your Sister,

Elizabeth Cowdery.

Oliver Cowdery's Final Testimony Reported by David Whitmer and John C. Whitmer, Son of Jacob Whitmer

Source: Milton V. Backman, Eyewitness Accounts of the Restoration (Deseret Book: Salt Lake City, 1986), p. 163.

I was present at the deathbed of Oliver Cowdery in 1850 . . . Oliver died the happiest man I ever saw . . . His last words were, "Brother David, be true to your testimony to the Book of Mormon, for we know that it is of God and that it is verily true." After shaking hands with the family and kissing his wife and daughter, he said, "Now I lay me down for the last time, I am going to my Savior," and died immediately, with a smile on his face. Many witnesses yet live in Richmond, who will testify to the truth of these facts, as well as to the good character of Oliver Cowdery.

[See also, Andrew Jenson, Edward Stevenson, and Joseph B. Black, "Historical Landmarks," Deseret News (Salt Lake City), 17 Sep 1888, p. 2; and David Whitmer to E. L. Kelley, 3 March 1884, Whitmer Papers, RLDS Church Archives.]

DAVID WHITMER AFFIRMS TESTIMONY OF OLIVER COWDERY, MAR 1884

Source: David Whitmer to E. R. Kelly, 3 Mar 1884, RLDS Archives.

Dear Sir:

. . . Oliver Cowdery * never to my knowledge denied any part of his testimony, on the contrary, as I have done, protested against every fabrication made by designing persons and parties and emphatically testified as written in the Book of Mormon until death; which occurred in this place, his wife and child yet living furnished one of the best pictures of a living faith in what their father testified to before death as written in the Book of Mormon.

Source: John Whitmer to M. H. Forest, 5 Mar 1876, Whitmer Papers, RLDS Archives. JOHN WHITMER'S ACCOUNT OF TESTIMONY OF OLIVER COWDERY AND OTHER WITNESSES TO THE BOOK OF MORMON, 1876

. . . . Oliver Cowdery lived in Richmond, Mo. [Missouri], some 40 miles from here at the time of his death. I went to see him and I was with him for some days previous to his demise.

I have never heard him deny the truth of his testimony of the Book of Mormon under any circumstances what ever.

I have no knowledge that there was any effort made to force him to deny the Book of Mormon. Neither do I believe that he would have denied at the peril of his life, so firm was he that he could not be moved to deny what he has affirmed to be a divine revelation from God.

I desire to do good when it is in my power. I have never heard that anyone of the three or eight witnesses ever denied the testimony that they have borne to the book as published in the first edition of the Book of Mormon.

There are only two of the witnesses to that book now living to wit. David Whitmer one of the three and John Whitmer one of the eight.

Our names have gone forth to all nations, tongues and people as a divine revelation from God. And it will bring to pass the designs of God according to the declaration therein contained.
