Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Introduction

I have long noticed a widespread disease among readers of the Book of Mormon, one quite damaging to one's spiritual health. This Mormon malady is the tendency to skip, shun, or, at the very most, skim the writings of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon.

This malady, or spiritual sickness, is not confined to any one particular person or group. All are potential victims: the active and less active in the Church; new converts and those of long-standing membership; the casual or occasional reader of the Book of Mormon as well as the serious student of scripture. Even teachers of the gospel have been afflicted by the disease. Some, in turn, have infected their students or class members by carelessly saying, "Let's just skip or skim Isaiah and go on to something more interesting or understandable."

Have you ever suffered from this malady? Have you ever said to yourself, "I'll just skip or skim the Isaiah portion of the Book of Mormon"? I confess that I have. In fact, I am ashamed to admit I used to regularly skip over the writings of Isaiah as I read or studied the Book of Mormon.

Yes, there were those wonderful passages from Isaiah regularly quoted at Christmastime in which I took delight and found spiritual uplift. (See 7:14; 9:6.) Yet, for the most part, the hidden treasures in the prophet's writings remained unmined and undiscovered by me because of my negligence and poor attitude.

I relate these personal feelings and experiences because I am convinced there are many in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and in the Christian world in general, who have had similar experiences.

Isaiah, whose words the resurrected Lord referred to as "great" (3 Nephi 23:1), is one of the most maligned and misunderstood of the prophets. Yet his words must be of singular importance to the world and to the Latter-day Saints in particular. Why else would the Nephite prophets have included them in their sacred record, especially since they knew their writings would come forth in the last days? (See Mormon 8:34-35.)

Nephi was very particular about that which he recorded on the plates containing the history and record of his people. "I desire," said he, "the room that I may write of the things of God.

"For the fulness of mine intent is that I may persuade men to come unto the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob [who is Jesus Christ], and be saved.

"Wherefore, the things which are pleasing unto the world I do not write, but the things which are pleasing unto God and unto those who are not of the world." (1 Nephi 6:3-5.)

Thus, Nephi's inclusion of the writings of Isaiah in The Book of Mormon: Another Testament of Jesus Christ must have been for the purpose of persuading us to "come unto Christ." Just as both the Old and New Testaments bore witness of the mission and message of the Messiah, so too "Another Testament" has provided a third witness to His role as our divine Redeemer.

The inclusion of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon is purposeful! Further evidence of this is found in the fact that Jesus Christ Himself quoted the words of this Old Testament prophet during His brief postmortal ministry in the Americas.

The resurrected Redeemer not only quoted the words of Isaiah, but He commanded that they should be searched (3 Nephi 20:11), not just skimmed or, even worse, skipped. Jesus later reemphasized: "Ye ought to search these things. Yea, a commandment I give unto you that ye search these things diligently; for great are the words of Isaiah." (3 Nephi 23:1; italics added.)

Perhaps the emphasis on the word "search" is indicative that the treasured truths of Isaiah will not yield themselves to the casual reader.

Elder Boyd K. Packer observed: "The prophecies of the Old Testament prophet Isaiah . . . loom as a barrier, like a roadblock or a checkpoint beyond which the casual reader, one with idle curiosity, generally will not go. . . . Perhaps only after you read the Book of Mormon and return to the Bible will you notice that the Lord quotes Isaiah seven times in the New Testament; in addition, the Apostles quote Isaiah forty more times. One day you may revere these prophetic words in Isaiah in both books. The Lord had a purpose in preserving the prophesies of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon, notwithstanding they become a barrier to the casual reader." (Ensign, May 1986, p. 61.)

As in all things, if we are to get the greatest benefit from studying, searching, and pondering the words of Isaiah, we must pay a price. Reading to the tick of the clock, or the count of pages, will not do. (Of course, we still must have regular or scheduled study of the scriptures.)

To get the most out of searching the scriptures we need to allow time for prayer and pondering without worrying about interruptions or appointments to be met. Each of us needs to determine for himself or herself what will work best to accomplish this end.

I fervently hope that this volume, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon, will assist you in the personal process of gaining greater scriptural understanding of the writings of this giant among the prophets—as well as a greater witness of Him of whom Isaiah testifies.

Isaiah is a six-letter word. To get the most out of his writings, consider other six-letter words such as search, ponder, and prayer. These six-letter words must be integral to your study of the prophet's writings. Only then will the meaning of the prophet's words become clear.

The promise is sure: "For he that diligently seeketh shall find; and the mysteries of God shall be unfolded unto them, by the power of the Holy Ghost, as well in these times as in times of old." (1 Nephi 10:19; italics added.)

A word of caution: The intent of this volume is to "open the door" to understanding. It does not, nor could it, provide a complete understanding of each prophecy and poetic utterance. Such understanding, as noted above, can come only by paying a personal price. Yet if this volume has opened the door and the reader can peer in and see the Light, then I have accomplished my purpose in writing this book.
