Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Chapter 1

The Significance of Isaiah's Writings

Obviously words spoken directly by the Savior Himself either as the premortal and postmortal Jehovah or as the mortal Jesus should carry great weight and importance. They certainly should command our attention. Then what about words which Jesus quotes from another? Should they not have a similar impact?

The writings in the book of Isaiah fit in both categories: Much of the book of Isaiah consists of direct quotations from Jehovah. Later, Jesus Christ quoted Isaiah's writings during both his mortal and postmortal ministries. (For example, see Matthew 13:13-15; Luke 4:17-21; 3 Nephi 16:16-20; 22:1-17.) Furthermore, as noted in the introduction to this volume, the Savior has commanded us to "search these things [the writings of Isaiah] diligently." (3 Nephi 23:1; see also 20:11.)

The ancient American prophet Nephi tells us that Isaiah's words are "of great worth" to those of the last days (the days in which we are now living); and he states he has written them "for [our] good." (2 Nephi 25:8.)

Further significance of the prophet Isaiah's writings was postulated by a servant of the Lord in the last days, one who, like the Old Testament prophet who went before him, has testified of the Messiah in voluminous writings. Elder Bruce R. McConkie boldly declared:

"If our eternal salvation depends upon our ability to understand the writings of Isaiah as fully and truly as Nephiunderstood them and who shall say such is not the case! how shall we fare in that great day when with Nephi we shall stand before the pleasing bar of Him who said: 'Great are the words of Isaiah'? .Â .Â . It just may be that my salvation (and yours also!) does in fact depend upon our ability to understand the writings of Isaiah as fully and truly as Nephi understood them. For that matter, why should either Nephi or Isaiah know anything that is withheld from us? Does not that God who is no respecter of persons treat all his children alike? Has he not given us his promise and recited to us the terms and conditions of his law pursuant to which he will reveal to us what he has revealed to them?" (Ensign, October 1973, p. 78.)

Who Was Isaiah?

Just who was this prophet whose prophecies and poetic writings are so important to each of us? We know that he served as a prophet in Jerusalem during the forty-year period from 740 to 701 b.c. While his ministry was essentially to the tribe of Judah, or the southern kingdom of Israel, his prophecies extended to the northern kingdom and to gentile nations of his time, as well as to the last days.

We know his father's name was Amoz (Isaiah 1:1), that he was married (Isaiah 8:3), and that he had at least two children, both sons: Shear-jashub (Isaiah 7:3) and Maher-shalal-hash-baz (Isaiah 8:3). Their names, as well as his own, were symbolic of the substance of his teachings. Shear-jashub means "a remnant shall return," and Maher-shalal-hash-baz signifies "the spoil speedeth, the prey hasteth." The name Isaiah means "The Lord is salvation" or "salvation is of Jehovah."

While the book of Psalms is the book most frequently quoted in the New Testament, Isaiah is the Old Testament prophet who is most quoted by Jesus and His apostles. Furthermore, Isaiah is quoted more frequently in the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants than any other prophet.

He was "among the great and mighty ones who were assembled in [the] vast congregation of the righteous" when the disembodied Jesus visited the spirit world following His crucifixion on Calvary. (D&C 138:38, 42.) There is no question that Isaiah also stood among the "noble and great ones" in the premortal council when the plans for this earth were laid. He certainly was foreordained and "chosen before [he was] born." (Abraham 3:22-23.)

There is strong tradition that Isaiah suffered a martyr's death, being "sawn asunder." Some maintain the apostle Paul alluded to this fate in his writings. (See MOK, 16; TOVBC, 409; Hebrews 11:37.)

What Was Isaiah's Message?

"The writings of Isaiah deal with events of his day as well as events beyond his time, some of which have already come to pass and others are yet to be. The bulk of Isaiah's prophecies deal with the coming of the Redeemer, both in his first appearance ('For unto us a child is born,' 9:6) and as the Great King at the last day, as the God of Israel. A major theme is that God requires righteousness of his people, and until they obey him they will be smitten and scattered by their enemies. But in the end, Israel will be restored; the barren land will be made fruitful and able to support a large population; and the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, will dwell in the midst of his people, who will be called Zion." (LDSBD, "Isaiah," p. 707.)

As noted, Isaiah's writings focus on the Messiah, the Lord Jesus Christ. Monte Nyman discovered that "of the 425 separate verses of Isaiah which are quoted in the Book of Mormon, 391 say something about the attributes or mission of Jesus Christ." (GAWI, 7; italics added.)

In keeping with the law of witnesses (2 Corinthians 13:1), Nephi cited Isaiah's witness that he had seen the Redeemer and declared that he, too, as well as his brother Jacob, had been given that sacred privilege. "Behold, my soul delighteth in proving unto my people the truth of the coming of Christ," Nephi testified. (2 Nephi 11:2-4.)

Indeed, Nephi deliberately quoted the prophet Isaiah as a means of testifying of Christ. In describing his efforts to teach his brothers, he declared, "But that I might more fully persuade them to believe in the Lord their Redeemer I did read unto them that which was written by the prophet Isaiah," (1 Nephi 19:23.)

Thus, the major reason for us to read and understand the writings of Isaiah is to strengthen our belief in the Lord our Redeemer.

Isaiah and the Book of Mormon

Scholars have calculated that over 30 percent of the Old Testament writings of Isaiah are found in the Book of Mormon. A comparison of the King James version of Isaiah with that found in the Nephite record "shows that there are differences in more than half of the 433 verses of Isaiah quoted in the Book of Mormon, while about 200 verses have the same wording as [the King James Version]." (2 Nephi 12:2, footnote a.)

The differences between the two texts are reproduced in the chapters of this commentary; they are shown in two ways: (1) Any changed text, including capitalization, punctuation, and plural usage, is identified by underlining. (2) Changes in spelling of the same word, or in word order, are identified by italics.

The reader will note that many changes in the Book of Mormon rendition provide significant insights and a greater understanding of the biblical text. Monte Nyman explained why the Nephite record is so valuable in understanding Isaiah:

"One reason why the Book of Mormon is such an excellent resource to help us understand Isaiah is that it preserves a better text. This text of Isaiah was taken from the brass plates of Laban and copied onto the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated; it is at least five hundred years older than the oldest manuscript of the Isaiah text available today. The discovery of the Dead Sea texts ofIsaiah was very significant because it moved the date of earliest Isaiah manuscripts from a.d. 900 (the Masoretic text) to about 100 b.c., the date of the Dead Sea Scroll texts. The plates of brass from which Nephi copied the text of Isaiah would have been recorded by at least 600 b.c., when Lehi and his party left Jerusalem. This places the Book of Mormon text of Isaiah within 100 to 150 years of the time of the original writing, making it closer to the time of the original writing than any other Old or New Testament manuscript. Therefore, this text is probably more accurate than any other account of Isaiah, so retentions in the Book of Mormon text should be given prime consideration." (GAWI, 10.)

The importance of the Book of Mormon in gaining an understanding of Isaiah is further emphasized by Elder Bruce R. McConkie, who declared: "May I be so bold as to affirm that no one, absolutely no one, in this age and dispensation has or does or can understand the writings of Isaiah until he first learns and believes what God has revealed by the mouths of his Nephite witnesses as these truths are found in that volume of holy writ." (Ensign, October 1973, p. 81.)

Why Is Isaiah So Difficult to Understand?

If it is so important to search and understand the writings of Isaiah, then why is it so difficult for so many to understand his message?

One major reason why the people of our day have such difficulty with Isaiah is that over 60 percent of the book is written in poetic form. It is very difficult to effectively translate the meanings enmeshed in this type of literary style into another language.

Another major difficulty is the prophet's extensive use of symbolism. Words, geographical locations, historical events, people, and even members of the animal kingdom that were readily familiar to the people of Isaiah's day but which are foreign to us were used by Isaiah to stand as symbols forevents both in his day and in the latter days. Additionally, many prophesied events have multiple fulfillments or applications.

The prophet Nephi recognized the challenge many would have in trying to understand Isaiah's writings even though they were very "plain" to him. He listed the following reasons why people would have such difficulty: (1) "They know not concerning the manner of prophesying among the Jews"; (2) They are not "filled with the spirit of prophecy"; and (3) They have not been "taught after the manner of the things of the Jews." (2 Nephi 25:1-5.)

Victor Ludlow suggested another reason why Isaiah is hard to understand: He is often "deliberately difficult." Dr. Ludlow explained: "Isaiah, when facing a difficult teaching situation, did not use the parable as a tool; instead, he veiled his message in clouds of symbolism, poetry, and complex terminology. In other words, instead of speaking at a simple level and letting his listeners build upon that foundation, Isaiah spoke at a high intellectual and spiritual level, thus challenging or even forcing his listeners to attain that level before they could begin to understand his words. Isaiah was not only difficult, he was deliberately difficult."

Dr. Ludlow then added this counsel: "We must study his words, wrestle with them, and ponder them at great length before his powerful, sublime teachings begin to emerge and inspire us. Because of this, it is easy to become discouraged and give up before we begin to understand his message. However, through serious and prayerful study, when we finally grasp the language and ideas of a particular chapter until they not only make sense, but enlighten and inspire as well, we realize that we have arrived at a profound level of understanding." (IPSP, 134-35.)

Suggestions for Understanding Isaiah

Gaining greater spiritual understanding is a step-by-step, line-upon-line process. Thus the following suggestions, and the commentary throughout this volume, are provided in an effort to help lay a foundation for understanding.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie, an apostle of the Lord, provided the following "Keys to Understanding Isaiah":

"1. Gain an overall knowledge of the plan of salvation and of God's dealings with his earthly children. . . .

"2. Learn the position and destiny of the house of Israel in the Lord's eternal scheme of things. . . .

"3. Know the chief doctrines about which Isaiah chose to write. [These include] .Â .Â . (a) restoration of the gospel in latter days through Joseph Smith, (b) latter-day gathering of Israel and her final triumph and glory, (c) coming forth of the Book of Mormon as a new witness for Christ and the total revolution it will eventually bring in the doctrinal understanding of men, (d) apostate conditions in the nations of the world in the latter days, (e) messianic prophecies relative to our Lord's first coming, (f) second coming of Christ and the millennial reign, and (g) historical data and prophetic utterances relative to his own day. . . .

"4. Use the Book of Mormon. . . .

"5. Use latter-day revelation. . . .

"6. Learn how the New Testament interprets Isaiah. . . .

"7. Study Isaiah in its Old Testament context. . . .

"8. Learn the manner of prophesying used among the Jews in Isaiah's day. . . .

"9. Have the spirit of prophecy. . . .

"10. Devote yourself to hard, conscientious study." (DOR, 301-6.)

The Latter-day Saint Bible Dictionary states: "The reader today has no greater written commentary and guide to understanding Isaiah than the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants. As one understands these works better he will understand Isaiah better, and as one understands Isaiah better, he more fully comprehends the mission of the Savior, and the meaning of the covenant that was placed upon Abraham and his seed by which all the families of the earth would be blessed." (LDSBD, "Isaiah," p. 707.)

Understanding Isaiah through the Spirit of Prophecy

As noted by Nephi, the key ingredient to understanding the writings and prophecies of Isaiah, or any other prophet, is to receive the guidance of the Spirit. The apostle Peter cautioned, "No prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation.

"For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." (2 Peter 1:20-21.)

With this in mind, I readily recognize the limitations of this particular volume, as well as those of other commentaries. In the end, one must be guided by the Spirit, being "filled with the spirit of prophecy," in order to grasp the spiritual insights of the scriptures.

Modern-day revelation gives sound counsel on this matter: "For they that are wise .Â .Â . have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide . . . and have not been deceived." (D&C 45:57.)

As you proceed through this book, I hope you will seek and receive the guidance of the Holy Ghost, both to help you in the understandings you might glean from this present volume, and also to help you understand the writings of the great prophet Isaiah.
