Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Chapter 2

Isaiah 2 and 2 Nephi 12

Overview

With this chapter, the earliest Isaiah chapter to be quoted, Nephi begins the longest uninterrupted recitation of Isaiah's writings in the Book of Mormon. Thirteen consecutive chapters of the Old Testament seer are quoted. Nevertheless, the Nephite version shows many modifications in the text. As noted earlier, these differences are shown by italics or underlining.

On the surface, some differences appear to be minimal; yet they are significant. For example, the time frame in which these prophecies will be fulfilled is identified (the last days) by the insertion of the following words: "when" (vs. 2); "soon cometh" (vs. 12); and "the day of the Lord shall come" (vs. 13).

The Nephite prophets copied Isaiah's writings from the plates of brass in their possession. Among other things, these plates contained "the prophecies of the holy prophets, from the beginning, even down to the commencement of the reign of [King] Zedekiah." (See 1 Nephi 5:11-14.) The addition of the phrase "And upon all the ships of the sea" in verse 16 of 2 Nephi 12 is a testimony to the fact that the Isaiah text in the Book of Mormon came from a source other than the King James Bible. The addition is consistent with the text in the early Greek version of the Old Testament, or the Septuagint. (See footnote 16a of 2 Nephi 12.) Other examples might be cited as well. (See GAWI, 33; IPSP, 90-91.)

Chapter 2 of Isaiah begins with a vision of some events that will precede and/or occur during the millenium. It continues with a rebuke and a promise of judgement upon the rebellious. The possessions of the proud will be taken from them. Isaiah contrasts the ways of the wicked with those of the Lord. For example, the Lord's house, which is truly "a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning... a house of God" (D&C 109:8), is "established in the top of the mountains... exalted above the hills" (Isaiah 2:2). On the other hand, the wicked seek to hide in "the tops of ragged rocks" or the crevices of cliffs. Here they vainly hope that darkness will shield them from the piercing rebuke of the Lord.

Commentary

Isaiah 2:1-4 and 2 Nephi 12:1-4

Isaiah is shown in vision the establishment of the house of the Lord and its power to draw people to it. The righteous of all nations will seek to enter its holy portals, there to be taught in the ways of the Lord.

The prophet sees two headquarters for the Lord's kingdom—Zion and Jerusalem—with "the law" going forth from one and "the word of the Lord" from the other. The millennial Messiah is seen as the Judge who will establish peace on the earth.

Isaiah 2 1 The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem. 2 And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it. 3 And many people shall go and say, come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths; for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. 4 And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people: and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. 2 Nephi 12 1 The word that Isaiah, the son of Amoz, saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem: 2 and it shall come to pass in the last days, when the mountain of the Lord's house shall be establisehed in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted abovce the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it. 3 And many people shall fo and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths; for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. 4 And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people: and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning-hooks— nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

2:1 (2 Nephi 12:1). "Judah and Jerusalem." Sidney Sperry states, "Despite the fact that Isaiah speaks only of Judah and Jerusalem, his words may be 'likened' or applied to all the tribes of Israel—indeed, as Nephi says, 'unto all men.' (2 Nephi 11:8)" (BMC, 173.)

Monte Nyman has written: "Although Isaiah notes that he saw things concerning Judah and Jerusalem (2:1), his vision includes references to three different peoples and two different lands. . . . The three peoples include the inhabitants of Jerusalem in general, the inhabitants of Zion in general, and the specific group from Zion and Jerusalem who constitute the beautiful and glorious branch of the Lord. The two lands include the land of Jerusalem and the land of the Americas.

"Justification for Isaiah's including people not of Judah and not living in Jerusalem in a vision of Judah and Jerusalem is shown in the Savior's words regarding Isaiah: 'for surely he spake as touching all things concerning my people which are of the house of Israel; therefore it must needs be that he must speak also to the Gentiles' (3 Nephi 23:2). Just as it was necessary to speak to or about the Gentiles to show all things concerning the house of Israel, it was also necessary to speak to or about Zion to show the ultimate destiny of Judah."(GAWI, 23-24.)

2:2 (2 Nephi 12:2). "The mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains." During the dedicatory prayer for the Salt Lake Temple, President Wilford Woodruff mentioned Isaiah's prophecy in conjunction with the temple. (DWW, 337.) Over eight decades later a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Elder LeGrand Richards, declared the Salt Lake Temple to be "that house of the God of Jacob" of whom the Old Testament prophets Isaiah and Micah spoke. (CR, October 1975, p. 77; see also Micah 4:1; BICQ, 115-16.)

While Isaiah, Micah, and Nephi may have seen the Salt Lake Temple in vision, there is a broader application to this prophecy. Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "This has specific reference to the Salt Lake Temple and to the other temples built in the top of the Rocky Mountains, and it has a general reference to the temple yet to be built in the New Jerusalem in Jackson County, Missouri. Those in all nations, be it noted, shall flow to the houses of the Lord in the tops of the mountains, there to make the covenants out of which eternal life comes." (ANW, 539.)

An additional application comes from latter-day revelation, which admonishes "Judah [to] flee unto Jerusalem, unto the mountains of the Lord's house." (D&C 133:13.) As seen by Zechariah, a temple must be built in old Jerusalem before the Second Coming, a temple to be built by proper priesthood authority. (Zechariah 6:12-15; BICQ, 121-24.)

Isaiah's prophecy may also have further implications: "The word mountain as it appears in the scriptures. . . . is a place on earth where God meets his servants to instruct them and direct their activity. . . . When an earthly place has been sanctified to the Lord where he may commune with his servants (Exodus 25:21-22; 29:42-46), then such a place may be called 'the mountain of the Lord.'. . . . Thus, the mountain of the Lord is the Lord's administrative center where he is at work directing the affairs of his kingdom until the kingdom of heaven comes to earth. The entire earth will then be a 'mountain.'" (DCE, 372.)

2:3 (2 Nephi 12:3)."Out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." Two world capitals will be established during the Millennium: Zion (the New Jerusalem) and (the old but restored) Jerusalem. (See BICQ, 161-62; 209-10.) From these two centers of strength, the world will be governed politically and spiritually. The city of Zion will be established on the North American continent, specifically in what is now Independence, Jackson County, Missouri. (D&C 57:1-3; Ether 13:6; BICQ, 151-63.)

There have been other interpretations applied to the meaning of "out of Zion shall go forth the law." For example, the Prophet Joseph Smith identified "the whole of America [as] Zion." (TPJS, 362.) Keeping this in mind, consider the Lord's declaration that He "established the Constitution of this land." (D&C 101:80.) Part of the dedicatory prayer given by President George Albert Smith at the Idaho Falls Temple in 1945 stated: "We thank thee that thou hast revealed to us that those who gave us our constitutional form of government were men wise in thy sight and that thou didst raise them up for the very purpose of putting forth that sacred document. .Â .Â . We pray that kings and rulers and the peoples of all nations under heaven may be persuaded .Â .Â . to adopt similar governmental systems, thus to fulfill the ancient prophecy of Isaiah [and Micah] that ' .Â .Â . out of Zion shall go forth the law.'" (IE, Oct. 1945, p. 564.)

That there might be multiple interpretations of the prophecy is illustrated by statements of Elder Mark E. Petersen of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. He suggested that the counsel given at the general conferences of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was a fulfillment of the prophecy that "out of Zion shall go forth the law." (WRL, pp. 200-201, 305-7.)

2:4 (2 Nephi 12:4)."He shall judge among the nations." Not only will we "all stand before the [final] judgment seat of Christ" (Romans 14:10) to be judged of our works and deeds (D&C 19:3), but He will also serve as sovereign Judge and Arbitrator among the nations of the earth during the Millennium.

2:4 (2 Nephi 12:4)."Beat their swords into plowshares" This is an obvious reference to millennial conditions when peace will prevail and "violence shall no more be heard in thy land." (Isaiah 60:18; BICQ, 215-16.) Weapons of war will give way to tools of industry.

Isaiah 2:5-9 and 2 Nephi 12:5-9

Following an idealistic glimpse at the future, Isaiah returns to the reality of the present and chastens Israel, admonishing her to "walk in the light of the Lord." The Book of Mormon text makes it clear that Israel has "gone astray."

The prophet states that the people are forsaken of the Lord because of their pursuit of wickedness and the things of this world. Once again the Nephite text clarifies the biblical text. The addition of the word "not" two times in verse 9 provides the intended meaning of Isaiah's statement.

5 O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord. 6 Therefore thou hast forsaken thy people the house of Jacob, because they be replenished from the east, and are soothsayers like the Philistines, and they please themselves in the children of strangers. 7 Their land also is full of silver and gold, neither is there any end of their treasures; their land is also full of horses, neither is there any end of their chariots: 8 Their land also is full of idols; they worship the work of their own hands, that which their own fingers have made: 9 And the mean man boweth down, and the great man humbleth himself: therefore forgive them not. 5 O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord. 6 Therefore thou hast forsaken thy people the house of Jacob, because they be replenished from the east, and are soothsayers like the Philistines, and they please themselves in the children of strangers. 7 Their land also is full of silver and gold, neither is there any end of their treasures; their land is also full of horses, neither is there any end of their chariots. 8 Their land is also full of idols; they worship the work of their own hands, that which their own fingers have made. 9 And the mean man boweth not down, and the great man humbleth himself not, therefore, forgive him not.

2:5 (2 Nephi 12:5). "Walk in the light of the Lord." Let your paths be illuminated by the revelations or promptings from the Lord. He is your only true source of Light, the "light and the life of the world," who declared, "He that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life." (John 8:12; D&C 45:7; DCE, 324.) The apostle Paul admonished the Saints to "walk as children of light." (Ephesians 5:8.)

2:6 (2 Nephi 12:6)."Replenished from the east." One of the reasons the Lord forsook the house of Israel was that she kept herself supplied or filled with alien or apostate teachings, beliefs contrary to the true and living gospel of the Holy One of Israel. The children of Jacob "mingled among the heathen, and learned their works." (Psalm 106:35.)

2:6 (2 Nephi 12:6)."Soothsayers like the Philistines." As opposed to prophets who told the truth about the future, soothsayers were those who pretended to predict and fore-tell the future. Israel had turned from true prophets to false soothsayers. Mention of the Philistines may have reference to the time when the Israelite king Ahaziah sought help from Baal-zebub, the false god of the Philistine town of Ekron. (2 Kings 1.)

2:6 (2 Nephi 12:6)."They please themselves in the children of strangers." The Hebrew word for please here means, literally, to strike or shake hands. In the context of Isaiah's rebuke, it probably speaks of how the children of Israel had selfishly gone about pleasing themselves, rather than seeking to honor their God. They turned their backs on the God of Israel to make covenants with nonbelievers and agreements not in keeping with their faith. One of these covenants may have been the strongly forbidden practice of marrying those not of their faith.

2:7 (2 Nephi 12:7)."Their land also is full of .Â .Â . treasures; .Â .Â . their land is also full of horses [and] chariots." Isaiah refers here to their reliance on wealth and military power, rather than trusting in and remembering their God.

2:9 (2 Nephi 12:9)."The mean man boweth not down, and the great man humbleth himself not." As noted above, the added text in the Book of Mormon helps makes sense of an otherwise puzzling statement. The pride of the people is such that neither the "mean" (ordinary) man nor the "great" man bows before the true and living God of Israel.

Isaiah 2:10-22 and 2 Nephi 12:10-22

The prophet next lifts his voice against the proud and haughty in the last days. He uses symbols of materialism in his day to illustrate his message. Earthly wealth will be valueless when the Lord comes. Those who have spent their days seeking such transitory treasures will find no security in their possessions. Isaiah concludes with a final plea for the people to cease relying on mortals. The obvious implication is that they must turn to God.

10 Enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty. 11 The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. 12 For the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up; and he shall be brought low: 13 And upon all the cedars of Lebanon, that are high and lifted up, and upon all the oaks of Bashan, 14 And upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills that are lifted up, 15 And upon every high tower, and upon every fenced wall, 16 And upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all pleasant pictures. 17 And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be made low: and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. 18 And the idols he shall utterly abolish. 19 And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth. 20 In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which they made each one for himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats; 21 To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth. 22 Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils: for wherein is he to be accounted of? 10 O ye wicked ones, e nter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust, for the fear of the Lord and the glory of his majesty shall smite thee. 11 And it shall come to pass that t he lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. 12 For the day of the Lord of Hosts soon cometh upon all nations, yea, upon every one; yea, upon the proud and lofty, and upon every one who is lifted up, and he shall be brought low. 13 Yea, and the day of the Lord shall come upon all the cedars of Lebanon, for they are high and lifted up; and upon all the oaks of Bashan; 14 And upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills, and upon all the nations which are lifted up, and upon every people; 15 And upon every high tower, and upon every fenced wall; 16 And upon all the ships of the sea, a nd upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all pleasant pictures. 17 And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be made low; and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. 18 And the idols he shall utterly abolish. 19 And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth, for the fear of the Lord shall come upon them and the glory of his majesty shall smite them, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth. 20 In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which he hath made for himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats; 21 To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for the fear of the Lord shall come upon them and the majesty of his gloryshall smite them, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth. 22 Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils; for wherein is he to be accounted of?

2:10 (2 Nephi 12:10)."O ye wicked ones, enter into therock, and hide thee in the dust." The shame of the sinful will be evident in their countenances as well as in their consciences, and they will seek to hide themselves from the presence and wrath of the Lord. The wicked will cry out "to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover us." (Luke 23:30.) John the Revelator saw this occurrence as one of the signs of the last days. (Revelation 6:15-16.) However, there is no rock large enough, or pit deep enough, to hide them from the Lord. (See Amos 9:3.)

So it is with so-called "secret sins"; they are not hidden from God. One either properly repents of them in this life or faces an ultimate day where they will be revealed. The Lord has given fair warning: "And the rebellious shall be pierced with much sorrow; for their iniquities shall be spoken upon the housetops, and their secret acts shall be revealed." (D&C 1:3; see also 2 Nephi 30:17.)

2:11, 17 (2 Nephi 12:11, 17)."The Lord alone shall be exalted in that day." In the day when the Lord comes, all idols, false gods, and objects of mortal adoration and worship including the rich, famous, and powerful must fall and give way to the One. Only the Holy One of Israel will stand supreme as the object of worship. A messianic psalm declared: "Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the heathen, I will be exalted in the earth." (Psalm 46:10; see also Isaiah 52:6.)

2:12 (2 Nephi 12:12)."The day of the Lord of Hosts." This refers to the second coming of Him who is the God of Israel (1 Chronicles 17:24) and the One who wrought the atonement in behalf of all. His coming will be a great day for the righteous and a dreadful day for the "proud and lofty."

2:13 (2 Nephi 12:13)."The cedars of Lebanon." One of the ways in which the proud will "be brought low" (vs. 12) is the destruction of, or the taking away of, those material possessions they hold so dear. Among these are the "cedars of Lebanon," which provided beautiful, fragrant wood for buildings of status.

2:13 (2 Nephi 12:13)."The oaks of Bashan." Bashan was the area east of Jordan and the Sea of Galilee and north of Gilead. Its wooded areas provided highly prized but scarce hardwood. It too will be taken from the proud.

2:14-15 (2 Nephi 12:14-15)."All the high mountains .Â .Â . all the hills .Â .Â . every high tower, and .Â .Â . every fenced wall." Mention of these barriers or defenses may be an allusion to the fortifications of kings Uzziah and Jotham. (See 2 Chronicles 26:9-10; 27:3-4.) In the great and dreadful day of the Lord, such defenses will provide a false sense of security to the proud and lofty, for they will surely fall.

2:16 (2 Nephi 12:16)."The ships of the sea, and .Â .Â . the ships of Tarshish." The added phrase from the Book of Mormon is also found in the ancient Greek (Septuagint) text. "All the ships of the sea," represent the commercial enterprises of the proud and lofty. Tarshish is believed to be a location in Spain. Her ships were renowned for their strength, size, and ability to successfully complete long voyages. These too will be stripped from the wicked when the Lord returns.

2:16 (2 Nephi 12:16)."Pleasant pictures." Sidney Sperry suggests that this might portray "delightful imagery." (BMC, 178.) Drawing upon more modern translations of the Bible, Victor Ludlow identifies them as "the 'beautiful craft' [that] were apparently the pleasure crafts or ships in which the wealthy traveled throughout the Mediterranean." (IPSP, 91.) J. R. Dummelow states: "The word rendered 'pictures' means something figured or with imagery upon it." He goes on to explain that because of its relation to the mention of ships, it may have reference to "the sails, which were often embroidered with figures in ancient times." (TOVBC, 415.) In any event, the Lord will take away these symbols of pride or power.

2:19 (2 Nephi 12:19)."They shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth." See commentary on 2:10.

2:20 (2 Nephi 12:20)."A man shall cast his idols .Â .Â . to the moles and to the bats." In the day of the Lord, idolaters shall cast away their impotent idols made of precious metals. Victor Ludlow provides this insight: "The imagery of verse 20 is striking: the people will throw their gold and silver idols to moles and bats, animals who are blind from living so long in darkness. The irony of this is that people who understood the material value of the precious metals, and should also have seen the spiritual impotence of the idols, will throw these precious items to animals who will not be able to see them at all." (IPSP, 92.)

2:21 (2 Nephi 12:21)."Go into the clefts of the rocks." See the overview of this chapter.

2:21 (2 Nephi 12:21)."When he ariseth to shake terribly the earth." One of the final events preceding the Second Coming will be a great earthquake. (Revelation 11:11-13.) "This great earthquake, of a magnitude never before recorded on the Richter scale, will be 'such as was not since men were upon the earth.' (Revelation 16:18.) 'The mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep places shall fall.' (Ezekiel 38:20.) 'Every island [shall flee] away' (Revelation 16:20) as the earth's land masses join together (see D&C 133:23; Isaiah 62:4). 'All nations shall be shaken.' (Haggai 2:6-7.)

"The Savior will make His appearance during this earthquake: 'And then shall the Lord set his foot upon this mount [of Olives], and it shall cleave in twain, and the earth shall tremble, and reel to and fro, and the heavens also shall shake.' (D&C 45:48.)" (BICQ, 102 3.)

2:22 (2 Nephi 12:22)."Cease ye from man, .Â .Â . for wherein is he to be accounted of?" "Cease depending on mortal man; he is of little power compared to God." (LDSKJ, Isaiah 2:22, footnote b.)
