Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Chapter 3

Isaiah 3 and 2 Nephi 13

Overview

This chapter focuses on the punishments to be poured out on the wicked and rebellious of Judah and Jerusalem. In fact, only once is an optimistic note of hope found: verse 10 of the Nephite text proclaims, "Say unto the righteous that it is well with them."

Rebellious Judah will suffer physically, spiritually, politically, and socially. Every means of support upon which she relies will be threatened or taken away from her. There are undoubtedly multiple fulfillments of these prophecies, for Jerusalem and the people of Judah were frequently the target of oppressors and aggressors, as was the rest of the house of Israel.

The "daughters of Zion" are particularly criticized by the prophet for their reliance on the ways of the world. Latter-day leaders of the Lord's church have occasionally applied these verses to vain women of our days who get caught up with worldly fashions and ways.

The chapter closes with a description of the woes that will befall the people as a whole.

This chapter of Isaiah should be read in conjunction with the previous and following chapters in order to get the "big picture." While being filled with warnings to the "proud and lofty," Isaiah 2 contains a great deal of hope. Chapter 3, however, presents the down side; focusing on judgments to be poured out on the rebellious. Finally, Isaiah 4 provides the hope of a future redemption for Zion and Jerusalem.

Commentary

Isaiah 3:1-7 2 Nephi13:1-7)

Isaiah speaks of a period of great social chaos and oppression. As noted in the overview, Judah will experience the deprivation of everything on which she depends. There will be a scarcity of food, warriors, and leaders in both the spiritual and political sense. The people will plead for capable leadership but to no avail.

Isaiah 3 1 For, behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts, doth take away from Jerusalem and from Judah the stay and the staff, the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water, 2 The mighty man, and the man of war, the judge, and the prophet, and the prudent, and the ancient, 3 The captain of fifty, and the honourable man, and the counsellor, and the cunning artificer, and the eloquent orator. 4 And I will give children to be their princes, and babes shall rule over them. 5 And the people shall be oppressed, every one by another, and every one by his neighbour: the child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against the honourable. 6 When a man shall take hold of his brother of the house of his father, saying, Thou hast clothing, be thou our ruler, and let this ruin be under thy hand: 7 In that day shall he swear, saying, I will not be an healer; for in my house is neither bread nor clothing: make me not a ruler of the people. 2 Nephi 13 1 For behold, the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, doth take away from Jerusalem, and from Judah, the stay and the staff, the whole staff of bread, and the whole stay of water 2 The mighty man, and the man of war, the judge, and the prophet, and the prudent, and the ancient; 3 The captain of fifty, and the honorable man, and the counselor, and the cunning artificer, and the eloquent orator. 4 And I will give children unto them to be their princes, and babes shall rule over them. 5 And the people shall be oppressed, every one by another, and every one by his neighbor; the child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against the honorable. 6 When a man shall take hold of his brother of the house of his father, and shall say: Thou hast clothing, be thou our ruler, and let not this ruin come under thy hand 7 In that day shall he swear, saying: I will not be a healer; for in my house there is neither bread nor clothing; make me not a ruler of the people.

3:1 (2 Nephi 13:1)."The stay and the staff." One meaning of the word "stay" is "support." "Staff" also bears the connotation of being a "support." In Hebrew, "staff" is the feminine form of the masculine "stay." "By using both forms," noted Victor Ludlow, "Isaiah seems to suggest complete destruction spiritual, social, and physical. Thus, the prophet's language and imagery carry many implications beyond the threat of physical famine. .Â .Â . Removing the staff or support from a nation is analogous to suddenly taking away the props or stakes of a tent the tent collapses shapeless on the ground." (IPSP, 101.) In essence, Judah is threatened with a total collapse of the support products or people upon which she depends.

3:2-3 (2 Nephi 13:2-3)."Mighty man .Â .Â . man of war .Â .Â . [etc.]." When we look at the Hebrew words in this passage, we learn that among those of whom Israel will be deprived are leaders ("mighty man"), warriors and military chiefs ("man of war"), diviners ("prudent"), the elder who holds village office ("ancient"), men of repute ("honorable man"), skilled craftsmen or wise men of magic arts ("cunning artificer"), and the skillful enchanter ("eloquent orator").

3:4 (2 Nephi 13:4)."Children to be their princes." Judah's lack of leadership will be evident with the need to place the young and inexperienced those who lack maturity and understanding in these vital positions. Another possibility is the placement of outsiders in ruling positions over the Jews outsiders who lack an understanding (as children do) of the Jewish culture and religious heritage.

3:4 (2 Nephi 13:4)."Babes shall rule over them." Monte Nyman has given this insight: "With regard to the 'babes' who would rule over them, it should be remembered that Jacob had blessed Judah with the political leadership of all the house of Israel until the birth of Christ (see Genesis 49:8, 10). This leadership, of course, should have been exercised through the priesthood, as shown by the Prophet Joseph Smith in commenting upon the dominion given to Adam (see TPJS, p. 157). For 'babes' (or 'children,' if the word does not refer to the Gentiles) to rule over Judah, they would rule without the priesthood." (GAWI, 34 35.) (Also see the commentary in the preceding paragraph.)

3:5 (2 Nephi 13:5)."The child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient." Children shall act insolently against the elderly.

3:6 (2 Nephi 13:6)."A man shall take hold of his brother .Â .Â . saying .Â .Â . be thou our ruler." Victor Ludlow explains: "These verses are important because they reemphasize both the social breakdown of the patriarchal order and the extreme physical poverty of the state. That the man mentioned here should 'lay hold of his brother in his father's house' indicates, first of all, that the father has disappeared and left the family in upheaval, for the son (by custom, the eldest) refuses to fulfill the duty that is his by lineage. The cloak [clothing], or simlah, which is the brother's so-called claim to power, is not a rich robe but is itself a sign of extreme poverty. In other words, the petitioner is saying, 'You have at least some sort of cloak and the provisions necessary for physical sustenance, food and clothing.' Without eitherphysical or social 'stays,' it is no wonder that the brother declines a position for which he might otherwise be ambitious." (IPSP, 103 4.)

3:7 (2 Nephi 13:7)."I will not be an healer." As noted in the previous paragraph, the brother turns down the proffered position. His reply: "I cannot bind up your wounds or solve your problems. I've got problems of my own." (See LDSKJ, Isaiah 3:7, footnote a.)

Isaiah 3:8-11 and 2 Nephi 13:8-11

The prophet foretells the fall of Jerusalem and Judah because of wickedness so great it actually shows in the countenance of the people. The Nephite text declares "their sin tobe even as Sodom, and they cannot hide it." (13:9.) As noted in the commentary on Isaiah 2:10, no sin will be hidden from the Lord. Isaiah draws a contrast between thewell-being of the righteous and the woe that will come upon the wicked.

8 For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen: because their tongue and their doings are against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his glory. 9 The shew of their countenance doth witness against them; and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their soul! for they have rewarded evil unto themselves. 10 Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him: for they shall eat the fruit of their doings. 11 Woe unto the wicked! it shall be ill with him: for the reward of his hands shall be given him. 8 For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen, because their tongues and their doings have been against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his glory. 9 The show of their countenance doth witness against them, and doth declare their sin to be even as Sodom, and they cannot hide it. Wo unto their souls, for they have rewarded evil unto themselves! 10 Say unto the righteous that it is well with them; for they shall eat the fruit of their doings. 11 Wo unto the wicked, for they shall perish; for the reward of their hands shall be upon them!

3:8 (2 Nephi 13:8)."Their tongue and their doings are against the Lord." The words of their mouths as well as their deeds are both evil.

3:8 (2 Nephi 13:8)."To provoke the eyes of his glory." To rebel against the glory of the Lord, which He stated is "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) While all mortals will receive a resurrected body, thus achieving immortality, only the faithful who have kept all their covenants will receive eternal life. The rebellious disqualify themselves from this latter blessing.

3:9 (2 Nephi 13:9)."The shew of their countenance doth witness against them." When Satan instructed Cain to make an unacceptable offering to the Lord, and it was rejected by Deity, "Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell." His fallen countenance was very evident to the Lord and was, in fact, a witness against Cain's evil intentions; for "Cain loved Satan more than God." (Moses 5:18-22.)

None can hide their feelings, intentions, thoughts, or deeds from God. We either gather light to our countenance through righteousness or we diminish and darken our countenance through sin. Ultimately, our countenance will reflect the degree of eternal glory we will receive.

"To the wicked, who are filled with darkness, one may ask, 'Where is thy glory?' (Moses 1:12-14.) Yet the righteous 'shall shine forth in the kingdom of God' (Alma 40:25), and of them it will be said they are 'glorious beyond description [with a] countenance truly like lightning' (JS H 1:32)." (BICQ, 232-33.)

3:9 (2 Nephi 13:9)."Their sin to be even as Sodom." The wretched residents of Sodom unsuccessfully sought to defile the holy men visiting Lot. (Genesis 19.) Even as the men of Sodom publicly announced their sins, so shall the countenance of the wicked "declare" (show) their sins. Perhaps another meaning to be considered in the context of sins "even as Sodom" is the public campaign by some in these latter days to legalize and make acceptable that which God has declared abominable. (See BICQ, 39-49.)

3:9, 11 (2 Nephi 13:9, 11)."They have rewarded evil unto themselves." The words of the Lamanite prophet, Samuel, provide excellent commentary on how the wicked reward themselves: "If they are condemned they bring upon themselves their own condemnation. And now remember, remember, my brethren, that whosoever perisheth, perisheth unto himself; and whosoever doeth iniquity, doeth it unto himself; for behold, ye are free; ye are permitted to act for yourselves." (Helaman 14:29-30.)

Isaiah 3:12-15 and 2 Nephi 13:12-15

Isaiah laments the lack of proven and trained leadership among the people. In fact, the leaders also lack moral integrity and cause the people to err. This spiritually sicksociety has degenerated socially as well, for the poor and the aged are oppressed and neglected. As a result, the Lord will pass judgment upon the oppressors.

12 As for my people, children are their oppressors, and women rule over them. O my people, they which lead thee cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy paths. 13 The Lord standeth up to plead, and standeth to judge the people. 14 The Lord will enter into judgment with the ancients of his people, and the princes thereof: for ye have eaten up the vineyard; the spoil of the poor is in your houses. 15 What mean ye that y e beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor? saith the Lord God of hosts. 12 And my people, children are their oppressors, and women rule over them, O my people, they who lead thee cause thee to err and destroy the way of thy paths. 13 The Lord standeth up to plead, and standeth to judge the people. 14 The Lord will enter into judgment with the ancients of his people and the princes thereof; for ye have eaten up the vineyard and the spoil of the poor in your houses. 15 What mean ye? Y e beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor, saith the Lord God of Hosts.

3:12 (2 Nephi 13:12)."Children are their oppressors, and women rule over them." Sidney Sperry applied the following meaning to this phrase: "The leaders of the people act like children in maltreating those who come under their rule, and the corrupting influence of their prominent women is also felt. In other words, the leaders of the people are misleaders; they bring about apostasy with their false teachings and exploit the helpless poor." (BMC, 181.)

On the other hand, Victor Ludlow commented that Isaiah is repeating "his earlier warning of social upheaval, suggesting that the leaders will be as weak as or will actually be women, an insult in ancient Israelite culture. This implies a dissolution of the traditional patriarchal social structure that was the norm of the time." (IPSP, 106.)

3:13-14 (2 Nephi 13:13-14)."The Lord .Â .Â . standeth to judge the people." Because Judah's wicked leaders will not properly care for the poor and elderly, the Lord will "plead" (contend) and judge accordingly. He will pass judgment upon the "ancients" (elders, the primary administrators of justice) and the "princes" (royal appointees, rulers, or leaders). They are guilty of having "eaten up" (plundered, pillaged, consumed) the vineyards of the people and the Lord. They have taken the "spoil" (embezzled gain or plunder) of the poor into their own homes. They have beaten (crushed and mistreated) the people in general, and the poor in particular.

3:16-23 and 2 Nephi 13:16-23

These few verses are probably the most scathing criticism of the vanity of some women that have been written. Sidney Sperry provided the following excellent commentary on this section: "Just as the prophet Amos had shown the sad state of Israel by describing its women (Amos 4:1-4) he called them 'cows' so Isaiah now portrays or symbolizes the unfortunate state of the nation by describing the unseemly conduct of 'the daughters of Zion' in their gaudy and extravagant articles of apparel. .Â .Â . We do not know the exact nature of all these articles of apparel, but that fact need not disturb us; we still see the point that Isaiah is trying to make. The Prophet Joseph Smith probably did not change the renderings of these articles of women's clothing, as given in the King James Version, for that very reason.

"The 'daughters of Zion,' representing Israel, strut proudly in their fine clothes and jewels, but the Lord will smite them with disease and exhibit their shame (vss. 16, 17). 'In that day,' the day of the Lord's judgment, they will be stripped of all their finery and be left bareheaded and scantily clad (vss. 18-23.)" (BMC, 181-82.)

16 Moreover the Lord saith, Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet: 17 Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion, and the Lord will discover their secret parts. 18 In that day the Lord will take away the bravery of their tinkling ornaments about their feet, and their cauls, and their round tires like the moon, 19 The chains, and the bracelets, and the mufflers, 20 The bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the headbands, and the tablets, and the earrings. 21 The rings, and nose jewels, 22 The changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the wimples, and the crisping pins, 23 The glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods, and the vails. 16 Moreover, the Lord saith: Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched-forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet 17 Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion, and the Lord will discover their secret parts. 18 In that day the Lord will take away the bravery of their tinkling ornaments, and cauls, and round tires like the moon; 19 The chains and the bracelets, and the mufflers; 20 The bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the headbands, and the tablets, and the ear-rings; 21 The rings, and nose jewels; 22 The changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the wimples, and the crisping-pins; 23 The glasses, and the fine linen, and hoods, and the veils.

3:16 (2 Nephi 13:16)."Walk with stretched forth necks." Heads held high in haughtiness; prideful, not humble.

3:16 (2 Nephi 13:16)."Wanton eyes." Seductive eyes that focus on carnality.

3:16 (2 Nephi 13:16)."Walking and mincing as they go." Walking in an affected manner with short, rapid steps that draw attention to them.

3:16 (2 Nephi 13:16)."Making a tinkling with their feet." Ankle ornaments called bangles were often worn by women in Eastern countries. Sometimes a bell was attached.

3:17 (2 Nephi 13:17)."Smite with a scab the crown of the head." The scab is some sort of itchy rash which will afflict these proud and vain women and detract from the beauty they desire to project. (See Deuteronomy 28:27.)

3:17 (2 Nephi 13:17)."Discover their secret parts." Some modern versions of the Bible render this as "make their foreheads bare" (as a result of the scabs and subsequent loss of hair). In Hebrew the phrase means to expose, meaning to put them to shame.

3:18 (2 Nephi 13:18)."The bravery of their tinkling ornaments." The Lord will take away the glory or beauty of their anklets.

3:18 (2 Nephi 13:18)."Cauls." Possibly hair nets or headbands.

3:18 (2 Nephi 13:18)."Round tires like the moon." Crescent-shaped ornaments.

3:19 (2 Nephi 13:19)."Chains .Â .Â . and the mufflers." The chains are pendants or earrings; the mufflers are veils.

3:20 (2 Nephi 13:20)."Bonnets, .Â .Â . ornaments of the legs, .Â .Â . headbands, and the tablets." Headdresses, ankle chains, sashes, and perfume boxes.

3:22 (2 Nephi 13:22)."Changeable suits of apparel." Festival robes or resplendent garments.

3:22 (2 Nephi 13:22)."Wimples." Cloaks or shawls.

3:22 (2 Nephi 13:22)."Crisping pins." Purses or satchels.

3:23 (2 Nephi 13:23)."Glasses." Two possible meanings are considered. Several commentaries suggest this means polished metal mirrors or looking glasses. However, the footnote in Isaiah states these are "transparent garments." (LDSKJ, Isaiah 3:23, footnote a.)

3:23 (2 Nephi 13:23)."Hoods." Women's turbans.

Isaiah 3:24-26 and 2 Nephi 13:24-26

These last three verses depict a time of ravaging war. Perhaps this is where the women will lose all their finery. The smell of death will be strong and the people will be taken captive. They will mourn their oppressed condition.

24 And it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet smell there shall be stink; and instead of a girdle a rent; and instead of well set hair baldness; and instead of a stomacher a girding of sackcloth; and burning instead of beauty. 25 Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy mighty in the war. 26 And her gates shall lament and mourn; and she being desolate shall sit upon the ground. 24 And it shall come to pass, instead of sweet smell there shall be stink; and instead of a girdle, a rent; and instead of well set hair, baldness; and instead of a stomacher, a girding of sackcloth; burning instead of beauty. 25 Thy men shall fall by the sword and thy mighty in the war. 26 And her gates shall lament and mourn; and she shall be desolate, and shall sit upon the ground.

3:24 (2 Nephi 13:24)."Instead of sweet smell there shall be stink." The stench of dead bodies and rottenness will sicken the air that once was filled with the sweet smell of perfume and pleasing spices.

3:24 (2 Nephi 13:24)."Instead of a girdle a rent." Something that is "rent" is ripped or torn. The "rent" could refer to rags, clothing symbolic of captivity or extreme poverty. Some versions of the Bible use the word rope instead of rent. It may be that girdles will be replaced with ropes of captivity.

3:24 (2 Nephi 13:24)."Instead of well set hair baldness." A bald or shaved head was a symbol of captivity. (See Isaiah 15:2; Ezekiel 7:18. See also commentary on 3:17.)

3:24 (2 Nephi 13:24)."Instead of a stomacher a girding of sackcloth." Sackcloth will replace robes. Sackcloth was a coarse, dark cloth made of the hair of goats or camels. Mourners wore clothing made of sackcloth, and it became symbolic of sorrow.

3:24 (2 Nephi 13:24)."Burning instead of beauty." Branding, once again a mark of captivity and slavery.

3:26 (2 Nephi 13:26)."Her gates shall lament and mourn." As noted elsewhere in this volume, the gates of a city were the public thoroughfares. Here is where public and private business was transacted. Here also is where public displays of lamenting and mourning were exhibited. The site of Jerusalem's gates will be the scene of such a display. (See Lamentations 2:8-10. See also commentary on Isaiah 13:2.)

3:26 (2 Nephi 13:26)."She being desolate shall sit upon the ground." Jerusalem shall virtually be emptied, cleaned out ("desolate"). To sit upon the ground is a posture of mourning.
