Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Chapter 4

Isaiah 4 and 2 Nephi 14

Overview

In his inspired revision or translation of the Bible (JST), the Prophet Joseph Smith placed verse 1 of this chapter as the last verse of the previous chapter, where it more logically fits. Chapter 3 of Isaiah is filled with woe and destruction, whereas chapter 4 focuses on hope and holiness in the millennial day.

Isaiah portrays the beauty of the Lord's Zion. He emphasizes that the future inhabitants of both Zion (the New Jerusalem) and (the old) Jerusalem will be holy. Just as in ancient times, the Lord's canopy will cover His people. His presence will be evident in their homes as well as their places of worship.

Commentary

Isaiah 4:1-6 and 2 Nephi 14:1-6

Isaiah 4 1 And in that day seven women shall take hold of one man, saying, We will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel: only let us be called by thy name, to take away our reproach. 2 In that day shall the branch of the Lord be beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the earth shall be excellent and comely for them that are escaped of Israel. 3 And it shall come to pass, that he that is left in Zion, and he that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem: 4 When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning. 5 And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defence. 6 And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the daytime from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain. 2 Nephi 14 1 And in that day, seven women shall take hold of one man, saying: We will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel; only let us be called by thy name to take away our reproach. 2 In that day shall the branch of the Lord be beautiful and glorious; the fruit of the earth excellent and comely to them that are escaped of Israel. 3 And it shall come to pass, they that are left in Zion and remain in Jerusalem shall be called holy, every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem 4 When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof by the spirit of judgment and by the spirit of burning. 5 And the Lord will create upon every dwelling-place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day and the shining of a flaming fire by night; for upon all the glory of Zion shall be a defence. 6 And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the daytime from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and a covert from storm and from rain.

4:1 (2 Nephi 14:1)."Seven women shall take hold of one man." This scripture is not, as some have supposed, a rallying call for polygamy; but rather it is a description of very adverse conditions. So many men will have been killed in wars (see Isaiah 3:25) that there will be a shortage of eligible marriage partners for single women. "Seven women" (symbolically meaning "many") will propose marriage to "one man." Contrary to law, which requires the husband to provide for the wife (Exodus 21:10), in these desperate times the women will pledge to provide the necessities of life for themselves.

4:1 (2 Nephi 14:1)."Only let us be called by thy name, to take away our reproach." In Near Eastern culture it was considered a disgrace to remain unmarried. Furthermore, for a woman to be childless was considered a great curse. (See Genesis 30:22-24; Luke 1:24-25.) Thus, Isaiah sees desperate women who want to marry to remove the stigma of being unmarried and childless. As an interesting side note, Victor Ludlow suggested the possibility that many men of this future time period might be incapable of fathering children because of sterility caused by exposure to radiation. (IPSP, 109.)

4:2 (2 Nephi 14:2)."The branch of the Lord [shall] be beautiful and glorious." The word "branch" in Hebrew was symbolic of the Messiah. The Branch is the Messiah, even Jesus Christ, He whose "glory def[ies] all description." (JS H 1:17; see also Jeremiah 23:5-6.) In another sense, the "branch" could represent dispersed remnants of the house of Israel who have been redeemed and brought back to the glory of the Lord. (See Isaiah 60:21; 61:3; 2 Nephi 3:5; Jacob 2:25.)

4:2 (2 Nephi 14:2)."The fruit of the earth shall be excellent and comely." This speaks of a time when the earth will be renewed (the paradisiacal glory in the Millennium) and will be "productive, prosperous, and beautiful." (LDSKJ, Isaiah 4:2, footnote c.) It has also been suggested that the "fruit" could represent either the spiritual food provided by the Redeemer or the blessings of the restored gospel.

4:2 (2 Nephi 14:2)."Them that are escaped of Israel." These are the redeemed of Israel, who are relying upon Jesus Christ for sustenance rather than depending on their former captors. (Isaiah 10:20.)

4:3 (2 Nephi 14:3)."They that are left in Zion and remain in Jerusalem." At His coming, the Lord will burn the wicked, leaving only the righteous to dwell on earth during His millennial reign. (JST Matthew 13:41-45.) The inhabitants of Zion and Jerusalem will all be holy.

4:3 (2 Nephi 14:3)."Every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem." Those who are "saved by approval of the Messiah." (LDSKJ, Isaiah 4:3, footnote d.)

4:4 (2 Nephi 14:4)."When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion." When the Lord has cleansed the earth and only the righteous, those who have properly repented, remain.

4:4 (2 Nephi 14:4)."Purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning." All who are unholy will be purged from the earth at the Second Coming. They will be judged, found wanting, and burned or destroyed. (Malachi 3:2; 4:1; JST Matthew 13:29; BICQ, 194 98.)

4:5 (2 Nephi 14:5)."The Lord will create .Â .Â . a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night." The Lord made His presence and protective covering to ancient Israel evident by very visible signs: "And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; to go by day and night." (Exodus 13:21.)

In addition, "the cloud of the Lord was upon the tabernacle [the portable temple in the wilderness] by day, and fire was on it by night." (Exodus 40:38.)

In this future millennial day, the symbolic cloud of smoke and pillar of fire representing the presence of the Lord will not be limited to resting on a temple. As promised, His presence will extend to "every dwelling place [home] of mount Zion and upon her assemblies [places of worship]," for all will be holy places.

4:6 (2 Nephi 14:6)."There shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the daytime from the heat." In that glorious day when literally the whole earth will be Zion ("for this is Zion the pure in heart" [D&C 97:21]), the Lord will shield the people from heat and storm. His protective pavilion will encompass the pure in heart in all places.
