Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Chapter 5

Isaiah 5 and 2 Nephi 15

Overview

This chapter combines a parable, six woes, and future promises of hope. It is viewed as an extension of the previous three chapters and as a transition to Isaiah 6. The chapter can logically be divided into three sections: (1) verses 1-7 describe the parable of the Lord's vineyard; (2) verses 8-25 pronounce six woes upon the wicked; and (3) verses 26-30 prophesy of a future time when the Lord will lift up an ensign to the nations of the world and gather His people.

Commentary

Isaiah 5:1-7 and 2 Nephi 15:1-7

Isaiah commences this chapter with a song or poetic parable in which he portrays his "well-beloved" (the Lord) as having a vineyard (the house of Israel, including those of Judah). It has been unproductive, in spite of having been planted under the best of conditions and having received the best of care. The Lord laments, "What could have been done more to my vineyard that I have not done in it?"

He pronounces judgment upon the vineyard, tearing down its protective fences and leaving it open to predators.

The reader would do well to study this chapter in conjunction with Jacob 5 in the Book of Mormon, where a similar parable or allegory is presented.

Isaiah 5 1 Now will I sing to my wellbeloved a song of my beloved touching his vineyard. My wellbeloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill: 2 And he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with the choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, and also made a winepress therein: and he looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes. 3 And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard. 4 What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it? wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? 5 And now go to; I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard: I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down: 6 And I will lay it waste: it shall not be pruned, nor digged; but there shall come up briers and thorns: I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it. 7 For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant plant: and he looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry. 2 Nephi 15 1 And then will I sing to my well-beloved a song of my beloved, touching his vineyard. My well-beloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill. 2 And he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with the choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, and also made a wine-press therein; and he looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes. 3 And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard. 4 What could have been done more to my vineyard that I have not done in it? Wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth grapes it brought forth wild grapes. 5 And now go to; I will tell you what I will do to my vineyardI will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and I will break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down; 6 And I will lay it waste; it shall not be pruned nor digged; but there shall come up briers and thorns; I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it. 7 For the vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant plant; and he looked for judgment, and behold, oppression; for righteousness, but behold, a cry.

5:2 (2 Nephi 15:2)."Built a tower in the midst of it." Watchtowers were built in the midst of vineyards to keep an eye out for predators or thieves. Monte Nyman suggests this tower "could have been the temple built by Solomon. This inference is drawn from the latter-day parable concerning another tower (temple) which was to be built upon a 'very choice piece of land' (Jackson County, Missouri) but has not yet been built (see D&C 101:43-62)." (GAWI, 42-43.)

5:2 (2 Nephi 15:2)."Made a winepress therein." Two vats used for making wine. In one, the grapes were pressed or trodden under foot to produce the juice, which was collected in the second. The construction of such a device in the midst of the vineyard is indicative of the high expectations the Lord of the vineyard had for a bountiful harvest.

5:2 (2 Nephi 15:2)."It brought forth wild grapes." Although the vineyard was planted with "the choicest vine," which should have produced the sweetest fruit, it produced wild or sour grapes. (See Jeremiah 2:21.) The wild grapes are symbolic of Israel's apostasy.

5:5 (2 Nephi 15:5)."Take away the hedge .Â .Â . and breakdown the wall." The hedge is the inner enclosure, and the wall is the stone fence or outer enclosure protecting the vineyard. The Lord is declaring that His protecting hand is being removed from the house of Israel. (See Psalm 80:12-13.) The consequences of the Lord's absence from apostate Israel are spelled out in verses 5 and 6.

5:7 (2 Nephi 15:7)."He looked for judgment .Â .Â . for righteousness." This verse is the justification for the Lord's actions against the vineyard. He had looked for justice ("judgment") among His people but saw only injustice and bloodshed ("oppression"); He hoped to see righteousness but beheld only riotousness and raucousness. (See LDSKJ, Isaiah 5:7, footnote c.)

Isaiah 5:8-25 and 2 Nephi 15:8-25

Six woes are pronounced upon the people because of their sinfulness. A woe is "a condition of deep suffering from misfortune, affliction, or grief." (DCE, 644.) In this instance, it is the result of the people's following forbidden practices and suffering the consequences.

8 Woe unto them that join house to house, that lay field to field, till there be no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth! 9 In mine ears said the Lord of hosts, Of a truth many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair, without inhabitant. 10 Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and the seed of an homer shall yield an ephah. 11 Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink; that continue until night, till wine inflame them! 12 And the harp, and the viol, the tabret, and pipe, and wine, are in their feasts: but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands. 13 Therefore my people are gone into captivity, because they have no knowledge: and their honourable men are famished, and their multitude dried up with thirst. 14 Therefore hell hath enlarged herself, and opened her mouth without measure: and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoiceth, shall descend into it. 15 And the mean man shall be brought down, and the mighty man shall be humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled: 16 But the Lord of hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and God that is holy shall be sanctified in righteousness. 17 Then shall the lambs feed after their manner, and the waste places of the fat ones shall strangers eat. 18 Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart rope: 19 That say, Let him make speed, and hasten his work, that we may see it: and let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it! 20 Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter! 21 Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight! 22 Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink: 23 Which justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him! 24 Therefore as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumeth the chaff, so their root shall be as rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust: because they have cast away the law of the Lord of hosts, and despised the word of the Holy One of Israel. 25 Therefore is the anger of the Lord kindled against his people, and he hath stretched forth his hand against them, and hath smitten them: and the hills did tremble, and their carcases were torn in the midst of the streets. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. 8 Wo unto them that join house to house, till there can be no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth! 9 In mine ears, said the Lord of Hosts, of a truth many houses shall be desolate, and great and fair cities without inhabitant. 10 Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and the seed of a homer shall yield an ephah. 11 Wo unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink, that continue until night, and wine inflame them! 12 And the harp, and the viol, the tabret, and pipe, and wine are in their feasts; but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands. 13 Therefore, my people are gone into captivity, because they have no knowledge; and their honorable men are famished, and their multitude dried up with thirst. 14 Therefore, hell hath enlarged herself, and opened her mouth without measure; and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoiceth, shall descend into it. 15 And the mean man shall be brought down, and the mighty man shall be humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled. 16 But the Lord of Hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and God that is holy shall be sanctified in righteousness. 17 Then shall the lambs feed after their manner, and the waste places of the fat ones shall strangers eat. 18 Wo unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart rope; 19 That say: Let him make speed, hasten his work, that we may see it; and let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it. 20 Wo unto them that call evil good, and good evil, that put darkness for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter! 21 Wo unto the wise in their own eyes and prudent in their own sight! 22 Wo unto the mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink; 23 Who justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him! 24 Therefore, as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumeth the chaff, their root shall be rottenness, and their blossomsshall go up as dust; because they have cast away the law of the Lord of Hosts, and despised the word of the Holy One of Israel. 25 Therefore, is the anger of the Lord kindled against his people, and he hath stretched forth his hand against them, and hath smitten them; and the hills did tremble, and their carcasses were torn in the midst of the streets. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

5:8 (2 Nephi 15:8)."Woe unto them that join house to house." This woe is pronounced on the wealthy landowners who covet and buy up property, thus depriving the poor of their heritage. (See Micah 2:1-2.) The law of ancient Israel prescribed that land could not "be sold for ever." (Leviticus 25:23; see also 1 Kings 21.) It was to remain within families as a heritage for posterity. When economical circumstances necessitated the sale of land, it was to be returned to the original owners in the year of jubilee, which occurred every fifty years. (LDSBD, "Jubilee, Year of," p. 718.)

Another interpretation of this verse has been posited by Monte Nyman. He believes this expression is an indictment of the socialistic practice of a central government controlling the property. Such a system would prevent Zion from being established because it would eliminate the possibility of practicing the law of stewardship and consecration. (GAWI, 43-44.)

5:8 (2 Nephi 15:8)."Till there be no place, that they may be placed." The wealthy landowners leave no place for the poor to dwell alone (in their own home), or without indenture to another.

5:9 (2 Nephi 15:9)."Many houses shall be desolate." The pronounced woe will take the homes from the wealthy land-grabbers.

5:10 (2 Nephi 15:10)."Ten acres .Â .Â . one bath .Â .Â . a homer .Â .Â . an ephah." The lands of the wealthy will become extremely unproductive. Ten acres represents the amount of land that ten yoke of oxen can plow in a day, or the equivalent of five acres of land by our modern measurement. From this acreage, the yield will be only one bath (four to eight gallons of wine). One homer of seed (about six bushels) will yield only an ephah of produce (four to six gallons of dry measure).

5:11 (2 Nephi 15:11)."Woe unto them that rise up early [to consume] strong drink." This second woe condemns drunkenness and riotous living. Wise Solomon said it well when he stated, "Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? .Â .Â . They that tarry long at the wine." (Proverbs 23:29-30.) This woe is not confined to drunks, but is an indictment of all who insatiably pursue raucous and riotous living. They pursue pleasure ("in their feasts") from "early in the morning .Â .Â . until night .Â .Â . but they regard not the work of the Lord."

5:12 (2 Nephi 15:12)."The harp, and the viol, the tabret, and pipe." The pleasure seekers will fill their feasts and places of entertainment with the music of the world. The instruments cited "viol" (a lyre or lute a hand-held stringed instrument), "tabret" (a small drum), "pipe" (flute) are simply symbolic of the worldly merriment associated with the people's pursuit of pleasure.

5:13 (2 Nephi 15:13)."My people are gone into captivity, because they have no knowledge." Because of their wayward-ness, the people have gone into spiritual bondage. They lack knowledge of God and His ways. The Lord declared, "It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance." (D&C 131:6.) In ignorance of what? The things of God! The apostle Paul wrote, "The things of God knoweth no man except he has the Spirit of God." (JST 1 Corinthians 2:11.)

5:13 (2 Nephi 15:13)."Their honourable men are fam-ished .Â .Â . their multitude dried up with thirst." The leaders ("honourable men") and the masses ("multitude") are without spiritual food or water. We recall the words of Jesus during His mortal ministry: "I am the bread of life: he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst." (John 6:35; see also John 4:14.)

5:14 (2 Nephi 15:14)."Therefore, hell hath enlarged herself." Because of the spiritual famine, many will leave this life without the saving knowledge needed to keep them from the captivity of spirit prison. Therefore, the numbers in hell (the spirit prison) have swelled.

5:15 (2 Nephi 15:15)."The mean man .Â .Â . and the mighty man." Both the ordinary or common ("mean") man and the man of position or wealth ("mighty") shall be humbled. The Lord does not distinguish between the wealthy and the poor, only between the wicked and the righteous. The haughty shall be humbled.

5:16 (2 Nephi 15:16)."The Lord of Hosts shall be exalted .Â .Â . shall be sanctified." The Lord is exalted in justice and He is sanctified in righteousness.

5:17 (2 Nephi 15:17)."The waste places of the fat ones shall strangers eat." Some commentaries suggest this verse should be placed next to verse 10. It is probably a reference to the desolate condition of the lands once inhabited by the wealthy. Rather than producing bountiful crops, their lands will provide forage for lambs and young goats or strangers. (The word "strangers" appears as "aliens" in early Hebrew texts while the Greek Septuagint uses "young goats.")

5:18 (2 Nephi 15:18)."Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity." This woe is pronounced on those who are yoked to falsehoods and sin as an animal is to a cart. They are tethered to this heavy burden, pulling it wherever they go.

5:19 (2 Nephi 15:19)."Let him make speed, and hasten his work, that we may see it." The woe is also pronounced upon the scoffers, who demand immediate fulfillment of prophecy. The apostle Peter saw such sign seekers in the last days, who shall say, "Where is the promise of his coming?" (2 Peter 3:1-4.) These disbelievers echo the words of others before their time who similarly mocked the faithful: "But there were some who began to say that the time was past for the words to be fulfilled. .Â .Â . And they began to rejoice .Â .Â . [and] make a great uproar throughout the land." (3 Nephi 1:5-7.)

5:20 (2 Nephi 15:20)."Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil." This woe is pronounced upon those who would pervert standards of morality and decency. They seek man's approval of that which God has condemned and disdain that which is good. They have been successful in getting legislation passed to make such perversion legal and acceptable by society. Immoral practices are called "alternate lifestyles" by those who practice them, and they label those who courageously speak against them as "radicals" or "narrow-minded bigots." A prophet of God, President Spencer W. Kimball, declared: "The fact that some governments and some churches and numerous corrupted individuals have tried to reduce such behavior from criminal offense to personal privilege does not change the nature nor the seriousness of the practice." (Ensign, November 1980, p. 97; see also BICQ, 38-51.)

Others upon whom this woe is pronounced are those who "lift up the heel against" the Lord's servants, "and cry they have sinned when they have not sinned." The Lord tells us that those who make such false accusations "do it because they are the servants of sin, and are the children of disobedience themselves." (D&C 121:16-17.)

5:21 (2 Nephi 15:21)."Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight!" This woe is pronounced on those who reject the wisdom of God for their own learning. Jacob described and warned against such arrogance: "O the vainness, and the frailties, and the foolishness of men! When they are learned they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not. And they shall perish." (2 Nephi 9:28; see also 2 Nephi 28:15.)

5:23 (2 Nephi 15:23)."Who justify the wicked for reward." This refers to those who take bribes. Because this statement immediately follows a woe pronounced against drunkenness, one wonders if Isaiah saw those well-known figures in sports, entertainment, or other positions of notoriety who accept payment for endorsing harmful products such as alcohol.

5:23 (2 Nephi 15:23)."Take away the righteousness of the righteous." At least two scholars suggest this refers to those who deprive the innocent of their legal rights. (BMC, 190; IPSP, 120.) It may also have reference to those who take away another's innocence or lead the righteous astray.

5:24 (2 Nephi 15:24)."As the fire devoureth the stubble." The Lord Jesus Christ declared that at His coming, "all the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, for I am the Lord of Hosts; and I will not spare any that remain in Babylon." (D&C 64:24; see also BICQ, 194-98.)

5:25 (2 Nephi 15:25)."The anger of the Lord." The Lord does not become angry in the sense that mortals understand the word. His anger is divine indignation that applies the laws of justice where necessary. (See DCE, 18.)

5:25 (2 Nephi 15:25)."And the hills did tremble, and their carcases were torn in the midst of the streets." Any who have watched the devastation of war on a news program, or seen graphic pictures of mutilated bodies torn asunder by artillery shells, rockets, or falling bombs, have perhaps had a glimpse of what Isaiah saw. In any event, the prophet foresaw terrible scenes of destruction brought about because of the wickedness of the people.

5:25 (2 Nephi 15:25)."His hand is stretched out still." Some interpret this phrase to mean that God is continuing to mete out punishment. However, another possible meaning is that He is ever reaching out to the repentant, inviting their return. (Also see commentary on Isaiah 9:12 and 10:4.)

Isaiah 5:26-30 and 2 Nephi 15:26-30

Isaiah now speaks words of encouragement. In the last days the Lord "will lift up an ensign to the nations from far." Those who gather to this ensign will come quickly and with power. They will do so amidst contrasting conditions of light and darkness or good and evil.

A secondary interpretation of these verses focuses on the Assyrian invasion of Israel in 722-721 b.c. Commentators who subscribe to this belief identify the speed with which the Assyrian soldiers invaded the land and the quick destruction they brought about. Nevertheless, the major focus of these verses appears to align itself more closely with events of the last days.

26 And he will lift up an ensign to the nations from far, and will hiss unto them from the end of the earth: and, behold, they shall come with speed swiftly: 27 None shall be weary nor stumble among them; n one shall slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken: 28 Whose arrows are sharp, and all their bows bent, their horses' hoofs shall be counted like flint, and their wheels like a whirlwind: 29 Their roaring shall be like a lion, they shall roar like young lions; yea, they shall roar, and lay hold of the prey, and shall carry it away safe, and none shall deliver it. 30 And in that day they shall roar against them like the roaring of the sea: and if one look unto the land, behold darkness and sorrow, and the light is darkened in the heavens thereof. 26 And he will lift up an ensign to the nations from far, and will hiss unto them from the end of the earth; and behold, they shall come with speed swiftly;[Begin Isaiah 5:27.] none shall be weary nor stumble among them. 27 None shall slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken; 28 Whose arrows shall be sharp, and all their bows bent, and their horses' hoofs shall be counted like flint, and their wheels like a whirlwind,[Begin Isaiah 5:29.] their roaring like a lion. 29 They shall roar like young lions; yea, they shall roar, and lay hold of the prey, and shall carry away safe, and none shall deliver. 30 And in that day they shall roar against them like the roaring of the sea; and if they look unto the land, behold, darkness and sorrow, and the light is darkened in the heavens thereof.

5:26 (2 Nephi 15:26)."An ensign to the nations." Elder Marion G. Romney declared: "This Church [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] is the standard which Isaiah said the Lord would set up for the people in the latter days. .Â .Â . This Church is the ensign on the mountain spoken of by the Old Testament prophets." (CR, April 1961, p. 119.)

Victor Ludlow provides a variety of possible interpretations of "ensign," including the scriptural justification for each. He concludes by saying, "we see that an ensign in the last days can refer to Zion, the gospel, missionary work, the gathering, and the Book of Mormon. . . . In short, the term ensign encompasses the Lord's whole work, and all aspects of his Church serve as his 'standard' to the world." (IPSP, 122-23; see also D&C 115:5-6; commentary on Isaiah 49:22 and Isaiah 11:10, 12 in this volume.)

5:26 (2 Nephi 15:26)."Hiss unto them from the end of the earth." To "hiss" is to whistle or summon. It is a signal to all quarters of the earth for the gathering. (In the context of 2 Nephi 29:2 it means to go forth.)

5:26-27 (2 Nephi 15:26-27)."They shall come with speed swiftly .Â .Â . none shall slumber .Â .Â . nor [shall] the latchet of their shoes be broken." Whereas ancient travel often took many days or weeks, the future gathering will be so swift the travelers won't need to camp for the night, nor will they wear out their clothing and sandals during the trip.

5:28-29 (2 Nephi 15:28)."Whose arrows are sharp, .Â .Â . their wheels like a whirlwind: Their roaring shall be like a lion." Elder LeGrand Richards has provided excellent commentary on these verses: "Since there were no such things as trains and airplanes in that day, Isaiah could hardly have mentioned them by name, but he seems to have described them in unmistakable words. How better could 'their horses' hoofs be counted like flint, and their wheel like a whirlwind' than in the modern train? How better could 'Their roaring .Â .Â . be like a lion' than in the roar of the airplane?" (MWW, 236.) To Isaiah, these future modes of transportation probably looked like great beasts which took their prey (passengers) to a safe destination.

At least one author suggests this may also depict missionaries traveling to the ends of the earth to gather converts who are safely enfolded within Zion's tent. (IPSP, 123.)

5:30 (2 Nephi 15:30)."Behold darkness and sorrow, and the light is darkened in the heavens." Victor Ludlow stated: "The 'darkness and sorrow' might refer either to physical or spiritual conditions as destruction and apostasy rage upon the earth. The light 'darkened in the heavens' seems to suggest the gospel or the Messiah himself coming forth out of obscure darkness." (IPSP, 123-24.)
