Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Chapter 6

Isaiah 6 and 2 Nephi 16

Overview

This chapter describes Isaiah's call to the ministry and the great vision that accompanied it. Logically, the chapter should probably be the first book in Isaiah's writings, for it not only includes his call but the charge that was given him. Possible reasons for its present placement are described by Victor Ludlow:

"There are many possible explanations as to why this sixth chapter of Isaiah is not placed at the head of his writings. Perhaps Isaiah wanted to introduce his message before he introduced himself; after delivering the important pronouncements found in the first five chapters, he wanted to provide a seal for his words by testifying concerning his prophetic authority. Or, it may even be that the vision and calling recorded in chapter 6 came to Isaiah after the visions of the first few chapters.

"Or, chapter 6 may be where it is to bridge the two major segments of his opening chapters. The first section of Isaiah, chapters 1-12, contains two major themes: the unrighteousness of the Israelites, and the promise of a new Zion in the last days. The first five chapters emphasize Israel's separation from the 'master of the vineyard,' while chapters 7-12 promise deliverance and the millennial day. Both themes are epitomized by Isaiah himself in chapter 6; he fears the Lord's judgment because of his own sins and yet is willing to serve the Lord because he knows that a latter-day remnant of Israel will believe and understand his prophecies." (IPSP, 126-27.)

Sidney Sperry stated that Nephi included this particular chapter of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon because he probably "wanted his people to know about Isaiah's personal testimony that he had seen and talked to the pre-existent Christ." (BMC, 193; see also 2 Nephi 11:2-3.)

Commentary

Isaiah 6:1-4 and 2 Nephi 16:1-4

As have prophets both before his time and since, Isaiah saw the Lord: He who was Jehovah of the Old Testament and who would become Jesus the Christ of the New Testament. The prophet saw the Lord's robe, throne, and some of the heavenly creatures crying holiness to His name.

Isaiah 6 1 In the year that king Uzziah died I saw also the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the temple. 2 Above it stood the seraphims: each one had six wings; with twain he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly. 3 And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory. 4 And the posts of the door moved at the voice of him that cried, and the house was filled with smoke. 2 Nephi 16 1 In the year that king Uzziah died, I saw also the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the temple. 2 Above it stood the seraphim; each one had six wings; with twain he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly. 3 And one cried unto another, and said: Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts; the whole earth is full of his glory. 4 And the posts of the door moved at the voice of him that cried, and the house was filled with smoke.

6:1 (2 Nephi 16:1)."In the year that king Uzziah died." This king reigned over Judah for fifty years and died around 750 b.c.

6:1 (2 Nephi 16:1)."His train filled the temple." In his vision of the Lord of Hosts, Isaiah describes the hem or skirts ("train") of Jehovah's garment as filling the temple in which He sat on a resplendent throne.

6:2-3 (2 Nephi 16:2-3)."The seraphims." The Book of Mormon provides the correct rendering, "seraphim." Seraph is singular and seraphs or seraphim plural. Perhaps these unusual six-winged creatures seen by Isaiah have some association with the strange beasts John the Revelator saw near the throne of God. (Revelation 4:2-10; 5:11-14.) Joseph Smith explained that wings of the latter beasts "are a representation of power, to move, to act, etc." (D&C 77:2-4.) The Prophet further stated: "John heard the words of the beasts giving glory to God, and understood them. God who made the beasts could understand every language spoken by them." (TPJS, 291-92.)

In his dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple, the Prophet pleaded that the Saints might have power to "mingle our voices with those bright, shining seraphs around thy throne, with acclamations of praise, singing Hosanna to God and the Lamb!" (D&C 109:79.) His description of "shining seraphs" is consistent with the Hebrew root of seraph, which is "burning." Thus, seraphs are burning (shining) or fiery beings. (See LDSBD, "Seraphim," p. 771.)

Joseph Smith described the heavenly messenger Moroni as having a "countenance truly like lightning." (JS H 1:32.) Oliver Cowdery gave a similar description of the resurrected John the Baptist. (JS-H 1: note, p. 59.) It seems logical that the "seraphic hosts of heaven" (D&C 38:1) could be a combination of glorious, shining beings who represent saved beings from both the human and animal kingdoms. (See also DCE, 508-9.)

6:4 (2 Nephi 16:4)."The posts of the door moved." The foundations of the threshold moved or trembled. "These could be the posts of the doorway leading into the Holy of Holies of the Jerusalem temple, or the heavenly doorway that leads into God's presence. In either case, that there is a door or gateway into the divine presence is a concept that is also suggested in other scriptures. (John 10; 2 Ne. 9:41; Isa. 22:22.)" (IPSP, 130.)

6:4 (2 Nephi 16:4)."The house was filled with smoke." Symbolically, God's presence was seen and felt when He covered Mount Sinai with smoke. (Exodus 19:18.) The sacred slopes of Sinai thus became a temple to Moses. Perhaps experiencing something similar to Isaiah, John saw "the temple .Â .Â . filled with smoke from the glory of God." (Revelation 15:8.)

Isaiah 6:5-8 and 2 Nephi 16:5-8

Isaiah agonized over his own felt unworthiness, as well as that of the people to whom he was called to minister. The Lord knew his heart and mind and purged him of his sins, following which Isaiah boldly stepped forward to answer the call to serve.

5 Then said I, Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts. 6 Then flew one of the seraphimsunto me, having a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar: 7 And he laid it upon my mouth, and said, Lo, this hath touched thy lips; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged. 8 Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? Then said I, Here am I; send me. 5 Then said I: Wo is unto me! for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips; and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips; for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts. 6 Then flew one of the seraphim unto me, having a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar; 7 And he laid it upon my mouth, and said: Lo, this has touched thy lips; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged. 8 Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying: Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? Then I said: Here am I; send me.

6:5 (2 Nephi 16:5)."Then said I, Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips." Isaiah's call to the ministry kindled within him a desire to be totally worthy of his call. He felt "undone" (cut off or lost) because he sensed the personal shortcomings in his less than perfect life. His self-evaluation is reminiscent of the process many go through when called to serve: "Who am I that the Lord should give me such a special assignment?" (See, for example, Enoch's response in Moses 6:31.)

6:5 (2 Nephi 16:5)."I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips." In addition to being aware of his own faults, the prophet was very much aware of the sins of the people among whom he lived.

6:6-7 (2 Nephi 16:6-7)."A live coal .Â .Â . from off the altar .Â .Â . he laid .Â .Â . upon my mouth." The "live coal" was a symbol of God's cleansing power. Through its touch, Isaiah's sins were "purged" and he was sanctified to perform God's work. The "live [hot] coal" could well be symbolic of being "cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost," which, or course, was made possible through the Atonement. (Moroni 6:4.) The altar Isaiah saw was probably the altar of incense inside the temple. The Hebrew word for "live coal" is ritzpah, translated as a "glowing (incandescent) stone." (See IPSP, 131.)

6:8 (2 Nephi 16:8)."I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send." While there are messianic overtones in both the question of the Lord and in the prophet's response, "Here am I," (compare Abraham 3:27), the direct application is to Isaiah's willingness to serve. His initial, but brief, hesitancy to serve was not based on his lack of faith in God's power, but only because of his own feelings of unworthiness. Once being assured he was cleansed and worthy to serve, he stepped to the forefront. Isaiah's response reminds one of Nephi's declaration regarding a difficult assignment given him. (See 1 Nephi 3:7.)

Isaiah 6:9-13 and 2 Nephi 16:9-13

The Lord gives Isaiah his charge to call the people to repentance, but ironically tells the prophet his efforts will be fruitless. The changed text in the Book of Mormon as well as other scriptural commentary provides understanding for otherwise difficult passages in verses 9 and 10.

Isaiah asks the Lord how long the hardhearted people will reject the message. The Lord's answer is not comforting. Yet, the final verse of the chapter gives hope that there will yet be a remnant of the people who will be redeemed.

9 And he said, Go, and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not. 10 Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed. 11 Then said I, Lord, how long? And he answered, Until the cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate, 12 And the Lord have removed men far away, and there be a great forsaking in the midst of the land. 13 But yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and shall be eaten: as a teil tree, and as an oak, whose substance is in them, when they cast their leaves: so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof. 9 And he said: Go and tell this peopleHear ye indeed, but they understood not; and see ye indeed, but they perceivednot. 10 Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and be converted and be healed. 11 Then said I: Lord, how long? And he said: Until the cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate; 12 And the Lord have removed men far away, for there shall be a great forsaking in the midst of the land. 13 But yet there shall be a tenth, and they shall return, and shall be eaten, as a teil-tree and as an oak whose substance is in them when they cast their leaves; so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof.

6:9 (2 Nephi 16:9)."Tell this people Hear ye indeed, but they understood not." As noted above, the Nephite text makes clear that the Lord is not giving the people an impossible task by asking them to do something and then preventing them from doing it. It is the people who are at fault, obstinately refusing to respond to the divine requests. Another aspect of one's inability to understand the word of the Lord is lack of spiritual depth. Some simply do not have the spiritual maturity to recognize the light that is available. The Savior referenced this passage in Isaiah during His mortal ministry. (See JST Matthew 13:12-15; Luke 8:10.)

6:10 (2 Nephi 16:10)."Make the heart of this people fat." This statement describes the consequence of the people's rejection of Isaiah's message, not its purpose. The heart was regarded by the Hebrew people as the seat of understanding. The hearts of the wicked would be hardened or become insensitive to Isaiah's message. "Just as the hardening of one's physical heart's arteries can cause death to the body, so, in like manner, can the hardening of one's spiritual arteries lead to spiritual death." (DCE, 230.)

6:10 (2 Nephi 16:10)."Make their ears heavy." Ears that are heavy are ears that are deaf. The people don't "open their ears to hear" (see 3 Nephi 11:3-5) and consequently don't understand the message given. Again, this is a consequence of the people's rejection of the prophet's message.

6:10 (2 Nephi 16:10)."Be converted and be healed." Spiritual healing comes through repenting and turning to God. One cannot be cured of the sickness caused by sin without the intervention and mercy of the great Healer, Jesus Christ. Conversion requires change, turning away from the ways of the world and turning towards the will of God.

6:11 (2 Nephi 16:11)."Then said I, Lord, how long? And he answered, Until the cities be wasted without inhabitant." "The prophet wonders how long men will be so [rebellious and hardhearted], and the Lord answers: until mortal man is no more." (LDSKJ, Isaiah 6:11, footnote 11a.)

6:13 (2 Nephi 16:13)."Yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return." This may be symbolic of the Lord's portion a tithe. Only those who will be(desire to be and live accordingly) the Lord's people will return or be gathered in with the redeemed of the Lord. The number of these returnees will be but a fraction ("a tenth") of the original group. (See Amos 5:3.)

6:13 (2 Nephi 16:13)."And shall be eaten, as a teil tree and as an oak whose substance is in them when they cast their leaves." Although the branches of Israel will have been broken off the main tree and scattered casting off their dead and dried up leaves the stump of the tree will yet produce edible fruit. According to the parable of the vineyard (see Jacob 5), scattered branches will be grafted into the original tree and its stump will produce good (edible) fruit. The potential to produce life ("substance") remains in the old tree. Teil tree, as used in this context, is "a rare English word for lime or linden tree. .Â .Â . Elsewhere the Heb[rew] word used is incorrectly translated [as] oak." (LDSBD, p. 780.)

6:13 (2 Nephi 16:13)."The holy seed." The consecrated remnant of Israel that will return and produce a new generation of believers. The Lord declared unto Israel, "thou art an holy people." (Deuteronomy 7:6.)
