Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Chapter 7

Isaiah 7 and 2 Nephi 17

Overview

Perhaps the main message of this chapter is that we must trust in God and His promises of protection in spite of the threats of mortals. Isaiah sought unsuccessfully to teach this to Ahaz, king of Judah. At this time, the southern king-dom of Judah was threatened by an alliance of the northern kingdom of Israel with Syria. The kings of these two coun-tries wanted Ahaz to join them in an alliance against the Assyrians, but the king of Judah decided to cast his lot with the Assyrians.

In verse 3, the Lord sends Isaiah to counsel Ahaz against entering any alliances; instead, he is to depend on the protection of the God of Israel. Isaiah prophesies that the threat from the northern kingdom and from Syria will come to naught and that these two countries will be the ones that will be destroyed.

The Lord offers to give the disbelieving Ahaz a sign of the verity of His words, but the king refuses to ask for confirmation of the prophecy. The Lord gives the king a sign anyway: a sign involving the future birth of the Messiah through the house of David.

Because of rejecting divine counsel, Judah suffers consequences that could have been avoided. The people are oppressed, scattered, and taken into slavery. The once-fertile lands are left barren of crops and become useful only for wandering animals.

Commentary

Isaiah 7:1-9 and 2 Nephi 17:1-9

At this point in the book of Isaiah, the kingdom of Judah (the southern kingdom) is undergoing a great deal of turmoil. The capital city has been attacked, although unsuccessfully, by the kings of Israel (the northern kingdom) and Syria. The invading kings' desire is to place a puppet ruler over Judah, one who would be responsive to their desire to form a solid anti-Assyrian block. Seemingly concerned about the city's water supply, Ahaz is evidently inspecting it when he is approached by the prophet Isaiah, accompanied by his son, with a message from the Lord. Ahaz is told not to worry about the alliance of his enemies, for it will be broken ("It shall not stand") and their plans of invasion will not succeed ("neither shall it come to pass").

Isaiah 7 1 And it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, that Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, went up toward Jerusalem to war against it, but could not prevail against it. 2 And it was told the house of David, saying, Syria is confederate with Ephraim. And his heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind. 3 Then said the Lord unto Isaiah, Go forth now to meet Ahaz, thou, and Shear-jashub thy son, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the fuller's field; 4 And say unto him, Take heed, and be quiet; fear not, neither be fainthearted for the two tails of these smoking firebrands, for the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria, and of the son of Remaliah. 5 Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah, have taken evil counsel against thee, saying, 6 Let us go up against Judah, and vex it, and let us make a breach therein for us, and set a king in the midst of it, even the son of Tabeal: 7 Thus saith the Lord God, It shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass. 8 For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin; and within threescore and five years shall Ephraim be broken, that it be not a people. 9 And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is Remaliah's son. If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established. 2 Nephi 17 1 And it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, that Rezin, king of Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, went up toward Jerusalem to war against it, but could not prevail against it. 2 And it was told the house of David, saying: Syria is confederate with Ephraim. And his heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind. 3 Then said the Lord unto Isaiah: Go forth now to meet Ahaz, thou and Shearjashub thy son, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the fuller's field; 4 And say unto him: Take heed, and be quiet; fear not, neither be faint-hearted for the two tails of these smoking firebrands, for the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria, and of the son of Remaliah. 5 Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah, have taken evil counsel against thee, saying: 6 Let us go up against Judah and vex it, and let us make a breach therein for us, and set a king in the midst of it, yea, the son of Tabeal. 7 Thus saith the Lord God: It shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass. 8 For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus, Rezin; and within three score and five years shall Ephraim be broken that it be not a people. 9 And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is Remaliah's son. If ye will not believe surely ye shall not be established.

7:2 (2 Nephi 17:2)."The house of David." The king and royal court of Judah.

7:2 (2 Nephi 17:2)."Syria is confederate with Ephraim." Syria has entered into an alliance with Ephraim (the dominant tribe of the northern kingdom of Israel).

7:2 (2 Nephi 17:2)."His heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind." The king's heart trembled with fear, as did the hearts of his people, upon hearing of the Ephraim-Syria confederacy. They shook as trees swaying in the wind.

7:3 (2 Nephi 17:3)."Shear-jashub thy son." One of two known sons of Isaiah, his name means "the remnant shall return." The reason for the son's presence on this occasion has been suggested by Monte Nyman: "It may have been to remind Ahaz of the prophecy that Judah would not be utterly destroyed, or it may have been a reminder that the Lord had prophesied concerning Judah in order to prepare Ahaz for the prophecy which Isaiah was to deliver." (GAWI, 54.)

7:3 (2 Nephi 17:3)."The conduit of the upper pool." The canal, aqueduct, or tunnel that carried the water supply into the city. (See 2 Kings 20:20.) Controlling this source of water appears to have been a major objective of the invading armies. (See 2 Kings 18:17; Isaiah 36:2.)

7:3 (2 Nephi 17:3)."In the highway of the fuller's field." "By way of the launderers' field near the stream below the pool of Siloam." (LDSKJ, Isaiah 7:3, footnote c.) Fullers were those who cleansed and whitened garments in large tubs.

7:4 (2 Nephi 17:4)."The two tails of these smoking firebrands." Judah's king is told not to fear his enemies King Rezin of Syria and King Pekah ("the son of Remaliah") of Israel. A firebrand is a torch. When the fire is spent, smoke is all that is left. Isaiah tells Ahaz that his two enemies have little fire left in them.

7:5 (2 Nephi 17:5)."Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah." Ephraim was the lead tribe of the northern kingdom and Pekah was the king. Isaiah appears to show his disdain for King Pekah by not mentioning his name, referring to him as "the son of Remaliah." That Pekah deserved this scorn is evident by this description of him: "And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord: he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam .Â .Â . , who made Israel to sin." (2 Kings 15:28.)

7:6 (2 Nephi 17:6)."Let us make a breach therein for us, and set a king in the midst of it, even the son of Tabeal." The two enemy kings, Pekah and Rezin, desired to conquer Judah and divide it up. They proposed placing a puppet king ("the son of Tabeal") on Judah's throne. They obviously had confidence in their ability to control this proposed king.

7:8 (2 Nephi 17:8)."The head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin." Damascus is the capital city of Syria and King Rezin is head of the government.

7:8 (2 Nephi 17:8)."Within threescore and five years shall Ephraim be broken, that it be not a people." Victor Ludlow explains: "In this prophecy, Isaiah promises that the Syro-Israelite alliance will fail and that Israel will be scattered within sixty-five years. The fulfillment came about in successive stages. First, Tiglath-Pileser III (Pul) attacked Syria and Israel in 732 b.c. and took many Israelites captive to Assyria, especially those from the northern tribes. Secondly, in 730-727, Pul annexed the Transjordan area and deported large numbers of the Israelite tribes from that area to the far reaches of the Assyrian Empire. Third, in 726, Hoshea refused to pay Assyrian tribute, and Pul's successor, Shalmaneser, retaliated by attacking Israel and besieging Samaria, which fell in 722 b.c. Thus, within a dozen years of Isaiah's prophecy, the alliance had completely failed, and three major groups of Israelites had been deported. Finally, large groups of the Israelites fled from Assyria to the remote areas northward and became the lost Ten Tribes of Israel. Apparently, within about fifty years of their leaving Assyria, they were scattered so widely that many of them no longer existed as a cohesive group. Thereby Isaiah's prophecy to Ephraim was completely realized." (IPSP, 141-42.)

7:9 (2 Nephi 17:9)."The head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is Remaliah's son." Samaria is the capital of the northern kingdom ("Ephraim"), and King Pekah ("Remaliah's son") is the head of the government.

7:9 (2 Nephi 17:9)."If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established." "If you lack faith, you will not be saved." (LDSKJ, Isaiah 7:9, footnote b.)

Isaiah 7:10-16 and 2 Nephi 17:10-16

Evidently King Ahaz had little faith in the promise of verse 9, for Isaiah followed with a challenge from the Lord. The king was invited to ask for a sign designed to build his faith in God's power to save. Ahaz rejected the invitation, not because he was fearful of "tempting" the Lord but because he had already put his trust in "the arm of flesh" of the Assyrians. He simply did not want to "try" the Lord or "prove" the power of God's word.

Isaiah gave the king a divine sign involving the future birth of the Messiah, who would come from the royal house of David. The prophet further prophesied that Judah would be rid of the two kings who were then tormenting her.

10 Moreover the Lord spake again unto Ahaz, saying, 11 Ask thee a sign of the Lord thy God; ask it either in the depth, or in the height above. 12 But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord. 13 And he said, Hear ye now, O house of David; Is it a small thing for you to weary men, but will ye weary my God also? 14 Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel. 15 Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil, and choose the good. 16 For before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her kings. 10 Moreover, the Lord spake again unto Ahaz, saying: 11 Ask thee a sign of the Lord thy God; ask it either in the depths, or in the heightsabove. 12 But Ahaz said: I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord. 13 And he said: Hear ye now, O house of David; is it a small thing for you to weary men, but will ye weary my God also? 14 Therefore, the Lord himself shall give you a signBehold, a virgin shall conceive, and shall bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel. 15 Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil and to choose the good. 16 For before the child shall know to refuse the evil and choose the good, the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her kings.

7:11 (2 Nephi 17:11)."Ask thee a sign." Some ask, how does this request that Ahaz ask for a sign comport with the scriptural injunction that one should not seek for signs? (See Matthew 12:39; Isaiah 5:18-19.) Foremost, it was the Lord who offered to provide a sign. Additionally, there have been occasions when, for His purposes, the Lord has willingly provided such signs. (See Judges 6:36-40.) In latter-day revelation the Savior said: "Yea, signs come by faith, not by the will of men, nor as they please, but by the will of God." (D&C 63:10; italics added.)

7:11 (2 Nephi 17:11)."Either in the depth, or in the height above." Ahaz is told he can ask for his sign to be shown from the depths of Sheol, or the world of departed spirits, to the heights of the heavens above.

7:13 (2 Nephi 17:13)."You [are willing to] .Â .Â . weary men, .Â .Â . will ye weary my God also?" Isaiah declares that Ahaz and his royal court have exhausted the patience of men (particularly the prophet's patience) and asks if they must also weary God with their obstinateness and lack of faith.

7:14-16 (2 Nephi 17:14-16)."A virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel." The New Testament identifies this as a prophecy of the conception and subsequent birth of Mary's divine Son Jesus Christ whose title of Immanuel means "God is with us." (Matthew 1:18-23.) The Book of Mormon adds additional testimony to the virgin birth of the Savior. (1 Nephi 11:14-21; Alma 7:9-10.) Latter-day leaders have added their testimony to this prophecy's being fulfilled in the divine birth of the Christ child.

Biblical scholars, however, question the application of this prophecy to the birth in Bethlehem. They indicate that the following two verses (15-16) make such an interpretation difficult to accept. Critics say the fulfillment of this prophecy had to be in the days of Isaiah. Latter-day Saint scholars have appropriately responded to the questions raised, adding strength to the messianic witness of the prophecy. Among these is the excellent explanation offered by Dr. Sidney B. Sperry:

"Now if Immanuel of verse 14 is the Messiah, the Savior, what is his connection with the 'child' of verses 15 and 16? Many Jewish commentators, not to mention some non-Jewish ones, think that the 'virgin' or 'young woman' of verse 14 may be a woman of the royal family, or any other young woman of Judah, and that her son, a boy whom she called Immanuel, does not refer to the Christ. Personally, I am inclined to accept Immanuel as a reference to the Savior, and especially in the light of [Isaiah 8:8], where Judah is referred to as Immanuel's land. The allusion to Immanuel suggests that the land of Judah (about which Ahaz was concerned) had a great destiny to fulfill, and hence that it was not about to be destroyed by Syria and Ephraim. Verses 15 and 16 of [Isaiah 7] simply make our Lord's infancy a symbolical representation of the short-lived nature of the threat to Judah." (BMC, 199; see also IPSP, 143-45; GAWI, 56-59.)

Monte Nyman adds this insightful comment: "The point was that, even if Ahaz rejected the counsel and advice of Jehovah through his prophet, and even if Ahaz led his people into captivity, the Lord Immanuel would still come as had been prophesied." (GAWI, 58.)

7:15, 22 (2 Nephi 17:15, 22)."Butter and honey shall he eat." Butter (curd) and honey were symbolic of a desolated and depopulated land, other foods not being available. The land would be occupied by grazing animals, including those which are milk producing, and covered with swarms of bees. Butter and honey were food easily available to the poor.

7:16 (2 Nephi 17:16)."Before the child shall know to refuse the evil and choose the good, the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her kings." Before the child matures, knowing how to choose good from evil, Judah's two enemies King Rezin of Syria and King Pekah of Ephraim would be deposed. In other words, within just a few years (before a child can mature), the threatening neighbors to the north would be destroyed. For a fulfillment of this prophecy, see 2 Kings 15:29-30 and 16:9.

Isaiah 7:17-25 and 2 Nephi 17:17-25

With King Ahaz having rejected the word of the Lord, the prophet now proceeds to pronounce the penalties that would befall the king and the people of Judah. Instead of becoming a partner with the Assyrians, Ahaz and his people would become their prey. They would experience a devastation such as they had not seen since the days the northern tribes broke away from the united kingdom of the twelve tribes. Flies and bees would infest the land, and thorns and briers would take over the once-productive land. The people would be taken into captivity, and those who remain would have to forage for food.

17 The Lord shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon thy father's house, days that have not come, from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah; even the king of Assyria. 18 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall hiss for the fly that is in the uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt, and for the bee that is in the land of Assyria. 19 And they shall come, and shall rest all of them in the desolate valleys, and in the holes of the rocks, and upon all thorns, and upon all bushes. 20 In the same day shall the Lord shave with a razor that is hired, namely, by them beyond the river, by the king of Assyria, the head, and the hair of the feet: and it shall also consume the beard. 21 And it shall come to pass in that day, that a man shall nourish a young cow, and two sheep; 22 And it shall come to pass, for the abundance of milk that they shall give he shall eat butter: for butter and honey shall every one eat that is left in the land. 23 And it shall come to pass in that day, that every place shall be, where there were a thousand vines at a thousand silverlings, it shall even be for briers and thorns. 24 With arrows and with bows shall men come thither; because all the land shall become briers and thorns. 25 And on all hills that shall be digged with the mattock, there shall not come thither the fear of briers and thorns: but it shall be for the sending forth of oxen, and for the treading of lesser cattle. 17 The Lord shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon thy father's house, days that have not come from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah, the king of Assyria. 18 And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall hiss for the fly that is in the uttermost part of Egypt, and for the bee that is in the land of Assyria. 19 And they shall come, and shall rest all of them in the desolate valleys, and in the holes of the rocks, and upon all thorns, and upon all bushes. 20 In the same day shall the Lord shave with a razor that is hired, by them beyond the river, by the king of Assyria, the head, and the hair of the feet; and it shall also consume the beard. 21 And it shall come to pass in that day, a man shall nourish a young cow and two sheep; 22 And it shall come to pass, for the abundance of milk they shall give he shall eat butter; for butter and honey shall every one eat that is left in the land. 23 And it shall come to pass in that day, every place shall be, where there were a thousand vines at a thousand silverlings, which shall be for briers and thorns. 24 With arrows and with bows shall men come thither, because all the land shall become briers and thorns. 25 And all hills that shall be digged with the mattock, there shall not come thither the fear of briers and thorns; but it shall be for the sending forth of oxen, and the treading of lesser cattle.

7:17 (2 Nephi 17:17)."Days that have not come, from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah." As noted above, this has reference to the days of Jeroboam when the Ten Tribes revolted from the united kingdom to form their own kingdom. (1 Kings 12.)

7:18-19 (2 Nephi 17:18-19)."The Lord shall hiss for the fly .Â .Â . and for the bee. .Â .Â . And they shall come, and shall rest .Â .Â . upon all." There are at least two possible interpretations of this phrase. The fly and the bee might be representative of invading forces from the countries of Egypt and Assyria, who will come upon the people no matter where they are hiding. Another possible interpretation is that the devastation of the land of Judah will be so severe that swarms of flies and bees will be attracted (summoned or hissed for) to the desolate land from Egypt and Assyria.

7:20 (2 Nephi 17:20)."Shave with a razor that is hired." "The land will be depopulated by a foreign invader." (LDSKJ, Isaiah 7:20, footnote a.) Shaving the beards and heads of captives was a common practice of invading armies. It was a sign of humiliation, particularly for Hebrew men. (See 2 Samuel 10:4-5.) It was also done to facilitate prisoner sanitation and to keep them separate from the rest of the population. (In their shaved condition they were easily identified, thus limiting escape possibilities.)

Monte Nyman suggests that "the Lord's 'shaving with a razor that is hired' symbolizes the comfort of having someone else perform a tedious or unpleasant task, such as .Â .Â . the Lord's using the king of Assyria to do the unpleasant task of punishing the wickedness of Judah." (GAWI, 59.)

7:21 (2 Nephi 17:21)."A man shall nourish a young cow, and two sheep." "Only a few self-sustaining survivors shall remain" in the land. (LDSKJ, Isaiah 7:21, footnote a.)

7:22 (2 Nephi 17:22)."For butter and honey shall every one eat that is left in the land." See commentary on verse 15.

7:23 (2 Nephi 17:23)."Where there were a thousand vines at a thousand silverlings." This is a further indication of the land's desolation. Where once the fruit of productive vines had brought in pieces of silver ("silverlings"), there would now be only briers and thorns.

7:24 (2 Nephi 17:24)."With arrows and bows shall men come thither." The once-agricultural land would now be a wilderness good only for hunters.

7:25 (2 Nephi 17:25)."Digged with the mattock." Cultivated with the hoe.

7:25 (2 Nephi 17:25)."Lesser cattle." Sheep or goats.
