Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Chapter 8

Isaiah 8 and 2 Nephi 18

Overview

Having been unsuccessful in his efforts to persuade King Ahaz to put his trust in the Lord rather than in the Assyrians, Isaiah next turns his attention to the people of Judah. He repeats the assurance given in the previous chapter to their king that in a very short time Syria and the northern kingdom (Ephraim or Israel) will be destroyed. However, the faith of the people is as shortsighted as their royal ruler, and as a consequence Isaiah prophesies that the Assyrians will invade the southern kingdom of Judah.

Ultimately, Judah's enemies will be punished for their aggression. A remnant of Judah will survive, "for God is with us," declared Isaiah.

The prophet relates the Lord's personal counsel to him that he should not get caught up in the persuasions or fears of the people. Let God be your refuge and sanctuary, the prophet is told. Isaiah is informed that the wicked will stumble over the Lord's teachings. The apostle Peter would later teach this same concept: "Unto you therefore which believe he [the Lord Jesus Christ] is precious: but unto them which be disobedient .Â .Â . a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence, even to them which stumble at the word, being disobedient." (1 Peter 2:7-8.)

Isaiah is told to record his testimony, and he testifies of his willingness to follow the Lord. He concludes the chapter with warnings against seeking spiritual help from the wrongsources. God is the only source of light. Those who seek elsewhere will find themselves immersed in darkness.

Commentary

Isaiah 8:1-4 and 2 Nephi 18:1-4

Isaiah is told to write the name of his newborn son, Maher-shalal-hash-baz, on a large scroll or tablet. The child's name, which incidentally is the longest word in the Bible, means "to speed to the spoil, he hasteneth the prey" ("quick to the plunder, swift to the spoil"). The name was symbolic of the pending fall of Damascus (capital of Syria) and Samaria (capital of the northern kingdom) to the invading Assyrian armies.

Isaiah 8 1 Moreover the Lord said unto me, Take thee a great roll, and write in it with a man's pen concerning Maher-shalal-hash-baz. 2 And I took unto me faithful witnesses to record, Uriah the priest, and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah. 3 And I went unto the prophetess; and she conceived, and bare a son. Then said the Lord to me, Call his name Maher-shalal-hash-baz. 4 For before the child shall have knowledge to cry, My father, and my mother, the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria shall be taken away before the king of Assyria. 2 Nephi 18 1 Moreover, the word of the Lord said unto me: Take thee a great roll, and write in it with a man's pen, concerning Maher-shalal-hash-baz. 2 And I took unto me faithful witnesses to record, Uriah the priest, and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah. 3 And I went unto the prophetess; and she conceived and bare a son. Then said the Lord to me: Call his name, Maher-shalal-hash-baz. 4 For behold, the child shall not have knowledge to cry, My father, and my mother, before the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria shall be taken away before the king of Assyria.

8:1 (2 Nephi 18:1)."Write in it with a man's pen." In Hebrew this means an engraving tool of a man. In essence, Isaiah is told to record his message with an ordinary or common writing tool.

8:2 (2 Nephi 18:2)."I took unto me faithful witnesses to record." In keeping with the law of witnesses ("at the mouth of two witnesses .Â .Â . shall the matter be established" [Deuteronomy 19:15]), Isaiah has two witnesses on hand to record and testify of what was being said.

8:3 (2 Nephi 18:3)."The prophetess." Isaiah's wife. It is reasonable to assume that Isaiah's wife had heard him speak often of the coming of the Messiah and that she too had a testimony of Christ. In this respect, it is of interest to note the words of President Wilford Woodruff: "Anybody is a prophet who has a testimony of Jesus Christ, for that is the spirit of prophecy." (JD 13:165.) The term "prophetess" is also used to identify other faithful women of the Bible such as Miriam (Exodus 15:20), Deborah (Judges 4:4-5), and Anna (Luke 2:36-38).

8:4 (2 Nephi 18:4)."Before the child shall have knowledge to cry." Before Isaiah's son is old enough to speak, saying "my father, and my mother," the capitals of Syria and the northern kingdom will be overrun by the Assyrians.

Isaiah 8:5-10 and 2 Nephi 18:5-10

Because the people of Judah refused to accept the word of the Lord through His prophet, Isaiah prophesies they too will be victimized by the Assyrians. Instead of being soothed by the gentle "waters of Shiloah," which represented the tender care of Christ, they will be ravaged by the floodwaters of the invading Assyrians. Yet there is hope. Inspite of the alliances formed against her, Judah will yet be the birthplace of the promised Messiah.

5 The Lord spake also unto me again, saying, 6 Forasmuch as this people refuseth the waters of Shiloah that go softly, and rejoice in Rezin and Remaliah's son; 7 Now therefore, behold, the Lord bringeth up upon them the waters of the river, strong and many, even the king of Assyria, and all his glory: and he shall come up over all his channels, and go over all his banks: 8 And he shall pass through Judah; he shall overflow and go over, he shall reach even to the neck; and the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel. 9 Associate yourselves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces; and give ear, all ye of far countries: gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces. 10 Take counsel together, and it shall come to nought; speak the word, and it shall not stand: for God is with us. 5 The Lord spake also unto me again, saying: 6 Forasmuch as this people refuseth the waters of Shiloah that go softly, and rejoice in Rezin and Remaliah's son; 7 Now therefore, behold, the Lord bringeth up upon them the waters of the river, strong and many, even the king of Assyria and all his glory; and he shall come up over all his channels, and go over all his banks. 8 And he shall pass through Judah; he shall overflow and go over, he shall reach even to the neck; and the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel. 9 Associate yourselves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces; and give ear all ye of far countries; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces. 10 Take counsel together, and it shall come to naught; speak the word, and it shall not stand; for God is with us.

8:6 (2 Nephi 18:6)."The waters of Shiloah." Isaiah uses the imagery of the soft-flowing waters of Jerusalem's only perennial spring to symbolize the soothing care of the Lord. It may be a parallel that the Lord's voice is generally described as "still" and "small," rather than as booming or loud. (See 1 Kings 19:12.)

8:6 (2 Nephi 18:6)."Rejoice in Rezin and Remaliah's son." As noted in Isaiah 7, Rezin was the king of Syria and the son of Remaliah was Pekah, king of Ephraim or the northern kingdom of Israel. The word "rejoice" is somewhat puzzling. This may be a reference to possible rejoicing of the Judeans when Syria and Ephraim are attacked by the Assyrians. However, as noted in the commentary on the next two verses, Judah will also be overrun by the same invading forces.

8:7 (2 Nephi 18:7)."The Lord bringeth up upon them the waters of the river." The Assyrians will come upon the northern kingdom ("them," verse 7) and the southern kingdom ("Judah," verse 8) like raging, torrential waters overflowing the banks of the riverbed.

8:8 (2 Nephi 18:8)."He shall reach even to the neck; and the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel." This word imagery is calculated to paint a picture of the widespread destruction the invading armies will have on the land. Instead of the gentle waters of Shiloah lapping at their feet, they will have the floodwaters of the Assyrians reaching to their necks and stretching out as wings to cover the entire land. By referring to the land as "Immanuel," meaning "God is with us," Isaiah reminds the people that the promised Immanuel (Isaiah 7:14) will yet be born in that land. Furthermore, it is an assurance that the people will not be entirely forsaken.

8:9 10 (2 Nephi 18:9-10)."Associate yourselves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces." Verses 9 and 10 appear to be a warning that regardless of the alliances that are formed among those of "far countries," regardless of their conspiring ("counsel[ing] together"), their efforts will be unsuccessful ("come to nought"). They will be "broken to pieces" because Judah, the land of Immanuel ("God is with us"), will yet be spared.

Isaiah 8:11-18 and 2 Nephi 18:11-18

With great power the Lord tells Isaiah not to follow the ways of the people to whom he was to preach and prophesy. He is not to fear the people but to trust in the Lord, who will be a place of safety for those who trust Him but a stumbling block to the disbelievers. The prophet is told to record his testimony which we are now reading and he affirms his willingness to follow the Lord.

11 For the Lord spake thus to me with a strong hand, and instructed me that I should not walk in the way of this people, saying, 12 Say ye not, A confederacy, to all them to whom this people shall say, A confederacy; neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid. 13 Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. 14 And he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offence to both the houses of Israel, for a gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 15 And many among them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken. 16 Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples. 17 And I will wait upon the Lord, that hideth his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him. 18 Behold, I and the children whom the Lord hath given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel from the Lord of hosts, which dwelleth in mount Zion. 11 For the Lord spake thus to me with a strong hand, and instructed me that I should not walk in the way of this people, saying: 12 Say ye not, A confederacy, to all to whom this people shall say, A confederacy; neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid. 13 Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. 14 And he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling, and for a rock of offense to both the houses of Israel, for a gin and a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 15 And many among them shall stumble and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken. 16 Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples. 17 And I will wait upon the Lord, that hideth his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him. 18 Behold, I and the children whom the Lord hath given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel from the Lord of Hosts, which dwelleth in Mount Zion.

8:11 (2 Nephi 18:11)."The Lord spake thus to me with a strong hand." Jehovah spoke to Isaiah with great power.

8:12 (2 Nephi 18:12)."Say ye not, A confederacy, to all them to whom this people shall say, A confederacy." "Judah should not rely on secret plots [confederacies] with others for safety." (LDSKJ, Isaiah 8:12, footnote a.) Monte Nyman suggests that this verse implies that "Isaiah was forbidden to preach unto Judah." (GAWI, 65.) Some newer translations of the Bible render this verse as: "Do not call conspiracy everything that these people call conspiracy."

8:13 (2 Nephi 18:13)."Sanctify the Lord .Â .Â . and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread." Regard the Lord as a holy being and act reverently and humbly before Him. Don't be afraid of that which others are afraid of; only be afraid of offending the Lord.

8:14 (2 Nephi 18:14)."And he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offence." God will be a "security for those who trust him, but dismay and suffering for unbelievers." (LDSKJ, Isaiah 8:14, footnote a.) Christ is the "stone of Israel." (D&C 50:44; DCE, 566.) The Book of Mormon prophet Jacob prophesied: "I perceive by the workings of the Spirit which is in me, that by the stumbling of the Jews they will reject the stone upon which they might build and have safe foundation." (Jacob 4:15.)

8:14 (2 Nephi 18:14)."To both the houses of Israel." Both the southern kingdom (Judah) and the northern kingdom (Israel or Ephraim).

8:14 (2 Nephi 18:14)."For a gin and for a snare." For a trap and for a snare.

8:16 (2 Nephi 18:16)."Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples." This wording is also found in latter-day revelation, although in two instances the Lord speaks of "sealing the testimony" and "binding the law." (D&C 88:84; 109:46; 133:71-72.) The law represents teachings and the testimony represents the inspired utterances of God's messengers. One commentary indicates that the binding and sealing of the law is a symbolic process whereby one actually ties up a parchment roll, whereon the teachings of the prophets are recorded, as a witness against those to whom the message was delivered. (TOVBC, 420.) Another suggests that this may be figurative in the sense of a document being signed in the hearts of the disciples. (BMC, 204.)

8:17 (2 Nephi 18:17)."The Lord, that hideth his face from the house of Jacob." Because the house of Israel (children of Jacob) departed from the ways of the Lord, He turned away His face in displeasure. "In a little wrath [displeasure] I hid my face from thee for a moment," the Lord would later declare. But then the promise would follow: "But with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer." (Isaiah 54:8.)

8:18 (2 Nephi 18:18)."I and the children .Â .Â . are for signs and for wonders in Israel from the Lord." The very names of Isaiah and his children are given as signs of the veracity of the prophet's words. Isaiah's name means "Jehovah saves;" Shear-jashub means "a remnant shall return;" and Maher-shalal-hash-baz means "he hastens the prey." These names are constant reminders to Israel's twelve tribes of the Lord's threats of disaster and of His promises of restoration.

Isaiah 8:19-22 and 2 Nephi 18:19-22

In the concluding verses of the chapter, Isaiah rebukes those who follow the apostate practices of seeking for spiritual help from sorcerers and soothsayers. God is the only source of true spiritual light and understanding. The people can find His word in the scriptures and teachings of the prophets.

19 And when they shall say unto you, Seek unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep, and that mutter: should not a people seek unto their God? for the living to the dead? 20 To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. 21 And they shall pass through it, hardly bestead and hungry: and it shall come to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and curse their king and their God, and look upward. 22 And they shall look unto the earth; and behold trouble and darkness, dimness of anguish; and they shall be driven to darkness.19 And when they shall say unto you: Seek unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep and muttershould not a people seek unto their God for the living to hear from the dead? 20 To the law and to the testimony; and if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. 21 And they shall pass through it hardly bestead and hungry; and it shall come to pass that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and curse their king and their God, and look upward. 22 And they shall look unto the earth and behold trouble, and darkness, dimness of anguish, and shall be driven to darkness.

8:19 (2 Nephi 18:19)."Them that have familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep, and that mutter." The children of Israel are expressly forbidden to associate with those who deal in black magic, such as those who consult with evil or "familiar spirits" and sorcerers ("wizards"). (See also Deuteronomy 18:10-12.) To "peep" is to chirp as a bird. According to J. R. Dummelow, chirping refers "to the thin and feeble voice of ghosts from Sheol [hell]." (TOVBC, 420.)

8:19 (2 Nephi 18:19)."Should not a people seek unto their God for the living to hear from the dead?" The Book of Mormon text significantly clarifies this verse. This clarification is not an invitation for one to seek contact with the dead. It seems this is Isaiah's way of saying we must avoid seances and other such nonsense. Fortune tellers, wizards, sorcerers, soothsayers, and others who claim to conjure up contact with the spirit world should be avoided like the plague. There is no doubt they can make contact with the evil spirits in Satan's world, and those who play with this fire will get spiritually burned. God is the God over the living and the dead, and He does not grant foolish requests.

8:20 (2 Nephi 18:20)."To the law and to the testimony." In addition to seeking answers from God (vs. 20), the people should look to the "law" (teachings or Torah) and to the "testimony" (witness of the prophets in the scriptures).

8:20 (2 Nephi 18:20)."If they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them." If the false spiritualist media fail to speak according to revealed truth (God's word, scriptures, law) it is because they are filled with darkness.

8:21 (2 Nephi 18:21)."And they shall pass through it hardly bestead and hungry." "Israel would be taken into captivity because they would not hearken." (LDSKJ, Isaiah 8:21, footnote a.) A modern translation of this verse renders it as follows: "Distressed and hungry, they will roam through the land; when they are famished, they will become enraged and, looking upward, they will curse their king and their God." (New International Version of the Bible.)

8:21 (2 Nephi 18:21)."When they shall be hungry, they shall fret." When the captive children of Israel finally recognize their spiritual emptiness, they will be agitated at themselves for their loss and curse King Ahaz, whom they will blame for their predicament, as well as blaspheme God for His absence.

8:22 (2 Nephi 18:22)."And they shall look unto the earth; and behold trouble and darkness, .Â .Â . dimness of anguish." In despair, the conquered and captive Israelites will look around and see nothing but difficulties and dark affliction.
