Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Chapter 9

Isaiah 9 and 2 Nephi 19

Overview

Bible commentators apply the early verses in this chapter to others besides Jesus Christ, but Latter-day Saints view them as very messianic. The Light of Christ will shine in the earth and in the world of departed spirits. He shall take His rightful place upon David's throne.

In verses 8 through 21, the prophet speaks of the past and future judgments that are to come upon Israel and Judah. "In all fairness it should be pointed out that it is difficult to tell whether these verses are completely a prediction of future events or a review of past events," wrote Sidney B. Sperry. "Some authorities think they refer only to Israel (the Northern Kingdom). Personally," continued Dr. Sperry, "I shall take a middle course among the various views that have been presented over the years. The main thing for us to remember is that the prophet is giving a warning of disaster to all Israel whether it be illustrated by past events or whether by the prediction of future events." (BMC, 208.)

Commentary

Isaiah 9:1-7 and 2 Nephi 19:1-7

Verse 1 is a transition between chapters 8 and 9 of Isaiah. In fact, in Hebrew versions of Isaiah it is included as the last verse of the previous chapter. Thus the beginning word ("Nevertheless") is a word of hope.

The children of Israel are promised that the darkness will not last forever; a light will break forth. They will experience joy as they are released from the yoke of their burden of oppression. They are promised that a child will be born upon whose shoulders the government will rightfully rest forever.

Isaiah 9 1 Nevertheless the dimness shall not be such as was in her vexation, when at the first he lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, and afterward did more grievously afflict her by the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, in Galilee of the nations. 2 The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light: they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined. 3 Thou hast multiplied the nations, and not increased the joy: they joy before thee according to the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice when they divide the spoil. 4 For thou hast broken the yoke of his burden, and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, as in the day of Midian. 5 For every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood; but this shall be with burning and fuel of fire. 6 For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. 7 Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this. 2 Nephi 19 1 Nevertheless, the dimness shall not be such as was in her vexation, when at first he lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun, and the land of Napthali, and afterwardsDid more grievously afflict by the way of the Red Sea beyond Jordan in Galilee of the nations. 2 The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light; they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined. 3 Thou hast multiplied the nation, and increased the joythey joy before thee according to the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice when they divide the spoil. 4 For thou hast broken the yoke of his burden, and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor. 5 For every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood; but this shall be with burning and fuel of fire. 6 For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given; and the government shall be upon his shoulder; and his name shall be called, Wonderful, Counselor, The Mighty God, The ever-lasting Father, The Prince of Peace. 7 Of the increase of government and peace there is no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth, even forever. The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this.

9:1 (2 Nephi 19:1)."The dimness shall not be such as was in her vexation, when at the first he lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali." The future dimness (dark affliction or gloom) mentioned in Isaiah 8:22 will be more difficult than that brought upon the people when Tiglath-pileser and Sargon II of Assyria previously attacked the lands of the tribes of Israel. (LDSKJ, Isaiah 9:1, footnote b.) The tribes of Zebulun and Naphtali occupied the northernmost borders of the promised land of Canaan. These lands were the first captured by the invading Assyrians.

9:1 (2 Nephi 19:1)."Afterward did more grievously afflict her by the way of the Red S ea." One commentator suggests that this phrase "probably has reference to a later captivity by Assyria." (GAWI, 67.) However, another states: "The latter time is a future period when God will 'be heavy' (from the Hebrew root, kaved) with the land. Translators differ as to the meaning of this term, saying variously that God will 'make glorious,' 'deal heavily' .Â .Â . , or 'grievously afflict' .Â .Â . the area. Besides the unsurety of what the Lord's actions will be, the precise time of this manifestation is not presented, and, for unknown reasons, the land area to be affected in the latter time is larger than that which was anciently attacked by the Assyrians." (IPSP, 152.)

9:2 (2 Nephi 19:2)."The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light." The darkness of captivity and apostasy will be dispersed by the great light of Christ. (LDSKJ, Isaiah 9:2, footnote a; see also John 8:12; Matthew 4:13-16.)

9:2 (2 Nephi 19:2)."They that dwell in the land of the shadow of death." It seems logical to apply this verse to those who live in the world of departed spirits. During the three days in which His earthly body lay in the borrowed tomb of Joseph of Arimathaea, the spirit body of Christ brought light to those living in the spirit world, "declaring liberty to the captives who had been faithful" and opening the doors of darkness enclosing the rebellious. (D&C 138:18; see also verses 1-37.)

9:3 (2 Nephi 19:3)."Thou hast multiplied the nation, and increased the joy." The Book of Mormon changes the meaning of this statement by deleting the word "not" before "increased the joy." The children of Israel, as promised to father Abraham (Abraham 2:9-10), will become numerous. Their joy will be great in the birth of the promised Christ child. Isaiah compares their joy to that received at the harvest festival, a time of national rejoicing, or when soldiers are victorious.

9:4 (2 Nephi 19:4)."Thou hast broken the yoke of his burden." Christ, the promised Messiah, will release them from physical and spiritual captivity. (Isaiah 10:27.)

9:4 (2 Nephi 19:4)."The staff of his shoulder." Reference to the cane by which Israel has been beaten by her taskmasters. Christ will remove yokes, staffs, and rods from the hands of oppressors.

9:4 (2 Nephi 19:4)."As in the day of Midian." Just as the Lord had delivered the Midianites into the hands of Gideon, so shall He release Israel from future bondage through His power. (See Judges 7:7-25.) The omission of this phrase in the Book of Mormon is noticeable. Monte Nyman states: "This could have been an intentional omission by Nephi, as it did not apply to his people." (GAWI, 68.)

9:5 (2 Nephi 19:5)."For every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood; but this shall be with burning and fuel of fire." Sidney Sperry interprets these phrases to read, "For every boot of him that tramps in tumult of battle .Â .Â . And every mantle rolled in blood .Â .Â . shall be for burning, fuel for fire." (BMC, 207.) "This 'burning' is to be the cleansing of the earth by fire prior to the setting up of the Messianic kingdom." (LDSKJ, Isaiah 9:5, footnote b; see also Ezekiel 39:9; BICQ, 103-4.)

9:6 (2 Nephi 19:6)."For unto us a child is born .Â .Â . and the government shall be upon his shoulder." As noted in the chapter overview, various interpretations have been applied to the identity of the promised child, but the author's position is that it primarily refers to Christ. One of the better summaries of the various interpretations of this verse was given by Victor Ludlow:

"If Isaiah is prophesying about Hezekiah [the young king of Judah who helped deliver the Israelites from the Assyrians], then verse 3 describes the Israelites' joy at their deliverance; verse 4 portrays how the Assyrians were defeated in spite of their greater numbers, just as the many Midianites were by Gideon and his 300 men (Judg. 7); verse 5 describes the Assyrian casualties; and verses 6 and 7 tell us about Hezekiah's titles and righteous, peaceful rule as king.

"If the verses describe a righteous people fighting against wickedness, then verse 3 describes their joy at success, verses 4 and 5 portray the defeat of the enemy, and verses 6 and 7 describe a new age of millennial peace that may be assisted or ushered in by a messianic figure.

"Finally, the identification of the ruler in verses 3 7 with Jesus Christ has a number of possibilities, as verse 3 talks about his many followers who rejoice at the spiritual blessings he has provided; verse 4 describes how he was able to overcome the temptations of Satan, break the yoke of sin, and maintain power over the legions of Satan's devils; verse 5 symbolizes his atonement and the cleansing powers of baptism and the Holy Ghost; verse 6 presents some of his titles and roles; and verse 7 describes his eternal position as the Lord and King of this earth." (IPSP, 154.)

9:7 (2 Nephi 19:7)."Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end." The resurrected Christ declared to His disciples: "All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth." (Matthew 28:18.) "And of his kingdom there shall be no end." (Luke 1:33.) His work and glory will roll on throughout the eternities. (See Moses 1:39.)

9:7 (2 Nephi 19:7)."The throne of David." King David's throne is to be established through Christ forever. (2 Samuel 7:12-13; see also Luke 1:32.)

Isaiah 9:8-12 and 2 Nephi 19:8-12

The Lord's decreed word is to all of the house of Jacob, to Israel or Ephraim on the north and to Judah on the south. However, Samaria, the capital of the northern kingdom, is particularly singled out for stern words from the Lord. In spite of past punishment for their arrogance and disobedience, the people have not repented. Therefore, more trouble is to come their way.

8 The Lord sent a word into Jacob, and it hath lighted upon Israel. 9 And all the people shall know, even Ephraim and the inhabitant of Samaria, that say in the pride and stoutness of heart, 10 The bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones: the sycomores are cut down, but we will change them into cedars. 11 Therefore the Lord shall set up the adversaries of Rezin against him, and join his enemies together; 12 The Syrians before, and the Philistines behind; and they shall devour Israel with open mouth. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. 8 The Lord sent his word unto Jacob and it hath lighted upon Israel. 9 And all the people shall know, even Ephraim and the inhabitantsof Samaria, that say in the pride and stoutness of heart: 10 The bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones; the sycamores are cut down, but we will change them into cedars. 11 Therefore the Lord shall set up the adversaries of Rezin against him, and join his enemies together; 12 The Syrians before and the Philistines behind; and they shall devour Israel with open mouth. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

9:10 (2 Nephi 19:10)."The bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones." This is indicative of the pride and arrogance of the people. They boast they will replace the destroyed bricks and wood with materials of higher quality.

9:11 (2 Nephi 19:11)."The Lord shall set up the adversaries of Rezin against him." The possible meaning of this phrase has been provided by J. R. Dummelow: "Perhaps we should read [as do some Hebrew manuscripts] 'the princes of Rezin' [the king of Syria]; the meaning would then be that the Syrian allies of Israel [Isaiah 7:1-2] will turn against it." (TOVBC, 421-22.)

9:12 (2 Nephi 19:12)."The Syrians before, and the Philistines behind." Israel, the northern kingdom, would be attacked on the east by the Syrians and on the west by the Philistines.

9:12, 17, 21 (2 Nephi 19:12, 17, 21)."His anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still." While the Lord is displeased, dispensing justice on His rebellious people, He is still available to them if only they will turn to him. (Also see commentary on Isaiah 5:25 and 10:4.)

Isaiah 9:13-17 and 2 Nephi 19:13-17

In spite of the dire predictions that await them, and the predicament in which they find themselves, the people stubbornly refuse to repent and return to the Lord of Hosts. They are led by corrupt leaders who lead them astray. The scriptures remind us that "when the wicked rule the people mourn." (D&C 98:9; see also Proverbs 29:2.) Because of their apostasy, they will be destroyed or scattered.

13 For the people turneth not unto him that smiteth them, neither do they seek the Lord of hosts. 14 Therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel head and tail, branch and rush, in one day. 15 The ancient and honourable, he is the head; and the prophet that teacheth lies, he is the tail. 16 For the leaders of this people cause them to err; and they that are led of them are destroyed. 17 Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their young men, neither shall have mercy on their fatherless and widows: for every one is an hypocrite and an evildoer, and every mouth speaketh folly. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. 13 For the people turneth not unto him that smiteth them, neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts. 14 Therefore will the Lord cut off from Israel head and tail, branch and rush in one day. 15 The ancient, he is the head; and the prophet that teacheth lies, he is the tail. 16 For the leaders of this people cause them to err; and they that are led of them are destroyed. 17 Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their young men, neither shall have mercy on their fatherless and widows; for every one of them is a hypocrite and an evildoer, and every mouth speaketh folly. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

9:14-15 (2 Nephi 19:14-15)."The Lord will cut off from Israel head and tail, branch and rush, in one day." Because of her apostasy, the Lord will cut off the government, elder, or man of rank ("head .Â .Â . the ancient and honourable" ) and the false prophets ("tail"). The leaders ("branch") and the followers ("rush" or reed) will be cut off.

9:17 (2 Nephi 19:17)."The Lord shall have no joy." The Lord takes no pleasure in dispensing divine punishment upon the wicked. Furthermore, just as parents are saddened when their children rebel or make wrong choices, so too the Lord is deprived of joy when His children choose to be disobedient.

Isaiah 9:18-21 and 2 Nephi 19:18-21

In the last verses of this chapter, the prophet vividly describes the effects of disobedience and sin. We are reminded of the apostle Paul's statement, "The wages of sin is death." (Romans 6:23.)

However, the people won't have to wait until death to suffer the terrible consequences of their wickedness, for their mortal lives will be filled with much anguish. Famine, anarchy, and murder will prevail.

18 For wickedness burneth as the fire: it shall devour the briers and thorns, and shall kindle in the thickets of the forest, and they shall mount up like the lifting up of smoke. 19 Through the wrath of the Lord of hosts is the land darkened, and the people shall be as the fuel of the fire: no man shall spare his brother. 20 And he shall snatch on the right hand, and be hungry; and he shall eat on the left hand, and they shall not be satisfied: they shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm: 21 Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh: and they together shall be against Judah. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. 18 For wickedness burneth as the fire; it shall devour the briers and thorns, and shall kindle in the thickets of the forests, and they shall mount up like the lifting up of smoke. 19 Through the wrath of the Lord of Hosts is the land darkened, and the people shall be as the fuel of the fire; no man shall spare his brother. 20 And he shall snatch on the right hand and be hungry; and he shall eat on the left hand and they shall not be satisfied; they shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm 21 Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh; they together shall be against Judah. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

9:18 (2 Nephi 19:18)."Wickedness burneth as the fire." Wickedness will spread like a roaring prairie fire driven by fierce winds. This is a powerful image, but there is a mean-ing to this verse that is even more significant. The Book of Mormon prophet-king Benjamin provided the following description: "Therefore if that man repenteth not, and remaineth and dieth an enemy to God, the demands of divine justice do awaken his immortal soul to a lively sense of his own guilt, which doth cause him to shrink from the presence of the Lord, and doth fill his breast with guilt, and pain, and anguish, which is like an unquenchable fire, whose flame ascendeth up forever and ever." (Mosiah 2:38; italics added.)

There will also be a literal burning of the wicked at the Second Coming: "For, behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble." (Malachi 4:1; see also BICQ, 194-96.)

9:19 (2 Nephi 19:19)."The people shall be as the fuel of the fire: no man shall spare his brother." Humans will become so coldhearted and bloodthirsty that the sanctity of life will no longer be a dearly held standard of society. People's lives will be dispatched with the same rapidity with which fire consumes fuel. This is truly a sign of "the love of men .Â .Â . wax[ing] cold." (JS M 1:30; BICQ, 79-82, 90.)

9:20 (2 Nephi 19:20)."They shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm." This prophecy probably has multiple fulfillments, one of which occurred during a later siege of Jerusalem when the people turned to cannibalism. (Jeremiah 19:9.) There may yet come a time when food will be so scarce that desperate survivors will eat the flesh of the dead.

9:21 (2 Nephi 19:21)."Manasseh, Ephraim .Â .Â . they together shall be against Judah." Manasseh and Ephraim represent the tribes of the northern kingdom that have positioned themselves against the southern kingdom of Judah. This sibling infighting has saddened and displeased the Lord, yet He is anxious to reach out and unite them once again.
