Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Chapter 10

Isaiah 10 and 2 Nephi 20

Overview

Isaiah continues with two common themes in this chapter: the destruction of the wicked and the ultimate return of a remnant of Israel to the fold of the Master Shepherd. The first four verses of the chapter are the final phrases of a prophetic poem that commences with verse 8 of the previous chapter; but the main focus of this chapter is on the Assyrian destruction of wayward Israel. This destruction is a commentary or a foreshadowing, as noted in the chapter heading, of the destruction of the wicked prior to the Second Coming.

Assyria was one of the great Eastern empires, and it exercised considerable conquering power over neighboring countries. It was situated in the Tigris valley to the north of Babylonia, with its capital city of Nineveh located on the east bank of the Tigris River. The Assyrians were noted for their cruelty, reigning with terror over their conquered victims.

In his excellent commentary, Victor L. Ludlow points out the introverted parallelism (chiasmus) which encompasses the entire chapter. This is a literary style in which a pattern of words or ideas is stated by the writer and then repeated, but in reverse order. As shown in the following outline, Isaiah presents eight initial themes or ideas in verses 1 through 21 and then repeats them in verses 22-34, but in reverse order:

"A. The wicked will bow down (vs. 1-4)

B. Assyria raised by the Lord (5)

C. The Assyrian king speaks against Jerusalem (6-11)

D. The Lord will punish proud Assyria (12-14)

E. An ax is used as a tool (15)

F. The Lord is a burning fire in the land (16-17)

G. Out of all the [multitudes] only a remnant remains (18-19)

H. A remnant of Israel shall return to the Lord (20-21)

G'. Out of the "sands of the sea" only a remnant returns (22)

F'. A divine consumption is in the land (23)

E'. A rod is used as an instrument (24-26)

D'. Assyria's yoke will be lifted (27)

C'. Assyrian army approaches Jerusalem (28-32)

B'. Assyria humbled by the Lord (33)

A'. The haughty will be cut down (34)"

(IPSP, 161.)

Commentary

Isaiah 10:1-4 and 2 Nephi 20:1-4

The Lord's people are warned against neglecting (turning away from) and oppressing (taking away and robbing) the poor and needy. Judgment will come upon those who are guilty of such offenses. A penetrating question is then asked: In your own day of need, "to whom will ye flee (turn) for help?" Unless these neglectful and oppressive people repent, they cannot expect the help of the Lord in their hour of need.

Isaiah 10 1 Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write grievousness which they have prescribed; 2 To turn aside the needy from judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of my people, that widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless! 3 And what will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation which shall come from far? to whom will ye flee for help? and where will ye leave your glory? 4 Without me they shall bow down under the prisoners, and they shall fall under the slain. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. 2 Nephi 20 1 Wo unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write grievousness which they have prescribed; 2 To turn away the needy from judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of my people, that widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless! 3 And what will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation which shall come from far? to whom will ye flee for help? and where will ye leave your glory? 4 Without me they shall bow down under the prisoners, and they shall fall under the slain. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

10:4 (2 Nephi 20:4)."But his hand is stretched out still." While many commentaries interpret this to mean that God's wrath is unappeasable, Sidney Sperry suggests that this may mean: "But his hand is stretched out still if only you but change your ways." (BMC, 213.) (Also see commentary on Isaiah 5:25 and 9:12.)

Isaiah 10:5-12 and 2 Nephi 20:5-12

The Assyrian army is the rod whereby the Lord chastises errant Israel. It is hoped that the hypocritical nation of Israel (which claims to be God's chosen people but does not follow His chosen ways) will recognize this as a wake-up call to repent. Yet Assyria goes beyond its mission to chastise Israel. In "their indignation" (Book of Mormon), the Assyrians seek to destroy not only Israel, but other "nations not a few" (verse 7) as well. Not recognizing the hand of the Lord in its assigned role as a chastiser of the wicked, Assyria arrogantly boasts of its own strength and power. The Assyrians claim that their princes (army leaders or commanders) are "altogether kings," and they list the cities they've conquered (verse 9) as evidence of the nation's might.

5 O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is mine indignation. 6 I will send him against an hypocritical nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge, to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets. 7 Howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think so; but it is in his heart to destroy and cut off nations not a few. 8 For he saith, Are not my princes altogether kings? 9 Is not Calno as Carchemish? is not Hamath as Arpad? is not Samaria as Damascus? 10 As my hand hath found the kingdoms of the idols, and whose graven images did excel them of Jerusalem and of Samaria; 11 Shall I not, as I have done unto Samaria and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her idols? 12 Wherefore it shall come to pass, that when the Lord hath performed his whole work upon mount Zion and on Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks. 5 O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is their indignation. 6 I will send him against a hypocritical nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets. 7 Howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think so; but in his heart it is to destroy and cut off nations not a few. 8 For he saith: Are not my princes altogether kings? 9 Is not Calno as Carchemish? Is not Hamath as Arpad? Is not Samaria as Damascus? 10 As my hand hath founded the kingdoms of the idols, and whose graven images did excel them of Jerusalem and of Samaria; 11 Shall I not, as I have done unto Samaria and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and to her idols? 12 Wherefore it shall come to pass that when the Lord hath performed his whole work upon Mount Zion and upon Jerusalem. I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks.

10:10-11 (2 Nephi 20:10-11)."Idols." Inasmuch as the false gods of Samaria and the other conquered nations did not save them from the invading Assyrians, can Jerusalem expect anything less? Although the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob is the true and living God, the people of Jerusalem are in a godless (idolatrous) state at this time.

10:12 (2 Nephi 20:12)."Mount Zion and .Â .Â . punish .Â .Â . the king of Assyria." The Assyrians will attack Mount Zion, the hill upon which Solomon built his temple. (1 Kings 8:1.) (This attack occurred in 701 b.c., under the Assyrian king Sennacherib.) Yet the Lord will punish the king of Assyria for his "stout heart" and "high looks" (arrogance, pride, and boasting). This prophecy was fulfilled when a desolating sickness was sent into the Assyrian camps, causing many deaths, and the king was later slain by his own sons. (2 Kings 19:32-37; Isaiah 37:33-38.)

Isaiah 10:13-19 and 2 Nephi 20:13-19

The Lord's wrath (just retribution) was poured out upon the Assyrian king and his country because of their wickedness and boasting. The Assyrians did not recognize their refining role as the ax in the hands of the One who actually created and wielded this weapon. They claimed to have moved (enlarged) the borders of their nation and increased their treasures on their own initiative. In verse 15 Isaiah metaphorically asks, "Can man [the Assyrian king] prosper against God?"

13 For he saith, By the strength of my hand I have done it, and by my wisdom; for I am prudent: and I have removed the bounds of the people, and have robbed their treasures, and I have put down the inhabitants like a valiant man: 14 And my hand hath found as a nest the riches of the people: and as one gathereth eggs that are left, have I gathered all the earth; and there was none that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or peeped. 15 Shall the axe boast itself against him that heweth therewith? or s hall the saw magnify itself against him that shaketh it? as if the rod should shake itself against them that lift it up, or as if the staff should lift up itself, as if it were no wood. 16 Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord of hosts, send among his fat ones leanness; and under his glory he shall kindle a burning like the burning of a fire. 17 And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his Holy One for a flame: and it shall burn and devour his thorns and his briers in one day; 18 And shall consume the glory of his forest, and of his fruitful field, both soul and body: and they shall be as when a standardbearer fainteth. 19 And the rest of the trees of his forest shall be few, that a child may write them. 13 For he saith: By the strength of my hand and by my wisdom I have donethese things; for I am prudent; and I have moved the borders of the people, and have robbed their treasures, and I have put down the inhabitants like a valiant man; 14 And my hand hath found as a nest the riches of the people; and as one gathereth eggs that are left have I gathered all the earth; and there was none that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or peeped. 15 Shall the ax boast itself against him that heweth therewith? Shall the saw magnify itself against him that shaketh it? As if the rod should shake itself against them that lift it up, or as if the staff should lift up itself as if it were no wood! 16 Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, send among his fat ones, leanness; and under his glory he shall kindle a burning like the burning of a fire. 17 And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his Holy One for a flame, and shall burn and shall devour his thorns and his briers in one day; 18 And shall consume the glory of his forest, and of his fruitful field, both soul and body; and they shall be as when a standard-bearer fainteth. 19 And the rest of the trees of his forest shall be few, that a child may write them.

10:16 (2 Nephi 20:16)."Under his glory he shall kindle a burning." The prosperity (fatness) of Assyria shall be short-lived, for, as noted above, "leanness" (a desolating sickness) will emaciate her. Indeed, there shall be a "burning" (fever) of internal organs.

10:17 (2 Nephi 20:17)."Fire .Â .Â . thorns and .Â .Â . briers." Assyria is threatened with a fire or flame, which is the Lord Himself (the "light of Israel" and the "Holy One"). He shall "devour" (destroy) the "thorns and .Â .Â . briers" (rank and file of the Assyrian army). Sidney Sperry suggests that the "glory" mentioned in verse 16 may allude to the "upper echelons of [Assyria's] government and armies." (BMC, 217.)

10:18-19 (2 Nephi 20:18-19)."Consume the glory of his forest." The "forest" (people) of Assyria shall be destroyed so completely that a child will be able to count those ("trees") who remain. The Babylonians and Persians later fulfilled this prophesy, destroying completely the Assyrians as a nation and people.

Isaiah 10:20-23 and 2 Nephi 20:20-23

In these verses, Isaiah returns to a favorite theme "a remnant will return," which is the meaning of the name of his son Shear-jashub. Although the country of Israel was overrun by her enemies and her people were scattered, yet a remnant would return. This return would not only be to the land of her ancestors, but also to her God the great Jehovah. This prophecy extends to scattered Israel of the latter days as well. She will no longer "stay" (rely) on the "arm of flesh," but on the living God. (See D&C 1:19-20.)

Victor Ludlow provides the following commentary regarding the remnant that will gather: "Isaiah uses the term remnant to describe two distinct groups of Israelites: he talks about a remnant that remains in the land after the Assyrian destruction and promises the return of a future righteous remnant. The two groups are called the historical remnant and the eschatological remnant respectively. The historical remnant is the group present from a past event (such as the Assyrian invasions), while the eschatological remnant is the group that will emerge from a future action of God and have the qualifications of a latter-day, millennial society. Isaiah's urgent hope is that the historical remnant of the eighth century b.c. will return to the Lord and become the community from which the eschatological remnant will emerge." (IPSP, 164.)

20 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the remnant of Israel, and such as are escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no more again stay upon him that smote them; but shall stay upon the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, in truth. 21 The remnant shall return, even the remnant of Jacob, unto the mighty God. 22 For though thy people Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant of them shall return: the consumption decreed shall overflow with righteousness. 23 For the Lord God of hosts shall make a consumption, even determined, in the midst of all the land. 20 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the remnant of Israel, and such as are escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no more again stay upon him that smote them, but shall stay upon the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, in truth. 21 The remnant shall return, yea, even the remnant of Jacob, unto the mighty God. 22 For though thy people Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant of them shall return; the consumption decreed shall overflow with righteousness. 23 For the Lord God of Hosts shall make a consumption, even determined in all the land.

10:22 (2 Nephi 20:22)."The consumption decreed shall overflow with righteousness." Shifting to a reference to the end of the world (destruction of the wicked) at the time of the Second Coming, the prophet declares that mercy is available to those who repent.

Isaiah 10:24-27 and 2 Nephi 20:24-27

With the promise fresh in his mind of the ultimate return of a remnant of Israel, Isaiah tells latter-day Israel (those who dwell in Zion, i.e., wherever the righteous are located) not to fear her enemies (symbolized by the conquering Assyrians and Egyptians of former days). Ultimately, the righteous must rely on the Lord's promise, "I will fight your battles." (D&C 105:14.) However, they must also remember that the righteous will not always be saved from pain and suffering, for the Lord has declared: "I will prove you in all things, whether you will abide in my covenant, even unto death, that you may be found worthy." (D&C 98:14.)

24 Therefore thus saith the Lord God of hosts, O my people that dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian: he shall smite thee with a rod, and shall lift up his staff against thee, after the manner of Egypt. 25 For yet a very little while, and the indignation shall cease, and mine anger in their destruction. 26 And the Lord of hosts shall stir up a scourge for him according to the slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb: and as his rod was upon the sea, so shall he lift it up after the manner of Egypt. 27 And it shall come to pass in that day, that his burden shall be taken away from off thy shoulder, and his yoke from off thy neck, and the yoke shall be destroyed because of the anointing. 24 Therefore, thus saith the Lord God of Hosts: O my people that dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian; he shall smite thee with a rod, and shall lift up his staff against thee, after the manner of Egypt. 25 For yet a very little while, and the indignation shall cease, and mine anger in their destruction. 26 And the Lord of Hosts shall stir up a scourge for him according to the slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb; and as his rod was upon the sea so shall he lift it up after the manner of Egypt. 27 And it shall come to pass in that day that his burden shall be taken away from off thy shoulder, and his yoke from off thy neck, and the yoke shall be destroyed because of the anointing.

10:26 (2 Nephi 20:26)."The slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb." Future enemies of the Lord's people will face the same fate meted out to the Midianites by Gideon and his three hundred warriors as recorded in Judges 7:19-25. One of the princes of these defeated enemies of Israel, a man named Oreb, was slain "upon the rock of Oreb."

20:27 (2 Nephi 20:27). "His burden [and] yoke shall be destroyed." The burden of oppression laid upon the shoulders of the Lord's people by those who oppose His work shall be removed because of the "anointing" (divine intervention of the Messiah, even Jesus Christ).

Isaiah 10:28-32 and 2 Nephi 20:28-32

In these verses Isaiah returns his attention to the future conquests of the invading Assyrians. The prophet lists a number of the cities that will fall before Assyria's armies as they march triumphantly towards Jerusalem. While the exact location of all these towns is unknown, they would certainly have been in the vicinity of Judah's capital city. The city of Nob was located near enough to Jerusalem that the invading king would be able from Nob to "shake his hand" (fist) against Jerusalem as his next intended victim. As previously noted, the invasion of Jerusalem did not succeed. (See Isaiah 36-37.)

Victor Ludlow suggests that "the invasion Isaiah foretells may also be eschatological and refer to the future attack upon Jerusalem by forces from the north. (See Zech. 14:2; Rev. 11:1-13; JST Matt. 24.) Another reason for looking at the end of chapter 10 from a latter-day context is that chapter 11 is definitely a prophecy to be fulfilled after 1823, for Moroni told Joseph Smith in September of that year 'that it was about to be fulfilled.' (JS H 1:40.)" (IPSP, 165.)

28 He is come to Aiath, he is passed to Migron; at Michmash he hath laid up his carriages: 29 They are gone over the passage: they have taken up their lodging at Geba; Ramah is afraid; Gibeah of Saul is fled. 30 Lift up thy voice, O daughter of Gallim: cause it to be heard unto Laish, O poor Anathoth. 31 Madmenah is removed; the inhabitants of Gebim gather themselves to flee. 32 As yet shall he remain at Nob that day: he shall shake his hand against the mount of the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem. 28 He is come to Aiath, he is passed to Migron; at Michmash he hath laid up his carriages. 29 They are gone over the passage; they have taken up their lodging at Geba; Ramath is afraid; Gibeah of Saul is fled. 30 Lift up the voice, O daughter of Gallim; cause it to be heard unto Laish, O poor Anathoth. 31 Madmenah is removed; the inhabitants of Gebim gather themselves to flee. 32 As yet shall he remain at Nob that day; he shall shake his hand against the mount of the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem.

Isaiah 10:33-34 and 2 Nephi 20:33-34

The theme of these final verses is the destruction of Assyria. The metaphor of a forest being cut down is used to describe her eradication. Those of high and low stature shall all be hewn down, as boughs and trees are cut and toppled together.

33 Behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts, shall lop the bough with terror: and the high ones of stature shall be hewn down, and the haughty shall be humbled. 34 And he shall cut down the thickets of the forest with iron, and Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one.33 Behold, the Lord, the Lord of Hosts shall lop the bough with terror; and the high ones of stature shall be hewn down; and the haughty shall be humbled. 34 And he shall cut down the thickets of the forests with iron, and Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one.
