Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Chapter 11

Isaiah 11 and 2 Nephi 21 (with Miscellaneous Other Citations)

Overview

This chapter of Isaiah's writings is particularly significant, as evidenced by the fact that it is referenced in all four of the Standard Works the Church accepts as scripture. In addition to the Old Testament and Book of Mormon accounts, portions of these writings are found in the New Testament (Revelation 2:16; 5:5; 19:15; and Romans 15:12) and the Doctrine & Covenants (19:15; 113:1-6; and 133:26-29); and in Joseph Smith's history as found in the Pearl of Great Price, he tells us that the entire chapter of Isaiah 11 was quoted to him by the Angel Moroni (JS H 1:40). Additionally, on several occasions the Prophet provided commentary on verses in this chapter. (See TPJS, 14-15, 71, 93, 316.)

Isaiah's vision included a look at the latter days in which we live, as well as a view of millennial conditions. In fact, when Moroni appeared to young Joseph Smith on the night of 21 September 1823, he informed him that these particular writings of Isaiah were "about to be fulfilled." Isaiah obviously knew about the great work to be accomplished by the Lord through His servants in this last dispensation of time.

Commentary

Isaiah 11:1-5 and 2 Nephi 21:1-5

The prophet-poet commences this chapter with metaphoric expressions through which he testifies of the coming forth of Jesus Christ and a specially called servant. Section 113 of the Doctrine and Covenants provides the Lord's commentary on this chapter.

Isaiah 11 1 And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a Branch shall grow out of his roots: 2 And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord; 3 And shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord: and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears: 4 But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth: and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. 5 And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins. 2 Nephi 21 1 And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots. 2 And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord; 3 And shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord; and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears. 4 But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth; and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. 5 And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins.

11:1 5 (2 Nephi 21:1-5)."Stem of Jesse." Christ is the One spoken of in verse 1 as the stem. (D&C 113:1-2.) He is also the Branch, the messianic King David, who was prophesied to come forth in the last days. (See Jeremiah 23:5; ANW, 518.) He was a descendant of Jesse, who was the father of King David. (Ruth 4:17; Matthew 1:5-6.) Verses 2 through 5 enumerate some of His attributes.

11:1 (2 Nephi 21:1)."Rod out of the stem of Jesse." An 1838 revelation identified this as "a servant in the hands of Christ, who is partly a descendant of Jesse as well as of Ephraim, or of the house of Joseph, on whom there is laid much power." (D&C 113:3-4.) Certainly the priesthood power bestowed on Joseph Smith, the Prophet of the Restoration, qualifies him to be this servant. Consider also the Angel Moroni's proclamation, following a recitation of the eleventh chapter of Isaiah to young Joseph, that "it was about to be fulfilled." (JS H 1:40.) Furthermore, the ancient seer Joseph, he who rose to such power in ancient Egypt, prophesied that one of his descendants bearing the name of Joseph would be raised up to do a great work for the Lord. (2 Nephi 3:6-15; JST Genesis 50:26-33.)

"With respect to Joseph's lineage, Brigham Young declared he was 'a pure Ephraimite' (JD 2:269). However, as Joseph Fielding Smith pointed out, 'No one can lay claim to a perfect descent from father to son through just one lineage' (AGQ 3:61). Therefore, though Joseph's lineage may be traceable directly back to Ephraim through a given line, of necessity there were intermarriages that took place, making it possible for his descent to have also come from Jesse through his forefather, Judah." (DCE, 479-80.)

One commentator suggests that the "rod" and "branch" may be a "great Jewish leader of the last days who will be called David. He further suggests that this individual "might not be a Christian or a member of Christ's true church, but he will respect the Lord and have concern for others." (IPSP, 169.) However, this interpretation is not consistent with the view generally held by Latter-day Saints, as described above.

11:3 (2 Nephi 21:3)."Not judge after the sight of his eyes." The Savior will not judge by outward appearance nor by hearsay, "for the Lord seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart." (1 Samuel 16:7.)

11:4 (2 Nephi 21:4)."The rod of his mouth .Â .Â . the breath of his lips." "The rod, as an instrument, is frequently associated with discipline or justice. Thus, if the unrepentant are to be smitten with the rod of the Lord's mouth, they will be punished or disciplined by the decree of his mouth." (DCE, 477-78.) The words on His holy breath will condemn the wicked. Certainly the wicked who will be destroyed by fire at the Second Coming will feel the hot impact of these words. (See 1 Nephi 22:23; 2 Nephi 30:10.)

11:5 (2 Nephi 21:5)."Righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins." It is of interest to note that Nephi uses this same phrase elsewhere in the Book of Mormon. (2 Nephi 30:11.) The Savior's girdle of righteousness is a symbol of His strength.

Isaiah 11:6-9 and 2 Nephi 21:6-9

A glimpse of serene millennial conditions is next portrayed by the prophet. Peace will prevail and enmity will cease, not only between humans but in the animal kingdom as well. (D&C 101:26; see also BICQ, 215-16.) However, as to the question of whether vegetarianism will be the order of the day, Sidney B. Sperry gave the following opinion: "We all know that the Lord has placed a balance in nature. And to contend that man cannot eat meat or use the fowls of the air or fish in the streams and oceans for needed sustenance during the millennium is beyond what Isaiah meant to convey." (BMC, 224 25; see also D&C 49:18-19.)

6 The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them. 7 And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. 8 And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice' den. 9 They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. 6 The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid, and the calf and the young lion and fatling together; and a little child shall lead them. 7 And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together; and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. 8 And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice's den. 9 They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.

11:8 (2 Nephi 21:8)."Asp [and] cockatrice." Infants and small children (as well as youth and adults), will not be harmed by asps (horned vipers or cobras) or by cockatrices (other venomous vipers).

11:9 (2 Nephi 21:9)."My holy mountain." The entire earth, in its paradisiacal peace and splendor, will be as a temple the abode of Deity, or house of the Lord.

11:9 (2 Nephi 21:9)."The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord." The Prophet Joseph Smith rendered this, "the earth will be filled with sacred knowledge." (TPJS, 93.) Surely the word of the Lord will fill the earth during this thousand-year period of peace. Men, women, and children will not only know of the Lord, but they will know Him!

Isaiah 11:10 and 2 Nephi 21:10

Commencing with verse 10, Isaiah leaves his description of millennial conditions and returns to the recovery of the remnant of Israel prior to the Second Coming.

10 And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek: and his rest shall be glorious. 10 And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek; and his rest shall be glorious.

11:10 (2 Nephi 21:10)."Root of Jesse." The Doctrine and Covenants identifies this individual as "a descendant of Jesse, as well as of Joseph, unto whom rightly belongs the priesthood, and the keys of the kingdom, for an ensign, and for the gathering of my people in the last days." (D&C 113:5-6.) The apostle Paul mistakenly identified the "root" as Christ. (Romans 15:12.) Dr. Sidney B. Sperry explained the reason for this mistake:

"Examination of Romans 15:12 demonstrates that Paul was closely following the Septuagint (LXX, Greek translation) text of Isaiah 11:10 rather than the Hebrew. As a matter of fact, the LXX version is only a paraphrase of the original Hebrew. We notice that the Greek version of Isaiah 11:1 translates the Hebrew text, 'stem of Jesse,' as the 'root of Jesse' and uses the same phrase in Isaiah 11:10. Of interest is the fact that the Greek word riza(root) is used in both verses to translate different Hebrew words. Paul would be quick to discern that the 'root of Jesse' of the LXX text of Isaiah 11:1-5 was the Christ. And when he observed that the phrase 'root of Jesse' was used again in verse 10, he would naturally assume that it, too, had reference to the Christ. Hence the reason for his quotation in Romans 15:12." (BMC, 227.)

Who, then, is the "root of Jesse?" It appears that the Prophet Joseph Smith is both the "rod" and the "root" that will come from Jesse. (See BMC, 223; DCBM 1:281; GAWI, 73-74.) He is the one upon whom the keys of the kingdom were bestowed, including the keys of the gathering of Israel. (See D&C 13:1; 27:12-13; 90:2-3; 110:11-16.) However, Victor Ludlow suggested that "Joseph Smith might not be the only 'root of Jesse' in these last days. Many presidents of the Church have been related to him by blood, and all have held the priesthood and the keys of the kingdom that he held. .Â .Â . The 'root of Jesse' could also be that particular prophet who will hold the keys when Christ returns to preside personally over his kingdom. The term could even represent the office of the president of the Church. In any case, the 'root of Jesse' designates a great leader in the Church of Jesus Christ in this dispensation." (IPSP, 174.)

A most interesting commentary on Joseph Smith's divine calling was supplied by Victor Ludlow. Jewish tradition anticipates two "saviors" or "messiahs": "Messiah ben David" (a redeemer Messiah descended from David) and "Messiah ben Joseph" (a redeemer descended from Joseph). Regarding this second "Messiah," the Encyclopedia Judaica 11:1411 states: "A secondary messianic figure is the Messiah son of Joseph (or Ephraim), whose coming precedes that of the Messiah, son of David, and who will die in combat with the enemies of God and Israel." Dr. Ludlow then suggests, "Joseph Smith and his martyrdom could already be a fulfillment of this role." (IPSP, 177.)

11:10 (2 Nephi 21:10)."Ensign of the people." The Prophet Joseph Smith, and his successors in the presidency of the Church he was directed to establish, are the "ensign of the people" to whom the Saints of the latter days will look for direction, as these prophets speak the word of the Lord. Truly, the phrase "follow the prophet" is a rallying cry for the righteous and their way of safety. (The "ensign to[or for] the nations" is discussed in the commentary in verse 12, as well as in Isaiah 49:22 and Isaiah 5:26.)

Isaiah 11:11-12 and 2 Nephi 21:11-12; 6:14; 25:17; 29:1; Jacob 6:2

Isaiah symbolically mentions seven countries plus the "islands of the sea" (continents) from whence the remnant of the Lord's people will be gathered for the second time. He used the names of nations with which the people of his day were most familiar, but the gathering of the last days will be worldwide in nature. The first gathering occurred after the Babylonian captivity. Joseph Smith stated in January 1833 that the time for the second gathering had arrived. (HC 1:313.)

11 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea. 12 And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth. 11 And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea. 2 Nephi 6:14.And behold, according to the words of the prophet, the Messiah will set himself again the second time to recover them; wherefore, he will manifest himself unto them in power and great glory, unto the destruction of their enemies, when that day cometh when they shall believe in him; and none will he destroy that believe in him. 2 Nephi 25:17. And the Lord will set his hand again the second time to restore his people from their lost and fallen state. Wherefore, he will proceed to do a marvelous work and a wonder among the children of men. 2 Nephi 29:1.But behold, there shall be many at that day when I shall proceed to do a marvelous work among them, that I may remember my covenants which I have made unto the children of men, that I may set my hand again the second time to recover my people, which are of the house of Israel; Jacob 6:2. And the day that he shall set his hand again the second time to recover his people, is the day, yea, even the last time, that the servants of the Lord shall go forth in his power, to nourish and prune his vineyard; and after that the end soon cometh. 12 And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.

11:12 (2 Nephi 21:12)."He shall set up an ensign for the nations." The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the ensign held up for the nations. It is the standard the Lord has raised for His people and one to which the gentiles of the nations of the earth should seek. (D&C 45:9; DCE, 157.) Elder Marion G. Romney declared: "This Church is the standard which Isaiah said the Lord would set up for the people in the latter days. .Â .Â . This Church is the ensign on the mountain spoken of by the Old Testament prophets." (CR, April 1961, p. 119.)

There is another possibility to consider regarding the identity of this standard or ensign. Speaking particularly of the Book of Mormon, the Lord said to Nephi, "My words shall hiss forth unto the ends of the earth, for a standard unto my people, which are of the house of Israel." (2 Nephi 29:2.) The Prophet Joseph identified the Book of Mormon as "the keystone of our religion," making it inseparable with the truthfulness of the Church. Thus, whether we speak of the Church or the Book of Mormon, both are standards or ensigns to the nations of the earth. (See also commentary on Isaiah 49:22 and Isaiah 5:26.)

11:12 (2 Nephi 21:12)."Outcasts of Israel, and .Â .Â . the dispersed of Judah." After quoting this verse, Elder Orson Pratt said: "Here is a declaration that the two great kingdoms of Israel its 'outcasts,' the ten tribes, scattered seven hundred and twenty years before Christ, and the 'dispersed of Judah,' dispersed among all nations, shall be gathered." (JD 14:66.) The Ten Tribes, or tribes of the northern kingdom of Israel, were taken into captivity by the Assyrians about 721 b.c. (See 2 Kings 17.) The return of these lost tribes, to receive their full blessings at the hands of Ephraim, is one of the basic beliefs of Latter-day Saints. (See D&C 133:26-34; BICQ, 135-42.) Judah, while having gathered to the nation of Israel in a political or cultural sense, has yet to be gathered to the fold of the True Shepherd in fulfillment of the Lord's admonition to "let them who be of Judah flee unto Jerusalem, unto the mountains of the Lord's house [His temples and His kingdom]." (D&C 133:13; BICQ, 125-34.)

11:12 (2 Nephi 21:12)."Four corners of the earth." Figuratively, the ends of the earth.

Isaiah 11:13-14 and 2 Nephi 21:13-14

When the remnants return, the long-standing adversarial relationship between Judah (the southern kingdom) and Ephraim (representing the northern kingdom) will end. They will be a united kingdom for the first time since Solomon's reign. Their feuding will be swallowed up in their common covenants with Christ. Combined Israel will then prevail over her enemies, symbolized by Edom, Moab, and Ammon.

13 The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim. 14 But they shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines toward the west; they shall spoil them of the east together: they shall lay their hand upon Edom and Moab; and the children of Ammon shall obey them. 13 The envy of Ephraim also shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off; Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim. 14 But they shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines towards the west; they shall spoil them of the east together; they shall lay their hand upon Edom and Moab; and the children of Ammon shall obey them.

11:14 (2 Nephi 21:14)."Fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines." Sidney Sperry suggested that this phrase meant the gentiles, represented by the Philistines, would assist in the gathering of Israel. (BMC, 228.) However, another interpretation is that combined Israel would "attack the western slopes that [once] were Philistine territory." (LDSKJ, Isaiah 11:14, footnote a.) The Philistines were bitter enemies of Israel and originally occupied the lowland on the Mediterranean coast known then as Palestine and today as the Gaza Strip.

11:14 (2 Nephi 21:14)."Edom and Moab; and the children of Ammon." Edom was the name of Esau's descendants and the territory they occupied in Mount Seir. The country lay southeast of Palestine, with Moab on the north and the Dead Sea on the northwest. The Edomites and Israelites shared a mutual hatred of one another. Moab was southeast of the Dead Sea, and its citizens were constantly at war with the Israelites. The Ammonites were descendants of Abraham's nephew, Lot. Their country was located east of Mount Gilead, north of Moab. They were a constant irritant to the Israelites. The area occupied by the Edomites, Moabites, and Ammonites now comprises the country of modern Jordan. As noted above, Isaiah used the names of these countries to symbolize latter-day enemies of Israel.

Isaiah 11:15-16 and 2 Nephi 21:15-16

Even as God showed forth his power against ancient Egypt at the time of the Exodus, so shall He provide divine intervention during the gathering of the last days. He will perform modern miracles in order to accomplish His purposes.

15 And the Lord shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea; and with his mighty wind shall he shake his hand over the river, and shall smite it in the seven streams, and make men go over dryshod. 16 And there shall be an highway for the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria; like as it was to Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt. 15 And the Lord shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea; and with his mighty wind he shall shake his hand over the river, and shall smite it in the seven streams, and make men go over dry shod. 16 And there shall be a highway for the remnant of his people which shall be left, from Assyria, like as it was to Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt.

11:15 (2 Nephi 21:15)."Utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea." There is uncertainty among LDS and other scriptural scholars as to the meaning of this prophecy. Sidney B. Sperry postulated that Isaiah was illustrating "the power of the Almighty by telling us that He will cut off or separate the tongue of the Egyptian sea, shake his hand over the Euphrates, smite it into many streams and cause men to go over it dryshod. Perhaps," said Dr. Sperry, "'Egyptian sea' and 'River' (vs. 15) are metonyms for places of exile and bondage. Such shall be overthrown when the time of redemption comes." (BMC, 229.)

The "tongue" according to Victor Ludlow "might be the western arm of the Red Sea (or Gulf of Suez, for which the modern Suez Canal was named) and the narrow body of water that extended north from the Red Sea into the desert. Another possibility," noted Dr. Ludlow, "is the delta (or tongue) of the Nile, which protruded into the Mediterranean Sea along Egypt's north coast. The most likely explanation, however, is the large inland sea created late each spring as the Nile overflows its banks and floods a large part of the valley, like a tongue sticking far inland. Isaiah 19:5-10 describes the destruction of the Nile River in greater detail. If the Nile River is the 'tongue of the Egyptian Sea,' then this prophecy might have been fulfilled since the building of the Aswan Dam and the destruction of the traditional way of life along the Nile." (IPSP, 176.)

Monte Nyman suggested that "this prophecy in verse 15 is one of those which will probably not be understood until it comes to pass, but when it does there will be no doubt as to its fulfillment." He cites 2 Nephi 25:7 as evidence of this conclusion. Said Nephi, "In the days that the prophecies of Isaiah shall be fulfilled men shall know of a surety, at the times when they shall come to pass." (GAWI, 76.)

11:16 (2 Nephi 21:16)."There shall be anhighway for the remnant." One is reminded of the great prophecy regarding the return of the lost tribes that "an highway shall be cast up in the midst of the great deep." (D&C 133:27.) The author has previously suggested that "this highway could be a literal road whereon the returning tribes will travel; it could [also] be symbolic of a highway of holiness (Isa. 35:8), which one scholar has identified as the strait and narrow path (Mill M, 327); or a combination of the two pathways." (DCE, 590.)

Whatever this highway will be, it will be a clear road or means of transportation whereby the Lord's people will find their way to His promised destination. Certainly the Lord's hand will be in the matter.
