Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Chapter 12

Isaiah 12 and 2 Nephi 22

Overview

In a joyous outburst of thanksgiving and praise, because of the redemption of the remnant spoken of in the previous chapter, Isaiah records a hymn consisting of two short psalms. This song of praise will undoubtedly be sung in the future congregations of the redeemed of Israel.

Commentary

Isaiah 12:1-3 and 2 Nephi 22:1-3

The redeemed remnant will be grateful for forgiveness. Because Israel will turn from sin to repentance, the Lord will turn from punishing her to comforting her. The Lord God Jehovah is not only a source of protecting strength to the once-beleaguered Israel, but He is also the source of her salvation in His role as the Redeeming One, or Savior.

Verse 3 has been referred to as "one of the loveliest in the Old Testament" (BMC, 231) and as "the most important verse in this set" (IPSP, 178). However, scholars are uncertain as to whether it belongs with the psalm in verses 1 and 2 or with the second psalm in verses 4 to 6.

Isaiah 12 1 And in that day thou shalt say, O Lord, I will praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortedst me. 2 Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid: for the Lord JEHOVAH is my strength and my song; he also is become my salvation. 3 Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation. 2 Nephi 22 1 And in that day thou shalt say: O Lord, I will praise thee; though thou wast angry with me thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortedest me. 2 Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid; for the Lord JEHOVAH is my strength and my song; he also has become my salvation. 3 Therefore, with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation.

12:2 (2 Nephi 22:2)."JEHOVAH." The covenant or proper name of the God of the Old Testament was so highly reverenced that it was rarely spoken. In fact, the original pronunciation of the name may be unknown to mortal man. When reading orally, the Israelites substituted the name Adonai, meaning literally, my Lord. Elder James E. Talmage tells us that "Jehovah is the Anglicized rendering of the Hebrew, Yahveh or Jahveh, signifying the Self-existent One, or The Eternal. This name is generally rendered in our English version of the Old Testament as Lord, printed in [small] capitals." (Talmage, p. 36; see also DCE, 276.) Of the four times the sacred name appears unchanged in the Old Testament, Isaiah uses it twice. (Isaiah 12:2; 26:4; see also Exodus 6:3; Psalm 83:18.)

Latter-day Saints affirm that this holy name is the premortal name of Jesus Christ and has been used in behalf of the Savior in sacred places during His postmortal ministry. The name can be found in the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. (2 Nephi 22:2; Moroni 10:34; D&C 109:34, 42, 56, 68; 110:3; 128:9; Abraham 1:16.)

12:3 (2 Nephi 22:3)."Draw water out of the wells of salvation." This is an invitation for others to join with the redeemed remnant and experience the joy of the gospel. It is an invitation to repent and be baptized; or, as the apostle Paul would later proclaim, to put off old (sinful) ways and put on a new (cleansed) body whereby we would then "walk in newness of life." (See Romans 6.) The sure promise of Him who is the source of "living water" (John 4:10) is this: "I will give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life freely." (Revelation 21:6.)

Isaiah 12:4-6 and 2 Nephi 22:4-6

This second psalm focuses more on praising than on thanksgiving. Victor Ludlow points out that "in a praise psalm, attention is centered upon the person being extolled, but in a thanks psalm the viewpoint is focused on the person giving thanks and upon the blessing that he has received. The first psalm of chapter 12 is in the 'thanks' category; the second is more of a 'praise' type." (IPSP, 179.)

4 And in that day shall ye say, Praise the Lord, call upon his name, declare his doings among the people, make mention that his name is exalted. 5 Sing unto the Lord; for he hath done excellent things: this is known in all the earth. 6 Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee. 4 And in that day shall ye say: Praise the Lord, call upon his name, declare his doings among the people, make mention that his name is exalted. 5 Sing unto the Lord; for he hath done excellent things; this is known in all the earth. 6 Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion; for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee.

12:5 (2 Nephi 22:5)."Sing unto the Lord." The admonition to "sing unto the Lord" is not one that is reserved for the redeemed remnant of the future. Sacred music invites the Spirit of the Lord into our midst and is a wonderful way in which to worship Deity. Modern revelation reminds us that the Lord's "soul delighteth in the song of the heart; yea, the song of the righteous is a prayer unto [Him]." (D&C 25:12.)
