Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Chapter 13

Isaiah 13 and 2 Nephi 23

Overview

The authorship of this chapter is disputed by some of the uninspired worldly scholars, who rely on their academic learning but do not recognize the role of the Spirit in understanding scripture and prophetic utterances. Because Isaiah focuses on the destruction of Babylon, an event that occurred long after his time, and because these so-called scholars do not believe in prophecy, they assume that this chapter was written by someone after the event had come to pass. Such assumptions cause one to reflect on Jacob's astute observation:

"O that cunning plan of the evil one! O the vainness, and the frailties, and the foolishness of men! When they are learned they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not. And they shall perish." (2 Nephi 9:28.)

Isaiah ancient prophet, seer, and revelator of the Lord not only foresaw the destruction of the mighty Babylon of his days, but also the ultimate destruction of spiritual Babylon (the world) in the last days. Surely the many who have trusted in the arm of flesh who have worshiped the false idols of materialism, carnality, sophistry, status, and pride will one day be faced with the truth that these gods of Baal cannot prevail against the true and living God! Then, perhaps, as was the case anciently, they will be ledto declare: "The Lord [Jehovah], he is the God; the Lord, he is the God." (1 Kings 18:39.)

Certainly, in response, the Lord God Jehovah shall say: "There is no God else beside me; a just God and a Saviour; there is none beside me. .Â .Â . [U]nto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear." (Isaiah 45:21-23; see also Romans 14:11; Philippians 2:10; Mosiah 27:31; D&C 76:110; 88:104.)

Commentary

Isaiah 13:1 and 2 Nephi 23:1

This opening verse speaks of the "burden" (message of doom) that is lifted up against Babylon. Isaiah's seeric powers allowed him to see in vision what was to take place.

Isaiah 13 1 The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see. 2 Nephi 23 1 The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see.

13:1 (2 Nephi 23:1)."Babylon." Babylon was the ancient capital city of Babylonia, a society noted for its wickedness and cruelty. In our day it is a representation of the wickedness of the world. In fact, the Lord Himself equated the "midst of wickedness" with "spiritual Babylon." (D&C 133:14.) The ancient city appeared to be impregnable to attack, with walls said to be 56 miles in circumference, 335 feet high, and 85 feet wide. Yet, as foreseen by Isaiah, this fortress of ancient Babylonia fell. The plea to come forth out of today's Babylon (D&C 133:5, 7, 14) is the clarion call to modern Israel to escape from the Babylonian bondage of wickedness to the freedom and light of the gospel of Jesus Christ (D&C 45:9; 50:24; 88:86.)

Isaiah 13:2-5 and 2 Nephi 23:2-5

In figurative language, Isaiah describes the mustering of those called to the service of the Lord (the "sanctified" and "mighty ones") to do battle against the wickedness of Babylon. These warriors of righteousness include not only mortal men (those "from a far country") but also destroying angels (those "from the end of heaven"), who are called to cut down the tares (destroy the wicked). (See Matthew 13:24-30; D&C 86:1-7.)

2 Lift ye up a banner upon the high mountain, exalt the voice unto them, shake the hand, that they may go into the gates of the nobles. 3 I have commanded my sanctified ones, I have also called my mighty ones for mine anger, even them that rejoice in my highness. 4 The noise of a multitude in the mountains, like as of a great people; a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered together: the Lord of hosts mustereth the host of the battle. 5 They come from a far country, from the end of heaven, even the Lord, and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole land. 2 Lift ye up a banner upon the high mountain, exalt the voice unto them, shake the hand, that they may go into the gates of the nobles. 3 I have commanded my sanctified ones, I have also called my mighty ones, for mine anger is not upon them that rejoice in my highness. 4 The noise of the multitude in the mountains like as of a great people, a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered together, the Lord of Hosts mustereth the hosts of the battle. 5 They come from a far country, from the end of heaven, yea, the Lord, and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole land.

13:2 (2 Nephi 23:2)."A [my] banner." The banner to be raised up is the battle flag or standard of the Lord. By inserting the word "my" before "banner," the Joseph Smith Translation makes it clear that this standard is the Lord's. (JST Isaiah 13:2.) This rallying standard unites the righteousof the world in the common cause of Christ. (See commentary for Isaiah 11:12 and 2 Nephi 21:12.)

13:2 (2 Nephi 23:2)."Gates of the nobles." The gates of Eastern cities were an important part of ancient city life. They were not only places of entrance and exit, but also served as places of private and public business transactions. The gates were often taken as representing the city itself. (See the commentary on Isaiah 3:26.) In the Isaiah context, the meaning is probably an invitation for those who are fleeing Babylon to enter the holy cities of Jerusalem and Zion (the new Jerusalem). (See D&C 133:12-14.)

13:3 (2 Nephi 23:3)."Sanctified ones." Footnote 3a(LDSKJ) identifies these as synonymous for "Saints." These are the consecrated ones who have made covenants with Christ through sacred and saving ordinances. They have "a determination to serve him to the end." (D&C 20:37.)

13:3 (2 Nephi 23:3)."Mine anger is not upon them that rejoice in my highness." The Book of Mormon clarification of this verse is most helpful in eliminating the ambiguity of the wording in the Bible. The Lord's "anger" (displeasure or wrath) is not directed toward those who "rejoice in [His] highness" (eminence or majesty). These are they who find joy in worshiping and serving Him.

Isaiah 13:6-9 and 2 Nephi 23:6-9

Great destruction will come upon the wicked in the days preceding the second coming of the Lord, as well as when He actually arrives. Fear shall grip the hearts of the wicked as, in the midst of sorrow, they face the reality that "wickedness never was happiness." (Alma 41:10.) Truly, for them this will be the "dreadful day of the Lord." (Malachi 4:5.)

6 Howl ye; for the day of the Lord is at hand; it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty. 7 Therefore shall all hands be faint, and every man's heart shall melt: 8 And they shall be afraid: pangs and sorrows shall take hold of them; they shall be in pain as a woman that travaileth: they shall be amazed one at another; their faces shall be as flames. 9 Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate: and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it. 6 Howl ye, for the day of the Lord is at hand; it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty. 7 Therefore shall all hands be faint, every man's heart shall melt; 8 And they shall be afraid; pangs and sorrows shall take hold of them; they shall be amazed one at another; their faces shall be as flames. 9 Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate; and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it.

13:6 (2 Nephi 23:6)."Day of the Lord." This phrase is used first by the prophets Isaiah and Amos. (Isaiah 2:12; Amos 5:18.) In general, this is that period of time just preceding the return of the resurrected Lord to this earth, as well as the time of His actual coming. In His postmortal ministry among the inhabitants of the ancient Americas, Jesus commanded that some of the writings of the Old Testament prophet Malachi be recited and recorded. Among these prophecies was the promise of "the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord." (Malachi 4:5-6; 3 Nephi 25:5-6.) It will truly be a great day to those who righteously await its onset; but, to the wicked, it shall be a dreadful day of exquisite sorrow. Some other appellations applied to this "day" are "day of visitation, and of judgment, and of indignation" (D&C 56:16); "day of wrath" (D&C 63:6); "day of vengeance" (D&C 133:51); and "day .Â .Â . that shall burn as an oven" (Malachi 4:1; D&C 133:64). (See also DCE, 222-23; BICQ, 194-99.)

Although the righteous will ultimately be saved in the kingdom of God, it should be pointed out that even some of them will fall prey to the war and pestilence that will precede the Second Coming. "It is a false idea," said the Prophet Joseph Smith, "that the Saints will escape all the judgments, whilst the wicked suffer; for all flesh is subject to suffer, and 'the righteous shall hardly escape;' still many of the Saints will escape, for the just shall live by faith; yet many of the righteous shall fall a prey to disease, to pestilence, etc., by reason of the weakness of the flesh and yet be saved in the Kingdom of God." (HC 4:11; see also BICQ, 91.)

13:7 (2 Nephi 23:7)."Every man's heart shall melt." While this may have reference to despairing hearts, it is possible it could be descriptive of the abundance of failing hearts in the last days. (See Luke 21:26; D&C 45:26; Moses 7:66.)

13:8 (2 Nephi 23:8)."Their faces shall be as flames." This could mean that the faces of sinners will burn with shame or be inflamed because of weeping. Or it may be possible that the amazement (astonishment) of the people in looking at one another could be expressive of their horror in viewing the ravages of a burning disease, or the result of chemical, biological, or nuclear warfare. Conceivably, such catastrophes could not only cause a face to "be as flames," but also the "flesh [to] fall from off [the] bones, and [the] eyes from [the] sockets." (D&C 29:18-19; see also BICQ, 92-93.)

Isaiah 13:10 and 2 Nephi 23:10

Samuel, the great Lamanite prophet of Book of Mormon times, prophesied that at the time of the crucifixion of the Savior "the sun shall be darkened .Â .Â . and also the moon and the stars .Â .Â . for the space of three days." (Helaman 14:20.) While the fulfillment of that prophecy was restricted to the ancient Americas, the prophecy of Isaiah regarding a future time when these heavenly bodies would refuse to give their light will be a worldwide event. (See Joel 2:10; Matthew 24:29.) Similar but somewhat divergent prophecies are found elsewhere in scripture. (Revelation 6:12-14; D&C 45:42; 88:87; 133:49.) These references include the moon turning to blood and the stars falling from the heavens. There may, in fact, be multiple fulfillments of these manifestations in the heavens. And it well may be that in spite of such signs and wonders the unbelieving and skeptical will "be less and less astonished at a sign or a wonder from heaven," just as occurred with some anciently. (3 Nephi 2:1-2.)

10 For the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall not give their light: the sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine. 10 For the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall not give their light; the sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine.

Isaiah 13:11-13 and 2 Nephi 23:11-13

The worldly will be punished for their evil ways. The destruction will be so widespread that, in comparison to the original population, there will be a scarcity of survivors.

11 And I will punish the world for their evil, and the wicked for their iniquity; and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible. 12 I will make a man more precious than fine gold; even a man than the golden wedge of Ophir. 13 Therefore I will shake the heavens, and the earth shall remove out of her place, in the wrath of the Lord of hosts, and in the day of his fierce anger. 11 And I will punish the world for evil, and the wicked for their iniquity; I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and will lay down the haughtiness of the terrible. 12 I will make a man more precious than fine gold; even a man than the golden wedge of Ophir. 13 Therefore, I will shake the heavens, and the earth shall remove out of her place, in the wrath of the Lord of Hosts, and in the day of his fierce anger.

13:12 (2 Nephi 23:12)."The golden wedge of Ophir." As a result of the terrible destruction, death will make mankind more rare than the golden wedge (gold) of Ophir (probably a port of southern Arabia, famed for its gold).

13:13 (2 Nephi 23:13)."Shake the heavens." One of the heavenly signs to be manifest in the last days will be a shaking (trembling) of the heavens. An elaboration of this prophecy was revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The Lord declared: "And also cometh the testimony of the voice of thunderings, and the voice of lightnings, and the voice of tempests, and the voice of the waves of the sea heaving themselves beyond their bounds. And all things shall be in commotion; and surely, men's hearts shall fail them; for fear shall come upon all people." (D&C 88:90-91.)

In addition to the great rains and hailstorms which have been forecast for the last days, inspired servants of God have spoken of fire and brimstone being rained from the heavens. (See BICQ, 33-34.)

13:13 (2 Nephi 23:13)."The earth shall remove out of her place." While it is true that Isaiah's seeric eyes could have seen the many earthquakes which will rock this planet in the last days, including the great one to occur at the time of the Second Coming, there may be a more significant explanation for what this Old Testament seer saw. One of the basic beliefs of Latter-day Saints is: "We believe .Â .Â . that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory." (A of F 1:10.) Before the fall of Adam and Eve, this earth was a terrestrial sphere in a Garden-of-Eden state of existence. This same condition will return and prevail throughout the thousand-year period of time known as the Millennium. This will include "bringing the mass of the earth back to the conditionit was in before the continents and islands were separated, when the earth was 'divided.'" (See BICQ, 216-18.)

Isaiah 13:14-18 and 2 Nephi 23:14-18

Isaiah now returns his commentary to the destruction of the Babylon of his days. Her prophesied doom is sure. The citizens of Babylon will be hunted and killed, while the strangers or visitors within her walls will flee to their own lands for safety. None will be spared the savagery, including infants and children, nor will ransom payments or peace offerings be accepted by the invaders.

14 And it shall be as the chased roe, and as a sheep that no man taketh up: they shall every man turn to his own people, and flee every one into his own land. 15 Every one that is found shall be thrust through; and every one that is joined unto them shall fall by the sword. 16 Their children also shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes; their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished. 17 Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not regard silver; and as for gold, they shallnot delight in it. 18 Their bows also shall dash the young men to pieces; and they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eye shall not spare children. 14 And it shall be as the chased roe, and as a sheep that no man taketh up; and they shall every man turn to his own people, and flee every one into his own land. 15 Every one that is proud shall be thrust through; yea, and every one that is joined to the wicked shall fall by the sword. 16 Their children also shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes; their houses shall be spoiled and their wives ravished. 17 Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not regard silver and gold, nor shall they delight in it. 18 Their bows shall also dash the young men to pieces; and they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eyes shall not spare children.

13:14 (2 Nephi 23:14)."The chased roe." The inhabitants of Babylon will be as hunted gazelles or deer.

13:14 (2 Nephi 23:14)."Sheep that no man taketh up." The Babylonians will find none to gather them like sheep to the safety of a sheepfold. No protecting shepherd will rescue them from the invading predators.

13:15 (2 Nephi 23:15)."Every one that is joined to the wicked." The Book of Mormon adds the significant insight that outsiders (visitors, strangers, or foreigners) who join in the wicked ways of the citizenry of Babylon will also be slain.

13:17 (2 Nephi 23:17)."The Medes." They "came from Persia and easily conquered Babylon in 538 b.c. The walls were destroyed twenty years later, after which the city never again became the capital of an independent, strong Mesopotamian power. Two centuries later, after Alexander the Great and his Greek armies conquered the Persians, Babylon rapidly declined in commercial and cultural importance; Seleucia became the major city in the area. By the time of Christ, only a few astronomers and mathematicians continued to live in the ancient, sparsely populated city. After they left, Babylon became a deserted tell(mound), gradually covered by sand and brush until it became a hill used only by wild animals and as grazing land for nomadic flocks." (IPSP, 185.)

13:17 (2 Nephi 23:17)."Shall not regard silver and gold." The invading Medes will not be deterred from their destruction by offers of precious metals or ransom money.

13:18 (2 Nephi 23:18)."Bows shall also dash the young men to pieces." While this may have reference to the killing of the Babylonians with bows and arrows, it could also mean that the bows of the defenders of Babylon will be broken or made useless.

Isaiah 13:19-22 and 2 Nephi 23:19-22

In its time, Babylon "was the greatest city in all the world" said Elder LeGrand Richards. "Yet Isaiah announced that that city would be destroyed; he said that it would never be rebuilt, that it would never be inhabited from generation to generation, that it would become the abode of reptiles and wild animals and that the Arabs would no more pitch their tents there. That was a declaration that the greatest city in the world would not only be destroyed, but it would also never be rebuilt." (CR, April 1954, p. 54.)

19 And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees' excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. 20 It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there; neither shall the shepherds make their fold there. 21 But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there; and their houses shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls shall dwell there, and satyrs shall dance there. 22 And the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate houses, and dragons in their pleasant palaces: and her time is near to come, and her days shall not be prolonged. 19 And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees' excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. 20 It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there; neither shall the shepherds make their fold there. 21 But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there; and their houses shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls shall dwell there, and satyrs shall dance there. 22 And the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate houses, and dragons in their pleasant palaces; and her time is near to come, and her day shall not be prolonged. For I will destroy her speedily; yea, for I will be merciful unto my people, but the wicked shall perish.

13:21 (2 Nephi 23:21)."Satyrs shall dance there." He-goats or demons of folklore.

13:22 (2 Nephi 23:22)."Dragons." Jackals or wild dogs.

13:22 (2 Nephi 23:22)."Her days shall not be prolonged." The Book of Mormon makes clear that Babylon and her wicked inhabitants will be destroyed with swift destruction.
