Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Chapter 14

Isaiah 14 and 2 Nephi 24

Overview

In contrast to the terrible and total destruction decreed upon Babylon, as outlined in the previous chapter, this chapter opens with a declaration of hope to the once-downtrodden and scattered people of Israel. They shall be restored to their lands of promise and, more importantly, to their status as the covenant people of the Lord. Whereas the children of Israel, and perhaps more particularly those of Judah, had been despised and treated as second-class citizens or even slaves, they would now become the masters or the ruling class, so to speak.

In poetic fashion, the prophet Isaiah describes how the new position of power of these former servants will cause them to recite or sing a taunt-song(verses 4 21), which focuses on the now powerless position of their former persecutors. The king of Babylon is equated with Lucifer. Both held powerful positions at one time but both will ultimately be reduced to a state of nothingness. Judgment is also pronounced upon Assyria and Philistia. While much of this prophecy deals with ancient times, there are portentous portions that affect the last days, particularly those that relate to the demise and total dissolution of the devil's power on this earth.

Commentary

Isaiah 14:1-3 and 2 Nephi 24:1-3

The people of Jacob (whose covenant name is Israel) will return to their own lands and even invite strangers to join them. In a reversal of roles, the former servants will now become the masters. Victor Ludlow suggests that "these verses can also find two fulfillments in the latter days. First, they may refer to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, whose missionary work spreads to all nations and prepares for the peaceful conditions under which the Savior will establish his kingdom at the time of his second coming. Second, these verses may refer to the modern-day return of the Jews to the Holy Land and their building of the modern state of Israel. However, the full blessings of these verses will not be realized until the second coming of Christ, when the Jews will accept him as their Savior." (IPSP, 186; see also BICQ, 125-34.)

Isaiah 14 1 For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land: and the strangers shall be joined with them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob. 2 And the people shall take them, and bring them to their place: and the house of Israel shall possess them in the land of the Lord for servants and handmaids: and they shall take them captives, whose captives they were; and they shall rule over their oppressors. 3 And it shall come to pass in the day that the Lord shall give thee rest from thy sorrow, and from thy fear, and from the hard bondage wherein thou wast made to serve, 2 Nephi 24 1 For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land; and the strangers shall be joined with them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob. 2 And the people shall take them and bring them to their place; yea, from far unto the ends of the earth; and they shall return to their lands of promise. A nd the house of Israel shall possess them, and the land of the Lord shall be for servants and handmaids; and they shall take them captives unto whom they were captives; and they shall rule over their oppressors. 3 And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall give thee rest, from thy sorrow, and from thy fear, and from the hard bondage wherein thou wast made to serve.

14:1 (2 Nephi 24:1)."Strangers shall be joined with them." What "strangers" will join with the house of Jacob or the covenant people of Israel? We are reminded of the apostle Paul's declaration to the converts to Christ of his day: "Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellowcitizens with the saints, and of the household of God." (Ephesians 2:19.) Furthermore, we think of the promise regarding the posterity of the great patriarch Abraham, grandfather of Jacob: "And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise." (Galatians 3:29.) By accepting the gospel, "There is neither Jew nor Greek [Gentile] .Â .Â . for ye are all one in Christ Jesus." (Galatians 3:28.)

14:2 (2 Nephi 24:2)."And the people shall take them, and bring them to their place." Other nations shall help Israel gather to her promised lands. This promise has been partially fulfilled as the kings and queens of the earth (those in positions of political power) have materially helped the dispersed return to their homelands. (See Isaiah 49:22-24; 2 Nephi 6:6-7; 10:8-9; BICQ, 129 30.) However, the promise may also find fulfillment as heads of state open doors and break down barriers that have previously prevented the work of the Lord from moving forward.

Isaiah 14:4-8 and 2 Nephi 24:4-8

These verses begin the taunt-song aimed at the once-powerful king of Babylon. Even the trees rejoice in the demise of this once-powerful king. Although the historical context of these verses is couched in ancient Babylon, the application extends to the latter days as well. It could apply to the ultimate removal of any wicked leader, particularly Satan. He will be bound at the commencement of the Millennium, reducing him to the role of a powerless prisoner for one thousand years. (See D&C 88:110; BICQ, 198-99.)

4 That thou shalt take up this proverb against the king of Babylon, and say, How hath the oppressor ceased! the golden city ceased! 5 The Lord hath broken the staff of the wicked, and the sceptre of the rulers. 6 He who smote the people in wrath with a continual stroke, he that ruled the nations in anger, is persecuted, and none hindereth. 7 The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet: they break forth into singing. 8 Yea, the fir trees rejoice at thee, and the cedars of Lebanon, saying, Since thou art laid down, no feller is come up against us. 4 And it shall come to pass in that day, t hat thou shalt take up this proverb against the king of Babylon, and say: How hath the oppressor ceased, the golden city ceased! 5 The Lord hath broken the staff of the wicked, the scepters of the rulers. 6 He who smote the people in wrath with a continual stroke, he that ruled the nations in anger, is persecuted, and none hindereth. 7 The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet; they break forth into singing. 8 Yea, the fir-trees rejoice at thee, and also the cedars of Lebanon, saying: Since thou art laid down no feller is come up against us.

14:4 (2 Nephi 24:4)."Take up this proverb against the king of Babylon." As used in these verses, the proverb is a taunt-song, which expresses great pleasure in the reversed role of the king of Babylon and his people. It is poetic satire.

14:4 (2 Nephi 24:4)."The golden city ceased." This appears to be an obvious reference to the once-prized and proud city of Babylon, which will have ceased to exist. The footnote indicates that perhaps this has reference to the city's insolence or pride. Another possible interpretation is that the boisterous raging of her citizenry has ceased.

14:7 (2 Nephi 24:7)."The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet." The turmoil and commotion that have been so prevalent during the last days will cease. Not only will civil strife come to an end, but evidently "the voice of thunderings, and the voice of lightnings, and the voice of tempests, and the voice of waves of the sea heaving themselves beyond their bounds" (D&C 88:89-91), and "earthquakes . . . in divers places" (Matthew 24:7) shall cease.

14:8 (2 Nephi 24:8)."No feller is come up against us." The fir (cypress) and cedar trees figuratively rejoice because there is no more enemy to come and cut them down. It is a historical fact that the trees of Lebanon had been felled by the kings of Assyria. (See Habakkuk 2:17.) Conquering armies frequently ravaged the land as well as the people.

Isaiah 14:9-11 and 2 Nephi 24:9-11

As the king of Babylon enters the abode of the wicked in the spirit world, he is greeted by other once-powerful leaders ("chief ones") in mortality. They are amazed that he has become as weak and powerless as they are and they note that his once-influential voice is no longer listened to.

9 Hell from beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming: it stirreth up the dead for thee, even all the chief ones of the earth; it hath raised up from their thrones all the kings of the nations. 10 All they shall speak and say unto thee, Art thou also become weak as we? art thou become like unto us? 11 Thy pomp is brought down to the grave, and the noise of thy viols: the worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee. 9 Hell from beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming; it stirreth up the dead for thee, even all the chief ones of the earth; it hath raised up from their thrones all the kings of the nations. 10 All they shall speak and say unto thee: Art thou also become weak as we? Art thou become like unto us? 11 Thy pomp is brought down to the grave; the noise of thy viols is not heard; the worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee.

14:9 (2 Nephi 24:9)."Hell." Sheol, or the abode of departed spirits. Particularly, this refers to the spirit prison where the wicked dwell. (See Alma 40:13-14; DCE, 238-39.)

14:9 (2 Nephi 24:9)."Hell from beneath is moved for thee." The inhabitants (prisoners) of hell are stirred or excited about the arrival of this once-powerful person.

14:11 (2 Nephi 24:11)."The worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee." The king, who was sought by the rich and powerful in life, is now reduced to fodder for worms and maggots.

Isaiah 14:12-14 and 2 Nephi 24:12-14

Isaiah now personifies the king of Babylon as Lucifer himself. He speaks of the devil's ill-fated attempt in the premortal world to usurp the position and power of God for his own evil ends, for which he and his followers were cast out. (See Moses 4:1-4; D&C 29:36-37; DCE, 134-35.)

12 How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how a rt thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations! 13 For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north: 14 I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High. 12 How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! Art thou cut down to the ground, which did weaken the nations! 13 For thou hast said in thy heart: I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God; I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north; 14 I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the Most High.

14:12 (2 Nephi 24:12)."Lucifer, son of the morning." Lucifer is the name whereby the devil was known in our premortal existence. In Hebrew the title means morning star or son of dawn. It may have some implication to the timing of his birth as a spirit child in the premortal life or reference to his once-held position of prominence before his fateful fall. (See Elder Marion G. Romney, CR, April 1971, p. 23; DCE, 332.)

14:13 (2 Nephi 24:13)."In the sides of the north." Among the Babylonians and others, there was the belief that the abode of Deity was in the north. (See LDSKJ, Psalm 48:2, footnote d;Isaiah 14:13, footnote e.) Lucifer wished to ascend to this lofty place.

Isaiah 14:15-17 and 2 Nephi 24:15-17

Lucifer's lust for power and prominence landed him in the pit of hell rather than on the sought-after throne of God. The inhabitants of Sheol will be so surprised to see the now-powerless Lucifer that they will exclaim in disbelief, "Is this the man that made the earth to tremble?" Surely such a pitiful, powerless creature could not be the one who "did shake kingdoms" and wreaked such destruction on earth! (Such words could also be said of the king of Babylon, the once-powerful conqueror now reduced to the role of a serf.)

15 Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit. 16 They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider thee, saying, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake kingdoms; 17 That made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities thereof; that opened not the house of his prisoners? 15 Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit. 16 They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and shall consider thee, and shall say: Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake kingdoms? 17 And made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities thereof, and opened not the house of his prisoners?

14:15 (2 Nephi 24:15)."The sides of the pit." Figuratively, the remotest parts of hell. John the Revelator tells us that at the commencement of the Millennium the devil will be cast into a bottomless pit with a seal set upon him that will not be broken until the end of the thousand years, when he will be "loosed a little season." (Revelation 20:2-3; see also BICQ, 221-26.)

14:16 (2 Nephi 24:16)."Narrowly look upon thee." They will squint at Lucifer and reflect upon him; or they will stare at him intently.

14:17 (2 Nephi 24:17)."That opened not the house of his prisoners." Once one has been caught up (captured) in wickedness, it is very difficult to escape. Elder Neal A. Maxwell observed: "Lucifer is permissive on most things, but not on granting passports for citizens to leave his realm." (DOD, 12.)

Isaiah 14:18-20 and 2 Nephi 24:18-20

Isaiah now strikes at the heart of Lucifer's punishment. While those he has seduced into sin will lay their bodies down in graves one day to be resurrected the devil will have no need of a burial plot. His decision to rebel against the Almighty deprived him and those who followed him of ever receiving a mortal body. These demons are so desperate to take over a physical body that a legion of them even pleaded to be cast into the bodies of swine. (Mark 5:1-13.) Nor will the devil and his demoniacal followers ever have posterity. The only way Lucifer will ever be a "father" is as the "father of lies." (See Moses 4:4; BICQ, 52-53.)

18 All the kings of the nations, even all of them, lie in glory, every one in his own house. 19 But thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch, and as the raiment of those that are slain, thrust through with a sword, that go down to the stones of the pit; as a carcase trodden under feet. 20 Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou hast destroyed thy land, and slain thy people: the seed of evildoers shall never be renowned. 18 All the kings of the nations, yea, all of them, lie in glory, every one of them in his own house. 19 But thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch, and the remnant of those that are slain, thrust through with a sword, that go down to the stones of the pit; as a carcass trodden under feet. 20 Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou hast destroyed thy land and slain thy people; the seed of evil-doers shall never be renowned.

14:18 (2 Nephi 24:18)."Lie in glory." There are at least two possible meanings of this phrase. First, kings (royalty, pharaohs, presidents, etc.) are generally buried with great pomp, ceremony, and splendor. Second, even wicked kings, once they have paid the price of penance and suffered the wrath of God (D&C 76:103-12), will be redeemed from the grave and resurrected to a degree of glory in the eternities. However, Lucifer and his minions will be cast into outer darkness, where there will be neither light nor glory. (See D&C 88:24; DCE, 301-2.)

14:18 (2 Nephi 24:18)."Every one in his own house." In his own family tomb. (See 1 Kings 2:34.)

14:19 (2 Nephi 24:19)."Thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch." Again, there are two possible meanings here. Applied to Lucifer, the statement suggests he will have no more part in a grave than an unfruitful shoot or blighted branch will be part of the tree from which it was cut off. On the other hand, as applied to the king of Babylon, the implication is that his body would remain unburied (which anciently was considered to be a great curse).

14:19 (2 Nephi 24:19)."The remnant of those that are slain." The Book of Mormon makes a significant substitution here. Isaiah is not speaking of clothing ("raiment"), but of people ("remnant"). The corpse of the dead king will lie among the remains of others who have been slain, all of them rotting like cast-off twigs and branches.

14:19 (2 Nephi 24:19)."The stones of the pit." Ultimately, a common grave will be hastily dug, or stones will be flung together to form a burial plot on the battlefield. The mighty and the common will be heaped together as stones at the very bottom of this burial pit. As applied to Lucifer, the implication is that he will be thrown into the pit of outer darkness, from which there will never be an escape.

14:20 (2 Nephi 24:20)."Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial." Neither the king of Babylon nor Lucifer will have the honor of a decent burial, an honor usually bestowed on the kings and mighty of the world.

14:20 (2 Nephi 24:20)."The seed of evildoers shall never be renowned." The king of Babylon will have no offspring who will be honored, held in high esteem, or even mentioned by others. Lucifer, as noted above, will never have posterity.

Isaiah 14:21-23 and 2 Nephi 24:21-23

The posterity of the wicked king of Babylon will not be allowed to perpetuate his evil ways. Not only will his own children be slain, but his people will as well. In addition, his great city will be utterly destroyed. In reality, the deaths and destruction of his own people and lands are of his own doing.

21 Prepare slaughter for his children for the iniquity of their fathers; that they do not rise, nor possess the land, nor fill the face of the world with cities. 22 For I will rise up against them, saith the Lord of hosts, and cut off from Babylon the name, and remnant, and son, and nephew, saith the Lord. 23 I will also make it a possession for the bittern, and pools of water: and I will sweep it with the besom of destruction, saith the Lord of hosts. 21 Prepare slaughter for his children for the iniquities of their fathers, that they do not rise, nor possess the land, nor fill the face of the world with cities. 22 For I will rise up against them, saith the Lord of Hosts, and cut off from Babylon the name, and remnant, and son, and nephew, saith the Lord. 23 I will also make it a possession for the bittern, and pools of water; and I will sweep it with the besom of destruction, saith the Lord of Hosts

14:21 (2 Nephi 24:21)."Prepare slaughter for his children." In essence, "Let not another evil generation arise and resume an evil regime." (LDSKJ, Isaiah 14:21, footnote a.) The decimation of the children of the wicked ruler is the natural consequence of his own crimes.

14:23 (2 Nephi 24:23)."Make it a possession for the bittern, and pools of water." The lowly "bittern" (hedgehog) would typify the future life form of this once-proud land. When Cyrus conquered Babylon, he destroyed her irrigation works, turning the once lush and fruitful land into fetid pools of water (swamps or bogs).

14:23 (2 Nephi 24:23)."Sweep it with the besom of destruction." The broom of destruction.

Isaiah 14:24-27 and 2 Nephi 24:24-27

Isaiah now shifts his focus from Babylon to Assyria. The Lord has foreseen the efforts of the Assyrians to overthrow Judah, but the invaders' efforts shall fail. Lest anyone doubt that His purposes will be accomplished, the Lord declares that whatever He has pronounced or seen in His omniscience shall come to pass.

24 The Lord of hosts hath sworn saying, Surely as I have thought, so shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed, so shall it stand: 25 That I will break the Assyrian in my land, and upon my mountains tread him under foot: then shall his yoke depart from off them, and his burden depart from off their shoulders. 26 This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth: and this is the hand that is stretched out upon all the nations. 27 For the Lord of hosts hath purposed, and who shall disannul it? and his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back? 24 The Lord of Hosts hath sworn, saying: Surely as I have thought, so shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed, so shall it stand 25 That I will bring the Assyrian in my land, and upon my mountains tread him under foot; then shall his yoke depart from off them, and his burden depart from off their shoulders. 26 This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth; and this is the hand that is stretched out upon all nations. 27 For the Lord of Hosts hath purposed, and who shall disannul? And his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back?

14:24 (2 Nephi 24:24)."Surely as I have thought, so shall it come to pass." As the Lord has "thought" (resolved) so shall it be. He does not change His mind. He is consistent and sure! One may, with full confidence, rely upon every word of the Lord, for "he never doth vary from that which he hath said." (Mosiah 2:22.) "His purposes fail not, neither are there any who can stay his hand." (D&C 76:3.)

14:25 (2 Nephi 24:25)."I will bring the Assyrian in my land." The Book of Mormon substitutes the word "bring" for the biblical or Hebrew word "break." In either event, the invading Assyrian armies are foreseen by the Lord (brought into the land of Judah) but they will be broken or defeated. One renowned biblical commentary suggests that this was fulfilled in the defeat and destruction of the Assyrian King Sennacherib's army. (TOVBC, 426.) However, a Latter-day Saint scholar, with the advantage of additional revelation, states: "It is difficult to determine whether Isaiah is prophesying about the destruction of Sennacherib's Assyrian army in 701 b.c. or the defeat of the army of the nations led by King Gog in the last days. (Compare Isa. 36-37 with Ezek. 38-39.) In both cases, the Lord's punishment is felt by the wicked nations of the earth." (IPSP, 189.)

14:25 (2 Nephi 24:25)."Upon my mountains tread him under foot." Upon the mountains of Judah, the enemy will be defeated or trodden under foot.

14:26 (2 Nephi 24:26)."The purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth." The Lord purposes to ultimately defeat all the wicked upon the whole earth, thus lifting the burdens they have placed upon those they have oppressed.

14:26 (2 Nephi 24:26)."The hand that is stretched out upon all the nations." The Lord ultimately controls the future of all nations. In an 1838 revelation He declared: "Do I not hold the destinies of all the armies of the nations of the earth?" (D&C 117:6.) Eventually all worldly nations will be overthrown and replaced by the kingdom of God, for "Christ will [return and] reign personally upon the earth." (A of F 1:10.)

14:27 (2 Nephi 24:27)."Who shall disannul it?" Nothing the Lord proclaims shall be disannulled (be completely annulled or come to naught) by any means; neither man, nature, nor the forces of the adversary shall stay His hand or make void His words. Said the Lord to the Prophet Joseph, "Behold, I, the Lord, declare unto you, and my words are sure and shall not fail." (D&C 64:31.)

Isaiah 14:28-31 and 2 Nephi 24:28-31

Another "burden" (prophecy of doom) is now pronounced. This time the victim is yet another enemy of Judah Palestina, or Philistia. Sidney Sperry noted that "although the prophecy is more especially directed against Philistia, Judah is also involved. Unfortunately," he then adds, "a number of thorny, unresolved historical problems prevent the giving of a reasonably exact interpretation of some parts of the prophecy. But Isaiah seems to be telling Philistia not to rejoice over his predictions of the ruin and downfall of Judah, her traditional enemy. For whereas the kingdom of Judah will fall, there will come a glorious day when the people of Israel will rise above their troubles. .Â .Â . On the other hand, Philistia is to be ruined and to fall without having any prospects of recovery." (BMC, 244-45.)

28 In the year that king Ahaz died was this burden. 29 Rejoice not thou, whole Palestina, because the rod of him that smote thee is broken: for out of the serpent's root shall come forth a cockatrice, and his fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent. 30 And the firstborn of the poor shall feed, and the needy shall lie down in safety: and I will kill thy root with famine, and he shall slay thy remnant. 31 Howl, O gate; cry, O city; thou, whole Palestina, art dissolved: for there shall come from the north a smoke, and none shall be alone in his appointed times. 28 In the year that king Ahaz died was this burden. 29 Rejoice not thou, whole Palestina, because the rod of him that smote thee is broken; for out of the serpent's root shall come forth a cockatrice, and his fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent. 30 And the first-born of the poor shall feed, and the needy shall lie down in safety; and I will kill thy root with famine, and he shall slay thy remnant. 31 Howl, O gate; cry, O city; thou, whole Palestina, art dissolved; for there shall come from the north a smoke, and none shall be alone in his appointed times.

14:28 (2 Nephi 24:28)."The year that king Ahaz died." This identifies the time when the prophecy was given, which, according to the footnote reference in the LDS edition of the King James Bible, was about 720 b.c. Ahaz became king of Judah somewhere around 742-734 b.c. (See commentary on Isaiah 7 and 2 Nephi 17.)

14:29 (2 Nephi 24:29)."Palestina." The country of Philistia consisted essentially of five city-states, each governed by its own lord. The nation was home of the Philistines, detested enemies of Judah and the Israelites. This country was at the height of its power at the time of King Saul's death, but declined during the reign of King David. The Philistines were conquered by the Assyrians in 734 b.c., later they became part of the Persian Empire, and finally the land was annexed to Syria by the Romans. "Strangely enough the name of the territory of these detested enemies of the Jews has become one familiar title (Palestine) for the whole of the Holy Land." (LDSBD, "Philistines," 751.)

14:29 (2 Nephi 24:29)."Rejoice not .Â .Â . because the rod .Â .Â . is broken." The Philistines were warned not to be premature in exulting over the death of the oppressor who had wielded a rod (instrument of punishment) over them. The rejoicing may have been the result of Ahaz's death, but more likely was directed to other oppressors. J. R. Dummelow suggested that the broken rod applied more directly to the Assyrian king, Tiglath-pileser (747-734 b.c.), who had been an ally of Ahaz. (TOVBC, 426.) However, Victor Ludlow stated that this premature rejoicing was "either in the death of [Assyrian King] Shalmaneser V (727-722) or the freedom Philistia maintained after Sargon's conquest of Samaria and Israel (722-721)." (IPSP, 190.) In any event, the rejoicing would be short-lived because further oppression was prophesied.

14:29 (2 Nephi 24:29)."Out of the serpent's root shall come forth a cockatrice, and his fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent." Although Philistia shall see the death of one or more enemies as the means of deliverance from oppression, yet worse dangers (out of the serpent's root) are to come. Sidney Sperry points out the serpent's root,cockatrice(venomous viper), and fiery flying serpent are "all symbolic of evil to come upon her [Philistia]." (BMC, 245.) Each of these represents a more deadly threat than the previous one mentioned. J. R. Dummelow identified Sargon (Assyrian king from 722 to 705 b.c.) and Sennacherib (Assyrian king from 705 to 681 b.c.) as the cockatrice and fiery serpent, "each one proving more terrible and formidable to the nations of Western Asia than his predecessor." (TOVBC, 426.)

14:30 (2 Nephi 24:30)."The first-born of the poor shall feed." The very poor, the low and helpless, shall yet find sustenance both of a physical and spiritual nature. Some scholars suggest this applies specifically to the children of scattered and despised Judah, while others have identified the defeated Philistines as the subject of this promise they are also children of the Lord and He will not forget them. The identity of the redeemed poor does not matter. What is important is that their hungry bellies shall yet be filled with food and their starving spirits shall be fed with the bread of eternal truths.

14:30 (2 Nephi 24:30)."I will kill thy root with famine, and he shall slay thy remnant." While Judah and Israel will ultimately survive their scatterings and oppression, Philistia willperish as a nation and as a people, never to recover. She is (vs. 31) "dissolved" or melted away.

14:31 (2 Nephi 24:31)."There shall come from the north a smoke." An invading army (probably the Assyrians) shall come from the north.

14:31 (2 Nephi 24:31)."None shall be alone in his appointed times." There will be no soldier missing from the ranks of the well-disciplined invading Assyrian armies. There will be no stragglers; each warrior will be found standing in his place of assembly, or at his appointed post.

Isaiah 14:32 and 2 Nephi 24:32

Isaiah concludes his chapter with a question and an answer.

32 What shall one then answer the messengers of the nation? That the Lord hath founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall trust in it. 32 What shall then answer the messengers of the nations? That the Lord hath founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall trust in it.

14:32 (2 Nephi 24:32)."What shall then answer the messengers of the nation?" What reply should be given those who ask why God destroys (or allows to be destroyed) whole nations or people?

14:32 (2 Nephi 24:32)."That the Lord hath founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall trust in it." This is the answer to the question raised in the first part of the verse. God will not tolerate wicked people or nations. His desire is to establish the standard of Zion in every heart, home, village, and nation throughout the world. Among other things, this standard calls for the "pure in heart" to "dwell in righteousness" and to see that there is "no poor among them." (See D&C 97:21; Moses 7:18.) In such a place there is no contention, envying, disharmony, or distrust, for the love of God will dwell in the hearts of each one. (See 4 Nephi 1:2-3, 12-13, 15-16.) This is the environment in which the poor or afflicted can seek refuge both physically and spiritually. They can trust in the standard of Zion!
