Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Chapter 15

Isaiah 29 and 2 Nephi 25, 26, 27

Overview

After two chapters of personal but inspired commentary (2 Nephi 25 and 26), in which he has borne powerful witness to the divine nature and mission of Jesus Christ, Nephi returns to recording the writings of Isaiah. He quotes the Old Testament seer to show that Isaiah knew of the latter-day coming forth of the Book of Mormon: Another Testament of Jesus Christ.

Just as Isaiah's messianic prophecies in ancient times bore strong testimony to the coming of Jesus Christ, so a strong scriptural witness for Jesus Christ in the latter days would speak from the pages of another scriptural record which Isaiah saw through seeric vision.

The ancient seer saw those who would be raised up as latter-day witnesses to the truthfulness of this other scriptural record. Isaiah saw that it would come forth in a day of apostasy, as part of the great restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ in its fulness. He even saw an anecdotal event that would involve the future translator of the sacred record, one of the witnesses to the book's divine authenticity, and several of the learned of the world.

It is ironic that the learned of the world today have little understanding of the significance or meaning of this inspired chapter of Isaiah's ancient prophecies. In the words of the apostle Paul, they are "ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth." (2 Timothy 3:7.) The wisdom of the wise of the world is limited because they lack an understanding of, or acceptance of, latter-day prophets, revelation, and scripture. Yet all of these are necessary to hold the key to unlocking the meaning of this great vision of the ancient seer, the prophet Isaiah.

Commentary

Isaiah 29:1-2

These verses are not quoted by Nephi. However, as the Prophet Joseph Smith worked on his inspired translation of the Bible, he made a slight alteration in verse 2, adding the phrase "for thus hath the Lord said unto me" after the word "sorrow," and deleting the words "me as" between "unto" and "Ariel." (JST Isaiah 29:2.) Ariel (the city where David dwelt) was Jerusalem. It meant "altar of God" or "hearth of God." The hearth was the highest tier of the altar of Solomon's temple and was the place where sacrifices were consumed by fire. "Since the term is used to describe Jerusalem in her distressed condition (the word 'Zion' replaces this term in 2 Ne. 27:3), it implies that Judah will need to be humbled and that God's fire of judgment will refine her." (IPSP, 270-71.)

Isaiah 29 1 Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, the city where David dwelt! add ye year to year; let them kill sacrifices. 2 Yet I will distress Ariel, and there shall be heaviness and sorrow: and i t shall be unto me as Ariel. JST, Isaiah 29 1 Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, the city where David dwelt! add ye year to year; let them kill sacrifices. 2 Yet I will distress Ariel, and there shall be heaviness and sorrow; for thus hath the Lord said unto me, I t shall be unto Ariel;

Isaiah 29:3-5 and 2 Nephi 26:15-18

These verses could refer to the nations of Judah and Israel being brought low, or destroyed. The ancient covenant people would then speak "low out of the dust" in the sense that they would speak out of the depths of their humbled condition.

A more probable interpretation of these verses would be their application to the destruction of the ancient Nephite civilization. This is obviously the interpretation Nephi had in mind. This people, because of iniquity and unbelief, were to be "brought down low in the dust, even that they are not." Yet, even though destroyed as a people without posterity, their words "shall speak .Â .Â . out of the ground, and their speech shall be low out of the dust." The record of this ancient people not only their secular history but more particularly their prophecies and sacred writings shall be made available to future generations.

The last survivor of that ancient Nephite society was a prophet, scribe, and warrior named Moroni. He was charged with safeguarding those sacred writings. He discharged that duty by concluding the record and safely burying it in a protected place to which he was undoubtedly led. Over fourteen hundred years later, then a resurrected being, he was divinely directed to deliver the plates "out of the ground" to the young Prophet Joseph Smith. Joseph, in turn, was called to translate the sacred record into what is now known to millions throughout the earth as the Book of Mormon: Another Testament of Jesus Christ. (See JS H 1:27-54, 59 60.)

Because Nephi is expounding on Isaiah, rather than simply quoting, his words cast a great deal of light on this passage.

Isaiah 29 3 And I will camp against thee round about, and will lay siege against thee with a mount, and I will raise forts against thee. 4 And thou shalt be brought down, and shalt speak out of the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust, and thy voice shall be, as of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the ground, and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust. 5 Moreover the multitude of thy strangers shall be like small dust, and the multitude of the terrible ones shall be as chaff that passeth away: yea, it shall be at an instant suddenly. 2 Nephi 26 15 After my seed and the seed of my brethren shall have dwindled in unbelief, and shall have been smitten by the Gentiles; yea, after the Lord God shall have camped against them round about, and shall have laid siege against them with a mount, and raised forts against them; and after they shall have been brought down low in the dust, even that they are not, yet the words of the righteous shall be written, and the prayers of the faithful shall be heard, and all those who have dwindled in unbelief shall not be forgotten. 16 For those who shall be destroyed shall speak unto them out of the ground, and their speech shall be low out of the dust, and their voice shall be as one that hath a familiar spirit; for the Lord God will give unto him power, that he may whisper concerning them, even as it were out of the ground; and their speech shall whisper out of the dust. 17 For thus saith the Lord God: They shall write the things which shall be done among them, and they shall be written and sealed up in a book, and those who have dwindled in unbelief shall not have them, for they seek to destroy the things of God. 18 Wherefore, as those who have been destroyed have been destroyed speedily; and the multitude of their terrible ones shall be as chaff that passeth awayyea, thus saith the Lord God: I t shall be at an instant, suddenly

29:5 (2 Nephi 26:18)."The multitude of their terrible ones shall be as chaff." The wicked shall be tossed to the wind as chaff that is separated from the good seed at harvest time. This could apply to the wicked in the latter days who oppose the Lord's standard of Zion, or it could have application to the past destruction of the wicked Nephite society: they who were "led about by Satan, even as chaff is driven before the wind." (Mormon 5:16-18.)

Isaiah 29:6-10 and 2 Nephi 27:2-5

These next few verses deal with judgments which are to come upon the wicked in the last days. Those who fight against Zion, who reject her ways and her prophets, will be disappointed; they will be as one who dreams and thinks he has eaten but wakes up empty, racked with hunger pangs.

Isaiah 29 6 Thou shalt be visited of the Lord of hosts with thunder, and with earthquake, and great noise, with storm and tempest, and the flame of devouring fire. 7-8 And the multitude of all the nations that fight against Ariel, even all that fight against her and her munition, and that distress her, shall be as a dream of a night vision. I t shall even be as when an hungry man dreameth, and, behold, he eateth; but he awaketh, and his soul is empty: or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and, behold, he drinketh; but he awaketh, and, behold, he is faint, and his soul hath appetite: so shall the multitude of all the nations be, that fight against mount Zion. 9 Stay yourselves, and wonder; cry ye out, and cry:they are drunken, but not with wine; they stagger, but not with strong drink. 10 For the Lord hath poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and hath closed your eyes: the prophets and your rulers, the seers hath he covered. 2 Nephi 27 2 And when that day shall come they shall be visited of the Lord of Hosts, with thunder and with earthquake, and with a great noise, and with storm, and with tempest, and with the flame of devouring fire. 3 And all the nations that fight against Zion, and that distress her, shall be as a dream of a night vision; yea, i t shall beunto them, even as unto a hungry man which dreameth, and behold he eateth but he awaketh and his soul is empty; or like unto a thirsty man which dreameth, and behold he drinketh but he awaketh and behold he is faint, and his soul hath appetite; yea, even so shall the multitude of all the nations be that fight against Mount Zion. 4 For behold, all ye that doeth iniquity, s tay yourselves and wonder, for yeshall cry out, and cry; yea, ye shall be drunken but not with wine, ye shall stagger but not with strong drink. 5 For behold, the Lord hath poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep. For behold, ye have closed your eyes, and ye have rejected the prophets; and your rulers, and the seers hath he covered because of your iniquity.

29:6 (2 Nephi 27:2)."Visited .Â .Â . with thunder .Â .Â . earthquake .Â .Â . great noise .Â .Â . storm and tempest." The Lord has often used the elements to call people to repentance. He has specifically warned the inhabitants of the earth in the last days that He will speak to them through these voices of nature. (D&C 43:25; 88:89-91; 97:26; Mormon 8:29; BICQ, 25-37.)

29:7 (2 Nephi 27:3)."Munition." Fortification or place of safety.

29:8 (2 Nephi 27:3)."His soul is empty .Â .Â . he is faint, and his soul hath appetite." Not only will those who actively fight against Zion find their souls empty, but so also will those who simply stand idly by, allowing their spirits to atrophy. Those who reject or neglect the words of living bread that can stave off spiritual starvation, or the truths of livingwaters that can quench spiritual thirst, will find their souls empty and their spirits faint. No matter how often they eat bread at the tables of the learned, or drink the waters of the man-made religions of the world, they will not be satisfied.

Philosophies and theological teachings, no matter how well intended, that lack true spiritual nutrients (the fulness of the gospel and priesthood power) will not satisfy the soul's hunger for truth. We are reminded of the Savior's words to the woman at the well in Samaria: "Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life." (John 4:14.)

Furthermore, we think of this divine promise: "And blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost." (3 Nephi 12:6; italics added.)

The words of a prophet of old are worth pondering in this respect: "Cursed is he that putteth his trust in man, or maketh flesh his arm, or shall hearken unto the precepts of men, save their precepts shall be given by the power of the Holy Ghost." (2 Nephi 28:31.)

29:8 (2 Nephi 27:3)."The multitude of all .Â .Â . that fight against Mount Zion." Joseph McConkie and Robert Millet offer the following insights: "As the phrase mountain of the Lord's house(2 Nephi 2:12) can properly be understood to apply to all temples, so the phrase Mount Zion can appropriately be used to refer to the gathering places of the Saints. . . .

"Those who would raze the temples of the true believers are left without defense and without refuge against the 'storm, and from wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth' (D&C 115:6). They have poisoned the water in the well from which they too must drink." (DCBM 1:313-14.)

29:9 (2 Nephi 27:4)."Stay yourselves." The Book of Mormon clarifies that this phrase is addressed to "all ye that doeth iniquity." A "stay" is a brace or support. The plea of the prophet is for those who are presently unanchored in the gospel to cease their pursuit of the ways of the world. "Brace yourselves against the winds of wickedness! Hold fast to the iron rod whereby you will be strengthened against sin!" (See 1 Nephi 8:30; "The Iron Rod," Hymns, no. 274.)

29:9 (2 Nephi 27:4)."Drunken, but not with wine." They are "drunken with iniquity and all manner of abominations." (2 Nephi 27:1.) They are so intoxicated with wickedness in any of its forms, including a lust for power or position in the world, that they have lost their spiritual senses. They neither think nor walk straight.

29:10 (2 Nephi 27:5)."The spirit of deep sleep." The apostle Paul refers to this as the "spirit of slumber." This is a deep sleep or spiritual stupor which prevents the spiritually unprepared from seeing and hearing things they are not prepared to receive, understand, or follow. (Romans 11:8.)

In this respect, we should consider the response of Jesus to those who questioned why He spoke in parables: "He answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them [the spiritually unprepared or asleep] it is not given.

"For whosoever receiveth, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance; but whosoever continueth not to receive, from him shall be taken away even that he hath.

"Therefore speak I to them in parables: because they seeing see not; and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand." (JST Matthew 13:10-13.)

29:10 (2 Nephi 27:5)."The prophets and your rulers, the seers hath he covered because of your iniquity." Because of their spiritual blindness and iniquity, the Lord would remove the prophets and seers from among them. They would be left to grovel and stumble in spiritual darkness. The heavens and the voices of the prophets are silent to those whose ears will not hear. This is descriptive of the apostate condition that prevailed at the time young Joseph Smith sought for the truth. In response to his prayerful plea, and as foreordained in the premortal councils before this world was, the heavens were once again opened and the spiritual eyes and ears of the young Prophet Joseph were touched.

Isaiah 29:11-12 and 2 Nephi 27:6-24

The Book of Mormon adds major clarifying text to these two verses of Isaiah. The scholars of the world have no understanding of the Old Testament prophet's reference to the words of a sealed book that are delivered to both the learned and the unlearned. The added verses in the Book of Mormon reveal that the book will come from "them which have slumbered" (meaning the destroyed civilizations of the Nephites and the Jaredites). (2 Nephi 27:6.)

It will contain revelations that tell of events "from the beginning of the world to the ending thereof," but this information will be sealed up, yet to come forth in "the own due time of the Lord." (2 Nephi 27:7-11.)

The portion of the book which has not been sealed will be made available to the world, and "three witnesses shall behold it, by the power of God, .Â .Â . and they shall testify to the truth of the book." (2 Nephi 27:12.) In 1829, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris were called of God to be these witnesses. They bore testimony to the world of having seen the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated, of seeing the heavenly messenger Moroni, and of hearing the voice of God bear record that the plates had been translated "by the gift and power of God."

The added text of Nephi also tells that, in addition to the translator of the record (Joseph Smith) and the Three Witnesses, "a few according to the will of God" will also be called "to bear testimony." (2 Nephi 27:13.) These few are known as the Eight Witnesses, who were divinely authorized to see and handle the plates under the direction of theProphet Joseph. Those who bore testimony of their participation on this momentous occasion were Christian Whitmer; Jacob Whitmer; Peter Whitmer, Jr.; John Whitmer; Hiram Page; Joseph Smith, Sr.; Hyrum Smith; and Samuel H. Smith. Their testimony, as that of the Three Witnesses, can be found in the forepart of the Book of Mormon. (See also HC 1:58, note.)

In addition to the twelve formal witnesses listed above (including Joseph Smith), the truthfulness of the book will be testified "in the mouth of as many witnesses as seemeth [the Lord] good." (2 Nephi 27:14; see also 2 Nephi 11:3.) This prophecy has been fulfilled by the millions who have borne testimony of its truthfulness from the days it was first published until the present time; and millions, if not billions, will continue to add their testimony of it in the future.

The Nephite text also adds this warning: "And wo be unto him that rejecteth the word of God!" (2 Nephi 27:14.) Such rejection occurs not only when the book is spurned by unbelievers but also when Latter-day Saints those who have accepted the book as the word of God fail to take it seriously. Regarding such neglect, consider the warnings of two latter-day prophets.

President Joseph Fielding Smith, tenth prophet of the Lord in these latter days, stated: "No member of [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] can stand approved in the presence of God who has not seriously and carefully read the Book of Mormon." (CR, October 1961, p. 18.)

President Ezra Taft Benson, the thirteenth man to wear the prophet's mantle in this dispensation, declared: "Every Latter-day Saint should make the study of this book a lifetime pursuit. Otherwise he is placing his soul in jeopardy and neglecting that which could give spiritual and intellectual unity to his whole life." (CR, April 1975, p. 97.)

11 And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: . . . and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed: 12 And the book is delivered to him that is not learned,saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I am not learned. 6 And it shall come to pass that the Lord God shall bring forth unto you the words of a book, and they shall be the words of them which have slumbered. 7 And behold the book shall be sealed; and in the book shall be a revelation from God, from the beginning of the world to the ending thereof. 8 Wherefore, because of the things which are sealed up, the things which are sealed shall not be delivered in the day of the wickedness and abominations of the people. Wherefore the book shall be kept from them. 9 But the book shall be delivered unto a man, and he shall deliver the words of the book, which are the words of those who have slumbered in the dust, and he shall deliver these words unto another; 10 But the words which are sealed he shall not deliver, neither shall he deliver the book. For the book shall be sealed by the power of God, and the revelation which wassealed shall be kept in the book until the own due time of the Lord, that they may come forth; for behold, they reveal all things from the foundation of the world unto the end thereof. 11 And the day cometh that the words of the book which were sealed shall be read upon the house tops; and they shall be read by the power of Christ; and all things shall be revealed unto the children of men which ever have been among the children of men, and which ever will be even unto the end of the earth. 12 Wherefore, at that day when the book shall be delivered unto the man of whom I have spoken, the book shall be hid from the eyes of the world, that the eyes of none shall behold it save it be that three witnesses shall behold it, by the power of God, besides him to whom the book shall be delivered; and they shall testify to the truth of the book and the things therein. 13 And there is none other which shall view it, save it be a few according to the will of God, to bear testimony of his word unto the children of men; for the Lord God hath said that the words of the faithful should speak as if it were from the dead. 14 Wherefore, the Lord God will proceed to bring forth the words of the book; and in the mouth of as many witnesses as seemeth him good will he establish his word; and wo be unto him that rejecteth the word of God! 15 But behold, it shall come to pass that the Lord God shall say unto him to whom he shall deliver the book: Take these words which are not sealed and deliver them to another, that he may show them unto the learned, saying: Read this, I pray thee. And the learned shall say: Bring hither the book, and I will read them. 16 And now, because of the glory of the world and to get gain will they say this, and not for the glory of God. 17 And the man shall say: I cannot bring the book, for it is sealed. 18 Then shall the learned say: I cannot read it. 19 Wherefore it shall come to pass, that the Lord God will deliver again the book and the words thereof to him that is not learned; and the man that is not learned shall say: I am not learned. 20 Then shall the Lord God say unto him: The learned shall not read them, for they have rejected them, and I am able to do mine own work; wherefore thou shalt read the words which I shall give unto thee. 21 Touch not the things which are sealed, for I will bring them forth in mine own due time; for I will show unto the children of men that I am able to do mine own work. 22 Wherefore, when thou hast read the words which I have commanded thee, and obtained the witnesses which I have promised unto thee, then shalt thou seal up the book again, and hide it up unto me, that I may preserve the words which thou hast not read, until I shall see fit in mine own wisdom to reveal all things unto the children of men. 23 For behold, I am God; and I am a God of miracles; and I will show unto the world that I am the same yesterday, today, and forever; and I work not among the children of men save it be according to their faith. 24 And again it shall come to pass that the Lord shall say unto him that shall read the words that shall be delivered him:

29:11 (2 Nephi 27:15-18)."Deliver to one that is learned." This phrase deals with one of the classic stories of early Latter-day Saint history. Joseph Smith is the man to whom God delivered the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated. (2 Nephi 27:15.) The Prophet, in turn, delivered some of the words (translation) "to another" (Martin Harris). Martin showed the words (translation) and a copy of some of the reformed Egyptian characters (see Mormon 9:32) copied from the plates to a "learned" professor of classic languages (Greek and Latin) at Columbia University by the name of Charles Anthon.

Upon examination, Professor Anthon declared the characters to be authentic and the translation correct. Whether or not he really had the skills to make such a scholarly assertion is irrelevant to the incident. (He most likely did not possess such skills but was seeking the praise of men.) What really matters is his utterance upon learning that he himself would not be allowed to see the original record, or plates, because "a portion was sealed." Anthon then declared: "I cannot read a sealed book," thus fulfilling the ancient prophecy pronounced originally by Isaiah and later recorded by Nephi. Martin Harris also visited a Dr. Samuel Mitchell, "who sanctioned what Professor Anthon had said respecting both the characters and the translation." (See JS H 1:63-65.)

29:11 (2 Nephi 27:17-23)."For it is sealed." In describing the plates delivered to his care, the Prophet Joseph said: "The volume was something near six inches in thickness, a part of which was sealed." (HC 4:537; italics added.) While others have suggested one-third to two-thirds of the plates were sealed, this is all that Joseph Smith said on the matter of public record.

What do we know about this sealed portion? We know that Book of Mormon prophets, like prophets in other times and places, were sometimes forbidden to record that which they had seen in vision or which had been revealed to them. (See 1 Nephi 14:28; Ether 13:13; DCE, 454.) On other occasions, prophets were allowed to record sacred information but were then commanded to seal it up. (Ether 3:27; 4:5.) The future translator of the Book of Mormon plates was specifically cautioned by the ancient seers not to touch the sealed portion of the plates. (Ether 5:1; 2 Nephi 27:21.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie, one who held the apostolic office and was sustained as a prophet, seer, and revelator, provided the following explanation of the sealed portion:

"John the Revelator saw in the hands of the Great God a book sealed with seven seals. 'It contains,' as our revelation tells us, 'the revealed will, mysteries, and the works of God; the hidden things of his economy concerning this earth during the seven thousand years of its continuance, or its temporal existence,' each seal covering a period of one thousand years. As John saw, no one but the Lord Jesus 'the Lion of the tribe of Juda, the Root of David' had power to loose these seven seals. (Rev. 5:5; D&C 77:6.)

"This same or like knowledge is contained in the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon. For aught we know the two sealed books are one and the same. Of this much we are quite certain: When, during the Millennium, the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon is translated, it will give an account of life in preexistence; of the creation of all things; of the Fall and the Atonement and the Second Coming; of temple ordinances in their fulness; of the ministry and mission of translated beings; of life in the spirit world, in both paradise and hell; of the kingdoms of glory to be inhabited by resurrected beings, and many such things (see, e.g., Ether 1:3-5).

"As of now, the world is not ready to receive these truths." (DOR, 276 77; see also D&C 10:9.)

When Joseph Smith had completed the translation of that portion of the plates he was allowed to read, he returned them to the care of the angel Moroni. (JS H 1:60.) This appointed guardian will maintain his stewardship of the record until that future day when the God of miracles "shall see fit in [His] own wisdom to reveal all things unto the children of men." (2 Nephi 27:22.)

29:12 (2 Nephi 27:19-24)."Him that is not learned." The Lord chose Joseph Smith most likely considered to be one of "the weak things of the world" (D&C 1:17-19), a man with virtually no formal learning to be the translator of this ancient record. How did the unlearned young man accomplish this great task? Here is his own testimony: "Through the medium of the Urim and Thummim I translated the record by the gift and power of God." (HC 4:537.) While a special instrument had been prepared to assist Joseph in the process of translation, it should be remembered that the Urim and Thummim could be used only by chosen seers who possessed the gift and power of God.

Isaiah 29:13-14 and 2 Nephi 27:25-26; 25:17

The Nephite text in 2 Nephi 27 adds the introductory verse (24), which has the Lord speaking to Joseph Smith. He announces to this prophet of the restoration the coming forth of "a marvelous work and a wonder" in the latter days. It is of interest to note the similarity of these words recorded by Isaiah and Nephi anciently to those uttered by the Son of God in person to young Joseph Smith during what is known as the First Vision. (JS H 1:17-19.)

13 Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men: 14 Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. 25 Forasmuch as this people draw near unto me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heartsfar from me, and their fear towards me is taught by the precepts of men 26 Therefore, I will proceed to do a marvelous work among this people, yea, a marvelous work and a wonder, for the wisdom of their wise and learned shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent shall be hid. 2 Nephi 25:17.And the Lord will set his hand again the second time to restore his people from their lost and fallen state. Wherefore, he will proceed to do a marvelous work and a wonder among the children of men.

29:13 (2 Nephi 27:25)."This people draw near me with their mouth." The essence of this phrase is hypocrisy: to profess one thing but to do another; to pretend to be something one is not, or to declare a belief in something that is not personally practiced. Some of the Lord's strongest rebukes have been directed at hypocrites whom He has labeled as "whited sepulchres" (whitewashed tombs), serpents, and vipers. (See Matthew 23:23-33.)

29:13 (2 Nephi 27:25)."Fear toward me." Their regard or reverence for the Lord.

29:13 (2 Nephi 27:25)."Precepts of men." These are principles of conduct espoused by men but devoid of the Spirit. Such precepts are not based on the "living water" of gospel truths but rather leave men either thirsting or spiritually poisoned from their ill effects. (John 4:10-14.) Precepts of men are false doctrines that cause men to err, to fail to recognize the truth, and to deny the power of God. (2 Nephi 28:14-15, 26; D&C 45:28-29; JS-H 1:19; DCE, 433-34.)

29:14 (2 Nephi 27:26)."A marvelous work and a wonder." This phrase is well known as the title of the best-selling book on the restored gospel of Jesus Christ by the late apostle, Elder LeGrand Richards. Variations of the phrase are also found in the Doctrine and Covenants. (D&C 4:1; 6:1; 11:1; 12:1; 14:1; 18:44.) Its meaning was described by President Joseph Fielding Smith: "More than seven hundred years before the birth of Jesus Christ the Lord spoke through Isaiah of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and the restoration of the Gospel. Isaiah, by prophecy, spoke of the restoration of the new and everlasting covenant, and the Lord performing a 'marvelous work and a wonder,' which should cause 'the wisdom of their wise men' to perish, and 'the understanding of their prudent men' to be hid. .Â .Â . This marvelous work is the restoration of the Church and the Gospel with all the power and authority, keys and blessings which pertain to this great work for the salvation of the children of men." (DCE, 346.)

29:14 (2 Nephi 27:26)."The wisdom of their wise and learned shall perish." "The 'wisdom of the wise,' which shall be surpassed by the wisdom of the righteous (D&C 76:9), is the learning of the world. It is transitory and not of an eternal nature. It consists of the learning of those who 'hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not' (2 Ne. 9:28)." (DCE, 643.) The apostle Paul described such wisdom well when he said that those who pursue this course are "ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth." (2 Timothy 3:7.)

29:14 (2 Nephi 27:26)."The understanding of their prudent men shall be hid." "In the same manner in which wise can be applied both negatively and positively (1 Cor. 3:19; Proverbs 12:15), the term prudent can also be seen both ways. The Lord declared himself to be prudent(2 Ne. 20:13; Isa. 10:13); yet, he speaks harshly against those who are 'prudent in their own sight,' for the things of God shall be hid from them (2 Ne. 15:21; Isa. 5:21; D&C 76:9; 128:18). Webster states that one who is prudent is capable of directing or conducting oneself wisely and judiciously cautious, circumspect, and discreet in conduct. The 'prudent' against whom the Lord speaks are those who feign prudence or who appear to be 'prudent in their own sight' but are blind and 'looking beyond the mark,' which is the 'stone of Israel,' even Jesus the Christ (Jacob 4:14-16; D&C 50:44)." (DCE, 447.)

Isaiah 29:15-16 and 2 Nephi 27:27

The Lord warns those who furtively, yet fruitlessly, try to hide their so-called secret acts from Him. God is omniscient and knows not only their secret acts, but also their secret thoughts and the desires of their hearts. (D&C 6:16.) Perhaps in mocking rhetoric, the Creator then asks, "Shall the work say of him that made it .Â .Â . He had no understanding?"

15-16 Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, a nd their works are in the dark, and they say, Who seeth us? and who knoweth us? Surely your turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as the potter's clay: f or shall the work say of him that made it, He made me not? or shall the thing framed say of him that framed it, He had no understanding? 27 And wo unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord! A nd their works are in the dark; and they say: Who seeth us, and who knoweth us? And they also say: Surely, your turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as the potter's clay. But behold, I will show unto them, saith the Lord of Hosts, that I know all their works. F or shall the work say of him that made it, he made me not? Or shall the thing framed say of him that framed it, he had no understanding?

Isaiah 29:17-21 and 2 Nephi 27:28-32

Isaiah foresees the time when the land of Lebanon will once again be fruitful. This will occur after the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, the words of which shall allow the spiritually deaf and blind to hear and see that which was previously hidden. The meek (humble and teachable) and the poor (in spirit) of the earth shall rejoice in the newly revealed word of the Lord.

17 Is itnot yet a very little while, and Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest? 18 And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness. 19 The meek also shall increase their joy in the Lord, and the poor among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel. 20 For the terrible one is brought to nought, and the scorner is consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off: 21 That make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of nought. 28 But behold, saith the Lord of Hosts: I will show unto the children of men that it is yet a very little while and Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field; and the fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest. 29 And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity and out of darkness. 30 And t he meek also shall increase, and their joy shall be in the Lord, and the poor among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel. 31 For assuredly as the Lord liveth they shall see that the terrible one is brought to naught, and the scorner is consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off; 32 And they t hat make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of naught.

29:17 (2 Nephi 27:28)."Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field." Lebanon was the northernmost portion of Palestine. It was part of the land promised to the Israelites when they crossed into Canaan. (Deuteronomy 1:6-7; Joshua 1:1-4.) Isaiah's prophecy has been interpreted to include the entire land of Canaan. President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote of the "deplorable condition" of this land prior to its redemption in recent years, which redemption was in fulfillment of prophecy. (DS 3:260-61.)

Elder Orson Pratt noted that this changed condition would occur only following the publication of the book which Isaiah saw; "at which time Lebanon and all the land of Canaan is again to be blessed, while the fruitful field occupied by the nations of the Gentiles, 'will be esteemed as a forest:' the multitude of the nations of the Gentiles are to perish, and their lands which are now like a fruitful field, are to be left desolate of inhabitants and become as Lebanon has been for many generations past: while Lebanon shall again be occupied by Israel, and be turned into a fruitful field. These great events could not take place until the Lord should first bring forth a book out of the ground." (OPW, 276 77.)

29:20 (2 Nephi 27:31)."The terrible one is brought to nought." Isaiah appears to return to an earlier pronouncement against the wicked, whose works will ultimately fail ("brought to nought"). (See commentary on 29:5.) The "terrible one" could also refer to the devil himself, who will lose his power at the commencement of the Millennium and will ultimately be defeated during the "little season" at the end of this period of peace.

29:20 (2 Nephi 27:31)."The scorner is consumed." Those who mock sacred things and who make light of the words of the prophets are spiritually self-destructing. They are consumed in their wickedness and will forfeit the blessings that might have been theirs. They will be brought to the depths of personal suffering and sorrow. When they are brought to a realization, or, perhaps better said, an admission of what they have done, they may well cry out: "For our words will condemn us, yea, all our works will condemn us; we shall not be found spotless; and our thoughts will also condemn us; and in this awful state we shall not dare to look up to our God; and we would fain be glad if we could command the rocks and the mountains to fall upon us to hide us from his presence." (Alma 12:14.) Their torment will feel like a consuming, "unquenchable fire." (See Mosiah 2:37-38.)

29:20 (2 Nephi 27:31)."All that watch for iniquity are cut off." This includes those who look to "find fault one with another" (D&C 88:124), and those who actively seek to watch or participate in iniquity and abominations. The latter would include pornography in all its forms, including filthy jokes, sleazy magazines, and so-called adult entertainment. It would include those who cheat, steal, lie, embezzle, perjure, or prevaricate in any way. In essence, it is any who are not following the Lord's admonition to "stand ye in holy places, and be not moved." (D&C 87:8.)

In our dispensation the Lord declared, "They that have watched for iniquity shall be hewn down and cast into the fire." (D&C 45:50; see also DCE, 66.) They will be cut off from the presence of the Lord.

29:21 (2 Nephi 27:32)."Make a man an offender for a word." In one possible meaning, this phrase could apply to those who are offended because of their interpretation of another's words, even though no offense may have been intended. Another possibility is situations where one may make an offhand, perhaps even insensitive, remark that others turn into a great offense. The phrase could also apply to those who deliberately misconstrue or lie about another's words. All of these possibilities run counter to the repeatedcounsel in the scriptures to forgive, forget, and avoid faultfinding.

29:21 (2 Nephi 27:32)."Lay a snare for him that reproveth .Â .Â . and turn aside the just for a thing of nought." The wayward and wicked often seek to justify their actions by finding fault with the prophets or those who are called to set God's house in order. President Spencer W. Kimball astutely observed: "By one means or another, the swiftest method of rejection of the holy prophets has been to find a pretext, however false or absurd, to dismiss the man so that his message could also be dismissed." (CR, April 1978, p. 115.)

The word of the Lord to His falsely imprisoned prophet, Joseph Smith, adds insight to this matter: "Cursed are all those that shall lift up the heel against mine anointed, saith the Lord, and cry they have sinned when they have not sinned before me, saith the Lord, but have done that which was meet in mine eyes, and which I commanded them.

"But those who cry transgression do it because they are the servants of sin, and are the children of disobedience themselves." (D&C 121:16-17.)

Isaiah 29:22-24 and 2 Nephi 27:33-35

Isaiah ends this great chapter with a prophecy of hope for the posterity of Jacob. The Israelites will return to a loving and obedient relationship with their God. Those who have erred by believing in false doctrine will find the truth and be redeemed.

22 Therefore thus saith the Lord, who redeemed Abraham, concerning the house of Jacob, Jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his face now wax pale. 23 But when he seeth his children, the work of mine hands, in the midst of him, they shall sanctify my name, and sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and shall fear the God of Israel. 24 They also that erred in spirit shall come to understanding, and they that murmured shall learn doctrine. 33 Therefore, thus saith the Lord, who redeemed Abraham, concerning the house of Jacob: Jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his face now wax pale. 34 But when he seeth his children, the work of my hands, in the midst of him, they shall sanctify my name, and sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and shall fear the God of Israel. 35 They also that erred in spirit shall come to understanding, and they that murmured shall learn doctrine.

29:22 (2 Nephi 27:33)."Jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his face now wax pale." With the return of his descendants to their covenant place as firm believers in and followers of the Holy One of Jacob, or the God of Israel, father Jacob need no longer hang his head in shame or embarrassment. Nor need his face turn "pale," as it had previously done, because of their actions.

Furthermore, the children of Jacob themselves need no longer hang their heads in shame and sorrow as outcasts of society. Elder Orson Pratt noted: "The house of Jacob has been made ashamed, and his face has waxed pale, ever since he was driven away from Lebanon or Canaan, but the Lord has now brought forth out of the ground a book which shall, accompanied by His power, restore the tribes of Jacob from the four quarters of the globe, and establish them in the land of Palestine and Lebanon forever." (OPW, 278.)

29:23 (2 Nephi 27:34)."They shall sanctify my name .Â .Â . and shall fear the God of Israel." Jacob will see his descendants sanctifying the Lord's name in the conduct of their personal lives, in their homes, in public, and in sacred houses of worship. They shall fear (stand in awe of) and worship the God of Israel, who is Jesus Christ.

29:24 (2 Nephi 27:35)."They also that erred in spirit shall come to understanding." There are many who unintentionally err in spirit because they believe in and are following the philosophies of men disguised as the word of the Lord.

Perhaps Joseph Smith was thinking of those who have "erred in spirit" when he penned these words: "For there are many yet on the earth among all sects, parties, and denominations, who are blinded by the subtle craftiness of men, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, and who are only kept from the truth because they know not where to find it." (D&C 123:12.)

Jesus Christ declared, "I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me." (John 14:6.) There is only one way that leads to God, not multiple paths. As the apostle Paul preached, there is but "One Lord, one faith, one baptism." (Ephesians 4:5.)

The invitation of the Lord to all is to come unto Him, to cast off the burdens of sin, and to be perfected in Him. (Matthew 11:28; 3 Nephi 12:20; Moroni 10:32.) None are excluded, for "he inviteth them all to come unto him and partake of his goodness; and he denieth none that come unto him." (2 Nephi 26:33.) To come unto Christ means that one must disavow and turn away from all error, from anything that will prevent him or her from coming to a correct understanding of His doctrines, covenants, and saving ordinances.
