Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Chapter 16

Isaiah 48 and 1 Nephi 20

Overview

Isaiah 48 and 49 are the first Isaiah chapters to be quoted in the Book of Mormon; they are quoted in context with other writings found in the plates of brass. These plates contained the writings and prophecies of Old Testament prophets up to the time of Jeremiah. Nephi began a great written sermon on the Messiah by reciting prophecies uttered by three presently unknown prophets of Old Testament times: Zenock, Neum, and Zenos. All three of these prophets foretold the coming of the Messiah in the flesh, even He who was known to the people of the Old Testament as "the God of Israel," "the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and the God of Jacob," "the Holy One of Israel." (1 Nephi 19:7-14.)

Then, after his brief reference to these prophets and their prophecies, Nephi quoted two entire chapters from Isaiah.

It is obvious that Nephi esteemed highly the messages found in Isaiah's writings and felt them significant enough to duplicate, for he had declared: "I do not write anything upon plates save it be that I think it be sacred." (1 Nephi 19:6.) Certainly Nephi would not use the precious space on his metallic plates to write something he did not consider to be of great importance to future readers of his laboriously written record.

Nephi's stated purpose in quoting Isaiah 48 and 49 was "that I might more fully persuade [his brothers and those to whom this record would come] to believe in the Lord their Redeemer." He further declared, "Hear ye the words of the prophet [Isaiah], which were written unto all the house of Israel, and liken them unto yourselves." (1 Nephi 19:23-24.)

Thus, in reading and pondering these writings of Isaiah, our objective should be to strengthen our belief in the Universal Redeemer, even the Lord Jesus Christ, and to apply these sacred writings to our own personal circumstances.

Commentary

Isaiah 48:1-2 and 1 Nephi 20:1-2

The prophet chastises the covenant people (who are known by the name of Jacob by birth, but whose covenant name is Israel) for their hypocrisy. They claim privilege based on lineage rather than on righteousness. They have made sacred covenants (in the waters of baptism) and pretend to follow the Lord of Hosts, claiming citizenship in God's community (His holy city or presence), yet their actions belie their words. The clear warning is that none but the righteous will ultimately enter God's presence.

Isaiah 48 1 Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of Judah, which swear by the name of the Lord, and make mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth, nor in righteousness. 2 For they call themselves of the holy city, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel; T he Lord of hosts is his name. 1 Nephi 20 1 Hearken and hear this, O house of Jacob, who are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of Judah, or out of the waters of baptism, who swear by the name of the Lord, and make mention of the God of Israel, yet they swear not in truth nor in righteousness. 2 Nevertheless, they call themselves of the holy city, but they do not stay themselves upon the God of Israel, who is the Lord of Hosts; yea, the Lord of Hosts is his name.

48:1 (1 Nephi 20:1)."Or out of the waters of baptism." This clarifying phrase was added in parentheses to the 1840 edition of the Book of Mormon, which was "Carefully Revised by the Translator" (Joseph Smith). It also appeared in the 1842 edition but was left out of subsequent editions until 1920, when it was added without the parentheses. Most likely it was not part of Isaiah's original text, but was added by a latter-day seer to clarify a phrase understood anciently but not today.

48:2 (1 Nephi 20:2)."The Lord of Hosts is his name." Both the Book of Mormon and the Old Testament use this title over fifty times each. It refers to Jesus Christ or Jehovah and is used on occasions when a stern warning or reprimand is in order. It designates the Lord's role as the One who is "mighty in battle." (Psalm 24:8-10; DCE, 329.)

Isaiah 48:3-8 and 1 Nephi 20:3-8

The Lord reminds rebellious Israel that He alone has revealed future events to benefit or warn His people. Thus, in their stubborn and apostate condition, the people could not perversely give credit to false gods or idols for the events themselves or for a foreknowledge thereof.

3 I have declared the former things from the beginning; and they went forth out of my mouth, and I shewed them; I did them suddenly,and they came to pass. 4 Because I knew that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow brass; 5 I have even from the beginning declared it to thee; before it came to pass I shewedit thee: lest thou shouldest say, Mine idol hath done them, and my graven image, and my molten image, hath commanded them. 6 Thou hast heard, see all this; and will not ye declare it? I have shewed thee new things from this time, even hidden things, and thou didst not know them. 7 They are created now, and not from the beginning; even before the day when thou heardest them not; lest thou shouldest say, Behold, I knew them. 8 Yea, thou heardest not; yea, thou knewest not; yea, from that time that thine ear was not opened: for I knew that thou wouldest deal very treacherously, and wast called a transgressor from the womb. 3 Behold, I have declared the former things from the beginning; and they went forth out of my mouth, and I showed them. I did show them suddenly. 4 And I did it b ecause I knew that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow brass; 5 And I have even from the beginning declared to thee; before it came to pass I showed them thee; and I showed them for fear lest thou shouldst sayMine idol hath done them, and my graven image, and my molten image hath commanded them. 6 Thou hast seen and heard all this; and will ye not declare them? And that I have showed thee new things from this time, even hidden things, and thou didst not know them. 7 They are created now, and not from the beginning, even before the day when thou heardest them not they were declared unto thee, lest thou shouldst sayBehold I knew them. 8 Yea, and thou heardest not; yea, thou knewest not; yea, from that time thine ear was not opened; for I knew that thou wouldst deal very treacherously, and wast called a transgressor from the womb.

48:4 (1 Nephi 20:4)."Thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow brass." In more modern terminology the obstinate or stubborn of Israel could be described as having necks that would not turn they were stiffnecked; and their minds were not pliant to the promptings of the Spirit they were hardheaded. A stiff neck does not turn in the direction of divine guidance. By contrast, the Lord promises to "feel after" those who "stiffen not their necks." (D&C 112:13.)

48:8 (1 Nephi 20:8)."A transgressor from the womb. "Unfortunately, the nation of Israel had been rebellious from her infancy.

Isaiah 48:9-11 and 1 Nephi 20:9-11

In spite of the people's obstinacy, the Lord promises Israel He will defer cutting them completely off. He will not give His name or glory to another people, for Israel will be given opportunity to repent. The Lord's name will yet be held in reverence and will be praised by the repentant, to whom the door that opens unto God's good graces is always unlocked. But it must be appropriately opened by those who hope to return.

In the meantime, Israel (the "transgressor") will be refined with much adversity ("in the furnace of affliction").

9 For my name's sake will I defer mine anger, and for my praise will I refrain for thee, that I cut thee not off. 10 Behold, I have refined thee, but not with silver; I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction. 11 For mine own sake, even for mine own sake, will I do it: for how should my name be polluted? and I will not give my glory unto another. 9 Nevertheless, f or my name's sake will I defer mine anger, and for my praise will I refrain from thee, that I cut thee not off. 10 For, b ehold, I have refined thee, I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction. 11 For mine own sake, yea, for mine own sake will I do this, for I will not suffer my name to be polluted, and I will not give my glory unto another.

48:11 (1 Nephi 20:11)."I will not suffer my name to be polluted." This phrase from the Book of Mormon adds great clarity to Isaiah's text as found in the King James Bible. While such a statement might naturally turn our attention to the commandment that we should "not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain" (Exodus 20:7), it is of interest to note the words of the Lord's covenant with the great patriarch Abraham: "I will take thee, to put upon thee my name, even the Priesthood of thy father." (Abraham 1:18; italics added.)

Israel was chosen to be a "kingdom of priests, and an holy nation" (Exodus 19:6), and God would not allow His priesthood to be polluted. The apostle Peter reminded Israel in his day that they were a "royal priesthood, an holy nation." (1 Peter 2:9.) And, in our day, the Lord has warned that the rights of the priesthood can be controlled only "upon the principles of righteousness." (D&C 121:36.) Those who receive the priesthood are given a stewardship of trust, which, if violated, will be withdrawn, for the Lord will not suffer His name to be polluted.

Isaiah 48:12-13 and 1 Nephi 20:12-13

The Lord declares He is the First and the Last, the great Creator of the heavens and earth; verily, He is the God of the Old Testament Jehovah as well as the Savior of the New Testament Jesus Christ! By His right, or covenant, hand He has created all things. He reminds His chosen (called) people that His creations obey Him.

12 Hearken unto me, O Jacob and Israel, my called; I am he; I am the first, I also am the last. 13 Mine hand also hath laid the foundation of the earth, and my right hand hath spanned the heavens: when I call unto them, they stand up together. 12 Hearken unto me, O Jacob, and Israel my called, for I am he; I am the first, and I am also the last. 13 Mine hand hath also laid the foundation of the earth, and my right hand hath spanned the heavens. I call unto them and they stand up together.

Isaiah 48:14-15 and 1 Nephi 20:14-15

The Israelites are commanded to assemble and hear the testimony of the true and living God regarding a servant whom the Lord has loved and called to His work ("pleasure"). Who is this servant? This question brings a variety of answers from Latter-day Saint scholars.

Sidney Sperry suggests the servant is Cyrus, king of Persia, through whom the Lord will accomplish His work. (BMC, 130.) This is consistent with the footnote reference in the LDS edition of the Bible. Monte Nyman believes the referent of "him" is Israel (GAWI, 171), while Victor Ludlow believes the description best fits the Lord Jesus Christ Himself (IPSP, 405). In the latter instance, Jesus could be delivering a prophecy about Himself as a Spokesman for the Father. In any event, the work to be done by this servant, whoever he may be, has the divine approbation of Deity.

14 All ye, assemble yourselves, and hear; which among them hath declared these things? The Lord hath loved him: he will do his pleasure on Babylon, and his arm shall be on the Chaldeans. 15 I, even I, have spoken; yea, I have called him: I have brought him, and he shall make his way prosperous. 14 All ye, assemble yourselves, and hear; who among them hath declared these things unto them? The Lord hath loved him; yea, and he will fulfil his word which he hath declared by them; and he will do his pleasure on Babylon, and his arm shall come upon the Chaldeans. 15 Also, saith the Lord; I the Lord, yea, I have spoken; yea, I have called him to declare, I have brought him, and he shall make his way prosperous.

48:14 (1 Nephi 20:14)."Babylon." This capital city of ancient Babylonia was noted for its wickedness, corruption, and cruelty. Although the ancient city was destroyed, its name continues to be used as a symbol of wickedness. A revelation given in 1831 declares: "Go ye out from among the nations, even from Babylon, from the midst of wickedness, which is spiritual Babylon." (D&C 133:14; see also DCE, 32-33.)

48:14 (1 Nephi 20:14)."Chaldeans." Chaldea was the area of Babylonia which lay south and east of the capital city, Babylon. The name Chaldeans was used to describe both a race associated with the Assyrians and a learned class in Babylon who specialized in astrology. (LDSBD, 632.)

Isaiah 48:16-19 and 1 Nephi 20:16-19

The Lord has not spoken in secret. From the beginning He has clearly declared His works and His will, which was in full accord with that of His Father. Verse 16 is a foreshadowing of the Savior's later declaration during His mortal ministry: "My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work." (John 4:34.)

The Lord's counsel and commandments are always for the blessing (profit) of the obedient, while they who reject His words sow the seeds of sorrow and disappointment. Truly, as verse 22 later declares, "There is no peace .Â .Â . unto the wicked," for "there is peace [only] in righteous doing." ("Choose the Right," Hymns, no. 239.)

16 Come ye near unto me, hear ye this; I have not spoken in secret from the beginning; from the time that it was, there am I: and now the Lord God, and his Spirit, hath sent me. 17 Thus saith the Lord, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; I am the Lord thy God which teacheth thee to profit, which leadeth thee by the way that thou shouldest go. 18 O that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments! then had thy peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea: 19 Thy seed also had been as the sand, and the offspring of thy bowels like the gravel thereof; his name should not have been cut off nor destroyed from before me. 16 Come ye near unto me; I have not spoken in secret; from the beginning, from the time that it was declared have I spoken; and the Lord God, and his Spirit, hath sent me. 17 And t hus saith the Lord, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; I have sent him, the Lord thy God who teacheth thee to profit, who leadeth thee by the way thou shouldst go, hath done it. 18 O that thou hadst hearkened to my commandmentsthen had thy peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea. 19 Thy seed also had been as the sand; the offspring of thy bowels like the gravel thereof; his name should not have been cut off nor destroyed from before me.

48:18 (1 Nephi 20:18)."Thy peace .Â .Â . as a river .Â .Â . thy righteousness as the waves of the sea." Those who observe God's commandments experience a peace of conscience that flows continually, even as a river does. Their righteousness will have a rippling and far-flung effect, just as the waves of the sea are set in motion by the forces of nature.

48:19 (1 Nephi 20:19)."Thy seed also had been as the sand." Had Israel been obedient, she would have reaped the blessings of the Abrahamic promise of a posterity as countless as the sands of the sea or the gravel of the oceans. (Genesis 22:17.) Now, upon condition of repentance, she must await the future fulfillment of that promise.

Isaiah 48:20-22 and 1 Nephi 20:20-22

The Lord now pleads with Israel to repent and flee Babylon and Chaldea (the ways of the world). This same plea has been uttered in these latter-days: "Go ye out from Babylon .Â .Â . , from the midst of wickedness, which is spiritual Babylon." (D&C 133:5, 7, 14.)

Sidney Sperry suggests these verses foreshadow the Babylonian captivity, and Israel is urged to depart while singing praises to the Lord, who will redeem them. (BMC, 131-32.)

20 Go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye from the Chaldeans, with a voice of singing declare ye, tell this, utter it even to the end of the earth; say ye, The Lord hath redeemed his servant Jacob. 21 And they thirsted not when he led them through the deserts: he caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them: he clave the rock also, and the waters gushed out. 20 Go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye from the Chaldeans, with a voice of singing declare ye, tell this, utter to the end of the earth; say ye: The Lord hath redeemed his servant Jacob. 21 And they thirsted not; he led them through the deserts; he caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them; he clave the rock also and the waters gushed out.

48:21 (1 Nephi 20:21)."And they thirsted not." This verse is a reminder of some of the miracles performed in Israel's behalf during the great exodus from Egypt. (Exodus 17:1-6.) Perhaps the Lord is reassuring them that He will take care of them during any future exodus from physical or spiritual captivity.

48:22 (1 Nephi 20:22)."There is no peace .Â .Â . unto the wicked." Perhaps this is another way of saying "wickedness never was happiness." (Alma 41:10.) Christ has given us "the gospel of peace" (Ephesians 6:15), "and the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace" (James 3:18).

22 There is no peace, saith the Lord, unto the wicked.22 And notwithstanding he hath done all this, and greater also, t here is no peace, saith the Lord, unto the wicked.
