Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Chapter 17

Isaiah 49 and 1 Nephi 21, 2 Nephi 6

Overview

One of the primary focuses of Isaiah 49 is the servant called from his mother's womb. As noted in the previous chapter, Nephi's avowed purpose in quoting chapters 48 and 49 of Isaiah was "that I might more fully persuade [all] to believe in the Lord their Redeemer." (1 Nephi 19:23.) For this reason, I believe that the servant Isaiah speaks of is none other than the Messiah or Savior, He who will be a "light to the Gentiles." Indeed, He will be the means of "salvation unto the ends of the earth."

Other commentaries have suggested that the servant could be Israel, Isaiah, or the prophet of the Restoration Joseph Smith. (See IPSP, 408-10; GAWI, 173-75; DCBM 1:157-58.) Each such conclusion has logical support. Undoubtedly, as is often the case in prophecy, there are multiple applications or fulfillments of the great promises in this chapter. The case for Joseph Smith as the promised servant is particularly strong. However, as the commentary in this chapter will reflect, I believe the major focus of the Servant should be our Lord and Redeemer, Jesus Christ.

Spiritual darkness will be dispelled by this Servant-Messiah, and prisoners (on both sides of the veil) will be freed from the bondage of sin through their repentance.

The long dispersion of Israel will be ended as her children are gathered with power in the last days. The children of the covenant will far outnumber those of previous days, and the gathering places will seem far too narrow to hold her bulging numbers.

The powerful heads of state will become "nursing fathers and .Â .Â . nursing mothers" in restoring scattered Israel to the lands of her inheritance. No longer will despots and tyrants hold the Lord's people captive.

Such is the promise to covenant Israel of the last days!

President Wilford Woodruff, the fourth prophet of this dispensation, declared: "The revelations that are in the Bible, the predictions of the patriarchs and prophets who saw by vision and revelation the last dispensation and fulness of times plainly tell us what is to come to pass. The 49th chapter of Isaiah is having its fulfillment." (SOT, 112.)

Following Nephi's reading of these writings, his brothers wanted to know how they were to be understood. Were they to be understood in a spiritual or temporal context? A portion of Nephi's response follows:

"Wherefore, the things of which I have read are things pertaining to things both temporal and spiritual; for it appears that the house of Israel, sooner or later, will be scattered upon all the face of the earth, and also among all nations.

"And behold, there are many who are already lost from the knowledge of those who are at Jerusalem. Yea, the more part of all the tribes have been led away; and they are scattered to and fro upon the isles of the sea; and whither they are none of us knoweth, save that we know that they have been led away.

"And since they have been led away, these things have been prophesied concerning them, and also concerning all those who shall hereafter be scattered and be confounded, because of the Holy One of Israel; for against him will they harden their hearts; wherefore, they shall be scattered among all nations and shall be hated of all men."

He then speaks of the gentiles assisting in the restoration of scattered Israel and of a "mighty nation" being raised up in the land of America. He tells of a "marvelous work .Â .Â . of great worth" that will be especially beneficial to the seed of father Lehi (the Lamanites). "It shall also be of worth unto the Gentiles; and not only unto the Gentiles but unto all the house of Israel, unto the making known of the covenants of the Father of heaven unto Abraham, saying: In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed." (1 Nephi 22:1-9.)

Commentary

Isaiah 49:1-8 and 1 Nephi 21:1-8

The Nephite text restores an important introduction to the chapter. (See comparative text.) The wicked pastors of the people of Israel are identified as the cause of Israel's being scattered. (See also Jeremiah 23:1-2.) While past efforts to gather Israel have proven fruitless for the most part, the time has now arrived when she will respond to the Lord's pleadings for her return.

The Holy One will not only be Israel's Redeemer but will also be a "light to the Gentiles" and bring the repentant among them into His covenant.

Isaiah 49 1 Listen, O isles, unto me; and hearken, ye people, from far; The Lord hath called me from the womb; from the bowels of my mother hath he made mention of my name. 2 And he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow of his hand hath he hid me, and made me a polished shaft; in his quiver hath he hid me; 3 And said unto me, Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified. 4 Then I said, I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for nought, and in vain: yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God. 5 And now, saith the Lord that formed me from the womb to be his servant, to bring Jacob again to him,T hough Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength. 6 And he said, It is a light thing that thou shouldest be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel: I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth. 7 Thus saith the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, and his Holy One, to him whom man despiseth, to him whom the nation abhorreth, to aservant of rulers, Kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship, because of the Lord that is faithful, and the Holy One of Israel, and he shall choose thee. 8 Thus saith the Lord, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee: and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages; 1 Nephi 21 1 And again: Hearken, O ye house of Israel, all ye that are broken off and are driven out because of the wickedness of the pastors of my people; yea, all ye that are broken off, that are scattered abroad, who are of my people, O house of Israel. Listen, O isles, unto me, and hearken ye people from far; the Lord hath called me from the womb; from the bowels of my mother hath he made mention of my name. 2 And hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow of his hand hath he hid me, and made me a polished shaft; in his quiver hath he hid me; 3 And said unto me: Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified. 4 Then I said, I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught and in vain; surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God. 5 And now, saith the Lordthat formed me from the womb that I should be his servant, to bring Jacob again to himthough Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength. 6 And he said: It is a light thing that thou shouldst be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel. I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the ends of the earth. 7 Thus saith the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, his Holy One, to him whom man despiseth, to him whom the nations abhorreth, to servant of rulers: Kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship, because of the Lord that is faithful. 8 Thus saith the Lord: In an acceptable time have I heard thee, O isles of the sea, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee; and I will preserve thee, and give thee my servant for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages;

49:1 (1 Nephi 21:1)."Listen, O isles .Â .Â . and hearken, ye people, from far." Scattered Israel can be found throughout the earth. An isle of the sea could be any place reachable over water. For example, the family of Lehi and Sariah was led to the ancient Americas, which they considered to be "an isle of the sea." (2 Nephi 10:20.)

49:1, 5 (1 Nephi 21:1, 5)."The Lord hath called me (formed me) from the womb." Jesus Christ "was foreordained before the foundation of the world" to be our Savior. (1 Peter 1:20; see also Revelation 13:8; Ether 3:14.)

49:2 (1 Nephi 21:2)."He hath made my mouth like a sharp sword." In our dispensation the Lord declared: "Behold, I am God; give heed unto my word, which is quick and powerful, sharper than a two-edged sword." (D&C 6:2.) "A two-edged sword is one which has been sharpened on both sides to make it twice as effective. God's word and the still small voice of the Spirit are even sharper than this, for they are capable of piercing the most pernicious armament and of penetrating to the inner most depths of one's soul (D&C 85:6)." (DCE, 514-15.) When the Lord, or His servants, speak with the sharpness of the sword of their mouths, "the guilty taketh the truth to be hard, for it cutteth them to the very center." (1 Nephi 16:2.)

49:2 (1 Nephi 21:2)."In the shadow of his hand hath he hid me." "An 1832 revelation spoke of the faithful as being 'hid from the world with Christ in God' (D&C 86:9). The apostle Paul used this same phrase in writing to the early Saints in Colosse (Col. 3:3). The Prophet Joseph Smith gave an interpretation to this phrase. Placing his hands upon one of the faithful members of the Church, he said: 'Your life is hid with Christ in God, and so are many others. Nothing but the unpardonable sin can prevent you from inheriting eternal life for you are sealed up by the power of the priesthood unto eternal life, having taken the step necessary for that purpose.' (HC 5:391.) Thus, to be hid from the world is to be assured of eternal life or to have one's calling and election made sure." (DCE, 241-42.)

49:2 (1 Nephi 21:2)."Made me a polished shaft; in his quiver." An arrow whose shaft has been polished is true to its target. It flies fast and straight, never varying. The promised Servant (Christ) was absolutely true and never varied from His appointed target or work. He was surely polished in the furnace of affliction. It should be noted that Joseph Smith did refer to himself as "a smooth and polished shaft in the quiver of the Almighty." (TPJS, 304.) Certainly he too was true to his assigned mission.

49:3 (1 Nephi 21:3)."Thou art my servant .Â .Â . in whom I will be glorified." God is glorified through the gathering of His children and bringing about their immortality and eternal life. That is His work and His glory. (Moses 1:39.) Thus, whether gathered directly by the Servant-Savior or one of His disciples, it matters not. In either case, both He and His Father are glorified. (John 15:8.)

49:4 (1 Nephi 21:4)."I have laboured in vain." The statements of discouragement found in this verse sound similarto those made by the Lord of the vineyard when He saw the lack of good fruit coming forth in spite of His best efforts: "It profiteth me nothing, notwithstanding all our labor." (Jacob 5:32.)

49:4 (1 Nephi 21:4)."Yet surely my judgment is with the Lord." In spite of discouraging setbacks, the Lord and His undershepherds continue to pursue the work of God. Their wages are guaranteed.

49:5 (1 Nephi 21:5)."Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious." Although Israel was not gathered during the mortal ministry of the Savior, yet the promise is sure, and her wandering flocks shall yet return to the fold of the Good Shepherd. In His postmortal ministry, He visited the "other sheep" in the Americas as promised (John 10:16; 3 Nephi 15:21) and still "other sheep" who were "not of [that] land, neither of the land of Jerusalem" (3 Nephi 16:1). His visit in 1820 to the young Prophet Joseph Smith commenced in earnest the work of the gathering, which shall continue in intensity until His glorious second coming. (See BICQ, 107-14.)

49:6 (1 Nephi 21:6)."A light to the Gentiles." The aged seer Simeon, who was promised he would not die before seeing the Messiah, saw the baby Jesus in the temple where Mary and Joseph had gone to make an offering. Simeon declared, "Mine eyes have seen thy salvation. .Â .Â . A light to lighten the Gentiles." (Luke 2:25-32.)

Isaiah had also previously referred to the Savior in these terms. (Isaiah 42:6.) He who declared Himself to be the "life and the light of the world" (D&C 11:28) also called Joseph Smith "a light unto the Gentiles." (D&C 86:11.) Nevertheless, the Lord commanded all members of His church to "Arise and shine forth, that thy light may be a standard for the nations." (D&C 115:5.)

49:7 (1 Nephi 21:7)."Him whom man despiseth." Christ was "despised and rejected of men" (Isaiah 53:3) and "set at nought" (Mark 9:12). Once again, Joseph Smith could also fit this description, for the prophecy has come true that his "name should be had for good and evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues." (JS H 1:33.)

49:7 (1 Nephi 21:7)."Kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship." The day will come when earthly royalty will declare their allegiance to the one Sovereign King, the Holy One of Israel; for "Christ will reign personally upon the earth." (A of F 1:10.)

49:8 (1 Nephi 21:8)."In an acceptable time have I heard thee." In a time of favor, predetermined by the Lord, he has answered us. The Book of Mormon text adds the words, "O isles of the sea." The Lord will answer the prayers of Israel, though she is scattered to the "isles of the sea" (continents far beyond Asia). Remember that even the Americas were considered by their ancient inhabitants to be an "isle of the sea." (2 Nephi 10:20.) In His designated time, the Lord will gather His children. (See DCE, 5.)

49:8 (1 Nephi 21:8)."Day of salvation." Virtually every time one makes a commitment to follow Christ, including accepting the saving covenants and ordinances of His gospel, it becomes a day of salvation. The Prophet Joseph Smith declared: "We believe that through the Atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel." (A of F 1:3.)

49:8 (1 Nephi 21:8)."I will preserve thee, and give thee my servant for a covenant of the people." Isaiah used similar wording in an earlier reference to the promised Messiah. (Isaiah 42:6.) The addition of the words "my servant" in the Nephite text is significant. Who is the Servant who has been given as a covenant? None other than Jesus Christ! We take upon us the name of Jesus Christ in the waters of baptism and regularly renew that covenant when partaking of the emblems of the sacrament. (D&C 20:37, 75-79.) The fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ is the "new and everlasting covenant." (D&C 22:1; DCE, 381-82.)

49:8 (1 Nephi 21:8)."Inherit the desolate heritages." In considering these words, one would naturally think of the great promises made to Israel that she will inhabit and restore once-fruitful lands that have long lain desolate. (Isaiah 61:4.) There may, however, be a far more significant meaning attached to this phrase. During their long years of apostasy, have not the children of Israel been deprived of the heritage that might have been theirs had they been worthy? Thus, when they repent and return, will they not then inherit the heritage that has long been desolate?

Isaiah 49:9-13 and 1 Nephi 21:9-13

The promise of redemption continues in these verses. It extends to both sides of the veil: Whether in the spirit prison, where the gospel message is taken to the disembodied spirits, or in mortality, spiritual darkness will be dispersed. In addition to spiritual redemption, the physical gathering of Israel will proceed. Those returning shall come from afar. The inhabitants in heaven and on earth will break forth in joyous singing because Israel "shall be smitten no more."

9 That thou mayest say to the prisoners, Go forth; to them that are in darkness, Shew yourselves. They shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall be in all high places. 10 They shall not hunger nor thirst; neither shall the heat nor sun smite them: for he that hath mercy on them shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide them. 11 And I will make all my mountains a way, and my highways shall be exalted. 12 Behold, these shall come from far: and, lo, these from the north and from the west; and these from the land of Sinim. 13 Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O earth; and break forth into singing, O mountains: for the Lord hath comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted. 9 That thou mayest say to the prisoners: Go forth; to them that sit in darkness: Show yourselves. They shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall be in all high places. 10 They shall not hunger nor thirst, neither shall the heat nor the sun smite them; for he that hath mercy on them shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide them. 11 And I will make all my mountains a way, and my highways shall be exalted. 12 And then, O house of Israel, b ehold, these shall come from far; and lo, these from the north and from the west; and these from the land of Sinim. 13 Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O earth; for the feet of those who are in the east shall be established; and break forth into singing, O mountains; for they shall be smitten no more; for the Lord hath comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted.

49:9 (1 Nephi 21:9)."Say to the prisoners, Go forth." The footnote references imply that the prisoners spoken of are those who are presently confined to a spirit prison or "state of misery." These are they who "chose evil works rather than good" during their earthly sojourn. (Alma 40:13-14.) Following His death on Calvary, the disembodied Christ went to the spirit world where He organized His righteous followers into a missionary task force to take the gospel to those in the spirit prison. (D&C 138:18-21, 28.) As these confined spirits accept the gospel, and as saving ordinances are performed in their behalf in holy temples here on earth, the prisoners are set free.

This great work caused the Prophet Joseph to exclaim, "Let the dead speak forth anthems of eternal praise to the King Immanuel, who hath ordained, before the world was, that which would enable us to redeem them out of their prison; for the prisoners shall go free." (D&C 128:22.)

49:9 (1 Nephi 21:9)."Them that sit in darkness." One of the scriptures of the Restoration states: "And when the times of the Gentiles is come in, a light shall break forth among them that sit in darkness, and it shall be the fulness of my gospel." (D&C 45:28.) The ancient seer Joseph saw this dispersion of spiritual darkness when he prophesied "that the Messiah should be made manifest unto [the house of Israel] in the latter days, in the spirit of power, unto the bringing of them out of darkness unto light yea, out of hidden darkness and out of captivity unto freedom." (2 Nephi 3:5.)

49:9 (1 Nephi 21:9)."Their pastures shall be in all high places." The spiritual pastures of the Lord's sheep His redeemed shall be in His holy temples. Here they shall be taught of His ways. "The mountain of the Lord's house" is the temple. (Isaiah 2:2; Micah 4:1; BICQ, 115-16.) Frequently, communications between heaven and mortals have been in "high places": Moses on Mount Horeb (Exodus 3) and Mount Sinai (Exodus 19); Nephi on "an exceedingly high mountain" (1 Nephi 11); and the brother of Jared "upon the top of the mount" (Ether 3).

Shortly before the organization (restoration) of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the Lord commanded His disciples to "declare glad tidings, yea, publish it upon the mountains, and upon every high place, and among every people that thou shalt be permitted to see." (D&C 19:29.)

49:10 (1 Nephi 21:10)."They shall not hunger nor thirst; neither shall the heat nor sun smite them." At first glance, this may appear to be a promise of swift travel made to those returning to possess their lands of inheritance. However, placing this statement in the context of John's revelation, a new meaning is revealed. John saw in vision a future time when some "arrayed in white robes" would be serving God "day and night in his temple." Then follows a repetition of Isaiah 49:10, with this added verse: "For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters." (Revelation 7:13-17.) The sun won't smite (burn) them because they will be spending their time in the temple. (See Psalm 121:6.)

49:11 (1 Nephi 21:11)."I will make all my mountains a way, and my highways shall be exalted." The Lord will facilitate transportation. Roads will appear in mountain passes, and highways will be raised up in valley areas. This may have more direct reference to the Savior's second coming when "every valley shall be exalted and every mountain and hill shall be made low." (Isaiah 40:4; see also BICQ, 217 18.)

49:12 (1 Nephi 21:12)."These shall come from far .Â .Â . and these from the land of Sinim." Israel will be gathered from the ends or four corners of the earth. Many scholars interpret "Sinim" to be China, while others identify it with a place near Aswan, Egypt. However, more broadly interpreted, it "stands for distant lands generally." (TOVBC, 445.)

49:13 (1 Nephi 21:13)."Those who are in the east.Â .Â . O mountains." Monte Nyman described "those who are in the east" as the residents of "Jerusalem, while the 'mountains' appears to be a reference to Zion or America. Thus the Lord is declaring that the two capitals of Israel shall be established and smitten no more." (GAWI, 180.)

Isaiah 49:14-21 and 1 Nephi 21:14-21

Because of her long dispersion, and in an attitude of not accepting personal responsibility for her distressed condition, Israel or Zion will lament that the Lord has forgotten her. Yet, as the Nephite text shows, in her heart she knows her Redeemer "will show that he hath not." His memory of and feelings for her are even stronger than those of a mother for the child she has borne. The image of Israel is ever before the Lord.

Jehovah reiterates His promises that the children of Israel shall return from captivity. He swears with a divine oath ("as I live") that His word will be kept. Israel will be utterly amazed at her numbers and will plead for more space to hold her burgeoning population.

14 But Zion said, The Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me. 15 Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. 16 Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands; thy walls are continually before me. 17 Thy children shall make haste; thy destroyers and they that made thee waste shall go forth of thee. 18 Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold: all these gather themselves together, and come to thee. As I live, saith the Lord, thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all, as with an ornament, and bind them on thee, as a bride doeth. 19 For thy waste and thy desolate places, and the land of thy destruction, shall even now be too narrow by reason of the inhabitants, and they that swallowed thee up shall be far away. 20 The children which thou shalt have, after thou hast lost the other, shall say again in thine ears, The place is too strait for me: give place to me that I may dwell. 21 Then shalt thou say in thine heart, Who hath begotten me these, seeing I have lost my children, and am desolate, a captive, and removing to and fro? and who hath brought up these? Behold, I was left alone; these, where had they been? 14 But, behold, Zion hath said: The Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten mebut he will show that he hath not. 15 For c an a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee, O house of Israel. 16 Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands; thy walls are continually before me. 17 Thy children shall make haste against thy destroyers; and they that made thee waste shall go forth of thee. 18 Lift up thine eyes round about and behold; all these gather themselves together, and they shall come to thee. And as I live, saith the Lord, thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all, as with an ornament, and bind them on even as a bride. 19 For thy waste and thy desolate places, and the land of thy destruction, shall even now be too narrow by reason of the inhabitants; and they that swallowed thee up shall be far away. 20 The children whom thou shalt have, after thou hast lost the first, shall again in thine ears say: The place is too strait for me; give place to me that I may dwell. 21 Then shalt thou say in thine heart: Who hath begotten me these, seeing I have lost my children, and am desolate, a captive, and removing to and fro? And who hath brought up these? Behold, I was left alone; these, where have they been?

49:16 (1 Nephi 21:16)."I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands." The marks of the crucifying nails in His palms could be a messianic meaning of this phrase. (Zechariah 13:6; 3 Nephi 11:14.) This could also have reference to the ancient custom of tattooing sacred images or symbols on one's palms as a constant reminder of that to which one was devoted. In Isaiah's imagery, the Lord could not use His hands without being reminded of Israel.

49:16 (1 Nephi 21:16)."Thy walls are continually before me." This could suggest that the walls (plans) of the city of Zion are continually before the Lord's eyes. This is His constant vision or hope for Israel.

49:17 (1 Nephi 21:17)."Thy children shall make haste against thy destroyers." Israel is to quickly leave those who have oppressed her, and the Lord promises that her destroyers (oppressors) will depart from her.

49:18 (1 Nephi 21:18)."Thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all, as with an ornament, and bind them on thee, as a bride doeth." The returning children of Israel will be as clothing and jewelry adorning a new bride. In speaking of some of modern-day Israel who had been "cast out from the land of their inheritance," the Lord declared: "Yet I will own them, and they shall be mine in that day when I shall come to make up my jewels." (D&C 101:1-3.)

49:19 (1 Nephi 21:19)."The land of thy destruction, shall even now be too narrow." The lands to which Israel returns her previously wasted and destroyed lands will, in their rejuvenated condition, become overcrowded, scarcely able to contain the inhabitants.

49:19 (1 Nephi 21:19)."They that swallowed thee up shall be far away." Israel's former persecutors will be far removed from her.

49:20 (1 Nephi 21:20)."The children which thou shalt have, after thou hast lost the other (first)." Sidney Sperry indicates this "seems to mean that Zion's later children shall complain that they have too little room in which to dwell; hence, they plead for more." (BMC, 137.)

49:21 (1 Nephi 21:21)."Who hath begotten me these, seeing I have lost my children." Once again mother Israel expresses her amazement at the numbers of her posterity in the last days, knowing that her former children are gone. "Where did they all come from?" she exclaims.

Isaiah 49:22-26 and 1 Nephi 21:22-26; 2 Nephi 6:6 7, 13, 17-18

The prophet concludes this chapter with a reiteration of the Lord's promise to redeem His people. In fact, the gentiles and the mighty of the earth will assist in the process of restoring the dispersed to the lands of their inheritance. Nevertheless, it is by the power of the mighty God that His covenant people will be delivered.

22 Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people: and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders. 23 And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing mothers: they shall bow down to thee with their face toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt know that I am the Lord: for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me. 24 Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captive delivered? 25 But thus saith the Lord, Even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered: for I will contend with him that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy children. 26 And I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh; and they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine: and all flesh shall know that I the Lord am thy Saviour and thy Redeemer, the mighty One of Jacob. 22 Thus saith the Lord God: Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people; and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders. (See also 2 Nephi 6:6.) 23 And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing mothers; they shall bow down to thee with their face towards the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt know that I am the Lord; for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me. (See also 2 Nephi 6:7, 13.) 24 For s hall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captives delivered? (See also 2 Nephi 6:16.) 25 But thus saith the Lord, even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered; for I will contend with him that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy children. 2 Nephi 6:17. But thus saith the Lord: Even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered; for the Mighty God shall deliver his covenant people. For thus saith the Lord: I will contend with them that contendeth with thee 26 And I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh; they shall be drunken with their own blood as with sweet wine; and all flesh shall know that I, the Lord, am thy Savior and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob. (See also 2 Nephi 6:18.)

49:22 (1 Nephi 21:22; 2 Nephi 6:6)."I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people." The covenant children of Israel will come from all the gentile nations of the earth. The Lord extends His hand to all to partake of the saving covenants and ordinances of His gospel. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the standard to which these converts will gather in order to make their covenants with Christ and receive their saving ordinances. (See DCE, 559-60.) Within the Church is found the fulness of the gospel or the new and everlasting covenant. (See DCE, 381-82.) The Lord declared: "And even so I have sent mine everlasting covenant into the world, to be a light to the world, and to be a standard for my people, and for the Gentiles to seek to it." (D&C 45:9.) The Book of Mormon, one of the "standard works" of the Church, has also been identified by the Lord as "a standard unto my people, which are of the house of Israel." (2 Nephi 29:2.)

It is of interest to note that Nephi states that "after they [scattered Israel] shall be nursed by the Gentiles, and the Lord has lifted up his hand upon the Gentiles and set them up for a standard,.Â .Â . the Lord God will raise up a mighty nation among the Gentiles." (1 Nephi 22:6-7; italics added.) Has not the land of America, the birth place of the Restoration and home of the headquarters of the restored Church, stood out as a standard (rallying point) for the freedom-loving and God-fearing people of the earth? Consider the words of Joseph Smith: "The Constitution of the United States is a glorious standard. . . . It is a heavenly banner. .Â .Â . It is like a great tree under whose branches men from every clime can be shielded from the burning rays of the sun." (TPJS, 147.)

49:22 (1 Nephi 21:22; 2 Nephi 6:6)."They shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders." Nephi gives commentary on this in 1 Nephi 22:6-12. In essence, the gentiles of the earth will assist in gathering scattered Israel in the last days. (See also commentary on 49:23.)

49:23 (1 Nephi 21:23; 2 Nephi 6:7; 10:9)."Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing mothers." The mighty of the earth royalty, presidents, government ministers shall assist in the process of gathering the house of Israel. This could be through financial assistance to enable them to return to their homelands, such as the Jews to the Holy Land, or it could be in removing legal barriers that heretofore have prevented the preaching and establishment of the restored gospel in their lands. (See BICQ, 129-30.)

49:23 (1 Nephi 21:23; 2 Nephi 6:7, 13)."They shall bow down to thee .Â .Â . and lick up the dust of thy feet." Those who formerly despised and oppressed the Jews and the rest of the house of Israel "the covenant people of the Lord" (2 Nephi 6:13) will reverse their roles. "The sons also of them that afflicted thee shall come bending unto thee; and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet." (Isaiah 60:14.)

49:23 (1 Nephi 21:23; 2 Nephi 6:7)."They shall not be ashamed that wait for me." The apostle John wrote, "Abide in him [Christ]; that, when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming." (1 John 2:28; italics added.) The word wait in Hebrew means hope for or anticipate. Nephi tells us that "the people of the Lord are they who wait [hope] for him." (2 Nephi 6:13.) Thus, one who waits upon the Lord places his trust in Him and lives in accordance with His will as he or she anticipates His coming. Such persons will have their "confidence wax strong in the presence of God" (D&C 121:45), for they will have no unresolved sins to cause them to be ashamed.

49:24 (1 Nephi 21:24; 2 Nephi 6:16)."Lawful captive." The covenant people of the Lord. (1 Nephi 21:24, foot-note a.)

49:25 (1 Nephi 21:25; 2 Nephi 6:17)."The captives of the mighty .Â .Â . and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered." The "Mighty God shall deliver his covenant people" (2 Nephi 6:17; JST Isaiah 49:25) from the clutches of the "mighty" (rulers) and the "terrible" (wicked oppressors) of the earth. (See 1 Nephi 22:11-12.)

49:25 (1 Nephi 21:25; 2 Nephi 6:17)."I will contend with him that contendeth with thee." "For behold, I do not require at their hands to fight the battles of Zion; for, as I said in a former commandment, even so will I fulfil I will fight your battles." (D&C 105:14.)

49:26 (1 Nephi 21:26; 2 Nephi 6:18)."I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh; and they shall be drunken with their own blood." Consider Nephi's later commentary: "And every nation which shall war against thee, O house of Israel, shall be turned one against another. .Â .Â . And all that fight against Zion shall be destroyed." Furthermore, "they shall be drunken with their own blood." (1 Nephi 22:13-14.)

Perhaps the depraved condition of the ancient Nephites is descriptive of those wicked ones of the future who will "be drunken with their own blood": "They have lost their love, one towards another; and they thirst after blood and revenge continually." (Moroni 9:5.) The carnage among the wicked may be such that they resort to cannibalism both to satisfy their physical hunger and to demonstrate their depravity. Once again we look to the past for a prototype of this abominable behavior: "They did murder them in a most cruel manner .Â .Â . and after they have done this, they devour their flesh like unto wild beasts, because of the hardness of their hearts; and they do it for a token of bravery." (Moroni 9:10.)

49:26 (1 Nephi 21:26; 2 Nephi 6:18)."All flesh shall know that I the Lord am thy Saviour and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob." There will be no equivocating at His coming; both the wicked and the righteous shall acknowledge Him as the God of Israel and the One who wrought the atonement. (See BICQ, 188-93.)
