Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Chapter 18

Isaiah 50 and 2 Nephi 7

Overview

This short chapter begins with the Lord questioning Israel about her status as His wife. He reminds her that she sold herself for her iniquities and that He was not the one who put her away. Then follows a series of messianic statements foreshadowing events in the Savior's life. The people are admonished to put their trust in the Lord and are warned about the consequences accruing to those who walk by the light of their own reasoning.

Commentary

Isaiah 50:1-3 and 2 Nephi 7:1-3

Monte Nyman suggests that Nephi's commentary on the quoted passages includes "three verses from 'the prophet,' obviously Isaiah. We do not have these verses in the present Bible text, but they fit very well into the context of Isaiah 49 and 50." (GAWI, 191.) These verses (1 Nephi 22:15-17) can be placed between Isaiah 49:26 and 50:1. The addition of these verses adds a valuable dimension of understanding to the biblical text.

The question posed to Israel about her divorced status is a metaphorical reference to the law of divorce given in Deuteronomy 24:1-4. Under this law, if a wife was found unfaithful (unclean) her husband could dissolve the marriage by giving her a "bill of divorcement." Even though Israel had been unfaithful to her husband the Lord He had never given her such a document; she was never officially divorced. The Lord further states that neither has Israel been sold into bondage to relieve a debt, for He has no creditors. (At that time, one in debt could sell his children into servitude to pay the debt. See Exodus 21:7; Nehemiah 5:1-5.)

The Lord reminds the people of His power to redeem them. Nothing can stay His will and stated objectives.

Verses 2-3 and the last portion of verse 11 of the Isaiahtext is repeated, with slight modifications, in Doctrine and Covenants 133:65-70.

Isaiah 50 1 Thus saith the Lord, Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement, whom I have put away? or which of my creditors is it to whom I have sold you? Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away. 2 Wherefore, when I came, was there no man? when I called, was there none to answer? I s my hand shortened at all, that it cannot redeem? or have I no power to deliver? behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea, I make the rivers a wilderness: their fish stinketh, because there is no water, and diethfor thirst. 3 I clothe the heavens with blackness, and I make sackcloth their covering. 2 Nephi 7 1 Yea, for thus saith the Lord: Have I put thee away, or have I cast thee off forever? For t hus saith the Lord: Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement? To whom have I put thee away, or to which of my creditors have I sold you? Yea, to whom have I sold you? Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away. 2 Wherefore, when I came, there was no man; when I called, yea, there was none to answer. O house of Israel, i s my hand shortened at all that it cannot redeem, or have I no power to deliver? Behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea, I make their rivers a wilderness and their fish to stink because the waters are dried up, and they diebecause of thirst. 3 I clothe the heavens with blackness, and I make sackcloth their covering.

50:1 (2 Nephi 7:1)."For your transgressions is your mother put away." In speaking to latter-day Israel, who is to be redeemed, reference is made to her "mother" who was "put away" (separated) because of her "transgressions." Some have suggested this implies ancient Israel (the mother) was divorced (put away) but that the bill of divorcement does not apply to modern Israel. However, it appears that ancient "mother Israel" left her Husband (put herself away).

50:2 (2 Nephi 7:2)."When I came [and] called there was none to answer." Latter-day revelation renders this a little differently: "In that day when I came unto mine own, no man among you received me, and you were driven out.

"When I called again there was none of you to answer; yet my arm was not shortened at all that I could not redeem, neither my power to deliver." (D&C 133:66-67; italics added.) The Lord was ever ready to redeem His people, but they did not respond.

50:2 (2 Nephi 7:2)."Is my hand shortened?" The Doctrine and Covenants uses the word "arm" in place of "hand." The Lord's ability to extend His saving hands or arms is not limited. He can reach out and encompass all, without restriction. "His grasp is galactic," noted Elder Neal A. Maxwell. (CR, April 1976, p. 39; see also D&C 35:8.)

50:2 (2 Nephi 7:2)."At my rebuke I dry up the sea." The Lord makes reference to the manifestations of His power in behalf of Israel during her struggle to leave Egyptian bondage. (Exodus 7:14-21; 14:23-31.)

50:3 (2 Nephi 7:3)."Clothe the heavens with blackness, and I make sackcloth their covering." One of the plagues the Lord inflicted on Pharaoh's Egypt was to cover the land with darkness. (Exodus 10:21-23.) Footnote references in the Book of Mormon text identify Revelation 6:12 as a possible future fulfillment of this prophecy, when "the sun [shall become] black as sackcloth." (See also Matthew 24:29; D&C 45:42; BICQ, 183-85.) Sackcloth is a coarse fabric of a dark color and was used in making the garments worn by mourners.

Isaiah 50:4-9 and 2 Nephi 7:4-9

These verses are known among biblical scholars as a "servant's song." This is a major poetic passage wherein a servant of the Lord is described, although not specifically identified. (See IPSP, 358-60.) There are differences of opinion among commentaries regarding the identity of this Servant. While there may be dual meaning to these verses, the author believes the song in Isaiah 50 refers primarily to the Messiah. He will be treated despicably, but the power of God will be manifest in Him. Those who oppose Him will be destroyed.

4 The Lord God hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary: he wakeneth morning by morning, h e wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned. 5 The Lord God hath opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned away back. 6 I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting. 7 For the Lord God will help me; therefore shall I not be confounded: therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed. 8 He is near that justifieth me; w ho will contend with me? let us stand together: w ho is mine adversary? let him come near to me. 9 Behold, the Lord God will help me; who is he that shall condemn me? lo, they all shall wax old as a garment; the moth shall eat them up. 4 The Lord God hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season unto thee, O house of Israel. When ye are weary he waketh morning by morning. H e waketh mine ear to hear as the learned. 5 The Lord God hath opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned away back. 6 I gave my back to the smiter, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair. I hid not my face from shame and spitting. 7 For the Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not be confounded. T herefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed. 8 And the Lord is near, and he justifieth me. W ho will contend with me? Let us stand together. W ho is mine adversary? Let him come near me, and I will smite him with the strength of my mouth. 9 For the Lord God will help me. And all they who shall condemn me, behold, all they shall wax old as a garment, and the moth shall eat them up.

50:4 (2 Nephi 7:4)."The tongue of the learned." God gives the Servant the power of the learned: He is knowledgeable and fluent in expression, and He shall not be confounded. Perhaps more importantly, He knows how to speak to Israel, whether to comfort her or to appropriately rebuke her. A similar promise is given by Jesus to His disciples. (Luke 21:12-15.) Monte Nyman suggests that "verse 4 also fits the calling and mission of Joseph Smith and the elders of restored Israel, who were to cause the wisdom of the wise men to perish (see Isaiah 29:14)." (GAWI, 192.) Victor Ludlow cautions, "we should not limit these references to the life of Christ, but should try to apply them to many of God's chosen servants." (IPSP, 422.)

50:4 (2 Nephi 7:4)."A word in season." A word spoken at the appropriate time. (See Proverbs 25:11; DCE, 499-500.)

50:5 (2 Nephi 7:5)."The Lord God hath opened mine ear." Because of the Servant's willingness to listen, God spoke to Him. He was spiritually receptive to God's voice. Where there is no ear, so to speak, there is no voice. Joseph Smith later changed this verse to read: "The Lord God hath appointed mine ears." (JST Isaiah 50:5.)

50:6 (2 Nephi 7:6)."I gave my back to the smiter." The scourging of Christ by order of Pilate was clearly a fulfillment of this messianic statement. (Matthew 27:26.)

50:6 (2 Nephi 7:6)."I gave .Â .Â . my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair." Plucking the hair of a man's face or beard was looked upon as a shameful way of degrading him. (See 2 Samuel 10:1-4.) While our present New Testament makes no specific mention of this occurring to Christ, it is descriptive of the rude way in which He was treated by the Jews and the Romans during His final hours.

50:6 (2 Nephi 7:6)."I hid not my face from shame and spitting." Spittle from vile mouths was spewed upon the sinless Son of God by His tormentors. Yet He stood in regal silence as these fiends condemned themselves through their filthy actions. (Matthew 26:67.)

50:7 (2 Nephi 7:7)."I set my face like a flint." Flint is a very hard rock and is descriptive of something extremely hard and firm. One who sets his "face like flint" has determined a firm course to follow. He is not persuaded to turn aside from or abandon the set course.

50:8 (2 Nephi 7:8)."He .Â .Â . justifieth me." He is pronounced guiltless. No false accusations will succeed against the Servant of the Lord or His people.

50:8 (2 Nephi 7:8)."Let us stand together." This admonition is sandwiched between two rhetorical questions ("Who will contend with me?" and "Who is mine enemy?"). The apostle Paul provides this insightful commentary: "If God be for us, who can prevail against us?" (JST Romans 8:31; italics added.)

50:8 (2 Nephi 7:8)."I will smite him with the strength of my mouth." This added text from the Book of Mormon emphasizes the power of the Lord's word. Those who choose to oppose the work of the Lord shall be smitten (cursed) by His power. He has declared, "My words are sure and shall not fail." (D&C 64:31.)

50:9 (2 Nephi 7:9)."They shall wax old as a garment." To wax is to increase in intensity. Thus those who condemn or fight against the Lord, His work, or His servants, will become as an old garment, useless and cast aside. The Savior admonished all to seek after things "which wax not old." (Luke 12:33; see also DCE, 627.)

50:9 (2 Nephi 7:9)."The moth shall eat them up." The moth was frequently used as a symbol of destruction. (See Job 13:28; Isaiah 51:8; Matthew 6:19.) Those who oppose the Lord's work shall be destroyed.

Isaiah 50:10-11 and 2 Nephi 7:10-11

Once again, Isaiah poses a rhetorical question, the answer to which is obvious: Those who place their trust in the Lord will be protected. Assuredly all who follow the Lord and His chosen servants will not walk in darkness or have reason to fear. Yet those who walk by their own light, relying on their own limited reasoning, will be sorrowful, for they will be "cut off from among [His] people." (D&C 1:14.)

10 Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light? let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. 11 Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass yourselves about with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand; ye shall lie down in sorrow. 10 Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in darkness and hath no light? 11 Behold all ye that kindle fire, that compass yourselves about with sparks, walk in the light of your fire and in the sparks which ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine handye shall lie down in sorrow.

50:10."Stay upon his God." Be supported by or rely upon your God.

50:11 (2 Nephi 7:11)."All ye that kindle fire." Sidney Sperry provided the following insight: "Those who kindle fires and gird themselves with firebrands that is, those who conspire evil and plan the destruction of the faithful or who walk by their own lights shall be trapped by their own snares. They shall come to a sorrowful end." (BMC, 158; see also D&C 133:64-74.)
