Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Chapter 19

Isaiah 51 and 2 Nephi 8

Overview

The chapter begins with an appeal to the children of Israel to remember their heritage and to follow the righteous example of their progenitors, Abraham and Sarah. The promises God made to these grand heads of Israel's people are still in force. While the heavens and the earth may pass away, the Lord's promises and covenants will abide forever. But the people must qualify for the promised blessings through their obedience and righteousness.

Because of her long dispersion and persecution, Israel calls upon the Lord to intervene in her behalf and use the power He used anciently in defeating Rahab and the dragon. The Lord responds by reminding Israel that He will protect and comfort her and she need not fear any man. "Thou art my people," He declares.

Two great prophets are promised specifically to the house of Judah in the last days. They shall prophesy and protect the people for a season (three and one-half years) before their ministry is complete and their enemies slay them. Nevertheless, in the end, God's purposes will be fulfilled and His people will be redeemed.

Commentary

Isaiah 51:1-8 and 2 Nephi 8:1-8

As noted above, there is an initial appeal for the posterity of Abraham and Sarah to follow their ancestors' righteous examples. There follows the Lord's promise to comfort Hispeople and to redeem her waste places. Israel is admonished to listen to the Lord and to follow His teachings. While the heavens and the earth, as we know them today, will ultimately vanish, the salvation of the Lord is everlasting. Those whose heart is set upon righteousness need not fear what mortal man can do.

Isaiah 51 1 Hearken to me, ye that follow after righteousness, ye that seek the Lord: l ook unto the rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence ye are digged. 2 Look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah that bare you: for I called him alone, and blessed him, and increased him. 3 For the Lord shall comfort Zion: he will comfort all her waste places; and he will make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the Lord; j oy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of melody. 4 Hearken unto me, my people; and give ear unto me, O my nation: for a law shall proceed from me, and I will make my judgment to rest for a light of the people. 5 My righteousness is near; my salvation is gone forth, and mine arms shall judge the people; t he isles shall wait upon me, and on mine arm shall they trust. 6 Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath: for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner: b ut my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished. 7 Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my law; fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings. 8 For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool: b ut my righteousness shall be for ever, and my salvation from generation to generation. 2 Nephi 8 1 Hearken unto me, ye that follow after righteousness. L ook unto the rock from whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit from whence ye are digged. 2 Look unto Abraham, your father, and unto Sarah, she that bare you; for I called him alone, and blessed him. 3 For the Lord shall comfort Zion, he will comfort all her waste places; and he will make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the Lord. J oy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving and the voice of melody. 4 Hearken unto me, my people; and give ear unto me, O my nation; for a law shall proceed from me, and I will make my judgment to rest for a light for the people. 5 My righteousness is near; my salvation is gone forth, and mine arm shall judge the people. T he isles shall wait upon me, and on mine arm shall they trust. 6 Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath; for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment; and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner. B ut my salvation shall be forever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished. 7 Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart I have written my law, fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings. 8 For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool. B ut my righteousness shall be forever, and my salvation from generation to generation.

51:1 (2 Nephi 8:1)."Look unto the rock from whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit from whence ye are digged." The children of Israel are admonished to remember the works of their illustrious ancestors, Abraham ("the rock") and Sarah ("the hole of the pit" or rock quarry). It should be remembered that the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob is the very One who was born in the lineage of Abraham and Sarah and who Himself is the Stone of Israel. (Genesis 49:24; Psalm 118:22; Matthew 21:42; D&C 50:44; DCE, 566.)

51:2 (2 Nephi 8:2)."I called him alone, and blessed him, and increased him." Because of his great righteousness, the Lord promised Abraham that He would bless him and his posterity, making of them "a great nation." (Genesis 12:1-3.) "In thy seed," he was told, "shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed." (3 Nephi 20:27; see also Galatians 3:8.) Through the ministry of Abraham the Lord's name would "be known in the earth forever." (Abraham 1:19.) Indeed, all who accept the gospel of Jesus Christ will be accounted as "Abraham's seed" (Galatians 3:26-29), which would be as numerous as the stars (Genesis 15:5).

51:3 (2 Nephi 8:3)."The Lord shall comfort Zion: he will comfort all her waste places." In a later prophecy, another Old Testament prophet declared, "And the Lord shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet choose Jerusalem." (Zechariah 1:17.) After the Latter-day Saints had traveled the plains as pioneers in going to the western United States, they frequently referred to their new-found home in the Rocky Mountains as "Zion." In fact, the rallying cry for emigrants was "Let us go up to Zion!" Certainly the faith, prayers, and labor of these early pioneers and those whohave followed them have transformed "waste places, wilderness, and desert" into gardens and productive land.

The words in a Latter-day Saint hymn are reflective of the message found in this verse of Isaiah:

"For the wilderness has blossomed,

blossomed like a rose;

and the barren desert is a fruitful field;

joy and gladness now are found therein,

thanksgiving and the voice of melody."

("Let the Mountains Shout for Joy," by Evan Stephens; see also Isaiah 35:1.)

In a broader sense, the prophecy of Isaiah could also apply to the reclaiming of the land of Palestine by the returning Jews. The reference to the wilderness becoming "like Eden" has implications for the Millennium, when "the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory." (A of F 1:10; see also DCE, 411; BICQ, 216-18.) Yet another commentary has suggested that "the Lord promised that through the restoration of the gospel in the latter days, his children trusting in the immutable word of God would become as a watered garden, the truths of the gospel becoming to them as the riches and comforts of Eden." (DCBM 1: 232.)

51:4 (2 Nephi 8:4)."A law shall proceed from me." This law is a teaching or doctrine. Monte Nyman opined that the "law" here spoken of "is undoubtedly the Book of Mormon. This law is associated with judgment in both verses 4 and 5, and it will come forth from the 'isles.' The Book of Mormon is to judge the nations as well as individuals (see 2 Nephi 25:22; D&C 20:13-15.)" (GAWI, 195.)

51:4 (2 Nephi 8:4)."I will make my judgment to rest for a light of the people." The Lord's justice will be established as a light for the people.

51:5 (2 Nephi 8:5)."My salvation is gone forth." Jesus Christ is "the messenger of salvation." (D&C 93:8.) His gospel is "the gospel of salvation." (D&C 93:51.) Since its restoration through the Prophet Joseph Smith, it has continuously gone forth to the inhabitants of the earth.

51:5 (2 Nephi 8:5)."Mine arms shall judge the people." The Lord's arms are symbolic of the power with which He administers divine justice, as well as a representation of His authority. All will be judged by the power of Jesus Christ, who is the Eternal Judge.

51:5 (2 Nephi 8:5)."The isles shall wait upon me." Isles represent far distant places. In 1831, the Lord told the leaders of His fledgling latter-day Church to "send forth the elders of my church unto the nations which are afar off; unto the islands of the sea; send forth unto foreign lands; call upon all nations." (D&C 133:8.) The inhabitants of these far distant places wait for the message of salvation.

51:6 (2 Nephi 8:6)."The heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment." The heavens will vanish (be dispersed) and the earth wax old (decay). This has reference to "the day of the Lord" or second coming. (2 Peter 3:10.) Many signs and wonders will occur in the heavens at that time, which may include those seen by the prophet Joel: "And I will shew wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and the terrible day of the Lord come." (Joel 2:30-31; see also JS H 1:41; BICQ, 183-87.) The earth will undergo a baptism of fire, which will cleanse it of wickedness for the millennial reign of Christ. This cleansing will also prepare it for its final transformation following the last judgment, at which time "the earth will die; it will be dissolved, pass away, and then it will be renewed, or raised with a resurrection. It will receive its resurrection to become a celestial body," said President Joseph Fielding Smith. (See BICQ, 195-96, 235.) At both the beginning and the end of the Millennium there will be a "new heaven and new earth." (See BICQ, 219-20.)

51:7 (2 Nephi 8:7)."The people in whose heart I have written my law." The righteous are those who have the Lord's words and commandments engraved on their hearts. These are the meek or teachable of the earth who open their hearts to the penetrating power of the Spirit. President Joseph Fielding Smith said: "The Spirit of God speaking to the spirit of man has power to impart truth with greater effect and understanding than the truth can be imparted by personal contact even with heavenly beings. Through the Holy Ghost the truth is woven into the very fibre and sinews of the body so that it cannot be forgotten." (DS 1:47-48.)

51:7 (2 Nephi 8:7)."Fear ye not the reproach of men." In our day the Lord counseled those involved in His work: "And your whole labor shall be in Zion, with all your soul, from henceforth; yea, you shall ever open your mouth in my cause, not fearing what man can do, for I am with you. Amen." (D&C 30:11.) Proverbs sums it up with these words: "The fear of man bringeth a snare: but whoso putteth his trust in the Lord shall be safe." (Proverbs 29:25.)

51:8 (2 Nephi 8:8)."The moth shall eat them up." The moth was frequently used as a symbol of destruction. (See commentary on Isaiah 50:9.) Those who ridicule the Lord's people shall ultimately be destroyed in the flesh, but His righteousness and salvation will be never ending. This utterance of Isaiah is reminiscent of a statement by President George Albert Smith, seventh prophet in these latter days: "There have been some who have belittled [Joseph Smith], but I would like to say that those who have done so will be forgotten and their remains will go back to mother earth, .Â .Â . and the odor of their infamy will never die, while the glory and honor and majesty and courage and fidelity manifested by the Prophet Joseph Smith will attach to his name forever." (MOK, 80-81.)

Isaiah 51:9-11 and 2 Nephi 8:9-11

Israel has now awakened to her plight and pleads with the Lord to reach out and protect her as He did anciently. Some of His past victories are cited as reminders. As an almost immediate reply to these pleadings, Isaiah tells of the future occasion when the Lord will gather the ransomed and redeemed.

9 Awake, awake, p ut on strength, O arm of the Lord; awake, as in the ancient days, in the generations of old. Art thou not it that hath cut Rahab, and wounded the dragon? 10 Art thou not it which hath dried the sea, the waters of the great deep; that hath made the depths of the sea a way for the ransomed to pass over? 11 Therefore the redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come with singing unto Zion; and everlasting joy shall be upon their head: they shall obtain gladness and joy; and sorrow and mourning shall flee away. 9 Awake, awake! P ut on strength, O arm of the Lord; awake as in the ancient days. Art thou not he that hath cut Rahab, and wounded the dragon? 10 Art thou not he who hath dried the sea, the waters of the great deep; that hath made the depths of the sea a way for the ransomed to pass over? 11 Therefore, the redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come with singing unto Zion; and everlasting joy and holiness shall be upon their heads; and they shall obtain gladness and joy; sorrow and mourning shall flee away.

51:9 (2 Nephi 8:9)."Put on strength, O arm of the Lord." Israel pleads for the Lord to display or use His power.

51:9 (2 Nephi 8:9)."Art thou not he that hath cut Rahab, and wounded the dragon?" In desperation, but almost rhetorically, Israel asks the Lord if He is not the same who previously defeated Rahab and the dragon. The psalmist also mentioned the utter defeat of Rahab. (Psalm 89:10.) The "dragon" is easily identified as Satan. (Revelation 12:7-9; 20:2.) The identity of "Rahab" is a little more difficult. Some scholars suggest Rahab represents Egypt while others say it is a sea monster representing Satan. Footnote reference "c" in the Book of Mormon text cites Isaiah 27:1 as a cross-reference, which speaks of "leviathan that crooked serpent." The footnote identifies "leviathan" as "a legendary sea-monster representing the forces of chaos that opposed the Creator." (LDSKJ, Isaiah 27:1, footnote c.)

51:10 (2 Nephi 8:10)."Art thou not he who hath dried the sea [and] made the depths of the sea a way for the ransomed to pass over?" This reference is to the miracle the Lord performed in parting the waters of the Red Sea to enable the "ransomed" children of Israel to safely pass through, while the pursuing Egyptians were destroyed. (Exodus 14:21-31.) In verse 15, the Lord affirmatively responds to the question raised in this verse.

51:11 (2 Nephi 8:11)."The redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come with singing unto Zion." Perhaps reflecting on the highway of safety mentioned in the previous verse, Isaiah now speaks of yet another highway of safety, one to be created by the Lord for His redeemed at some point in the future. This will be called "The way of holiness" and "the unclean shall not pass over it. . . .

"And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away." (Isaiah 35:8-10.) This particular passage in Isaiah is cross-referenced with D&C 45:66-71, which speaks of the New Jerusalem.

Isaiah 51:12-17 and 2 Nephi 8:12-17

The Lord reminds the people of His power to comfort and again admonishes the people not to fear mortals. The God of Israel is the One who made this very earth. He is the One of everlasting power, to whom the people should give their attention and allegiance. Israel is admonished to open her eyes, to awaken from her stupor, and to recognize her role as the Lord's people.

12 I, even I, am he that comforteth you: who art thou, that thou shouldest be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the son of man which shall be made as grass; 13 And forgettest the Lord thy maker, that hath stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth; and hast feared continually every day because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy? a nd where is the fury of the oppressor? 14 The captive exile hasteneth that he may be loosed, and that he should not die in the pit, nor that his bread should fail. 15 But I am the Lord thy God, that divided the sea, whose waves roared: T he Lord of hosts is his name. 16 And I have put my words in thy mouth, and Ihave covered thee in the shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion, T hou art my people. 17 Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, which hast drunk at the hand of the Lord the cup of his fury; thou hast drunken the dregs of the cup of trembling, and wrung them out. 12 I am he; yea, I am he that comforteth you. Behold, who art thou, that thou shouldst be afraid of man, who shall die, and of the son of man, who shall be made like unto grass? 13 And forgettest the Lord thy maker, that hath stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth, and hast feared continually every day, because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy? And where is the fury of the oppressor? 14 The captive exile hasteneth, that he may be loosed, and that he should not die in the pit, nor that his bread should fail. 15 But I am the Lord thy God, whose waves roared; t he Lord of Hosts is my name. 16 And I have put my words in thy mouth, and have covered thee in the shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the heavens and lay the foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion: Behold, t hou art my people. 17 Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, which hast drunk at the hand of the Lord the cup of his furythou hast drunken the dregs of the cup of trembling wrung out

51:12 (2 Nephi 8:12)."The son of man who shall be made like unto grass." Why should one fear mortal man who is no more enduring than grass? Isaiah previously proclaimed, "All flesh is grass." (Isaiah 40:6.) In a latter-day revelation the Lord admonished his people not to fear those in positions of worldly power, "for they are as grass, and all their glory as the flower thereof which soon falleth." (D&C 124:7.) Place your confidence in the Lord, whose power is everlasting. The psalmist declared, "In God I have put my trust; I will not fear what flesh can do unto me." (Psalm 56:4.) Note that the expression "son of man" here is presented in lowercase letters referring to mortals. This should not be confused with "Son of Man," who is Jesus Christ.

51:13 (2 Nephi 8:13)."Hast feared continually every day, because of the fury of the oppressor." In this verse the people are asked why they have forgotten the Creator and lived in constant fear of their oppressors. The oppressors are "Israel's captors, typifying evil rulers who oppress the righteous." (2 Nephi 8:13, footnote c.)

51:14 (2 Nephi 8:14)."The captive exile hasteneth that he may be loosed, and .Â .Â . not die in the pit." The dispersed of Israel, held captive by oppressors, will soon be set free. They will "not die in the pit" (go down to the grave) nor be deprived of food.

51:16 (2 Nephi 8:16)."I have covered thee in the shadow of mine hand." The Lord's protecting hand is extended over His people. (See commentary on Isaiah 49:2 and 1 Nephi 21:2.)

51:17 (2 Nephi 8:17)."The cup of his fury .Â .Â . the dregs of the cup of trembling." To drink of such a cup is to taste the bitterness eventually experienced by the wicked and unrepentant. Dregs are the last remaining and least desirable sediments that settle to the bottom of a cup of liquid. The great Nephite prophet-king Mosiah taught that those who drink of such a cup do so because their works are evil and mercy has lost her claim on them. (Mosiah 3:24-27; see also DCE, 116.)

Isaiah 51:18-20 and 2 Nephi 8:18-20

Isaiah laments the lack of leadership among the sons of Judah, but then speaks prophetically of "two sons" who will be raised up to assist the nation. Fortunately, latter-day revelation provides inspired commentary on the identity of these two. They are great prophets raised up to prophesy and protect the Jewish people during a critical period just prior to the Second Coming.

18 There is none to guide her among all the sons whom she hath brought forth; neither is there any that taketh her by the hand of all the sons that she hath brought up. 19 These two things are come unto thee; who shall be sorry for thee? desolation, and destruction, and the famine, and the sword: by whom shall I comfort thee? 20 Thy sons have fainted, they lie at the head of all the streets, as a wild bull in a net: they are full of the fury of the Lord, the rebuke of thy God. 18 And none to guide her among all the sons she hath brought forth; neither that taketh her by the hand, of all the sons she hath brought up. 19 These two sons are come unto thee, who shall be sorry for theethy desolation and destruction, and the famine and the swordand by whom shall I comfort thee? 20 Thy sons have fainted, save these two; they lie at the head of all the streets; as a wild bull in a net, they are full of the fury of the Lord, the rebuke of thy God.

51:18 (2 Nephi 8:18)."There is none to guide her." This may not only be indicative of a lack of leadership among the children of Judah, but also a reference to the absence of priesthood leadership.

51:19 20 (2 Nephi 8:19-20)."These two sons are come unto thee . . . they lie at the head of all the streets." These two prophets were also spoken of by John the Revelator (Revelation 11:1-14), Zechariah (Zechariah 4:11-14), and Joseph Smith (D&C 77:15). The two will "have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy: and have power over waters to turn them to blood, and to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will." (Revelation 11:6.)

"The specified time of their ministry is 'a thousand two hundred and threescore days,' or three and one-half years. This is the same time as the Savior's mortal ministry. However, it would be wise not to be too confined in placing parameters on this period. Elder [Bruce R.] McConkie noted 'the detailed application of the 42 months to this period is yet to be revealed.'" (BICQ, 101.) Elder McConkie also suggested that these two will be members of the Council of the Twelve or of the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

At the end of their designated ministry, the two prophets will be slain. Their dead bodies will lie in the streets of Jerusalem for three and one-half days while the wicked of the world rejoice. However, their victory will be short-lived, for the two martyrs will arise as resurrected beings. A great earthquake, of a magnitude never before known, will follow and the Savior will shortly appear. The wicked will be destroyed and the earth prepared for the millennial reign. (BICQ, 100 104.)

Isaiah 51:21-23; 52:1-2; and 2 Nephi 8:21-25

The chapter concludes with the Lord's appeal to the people to repent and hearken to His words. If they do, He will be their Advocate with Heavenly Father. (See D&C 29:5.) In their sanctified state, they will no longer have to suffer the consequences of sin or drink the dregs from the Lord's cup of fury or justice. The last two verses of 2 Nephi 8 are the first two verses of Isaiah 52. These verses are interpreted in latter-day revelation as a call to the Lord's people to return to the Lord and put on the power and authority of the priesthood. (D&C 113:7-8.)

21 Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted, and drunken, but not with wine: 22 Thus saith thy Lord the Lord, and thy God that pleadeth the cause of his people, B ehold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling, even the dregs of the cup of my fury; thou shalt no more drink it again: 23 But I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee; which have said to thy soul, Bow down, that we may go over: and thou hast laid thy body as the ground, and as the street, to them that went over. Isaiah 52:1. Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city: for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean. 2 Shake thyself from the dust; arise, and sit down, O Jerusalem: loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion. 21 Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted, and drunken, and not with wine: 22 Thus saith thy Lord, the Lord and thy God pleadeth the cause of his people; b ehold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling, the dregs of the cup of my fury; thou shalt no more drink it again. 23 But I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee; who have said to thy soul: Bow down, that we may go over and thou hast laid thy body as the ground and as the street to them that went over. 24 Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city; for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean. 25 Shake thyself from the dust; arise, sit down, O Jerusalem; loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion.

51:21 (2 Nephi 8:21)."Afflicted, and drunken, but not with wine." Just as those whose physical, spiritual, and intellectual senses are dimmed by alcohol or drugs, those who immerse themselves in wickedness are afflicted with a loss of self-control and sound judgment. (See commentary on Isaiah 29:9 and 2 Nephi 27:4.)

51:22 (2 Nephi 8:22)."Thy Lord the Lord, and thy God that pleadeth the cause of his people." The Lord God Jehovah, even Jesus Christ the Advocate, pleads the cause of His repentant people. "Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them." (Hebrews 7:25; see also Jeremiah 50:34.)

51:22 (2 Nephi 8:22)."The cup of trembling, even the dregs of the cup of my fury." The repentant will no longer have to taste such bitterness. (See commentary for Isaiah 51:17 and 2 Nephi 8:17.)

51:23 (2 Nephi 8:23)."I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee." Those who have oppressed God's children will now be the ones to drink the dregs of His cup of wrath.

51:23 (2 Nephi 8:23)."Bow down, that we may go over." This refers to the practice of making conquered people lie on the ground while the victors walked over their bodies.

52:1 (2 Nephi 8:24)."Put on thy strength, O Zion." This is a plea to "those whom God should call in the last days, who should hold the power of priesthood to bring again Zion, and the redemption of Israel; and to put on her strength is to put on the authority of the priesthood, which she, Zion, has a right to by lineage; also to return to that power which she had lost." (D&C 113:7-8.)

52:1 (2 Nephi 8:24)."Put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city." "What comes about as a result of exercising the Priesthood is equivalent to putting on 'her beautiful garments,'" said Elder Hyrum M. Smith. (DCE, 40.) Perhaps this also implies the privilege of receiving sacred clothing in holy places.

52:1 (2 Nephi 8:24)."There shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean." Circumcision was a token of the covenant people of Israel. Isaiah uses this description to emphasize that in the day when the earth is cleansed of the ungodly, none but the covenant people of Christ will enter into holy places. (See Joel 3:17; Zechariah 14:20-21.)

52:2 (2 Nephi 8:25)."Shake thyself from the dust." This is a reference to Israel's former position of lying prone on the ground while her captors walked over her.

52:2 (2 Nephi 8:25)."Loose thyself from the bands of thy neck." "The scattered remnants are exhorted to return to the Lord from whence they have fallen; which if they do, the promise of the Lord is that He will speak to them, or give them revelation. [See Isaiah 52:6-8.] The bands of her neck are the curses of God upon her, or the remnants of Israel in their scattered condition among the Gentiles." (BMC, 168; see also D&C 113:9-10.)
