Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Chapter 21

Isaiah 53 and Mosiah 14, 15

Overview

Seven hundred years before the birth of the Messiah, the prophet Isaiah saw in vision the rejection and sorrow that would be suffered by the Son of God during His mortal sojourn. He witnessed the events of those final earthly moments when Jesus Christ would personally pay the price for all mankind's sins and would then give His life as part of the ransom to be paid for the redemption of all.

About five hundred and fifty years after Isaiah recorded this great prophecy, another prophet, by the name of Abinadi, quoted it to a people who were steeped in wickedness. Speaking with great "power and authority from God," Abinadi boldly called them to repentance. He recited the Ten Commandments and proclaimed that "salvation doth not come by the law alone" but requires the intervention (atonement) of God (Jehovah or Jesus Christ) Himself. He reminded the people that since the beginning of time on this earth, all the prophets have testified of the mission of this Messiah. (Mosiah 13.) Abinadi then quoted the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah in its entirety, in what is now Mosiah 14. During the rest of his sermon, he then provided some commentary.

President Joseph Fielding Smith observed: "Now Bible commentators will tell you that this [Isaiah 53] has nothing to do with the life of Jesus Christ. To them this story is one concerning suffering Israel. I want to tell you that it is a story, a synopsis of the life of our Redeemer, revealed to Isaiah 700 years before the Lord was born." (DS 1:23.)

Commentary

Isaiah 53:1-3 and Mosiah 14:1-3

Speaking for himself and other prophets who have testified of the coming of the Messiah, Isaiah introduces this chapter with a rhetorical question: "Who hath believed [given credence to] our report (words or testimony)?"

The prophet then proceeds to describe the early mortal life of this promised Messiah, including a description of how He would be looked upon and treated by others.

Isaiah 53 1 Who hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? 2 For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. 3 He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not. Mosiah 14 1 Yea, even doth not Isaiah say: Who hath believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? 2 For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of dry ground; he hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him there is no beauty that we should desire him. 3 He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief; and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not.

53:1 (Mosiah 14:1)."Who hath believed our report?" It is of interest to note how the apostle John later used these words of Isaiah to illustrate the lack of belief on the part of the people in his days: "But though he [Jesus] had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him:

"That the saying of Esaias [the Greek form of Isaiah] the prophet might be fulfilled, which he spake, Lord, who hath believed our report? and to whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed?" (John 12:37-38.)

53:1 (Mosiah 14:1)."Arm of the Lord." The Lord's holy arm is symbolic of the authority of His position and "the power with which he administers divine justice. . . . Thus, his arm may prove to be a blessing or a curse depending upon one's desire for and state of righteousness." (DCE, 26.) As applied to chapter 53 of Isaiah, the arm of the Lord is revealed in the Being of the mortal Messiah.

53:2 (Mosiah 14:2)."He shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground." The Christ child will grow up as any child of tender years, dependent upon the care of others. As a plant or root growing in arid ground, He will need the nurturing of others to survive. In addition to the conditions of the physical ground, the young Seedling who would later declare Himself to be the "root .Â .Â . of David" (Revelation 22:16) will also find Himself being raised in the spiritually dry and barren conditions of an apostate people.

53:2 (Mosiah 14:2)."He hath no form nor comeliness; .Â .Â . there is no beauty that we should desire him." "There was nothing about him to cause people to single him out," noted President Joseph Fielding Smith. "In appearance he was like men; and so it is expressed here by the prophet that he had no form or comeliness, that is, he was not so distinctive, so different from others that people would recognize him as the Son of God. He appeared as a mortal man." (DS 1:23.)

53:3 (Mosiah 14:3)."He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief .Â .Â . ; he was despised, and we esteemed him not." Some understanding of how He was despised and rejected can be gleaned from the incident of His return "into his own country" following the commencement of His ministry. His powerful teachings were greeted with such comments as "From whence hath this man these things? and what wisdom is this which is given unto him? .Â .Â . Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary? .Â .Â . And they were offended at him." Furthermore, because of their unbelief, "he could there do no mighty work." (Mark 6:1-6.)

Certainly He experienced sorrow at the rebelliousness of the people He was trying to teach and save. Undoubtedly there are tears still shed by this holiest of Men, whom we worship as a God, as He views the stiffneckedness and wickedness of our day. Surely those who treat lightly their covenants with Him, or who are disobedient to His commandments, could be counted among those who "esteem him not."

Throughout His mortal ministry there were those who "esteemed him not." Some accused Him of bearing false witness (John 8:12-20) or of being possessed of a devil (John 10:19-20). Others vainly sought to tempt Him to misuse His powers (Luke 11:16), and there were those who challenged His authority to minister and teach (Matthew 21:23). Some sought to twist His words "that they might accuse him." (JST Luke 11:53-54.) His life was sought on occasion (Luke 4:16-30; John 5:1-23), but such efforts failed, for His mission was not yet completed. Finally, He was betrayed by a trusted associate (Matthew 26:14-16), mockingly interrogated (John 18:14, 28 2; Matthew 26:63-64) and sentenced to a flogging and to death by crucifixion (Matthew 27:22-26). (For a more complete review of His trials and persecutions, see Martyrs of the Kingdom, pp. 28-46.)

Isaiah 53:4-6 and Mosiah 14:4-6

These verses give a brief synopsis of the suffering Christ bore in our behalf during His gift of the atonement in Gethsemane and on Calvary.

4 Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. 5 But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed. 6 All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquityof us all. 4 Surely he has borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows; yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. 5 But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed. 6 All we, like sheep, have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquities of us all.

53:4 (Mosiah 14:4)."He hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows." President Howard W. Hunter, fourteenth prophet of our dispensation, provided this commentary on the Savior's sorrows: "When his body was taken from the cross and hastily placed in a borrowed tomb, he, the sinless Son of God, had already taken upon him not only the sins and temptations of every human soul who will repent, but all of our sickness and grief and pain of every kind. He suffered these afflictions as we suffer them, according to the flesh. He suffered them all. He did this to perfect his mercy and his ability to lift us above every earthly trial." (Ensign, May 1988, pp. 16-17; see also 2 Nephi 9:21; Alma 7:11-12.)

His suffering sacrifice for our sins, offered in Gethsemane, is beyond mortal man's ability to comprehend. It was so intense that He bled at every pore of His sinless body. (D&C 19:16-19; Mosiah 3:7; Luke 22:44; DCE, 49.) One of His latter-day apostles, Elder James E. Talmage, penned this description of our suffering Savior:

"Christ's agony in the garden is unfathomable by the finite mind, both as to intensity and cause. .Â .Â . He struggled and groaned under a burden such as no other being who has lived on earth might even conceive as possible. It was not physical pain, nor mental anguish alone, that caused Him to suffer such torture as to produce an extrusion of blood from every pore; but a spiritual agony of soul such as only God was capable of experiencing." (Talmage, 613.)

One Latter-day Saint biblical scholar, Dr. Victor Ludlow, provides some interesting insights into how Jesus bore our sins. He noted, "The word forgive does not appear in this chapter of Isaiah, though the Hebrew root nasa, from which the word forgive is usually translated, does appear twice, as 'borne' in verse 4, and 'bare' in verse 12. (See Isa. 2:9; 33:24.) Christ 'bore' or carried our sins so that we do not have to carry their burden. (John 1:29; see 1 Pet. 1:18-20.) Or, as we say, 'He has forgiven us,' meaning he 'gave' the price 'before.' Indeed, almost two thousand years before our time, he gave the necessary payment in the Garden of Gethsemane. As we take advantage of his suffering, we can find the joy God wants all men to experience as they are cleansed and worthy to live in his presence. (2 Ne. 2:25; 9:21.)" (IPSP, 452.)

53:4 (Mosiah 14:4)."We did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted." Little did we realize in premortal councils how much Jesus was offering when He volunteered to be our Savior. No wonder a modern-day apostle, Elder Neal A. Maxwell, has observed: "Never has anyone offered so much to so many in so few words as did Jesus when He said, 'Here am I, send me.' [Abraham 3:27.]" (EAIA, 115.)

We loved and esteemed Him for His selfless sacrifice, knowing He was the key to our eternal salvation. For without His freewill and sinless offering, we would never break the bonds that would hold us captive to death and hell. (2 Nephi 9.) No wonder we "shouted for joy" (Job 38:4-7) when the plan of God was announced and Jesus was foreordained to be our Redeemer. (Moses 4:1-4; Abraham 3:22-28.) Yet, as He suffered through those torturous hours inGethsemane, how all heaven must have wept in knowing of His agony.

Was He "smitten of God"? Not in the sense that His Father was meting out some kind of punishment. Yet the great Elohim knew the agony to which His Only Begotten would be subjected as He fulfilled His foreordained assignment. Of necessity, the Father of us all had to deny or to turn a deaf ear to the agonizing plea, "O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me." According to President Brigham Young, the total withdrawal of the Father's spirit in Gethsemane precipitated the sweating of blood. (JD 3:206.)

Some commentaries have suggested that the reference to Christ's being smitten of God could apply to His seemingly forsaken condition on the cross. However, the author believes the above explanation to be more plausible.

53:5 (Mosiah 14:5)."He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities." See commentary on 53:4.

53:5 (Mosiah 14:5). "The chastisement of our peace was upon him." The peace of mind (forgiveness and a clear conscience) available to all upon conditions of true repentance which includes submitting to the saving ordinances of the gospel was made possible only through the "chastisement" (suffering) the Savior experienced in our behalf.

53:5 (Mosiah 14:5)."With his stripes we are healed." With or because of His wounds, bruises, and contusions we are healed. A stripe is the welt or discoloration on the flesh made by a lash or rod. The apostle Peter used similar language when he spoke of Christ having borne our sins and healing us with His stripes. (1 Peter 2:24.)

53:6 (Mosiah 14:6)."All we like sheep have gone astray." Like sheep without a shepherd, all have wandered into forbidden paths and pastures of sin. Each must be reclaimed (redeemed) by the Good Shepherd, He who has given His life for the sheep. (John 10:11.) Peter noted that the Saints of his day had "returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of [their] souls." (1 Peter 2:25.)

Isaiah 53:7-9 and Mosiah 14:7-9; 15:6, 10

Isaiah now speaks of the indignities to which the King of kings was subjected in courts of unworthy earthly rulers Annas, Caiaphas, Herod, and Pilate. The Sinless One was first brought before the deposed high priest Annas, who one chronicler said "ranks with Judas among the abominable of the earth." (John 18:13; MM 4:143.) He was next paraded before Caiaphas, the incumbent high priest of the Sanhedrin, and others of that body. Here Jesus was spat upon, mocked, and buffeted. (Matthew 26:57-68.) Although next taken to Pilate, he was sent by this puppet Roman ruler to the adulterous and murderous Herod, who had jurisdiction over Galileans. "Herod with his men of war set him at nought, and mocked him" before returning Jesus to Pilate for further mockery, abuse, and final judgment. (Luke 23:11.)

Judged of wicked men, the Righteous One was sentenced to death, cutting Him off from family and posterity. He was crucified alongside criminals deserving of their conviction, if not their punishment. And, finally, the mortal remains of this sinless Son of God were laid temporarily in the tomb of a man of worldly means whose charity extended to Him who once poignantly declared, "The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head." (Matthew 8:20.)

7 He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth. 8 He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for the transgression of my people was he stricken. 9 And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death; because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth. 7 He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb so he opened not his mouth. Mosiah 15:6.And after all this, after working many mighty miracles among the children of men, he shall be led, yea, even as Isaiah said, as a sheep before the shearer is dumb, so he opened not his mouth. 8 He was taken from prison and from judgment; and who shall declare his generation? For he was cut off out of the land of the living; for the transgressions of my people was he stricken. Mosiah 15:10.And now I say unto you, who shall declare his generation? Behold, I say unto you, that when his soul has been made an offering for sin he shall see his seed. And now what say ye? And who shall be his seed? 9 And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death; because he had done no evil, neither was any deceit in his mouth.

53:7 (Mosiah 14:7; 15:6)."Yet he opened not his mouth." In the hearing before the Sanhedrin, which was the highest Jewish court in both civil and ecclesiastical matters, many false witnesses were brought forward to testify against Jesus. In regal dignity, the Prisoner refused to respond to their false accusations, "But he held his peace, andanswered nothing." Only to the question, "Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?" did He give His straightforward response: "I am." (Mark 14:55-62.)

Further fulfillment of the prophesied silence of the Son of God when faced with his oppressors was in the presence of King Herod Antipas. Though this evil man questioned Jesus "in many words," the Savior "answered him nothing." (Luke 23:8-9.) Elder James E. Talmage observed that "Herod is the only character in history to whom Jesus is known to have applied a personal epithet of contempt ["that fox"]. .Â .Â . As far as we know, Herod is further distinguished as the only being who saw Christ face to face and spoke to Him, yet never heard His voice." (Talmage, 636.)

53:8 (Mosiah 14:8)."He was taken from prison and from judgment." He was unjustly taken as a prisoner by the Jews and Romans and through their oppressive judgment He was taken away from this life.

53:8 (Mosiah 14:8; 15:10)."Who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living." In taking away His life, His persecutors also took away potential posterity His seed. Nevertheless, the Book of Mormon prophet Abinadi provides an answer to Isaiah's query, "Who shall declare his generation?"

"Behold I say unto you, that whosoever has heard the words of the prophets, yea, all the holy prophets who have prophesied concerning the coming of the Lord I say unto you, that all those who have hearkened unto their words, and believed that the Lord would redeem his people, and have looked forward to that day for a remission of their sins, I say unto you, that these are his seed, or they are the heirs of the kingdom of God. . . .

"Yea, and are not the prophets, every one that has opened his mouth to prophesy, that has not fallen into transgression, I mean all the holy prophets ever since the world began? I say unto you that they are his seed." (Mosiah 15:10-13.)

53:9 (Mosiah 14:9)."He made his grave with the wicked." "And there were also two other, malefactors [criminals], led with him to be put to death." (Luke 23:32.)

53:9 (Mosiah 14:9)."And with the rich in his death." Lying in the hill country northwest of Jerusalem was the community of Arimathaea, which was also called Ramah or Ramathaim. This was the home of a wealthy counselor and disciple of Jesus, named Joseph. Following the death of Christ, Joseph received permission from Pilate to take the body of Jesus for burial. Joseph wrapped it in clean linen cloth and then "laid it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn out in the rock" in a hillside just outside Jerusalem. (Matthew 27:57-60.)

53:9 (Mosiah 14:9)."Because he had done no violence [evil], neither was any deceit in his mouth." The word because should be rendered as although. Christ was put to death although He was guiltless of any evil. His chief apostle, Peter, said of Him, "Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth." (1 Peter 2:22.)

Isaiah 53:10-12 and Mosiah 14:10-12; 15:10

Isaiah now shifts his focus from the past sorrows of the Savior to a more hopeful future. He identifies some of the triumphs Jesus will now enjoy because of His great sacrifice the atonement.

10 Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him; he hath put him to grief: when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. 11 He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities. 12 Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he hath poured out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors. 10 Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him; he hath put him to grief; when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. Mosiah 15:10.And now I say unto you, who shall declare his generation? Behold, I say unto you, that when his soul has been made an offering for sin he shall see his seed. And now what say ye? And who shall be his seed? 11 He shall see the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied; by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities. 12 Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he hath poured out his soul unto death; and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he bore the sins of many, and made intercession for the transgressors.

53:10 (Mosiah 14:10)."It pleased the Lord to bruise him." Our Father in Heaven was not pleased with the treatment His Son received at the hands of wicked men, but He was pleased with His Son's willingness to obediently fulfill the great atoning sacrifice. (See "smitten of God" commentary on 53:4; see also John 3:16-17.)

As a side note, Sidney Sperry observed that there is some difficulty with a literal translation of this verse, as it appears both in the Bible and the Book of Mormon, because it implies that "it pleased Jehovah to bruise Jehovah." Dr. Sperry suggests that it is possible that the original text of Isaiah was improperly copied on the Brass Plates as well as in later texts from which the Bible was translated. In the original it should have read "it pleased Elohim (God) to bruise Jehovah (Lord)." In any event, the scriptures make clear that Jesus (Jehovah) acts with full authority for His Father and the two act in unity, in total accord. (BMC, 305-6.)

53:10 (Mosiah 14:10; 15:10)."Make his soul an offering for sin." In a mini-sermon on sacrifice and service delivered to His apostles, Jesus declared: "The Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many." (Matthew 20:28.)(Also see commentary on 53:4.)

53:10 (Mosiah 14:10; 15:10)."He shall see his seed." Elder Bruce R. McConkie suggested that this prophecy also included all the righteous in the spirit world whom the disembodied Jesus visited during the three days in which His body lay in an earthly tomb. (PM, 361-62.) (Also see "Who shall declare his generation" commentary on 53:8.)

53:10 (Mosiah 14:10)."He shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand." Elder McConkie provided the following commentary on this phrase: "If this prophecy was meant to be fulfilled during his mortal sojourn on earth, we would list it as having failed. He did not prolong his days; a voluntary death overtook him in the prime of life. Nor did the pleasure of the Lord find full fruition while he dwelt in a state where death lies in wait for the weary pilgrim. It is only in the resurrection that the pleasure of the Lord is perfected, for it is only when 'spirit and element' are 'inseparably connected' that either God or man can 'receive a fulness of joy.' (D&C 93:33.) Thus, having made his soul an offering for sin; having seen his seed all the righteous dead from the days of Adam to that moment as they assembled to greet and worship him in the paradise of their Lord; and having thereafter risen in glorious immortality to live and reign forever, our Messiah truly fulfilled the prophetic utterance, for then his days were prolonged forever and the pleasure in his hand was infinite." (PM, 362.)

53:11 (Mosiah 14:11)."He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied." Both the Father and the Son shall be satisfied with the results of the atonement. In bearing witness of Jesus' divine nature at the time of His baptism, and with a complete foreknowledge that His Son would not stumble in sin or turn aside from completing the atonement, God the Father declared: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." (Matthew 3:17; italics added.)

53:11 (Mosiah 14:11)."Justify many." The doctrine of justification is really summarized in the third Article of Faith: "We believe that through the Atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel." (A of F 1:3.) One who is justified is declared righteous (just) and pronounced innocent before God. This presupposes that the individual remains on the road of righteousness, doing all that is required for celestial salvation. (2 Nephi 31:19-20.) We are incapable of becoming justified through our own efforts alone. We must rely on the grace of Christ. (2 Nephi 25:23; Alma 22:14.)

53:12 (Mosiah 14:12)."Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great." Jesus Christ "continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness.Â .Â . . [H]e received all power, both in heaven and on earth, and the glory of the Father was with him, for he dwelt in him." (D&C 93:13-17.) Thus, He whose name was a key element in the original title of the Melchizedek Priesthood even "the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God"(D&C 107:3) qualified first and foremost for the great promise given to those who honor that priesthood: to receive "all that [the] Father hath." (D&C 84:33-40.) In the words of the apostle Paul, He "thought it not robbery to be equal with God." (Philippians 2:6.)

53:12 (Mosiah 14:12)."He hath poured out his soul unto death." Christ voluntarily gave His life that He might bring about the resurrection for all. "No man taketh it from me," He declared, "but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again." (John 10:18.)

53:12 (Mosiah 14:12)."He was numbered with the transgressors." See "He made his grave with the wicked" commentary on 53:9.

53:12 (Mosiah 14:12)."He bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors." See commentary on 53:4.
