Hoyt W. Brewster, Isaiah Plain and Simple: The Message of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

Chapter 22

Isaiah 54 and 3 Nephi 22

Overview

The resurrected Lord felt so keenly about Isaiah 54 that He quoted it in its entirety to the ancient inhabitants of the Americas knowing it would be published as part of the Book of Mormon in the latter days. It is apparent that this is one of the most significant chapters in all scriptural literature. Certainly it warrants our fervent desire to understand it and to carefully consider its message.

Chapter 21 of 3 Nephi contains the Savior's teachings regarding the gathering of Israel at the time of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. He taught that a great gentile nation would be established for a free people in the land of America. However, He stressed that those who refuse to believe the words of the prophet-servant (Joseph Smith) to be raised up would be "cut off from among my people who are of the covenant." (3 Nephi 21:11.) He also announced the future building of the New Jerusalem in America and the return of the lost tribes of Israel.

This is the setting into which Jesus Christ interspersed a recitation of Isaiah 54, commencing with the introductory phrase: "And then shall that which is written come to pass." (Italics added.) Of this phrase, Sidney Sperry has written: "This is, of course, an indication given by our Lord that the prophet Isaiah saw the things of which He had been speaking (ch. 21) and wrote concerning them, or at least concerning what would happen when they were fulfilled.

"The fulfillment of this beautiful poem Isaiah 54 is all poetry is to be found in this dispensation. Part of it hasprobably already been fulfilled since the restoration of the gospel; the remainder will be in a time yet future." (BMC, 412.)

In this chapter of hope and encouragement, Isaiah speaks of the growth and gathering of Israel or Zion in the latter days. She is likened to a woman who has long been barren because of her separation from her husband, a separation brought about by her unfaithfulness. But now she has repented and returned to her forgiving husband (the Lord). As a result, the multitudes of her children have become so large in number that the stakes that hold her covering must constantly be spread out farther. Because of her faithfulness, her husband will never again forsake her. The chapter closes with the promise that "no weapon that is formed against thee [covenant Israel or the Lord's people, Zion] shall prosper."

Commentary

Isaiah 54:1-3 and 3 Nephi 22:1-3

For years Israel, or Zion, has been as a barren woman, but now she is told to sing and rejoice, for her children are becoming so multitudinous that she will constantly need to enlarge the place of her tent or dwelling. She does this by moving the stakes outward from the center pole (center stake), thus providing a greater area of protection and shelter. She, who was separated from her husband, will be so amazed at the increase in the numbers of her children that she might be inclined to proclaim other prophetic words spoken by Isaiah: "Who hath begotten me these seeing I have lost my children, and am . . . a captive . . . ? and who hath brought up these? Behold, I was left alone; these, where had they been?" (Isaiah 49:21.)

Isaiah 54 1 Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear; break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail with child: for more are the children of the desolate than the children of the married wife, saith the Lord. 2 Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes; 3 For thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left; and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate cities to be inhabited. 3 Nephi 22 1 And then shall that which is written come to pass: Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear; break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail with child; for more are the children of the desolate than the children of the married wife, saith the Lord. 2 Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thy habitations; spare not, lengthen thy cords and strengthen thy stakes; 3 For thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left, and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles and make the desolate cities to be inhabited.

54:1 (3 Nephi 22:1)."Children of the desolate." There are several possible interpretations of this phrase, according to LDS scholars. Sidney Sperry suggested the phrase means "Zion in her desolate, barren state." (BMC, 413.) Monte Nyman opined that they "represent the large number of people from the tribes of Israel who will gather to Zion following the building of the New Jerusalem." (GAWI, 211.) A trio of commentators identify them as "scattered Israel, those who for generations have lived without the light of the gospel, who have not been fruitful in the faith of their fathers." (DCBM 4:155.)Victor Ludlow, following the text of modern Biblical translations, identified desolate as a modifier of woman:"many children have been born to the'desolate' or forsaken woman." He then added this com-mentary:

"The desolate woman and her relationship to the [married] wife can be understood in two ways: (1) The desolate woman represents the Gentiles, and the wife Israel; thus the Gentiles will bring forth greater spiritual fruits than Israel has delivered; (2) the desolate woman is Israel in her scattered condition, while the wife is those people remaining in the Holy Land. Thus Israel will bring forth more children (both physically and spiritually) outside the land of her original inheritance than in it. (See Gal. 4:22-31; Rev. 12:1-6.) In either case, Isaiah uses these images to symbolize the relationship of the Lord to Israel; those who join with covenant Israel are the children of that relationship." (IPSP, 459.)

54:2 (3 Nephi 22:2)."Enlarge the place of thy tent .Â .Â . strengthen thy stakes." "The clarion call to 'enlarge' and 'strengthen' the stakes of Zion was given anciently to Isaiah (Isa. 54:2), repeated to the Nephites (3 Ne. 22:2), and reiterated in our day (D&C 109:59; 133:9). A stake is an ecclesiastical unit of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and covers a specific geographical area. According to the Lord, stakes are 'curtains or the strength of Zion' (D&C 101:21). They are places where the Saints of God may be instructed more perfectly in the doctrines of salvation." (DCE, 559.) As the number of stakes increases, the influence of the protective tent expands to reach more of the earth's inhabitants. The ultimate goal is to stretch it over the entire earth, to gather all people under its protection.

54:3 (3 Nephi 22:3)."Thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate cities to be inhabited." So great shall be the latter-day growth of redeemed Israel that her children will be found in the nations of the gentiles throughout the world. Her influence for good will be felt even in places considered to be spiritually or physically "desolate." As she gathers in strength, additional stakes will be established and the tent of Zion will further expand.

The plea of the Lord to His covenant people of the latter days is: "For Zion must increase in beauty, and in holiness; her borders must be enlarged; her stakes must be strengthened; yea, verily I say unto you, Zion must arise and put on her beautiful garments." (D&C 82:14.)

Isaiah recited a similar plea in verse 1 of chapter 52: "Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful garments." In response to the question of what Isaiah meant when he said "Put on thy strength, O Zion and what people had Isaiah reference to?" the Prophet Joseph Smith declared: "He had reference to those whom God should call in the last days, who should hold the power of priesthood to bring again Zion, and the redemption of Israel; and to put on her strength is to put on the authority of the priesthood, which she, Zion, has a right to by lineage; also to return to that power which she had lost." (D&C 113:7-8.)

Isaiah 54:4-8 and 3 Nephi 22:4-8

The Lord reaffirms His role as the husband to covenant Israel. He has forgiven the wayward wife of her sinful earlier years and, upon her repentance, has reestablished their relationship.

4 Fear not; for thou shalt not be ashamed: neither be thou confounded; for thou shalt not be put to shame: for thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any more. 5 For thy Maker is thine husband; the Lord of hosts is his name; and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; T he God of the whole earth shall he be called. 6 For the Lord hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy God. 7 For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies will I gather thee. 8 In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer. 4 Fear not, for thou shalt not be ashamed; neither be thou confounded, for thou shalt not be put to shame; for thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any more. 5 For thy maker, thy husband, the Lord of Hosts is his name; and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israelthe God of the whole earth shall he be called. 6 For the Lord hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy God. 7 For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee. 8 In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer.

54:4 (3 Nephi 22:4)."Shame of thy youth." This refers to her unfaithfulness in her earlier years, when she sought after false gods rather than remaining true to her covenant Husband the Lord God Jehovah. This was a time not only of shameful conduct, but also of spiritual sterility, when she was not blessed with increase. Some commentators have suggested this shame could mean her periods of captivity, such as the Egyptian bondage.

54:4 (3 Nephi 22:4)."Reproach of thy widowhood." Israel's period of exile, when she was without her Protector, her Husband.

54:5 (3 Nephi 22:5)."Thy Maker is thine husband." Five of the holy titles applied to Jehovah are mentioned in this verse. It is an emphatic emphasis that there is but one God of Israel, one Husband to whom she should be faithful.

54:6 (3 Nephi 22:6)."A woman forsaken .Â .Â . and a wife of youth." Because of her unfaithfulness, Israel a bride chosen in her early or youthful years had become a forsaken wife. Be it remembered, however, that it was she who left the house of her Husband.

54:7 (3 Nephi 22:7)."For a small moment have I forsaken thee." Israel's barren or forsaken years will seem but a "small moment" when she considers her bright future and the extent of eternity. One is reminded of similar language being applied to the seemingly forsaken prophet of God unjustly languishing in Liberty Jail in the winter of 1838-39: "My son," declared the voice of Israel's Husband, "peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment."

The Lord then added this comforting promise, which could well apply to the repentant wife of whom Isaiah prophesied: "And then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph over all thy foes." (D&C 121:7-8.)

54:8 (3 Nephi 22:8)."In a little wrath I hid my face from thee." While the rejected Husband had turned away from His unfaithful wife in a moment of righteous anger, He has now returned with everlasting love. Lest there be misunderstanding regarding the divine attributes of Deity, a brief explanation of God's wrath or anger is appropriate. Anger, as understood or displayed by mortals, is not a characteristic of God's conduct.

"A distinction should be made between the appropriate anger of God, which is a righteous application of the law of justice, and the unbridled anger of a fallible mortal. The Lord has consistently counseled his children against anger (Matt. 5:21-22; 3 Ne. 11:21-22); furthermore, we have been instructed that the devil 'is the father of contention, and he stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another' (3 Ne. 11:29). One who is angry loses the Spirit and his love of his fellowman (Moro. 9:3-5).

"In contrast, properly understood, God's anger is a divine display of his love. It is a manifestation of truth. (See 2 Ne. 1:24-27.)" (DCE, 18.)

Isaiah 54:9-10 and 3 Nephi 22:9-10

The Lord gives absolute assurance to His redeemed wife that she will never again be forsaken. Part of that assurance may well be His absolute knowledge of the future; He knows she will never again depart from her covenants.

9 For this is as the waters of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth; so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee. 10 For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee. 9 For this, the waters of Noah unto me, for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth, so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee. 10 For the mountains shall depart and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee.

54:9 (3 Nephi 22:9)."For this is as the waters of Noah unto me." In yet another verification of the reality of the Flood, the Lord compares the oath He now makes to remain with Israel to that which He made when He swore to Noah that the great Flood would not be repeated. Zion, His covenant people, will never be cast off. Such a vow reminds us of the dream interpreted by the prophet Daniel, where he saw "the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms,and it shall stand for ever." (Daniel 2:44; see also D&C 65:2-3; 104:86; 112:30.)

54:10 (3 Nephi 22:10)."For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed." The Lord's covenant with Israel will still be in place when mountains and hills that are now so prominent are gone; or, in other words, at the time the "earth [is] renewed and receive[s] its paradisiacal glory." (A of F 1:10.) Of this time, President Joseph Fielding Smith has written: "The earth is to be renewed or restored to its primitive beauty and condition, and when that day comes the high mountains which are seen today will be debased and the valleys exalted." (DS 2:316.)

Isaiah 54:11-13 and 3 Nephi 22:11-13

Perhaps as a result of his allusion to paradisiacal conditions in the previous verse, Isaiah now appears to turn his attention to the City of Zion, the New Jerusalem. His description of this holy city is similar to that given by John the Revelator. (Revelation 21:18-21.) If verses eleven and twelve do not directly relate to that great city, it is possiblethat they provide symbolic descriptions of conditions prevalent in the societies or stakes of Zion established throughout the earth.

11 O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted, b ehold, I will lay thy stones with fair colours, and lay thy foundations with sapphires. 12 And I will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones. 13 And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children. 11 O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted! B ehold, I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy foundations with sapphires. 12 And I will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones. 13 And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children.

54:11 (3 Nephi 22:11)."I will lay thy stones with fair colours, and lay thy foundations with sapphires." Building stones will be set in hard mortar, and crystalline substances will be used to enhance their brilliancy. The building materials will be worthy of the finished product.

54:12 (3 Nephi 22:12)."Windows of agates .Â .Â . gates of carbuncles .Â .Â . borders of pleasant stones." "Windows [pinnacles or turrets] of agates [rubies], gates of carbuncles [sparkling jewels], borders [walls] of pleasant [precious] stones." These could symbolize the beauty of the holy city, or dwelling place of the Saints of God, and the material blessings that will be poured out upon the righteous.

54:13 (3 Nephi 22:13)."Great shall be the peace of thy children." This verse may have specific reference to millennial conditions, when "children shall grow up without sin unto salvation." (D&C 45:58.) It may also imply that there will be some direct teaching of these blessed children by the Lord Himself. However, there may be a more immediate application. This entire verse is used by the Primary of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as its general theme. The goal of the Church and righteous parents everywhere is to teach the children about their Heavenly Father and their Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, that the peace of righteousness might prevail in their lives.

In speaking of Isaiah's promise of peace to the children, President Spencer W. Kimball, twelfth prophet of the Lord in the latter days, said, "Surely every good parent would like this peace for his offspring. It comes from the simple life of the true Latter-day Saint as he makes his home and family supreme." (Ensign, July 1973, p. 16.)

The Savior's tender feelings for children were evident in His mortal ministry in the Holy Land (JST Matthew 19:13-15), as well as in His postmortal ministry in the Americas, where "he took their little children, one by one, and blessed them, and prayed unto the Father for them." (3 Nephi 17:21.) Furthermore, in a revelation given in 1831, He specifically charged parents with teaching their children "the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands." (D&C 68:25.)

Isaiah 54:14-17 and 3 Nephi 22:14-17

The promise of the Lord's protection is given to His righteous followers. They have no need to fear oppression or terror, for those who fight against the people of Zion shall fail.

As a side note, it should be observed that from the day that Cain conspired with the devil to take his brother Abel's life and possessions, the righteous have suffered at the hands of the wicked. For divine purposes that we will all some day understand and appreciate, the Lord has not always intervened to stop oppression of His Saints and other good people of the earth. Nevertheless, when considered in the context of eternity, as noted in the commentary on 54:7, suffering and sorrow are but "a small moment." Regardless of circumstances, the true Saint will always declare, "The Lord gave and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord." (Job 1:21.)

14 In righteousness shalt thou be established: thou shalt be far from oppression; for thou shalt not fear: and from terror; for it shall not come near thee. 15 Behold, they shall surely gather together, but not by me: whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake. 16 Behold, I have created the smith that bloweth the coals in the fire, and that bringeth forth an instrument for his work; and I have created the waster to destroy. 17 No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord. 14 In righteousness shalt thou be established; thou shalt be far from oppression for thou shalt not fear, and from terror for it shall not come near thee. 15 Behold, they shall surely gather together against thee, not by me; whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake. 16 Behold, I have created the smith that bloweth the coals in the fire, and that bringeth forth an instrument for his work; and I have created the waster to destroy. 17 No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall revile against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord.

54:14 (3 Nephi 22:14)."Thou shalt be far from oppression; for thou shalt not fear." This appears to describe millennial conditions when righteousness will prevail upon the earth. In fact, all living creatures will live together in peace. (See BICQ, 215-16.)

54:15 (3 Nephi 22:15)."They shall surely gather together .Â .Â . against thee." Because of the absence of malice and enmity in the Millennium, this verse must have fulfillment prior to that period of peace. Up until that time, the righteous will continue to be challenged by "the enemy in the secret chambers [who] seeketh [their] lives." (D&C 38:28; see also DCE, 503 4.) While there may be a few individual casualties martyrs and even a few who succumb to apostasy the designs of the wicked shall fail, for they will not prevail against the people of the Lord nor His Church.

54:15 (3 Nephi 22:15)."Whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake." In his inspired dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple, the Prophet Joseph declared: "We ask thee, Holy Father, to establish the people that shall worship, and honorably hold a name and standing in this thy house, to all generations and for eternity;

"That no weapon formed against them shall prosper; that he who diggeth a pit for them shall fall into the same himself." (D&C 109:24-25; see also 1 Nephi 14:3.) Whether in mortality or the hereafter, "all that fight against Zion shall be destroyed." (1 Nephi 22:14.) They shall be "cut off from among the people." (D&C 1:14.)

54:16 (3 Nephi 22:16)."The smith that bloweth the coals in the fire." Just as the Lord created the blacksmith who may forge a weapon in his fire, the Lord can also create a "waster" to destroy any weapons created by man.

54:17 (3 Nephi 22:17)."No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper." As persecution against the Lord's people and His Church continues to increase in the last days, the promise of the Lord remains sure. No matter what the weapon slander or violence it will fail. Within a short time after the restoration of the priesthood and the establishment of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, a revelation was received in response to the publication of newspaper articles critical of the Church. The Prophet Joseph Smith was admonished to "confound your enemies. .Â .Â . [L]et them bring forth their strong reasons against the Lord." Then came this promise:

"Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you there is no weapon that is formed against you shall prosper;

"And if any man lift his voice against you he shall be confounded in mine own due time." (D&C 71:7-10; italics added.)

Thus, while it may appear that the efforts of some enemies of the Lord are having some success, they are ultimately doomed to fail "in [His] own due time." (Also see the commentary on 54:15 and 54:16.)

Perhaps these bold words of the Lord's prophet of the Restoration, even Joseph Smith, would serve as an appropriate conclusion to the commentary on this chapter:

"No unhallowed hand can stop the work from progressing; persecutions may rage, mobs may combine, armies may assemble, calumny may defame, but the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly, and independent, till it has penetrated every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall be accomplished, and the Great Jehovah shall say the work is done." (HC 4:540.)
