Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Adversity

WHAT GOD HATH PROMISED

God hath not promised Skies always blue, Flower-strewn pathways All our lives through; God hath not promised Sun without rain, Joy without sorrow, Peace without pain. But God hath promised Strength for the day, Rest for the labor, Light for the way, Grace for the trials, Help from above, Unfailing sympathy, Undying love. Annie Johnson Flint

THE FEW

The easy roads are crowded And the level roads are jammed; The pleasant little rivers With the drifting folks are crammed. But off yonder where it's rocky, Where you get a better view, You will find the ranks are thinning And the travelers are few. Where the going's smooth and pleasant You will always find the throng, For the many, more's the pity, Seem to like to drift along. But the steeps that call for courage, And the task that's hard to do, In the end result in glory For the never-wavering few. Edgar A. Guest

ALONG THE ROAD

I walked a mile with Pleasure. She chattered all the way, But left me none the wiser For all she had to say. I walked a mile with Sorrow, And ne'er a word said she; But, oh, the things I learned from her When Sorrow walked with me! Robert Browning Hamilton

ON HIS BLINDNESS

When I consider how my light is spent Ere half my days, in this dark world and wide, And that one talent, which is death to hide, Lodged with me useless, though my soul more bent To serve therewith my Maker, and present My true account, lest he returning chide; "Doth God exact day-labor, light denied?" I fondly ask: But Patience, to prevent That murmur, soon replies, "God doth not need Either man's work or his own gifts; who best Bear his mild yoke, they serve him best: his state Is kingly; thousands at his bidding speed, And post o'er land and ocean without rest; They also serve who only stand and wait." John Milton

From MILTON'S PRAYER FOR PATIENCE

I am old and blind! Men point at me as smitten by God's frown: Afflicted and deserted of my kind, Yet am I not cast down. I am weak, yet strong; I murmur not that I no longer see; Poor, old, and helpless, I the more belong, Father supreme, to thee! All-merciful One! When men are furthest, then art Thou most near; When friends pass by, my weaknesses to shun, Thy chariot I hear. Thy glorious face Is leaning toward me; and its holy light Shines in upon my lonely dwelling place,— And there is no more night. On my bended knee I recognize thy purpose clearly shown: My vision thou hast dimmed, that I may see Thyself, thyself alone. Elizabeth Lloyd Howell

GETHSEMANE

In golden youth when seems the earth A Summer-land of singing mirth, When souls are glad and hearts are light, And not a shadow lurks in sight, We do not know it, but there lies Somewhere veiled under evening skies A garden which we all must see— The garden of Gethsemane. With joyous steps we go our ways, Love lends a halo to our days; Light sorrows sail like clouds afar, We laugh, and say how strong we are. We hurry on; and hurrying, go Close to the border-land of woe That waits for you, and waits for me— For ever waits Gethsemane. Down shadowy lanes, across strange streams, Bridged over by our broken dreams; Behind the misty caps of years, Beyond the great salt fount of tears, The garden lies. Strive as you may, You cannot miss it in your way. All paths that have been, or shall be, Pass somewhere through Gethsemane. All those who journey, soon or late, Must pass within the garden's gate; Must kneel alone in darkness there, And battle with some fierce despair. God pity those who cannot say, "Not mine but thine," who only pray, "Let this cup pass," and cannot see The purpose in Gethsemane. Ella Wheeler Wilcox

THE LOOM OF TIME

Man's life is laid in the loom of time To a pattern he does not see, While the weavers work and the shuttles fly Till the dawn of eternity. Some shuttles are filled with silver threads And some with threads of gold, While often but the darker hues Are all that they may hold. But the weaver watches with skillful eye Each shuttle fly to and fro, And sees the pattern so deftly wrought As the loom moves sure and slow. God surely planned the pattern: Each thread, the dark and fair, Is chosen by His master skill And placed in the web with care. He only knows its beauty, And guides the shuttles which hold The threads so unattractive, As well as the threads of gold. Not till each loom is silent And the shuttles cease to fly Shall God reveal the pattern And explain the reason why The dark threads were as needful In the weaver's skillful hand As the threads of gold and silver For the pattern which He planned. Author Unknown

THO LOSSES AND CROSSES

Tho losses and crosses be lessons right severe, There's wit there ye'll get there You'll find no other where. Robert Burns

ANSWER TO PRAYER

We ask for strength and God gives us difficulties which make us strong. We pray for wisdom and God sends us problems, the solution of which develops wisdom. We plead for prosperity and God gives us brain and brawn to work. We plead for courage and God gives us dangers to overcome. We ask for favors—God gives us opportunities. —This is the answer. Author Unknown

GOD BROKE OUR YEARS TO HOURS AND DAYS

God broke our years to hours and days, That hour by hour and day by day, Just going on a little way, We might be able all along to keep quite strong. Should all the weight of life Be laid across our shoulders, and the future, rife With woe and struggle, meet us face to face At just one place, We could not go; Our feet would stop; and so God lays a little on us every day, And never, I believe, on all the way Will burdens bear so deep Or pathways lie so threatening and so steep But we can go, if by God's power We only bear the burden of the hour. George Klingle

THE RAINY DAY

The day is cold and dark and dreary; It rains, and the wind is never weary; The vine still clings to the moldering wall, But at every gust the dead leaves fall, And the day is dark and dreary. My life is cold and dark and dreary; It rains, and the wind is never weary; My thoughts still cling to the moldering past, But the hopes of youth fall thick in the blast, And the days are dark and dreary. Be still, sad heart! and cease repining; Behind the clouds is the sun still shining: Thy fate is the common fate of all: Into each life some rain must fall, Some days must be dark and dreary. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

HE SENDETH SUN

He sendeth sun; he sendeth shower; Alike they're needful to the flower; And joys and tears alike are sent To give the soul fit nourishment. As comes to me or cloud or sun Father, thy will, not mine, be done. Sarah Flower Adams

From ROOFS

They say that life is a highway, And its milestones are the years; And now and then there's a toll gate, Where you buy your way with your tears. It's a rough road and a steep road, And it stretches broad and far, But at last it leads to a golden town Where the golden houses are. Joyce Kilmer

WORTH WHILE

It is easy enough to be pleasant When life flows by like a song, But the man worth while is one who will smile When everything goes dead wrong. For the test of the heart is trouble, And it always comes with the years, And the smile that is worth the praises of earth Is the smile that shines through tears. It is easy enough to be prudent, When nothing tempts you to stray, When without or within no voice of sin Is luring your soul away; But it's only a negative virtue Until it is tried by fire, And the life that is worth the honor of earth Is the one that resists desire. By the cynic, the sad, the fallen, Who had no strength for the strife, The world's highway is cumbered to-day; They make up the sum of life. But the virtue that conquers passion, And the sorrow that hides in a smile, It is these that are worth the homage of earth, For we find them but once in a while. Ella Wheeler Wilcox

ADVERSITY

Sweet are the uses of adversity, Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous, Wears yet a precious jewel in his head. William Shakespeare, As You Like It 2.1.12-14 Additional poems about adversity appear in the topics "Character," "Courage," "Death and Immortality," "Perseverance," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
