Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Aging

From RABBI BEN EZRA

Grow old along with me! The best is yet to be, The last of life, for which the first was made: Our times are in His hand, Who saith "A whole I planned, Youth shows but half; trust God; see all, nor be afraid!" Robert Browning

AS I GROW OLD

God keep my heart attuned to laughter When youth is done; When all the days are gray days, coming after The warmth, the sun. God keep me then from bitterness, from grieving, When life seems cold; God keep me always loving and believing As I grow old. Author Unknown

HOW OLD ARE YOU?

Age is a quality of the mind. If you have left your dreams behind, If hope is cold, If you no longer look ahead, If your ambitions' fires are dead— Then you are old. But if from life you take the best, If in life you keep the jest, If love you hold; No matter how the years go by, No matter how the birthdays fly— You are not old. H. S. Fritsch

BLISS

There's a bliss beyond all that the minstrel has told, When two, that are link'd in one heavenly tie, With heart never changing, and brow never cold, Love on through all ills, and love on till they die. One hour of a passion so sacred is worth Whole ages of heartless and wandering bliss; And oh! if there be [any heaven] on earth, It is this—it is this! Thomas Moore

A LITTLE MORE TIRED

A little more tired at close of day, A little less anxious to have our way; A little less ready to scold and blame, A little more care of a brother's name; And so we are nearing our journey's end, Where time and eternity meet and blend. Rollin John Wells

From MEN TOLD ME, LORD!

Men told me, Lord, it was a vale of tears Where thou hadst placed me; wickedness and woe My twain companions whereso I might go; That I through ten and three-score weary years Should stumble on, beset by pains and fears. . . . When all was ended then I should demand Full compensation from thine austere hand: For 'tis thy pleasure, all temptation past, To be not just but generous at last. Lord, here am I, my three-score years and ten Are counted to the full; I've fought thy fight, Crossed thy dark valleys, scaled thy rocks' harsh height, Borne all the burdens thou dost lay on men With hand unsparing, three-score years and ten. Before thee now I make my claim, Oh, Lord! What shall I pay thee as a meet reward? David Starr Jordan

THE FLIGHT OF YOUTH

There are gains for all our losses. There are balms for all our pain: But when youth, the dream, departs It takes something from our hearts, And it never comes again. We are stronger, and are better, Under manhood's sterner reign: Still we feel that something sweet Followed youth, with flying feet, And will never come again. Something beautiful is vanished, And we sigh for it in vain; We behold it everywhere, On the earth, and in the air, But it never comes again! Richard Henry Stoddard

WHEN I AM OLD

When I am old—and O, how soon Will life's sweet morning yield to noon, And noon's broad, fervid, earnest light Be shaded in the solemn night, Till, like a story well-nigh told, Will seem my life—when I am old. When I am old, this breezy earth Will lose for me its voice of mirth; The streams will have an undertone Of sadness not by right their own; And Spring's sweet power in vain unfold In rosy charms—when I am old. When I am old, I shall not care To deck with flowers my faded hair; 'Twill be no vain desire of mine In rich and costly dress to shine; Bright jewels and the brightest gold Will charm me naught—when I am old. When I am old, my friends will be Old and infirm and bowed like me; Or else (their bodies 'neath the sod, Their spirits dwelling safe with God), The old church bells will long have tolled Above the rest—when I am old. When I am old, I'd rather bend Thus sadly o'er each buried friend Than see them lose the earnest truth That marks the friendship of our youth; 'Twill be so sad to have them cold Or strange to me—when I am old! When I am old—O! how it seems Like the wild lunacy of dreams To picture in prophetic rhyme That dim, far-distant, shadowy time— So distant that it seems o'erbold Even to say, "When I am old." Ere I am old—that time is now; For youth sits lightly on my brow; My limbs are firm, and strong, and free; Life hath a thousand charms for me— Charms that will long their influence hold Within my heart—ere I am old. Ere I am old, O! let me give My life to learning how to live; Then shall I meet, with willing heart, An early summons to depart, Or find my lengthened days consoled By God's sweet peace—when I am old. Caroline Atherton Mason

OLD AGE

The seas are quiet when the winds give o'er; So calm are we when passions are no more. For then we know how vain it was to boast Of fleeting things, so certain to be lost. Clouds of affection from our younger eyes Conceal that emptiness which age descries. The soul's dark cottage, battered and decayed, Lets in new light through chinks that Time hath made: Stronger by weakness, wiser men become As they draw near to their eternal home. Leaving the old, both worlds at once they view That stand upon the threshold of the new. Edmund Waller Additional poems about aging appear in the topics "Adversity," "Death and Immortality," "Life," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
