Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Character

SOW A THOUGHT

Sow a thought, reap an act; Sow an act, reap a habit; Sow a habit, reap a character; Sow a character, reap an eternal destiny. E. D. Boardman

BE STRONG!

Be strong! We are not here to play, to dream, to drift, We have hard work to do, and loads to lift. Shun not the struggle, face it, 'tis God's gift. Be strong! Say not the days are evil—who's to blame! And fold the hands and acquiesce—O shame! Stand up, speak out, and bravely, in God's name. Be strong! It matters not how deep entrenched the wrong, How hard the battle goes, the day, how long; Faint not, fight on! To-morrow comes the song. Maltbie D. Babcock

GIVE US MEN!

Give us Men! Men—from every rank, Fresh and free and frank; Men of thought and reading, Men of light and leading, Men of loyal breeding, The nation's welfare speeding; Men of faith and not of fiction, Men of lofty aim in action; Give us Men—I say again, Give us Men! Give us Men! Strong and stalwart ones; Men whom highest hope inspires, Men whom purest honor fires, Men who trample self beneath them, Men who make their country wreathe them As her noble sons, Worthy of their sires; Men who never shame their mothers, Men who never fail their brothers, True, however false are others: Give us Men—I say again, Give us Men! Give us Men! Men who, when the tempest gathers, Grasp the standard of their fathers In the thickest fight; Men who strike for home and altar, (Let the coward cringe and falter), God defend the right! True as truth the lorn and lonely, Tender, as the brave are only; Men who tread where saints have trod, Men for Country, Home—and God: Give us Men! I say again—again— Give us Men! Josiah Gilbert Holland

LORD, GIVE ME NOT JUST WORDS TO SAY

Lord, give me not just words to say, Tho' I need right words too, But strength to live in such a way My life will make my words come true. Author Unknown

A LIFE HEROIC

I like the man who faces what he must With step triumphant and a heart of cheer; Who fights the daily battle without fear; Sees his hopes fail, yet keeps unfaltering trust That God is God; that somehow, true and just His plans work out for mortals; not a tear Is shed when fortune, which the world holds dear, Falls from his grasp; better, with love, a crust Than living in dishonor; envies not Nor loses faith in man; but does his best Nor ever mourns over his humbler lot, But with a smile and words of hope, gives zest To every toiler; he alone is great Who by a life heroic conquers fate. Sarah K. Bolton

HE THAT HAS LIGHT

He that has light within his own clear breast May sit i' the centre, and enjoy bright day: But he that hides a dark soul and foul thoughts, Benighted walks under the mid-day sun; Himself in his own dungeon. John Milton

FOR THOSE WHO FAIL

"All honor to him who shall win the prize," The world has cried for a thousand years; But to him who tries and who fails and dies, I give great honor and glory and tears. O great is the hero who wins a name, But greater many and many a time, Some pale-faced fellow who dies in shame, And lets God finish the thought sublime. And great is the man with the sword undrawn, And good is the man who refrains from wine; But the man who fails and yet fights on, Lo! he is the twin-born brother of mine! Joaquin Miller

From JULIUS CAESAR

His life was gentle, and the elements So mix'd in him that Nature might stand up And say to all the world "This was a man!" William Shakespeare, Julius Caesar 5.5.73-75

WE ARE BUILDING EVERY DAY

We are building every day, In a good or evil way; And the building, as it grows, Shall our inmost selves disclose, And, in every arch and line, All our faults and failings find. We may build a palace grand, Or a wreck upon the sand. Do you ask what building this, That can show both pain and bliss, That can be both dark and fair? Lo, its name is Character. Build it well what'er you do, Build it straight and strong and true. Build it clean, and high, and broad, Build it for the eyes of God. Author Unknown

WILL

There is no chance, no destiny, no fate, Can circumvent or hinder or control The firm resolve of a determined soul. Gifts count for nothing; will alone is great; All things give way before it, soon or late. What obstacle can stay the mighty force Of the sea-seeking river in its course, Or cause the ascending orb of day to wait? Each wellborn soul must win what it deserves. Let the fool prate of luck. The fortunate Is he whose earnest purpose never swerves, Whose slightest action or inaction serves The one great aim. Why, even Death stands still, And waits an hour sometimes for such a will. Ella Wheeler Wilcox

YOU TELL ON YOURSELF

You tell on yourself by the friends you seek, By the very manner in which you speak, By the way you employ your leisure time, By the use you make of dollar and dime. You tell what you are by the things you wear, And even by the way you wear your hair, By the kind of things at which you laugh, By the records you play on your phonograph. You tell what you are by the way you walk, By the things of which you delight to talk, By the manner in which you bury deceit, By so simple a thing as how you eat. By the books you choose from the well-filled shelf. In these ways and more you tell on yourself. Author Unknown Additional poems about character appear in the topics "Courage," "Divine Nature," "Integrity," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
