Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Children

NOBODY KNOWS WHAT A BOY IS WORTH

Nobody knows what a boy is worth, We'll have to wait and see. But every man in a noble place A boy once used to be. Author Unknown

CHILD'S EVENING HYMN

Now the day is over, Night is drawing nigh, Shadows of the evening Steal across the sky. Now the darkness gathers, Stars begin to peep, Birds and beasts and flowers Soon will be asleep. Jesus, give the weary Calm and sweet repose, With thy tenderest blessing May our eyelids close. Grant to little children Visions bright of thee, Guard the sailors tossing On the deep blue sea. Comfort every sufferer Watching late in pain; Those who plan some evil From their sin restrain. Through the long night-watches May thy angels keep Loving watch about me, Guarding as I sleep. When the morning wakens, Then may I arise Pure and fresh and sinless In thy holy eyes. Sabine Baring-Gould, adapted

WHO TOUCHES A BOY BY THE MASTER'S PLAN

Who touches a boy by the Master's plan Is shaping the course of a future man, Is dealing with one who is living seed And may be a man whom the world will need. Author Unknown

From THE CHILDREN

When daily chores all are ended, And playtime for day is dismissed, And the little ones gather around me To say good-night prayers and be kissed, Oh! the little white arms that encircle My neck in a tender embrace! Oh! the smiles that are haloes of Heaven Shed sunshine of joy on my face! When they're in their beds, I sit dreaming Of my childhood, too lovely to last; Of love that my heart well remembers When it wakes to the pulse of the past 'Fore I noticed the mean things around me, Unaware of sorrow and sin— Then, the glory of God was about me, And the glory of gladness within. Oh! my heart goes back to my children And my thoughts and feelings flow As I think of the path, steep and stony, Where the feet of my dear ones must go; Of the mountains of sin hanging o'er them, Of the tempest of fate flowing wild; Oh! there's nothing on earth half so holy As the innocent heart of a child. They are idols of hearts and of household! They are angels of God in disguise; The sunlight still sleeps in their tresses, His glory still gleams in their eyes; These truants from home and from Heaven, They have made me more gentle and mild; And I know now how Jesus could liken The kingdom of God to a child. Charles M. Dickinson

A PARENTAL ODE TO MY SON

Aged Three Years and Five Months

Thou happy, happy elf! (But stop,—first let me kiss away that tear!) Thou tiny image of myself! (My love, he's poking peas into his ear!) Thou merry, laughing sprite, With spirits feather-light, Untouched by sorrow, and unsoiled by sin,— (My dear, the child is swallowing a pin!) Thou little tricksy Puck! With antics toys so funnily bestuck, Light as the singing bird that wings the air,— (The door! the door! he'll tumble down the stair!) Thou darling of thy sire! (Why, Jane, he'll set his pinafore afire!) Thou imp of mirth and joy! In Love's dear chain so strong and bright a link, Thou idol of thy parents,—(Drat the boy! There goes my ink!)

* * *

Thou enviable being! No storms, no clouds, in thy blue sky foreseeing, Play on, play on, My elfin John! Toss the light ball, bestride the stick,— (I knew so many cakes would make him sick!) With fancies, buoyant as the thistle-down, Prompting the face grotesque, and antic brisk, With many a lamb-like frisk! (He's got the scissors, snipping at your gown!) Thou pretty opening rose! (Go to your mother, child, and wipe your nose!) Balmy and breathing music like the South,— (He really brings my heart into my mouth!) Fresh as the morn, and brilliant as its star,— (I wish that window had an iron bar!) Bold as the hawk, yet gentle as the dove;— (I'll tell you what, my love, I cannot write unless he's sent above.) Thomas Hood

THE CHILDREN'S HOUR

Between the dark and the daylight, When the night is beginning to lower, Comes a pause in the day's occupations That is known as the Children's Hour. I hear in the chamber above me The patter of little feet, The sound of a door that is opened, And voices soft and sweet. From my study I see in the lamplight, Descending the broad hall stair, Grave Alice, and laughing Allegra, And Edith with golden hair. A whisper, and then a silence: Yet I know by their merry eyes They are plotting and planning together To take me by surprise. A sudden rush from the stairway, A sudden raid from the hall! By three doors left unguarded They enter my castle wall! They climb up into my turret O'er the arms and back of my chair; If I try to escape, they surround me; They seem to be everywhere. They almost devour me with kisses, Their arms about me entwine, Till I think of the Bishop of Bingen In his Mouse-Tower on the Rhine! Do you think, O blue-eyed banditti, Because you have scaled the wall, Such an old mustachio as I am Is not a match for you all! I have you fast in my fortress, And will not let you depart, But put you down into the dungeon In the round-tower of my heart. And there will I keep you forever, Yes, forever and a day, Till the walls shall crumble to ruin, And moulder in dust away. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

THERE WAS A CHILD WENT FORTH

There was a child went forth every day, And the first object he look'd upon, that object he became, Men and women crowding fast in the streets, if they are not flashes and specks what are they? The streets themselves and the facades of houses, and goods in the windows, Vehicles, teams, the heavy-plank'd wharves, the huge crossing at the ferries, The village on the highland seen from afar at sunset, the river between, Shadows, aureola and mist, the light falling on roofs and gables of white or brown two miles off, The schooner near by sleepily dropping down the tide, the little boat slack-tow'd astern, The hurrying tumbling waves, quick-broken crests, slapping, The strata of color'd clouds, the long bar of maroon-tint away solitary by itself, the spread of purity it lies motionless in,The horizon's edge, the flying sea-crow, the fragrance of salt marsh and shore mud, These became part of that child who went forth every day, and who now goes, and will always go forth every day. Walt Whitman

THE SCULPTOR MAY CHIP THE MARBLE BLOCK

The sculptor may chip the marble block, The painter a blot erase, But the teacher who wounds a little child May never his fault efface. O realize then, indifferent one, In moulding a plastic soul The blight you cause, the scar you make May meet you at Judgment's roll. Author Unknown

TWO AND A HALF

Hold him a little longer, Rock him a little more. Tell him another story (You've only told him four). Let him sleep on your shoulder, Rejoice in his happy smile. He is only two and a half For such a little while! Author Unknown Additional poems about children appear in the topics "Fatherhood," "Home and Family," "Motherhood," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
