Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Choice and Accountability

A BAG OF TOOLS

Isn't it strange that princes and kings And clowns that caper in sawdust rings And just plain folks like you and me Are builders for eternity? To each is given a bag of tools, A shapeless mass and a book of rules, And each must build, ere life has flown, A stumbling block or a steppingstone. R. L. Sharpe

IT SHOWS IN YOUR FACE

You don't have to tell how you live each day, You don't have to say if you work or play, A tried, true barometer serves in your place; However you live, it will show in your face. The false, the deceit that you bear in your heart Will not stay inside, where it first got a start, For sinew and blood are a thin veil of lace; What you wear in your heart you wear in your face. If your life is unselfish, if for others you live For not what you get, but for what you can give, If you live close to God, in His infinite grace, You don't have to tell it; it shows in your face. Author Unknown

A NAME IN THE SAND

Alone I walked the ocean strand, A pearly shell was in my hand; I stooped and wrote upon the sand My name, the year, the day; As onward from the spot I passed, One lingering look behind I cast, A wave came rolling high and fast And washed my lines away. And so, I thought, 'twill quickly be With every mark on earth from me; A wave of dark oblivion's sea Will sweep across the place Where I have trod the sandy shore Of time, and been, to be no more,— Of me, my day, the name I bore, To leave no track nor trace. And yet, with Him who counts the sands, And holds the waters in his hands, I know a lasting record stands Inscribed against my name, Of all this mortal part has wrought, Of all this thinking soul has thought, All, from these fleeting moments caught, For glory or for shame. George Denison Prentice

From JUSTICE

We get back our mete as we measure, We cannot do wrong and feel right, Nor can we give pain and feel pleasure, For justice avenges each slight. Alice Cary

MAN-TEST

When in the dim beginning of the years, God mixed in man the raptures and the tears And scattered through his brain the starry stuff, He said, "Behold! Yet this is not enough, For I must test his spirit to make sure That he can dare the Vision and endure. "I will withdraw my Face, Veil me in shadow for a certain space, Leaving behind Me only a broken clue— A crevice where the glory shimmers through, Some whisper from the sky, Some footprints in the road to track Me by. "I will leave man to make the fateful guess, Will leave him torn between the No and Yes, Leave him unresting till he rests in Me, Drawn upward by the choice that makes him free— Leave him in tragic loneliness to choose, With all in life to win or all to lose." Edwin Markham

THE WAYS

To every man there openeth A Way, and Ways, and a Way. And the High Soul climbs the High Way, And the Low Soul gropes the Low, And in between, on the misty flats, The rest drift to and fro. But to every man there openeth A High Way, and a Low. And every man decideth The Way his soul shall go. John Oxenham

MR. MEANT-TO

Mr. Meant-to has a comrade, And his name is Didn't-do. Have you ever chanced to meet them? Did they ever call on you? These two fellows live together In the house of Never-win, And I'm told that it is haunted By the ghost of Might-have-been. Author Unknown

BUILDING FOR ETERNITY

We are building in sorrow or joy A temple the world may not see, Which time cannot mar nor destroy; We build for eternity. We are building ev'ry day, A temple the world may not see; Building, building ev'ry day, Building for eternity. Ev'ry thought that we've ever had Its own little place has filled; Ev'ry deed we have done, good or bad, Is a stone in the temple we build. Ev'ry word that so lightly falls, Giving some heart joy or pain, Will shine in our temple walls, Or ever its beauty stain. Are you building for God alone— Are you building in faith and love A temple the Father will own In the city of light above? N. B. Sargent

KNOW THIS, THAT EVERY SOUL IS FREE

Know this, that ev'ry soul is free To choose his life and what he'll be; For this eternal truth is giv'n: That God will force no man to heav'n. He'll call, persuade, direct aright, And bless with wisdom, love, and light, In nameless ways be good and kind, But never force the human mind. Freedom and reason make us men; Take these away, what are we then? Mere animals, and just as well The beasts may think of heav'n or hell. May we no more our pow'rs abuse, But ways of truth and goodness choose; Our God is pleased when we improve His grace and seek his perfect love. Author Unknown

THE ROAD NOT TAKEN

Two roads diverged in a yellow wood, And sorry I could not travel both And be one traveler, long I stood And looked down one as far as I could To where it bent in the undergrowth; Then took the other, as just as fair, And having perhaps the better claim, Because it was grassy and wanted wear; Though as for that the passing there Had worn them really about the same, And both that morning equally lay In leaves no step had trodden black. Oh, I kept the first for another day! Yet knowing how way leads on to way, I doubted if I should ever come back. I shall be telling this with a sigh Somewhere ages and ages hence: Two roads diverged in a wood, and I— I took the one less traveled by, And that has made all the difference. Robert Frost Additional poems about choice and accountability appear in the topics "Character," "Self-Mastery," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
