Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Christmas

CHRISTMAS EVERYWHERE

Everywhere, everywhere, Christmas tonight! Christmas in lands of the fir-tree and pine, Christmas in lands of the palm-tree and vine, Christmas where snow peaks stand solemn and white, Christmas where cornfields stand sunny and bright. Christmas where children are hopeful and gay, Christmas where old men are patient and gray, Christmas where peace, like a dove in his flight, Broods o'er brave men in the thick of the fight; Everywhere, everywhere, Christmas tonight! For the Christ-child who comes is the Master of all; No palace too great, no cottage too small. Phillips Brooks

BRIGHTEST AND BEST OF THE SONS OF THE MORNING

Brightest and best of the sons of the morning Dawn on our darkness and lend us thine aid; Star of the east, the horizon adorning, Guide where our infant Redeemer is laid. Cold on His cradle the dew drops are shining, Low lies His head with the beasts of the stall; Angels adore Him in slumber reclining. Maker, and Monarch, and Savior of all. Say, shall we yield Him, in costly devotion, Odors of Edom, and offerings divine? Gems of the mountain and pearls of the ocean, Myrrh from the forest or gold from the mine? Vainly we offer each ample oblation; Vainly with gifts would His favor secure, Richer by far is the heart's adoration; Dearer to God are the prayers of the poor. A. C. Smyth

LIGHT OF THE WORLD

Light of the world so clear and bright, Enter our homes this Christmas night; Relight our souls so tenderly, That we may grow to be like Thee. Author Unknown

CHRISTMAS LEGENDS

Christmas morn, the legends say, Even the cattle kneel to pray, Even the beasts of wood and field Homage to Christ the Saviour yield. Horse and cow and woolly sheep Wake themselves from their heavy sleep, Bending heads and knees to Him Who came to earth in a stable dim. Far away in the forest dark Creatures timidly wake and hark, Feathered bird and furry beast Turn their eyes to the mystic East. Loud at the dawning, chanticleer Sounds his note, the rest of the year, But Christmas Eve the whole night long Honouring Christ he sings his song. Christmas morn, the legends say, Even the cattle kneel to pray, Even the wildest beast afar Knows the light of the Saviour's star. Denis A. McCarthy

ALL ARE VOCAL WITH HIS NAME

The silent skies are full of speech For who hath ears to hear; The winds are whispering each to each, The moon is calling to the beach, And stars their sacred wisdom teach Of faith and love and fear. But once the sky the silence broke And song o'erflowed the earth; The midnight air with glory shook, And angels mortal language spoke, When God our human nature took In Christ, the Savior's birth. And Christmas once is Christmas still; The gates through which he came, And forests' wild and murmuring rill, And fruitful field and breezy hill, And all that else the wide world fill Are vocal with his name. Shall we not listen while they sing This latest Christmas morn; And music hear in everything, And faithful lives in tribute bring To the great song which greets the King, Who comes when Christ is born? Phillips Brooks

THE CHRISTMAS SYMBOL

Only a manger, cold and bare, Only a maiden mild, Only some shepherds kneeling there, Watching a little Child; And yet that maiden's arms enfold The King of Heaven above; And in the Christ-Child we behold The Lord of Life and Love. Author Unknown

ON THE MORNING OF CHRIST'S NATIVITY

I

This is the month, and this the happy morn, Wherein the Son of Heaven's eternal King, Of wedded Maid and Virgin Mother born,Our great redemption from above did bring; For so the holy sages once did sing, That he our deadly forfeit should release, And with his Father work us a perpetual peace.

II

That glorious form, that light unsufferable, And that far-beaming blaze of majesty, Wherewith he wont at Heaven's high council-table To sit the midst of Trinal Unity, He laid aside; and here with us to be, Forsook the courts of everlasting day, And chose with us a darksome house of mortal clay. . . .

V

But peaceful was the night Wherein the Prince of Light His reign of peace upon the earth began: The winds with wonder whist, Smoothly the waters kissed, Whispering new joys to the mild ocean, Who now hath quite forgot to rave, While birds of calm sit brooding on the charmed wave.

VI

The stars with deep amaze Stand fixed in steadfast gaze, Bending one way their precious influence, And will not take their flight For all the morning light, Or Lucifer that often warned them thence; But in their glimmering orbs did glow, Until their Lord himself bespake, and bid them go. John Milton

AT CHRISTMAS BE MERRY

At Christmas be merry, and thankful withal, And feast thy poor neighbours, the great with the small. Thomas Tusser

YOU, SIMEON, SPIRIT-FILLED

You, Simeon, Spirit-filled, went to the temple The small voice whispered and you went, And there you found our baby Lord Newborn, helpless, a God in infant's flesh. It was he who shared our human burden, He who cleanses flesh from death, He who washes soul from soil: The baby Jesus Who burns us clean with cooling light. Now when Christmas says he's near, And I recall that same small voice, May I go newborn to his place Helpless, an infant god in spirit, But wrapped in holy swaddling clothes, Trusting him to teach me life. Jay A. Parry

A CHRISTMAS HYMN

Love came down at Christmas, Love all lovely, Love Divine; Love was born at Christmas, Star and Angels gave the sign.

* * *

Love shall be our token, Love be yours and love be mine, Love to God and all men, Love for plea and gift and sign. Christina Rossetti

PRAYER ON CHRISTMAS EVE

O wondrous night of star and song, O blessed Christmas night! Lord, make me feel my whole life long Its loveliness and light! So all the years my heart shall thrill Remembering angels on a hill, And one lone star shall bless me still On every Christmas night! Nancy Byrd Turner

THERE'S A SONG IN THE AIR!

There's a song in the air! There's a star in the sky! There's a mother's deep prayer And a baby's low cry! And the star rains its fire while the beautiful sing, For the manger of Bethlehem cradles a King! There's a tumult of joy O'er the wonderful birth, For the Virgin's sweet boy Is the Lord of the earth. Ay! the star rains its fire while the beautiful sing, For the manger of Bethlehem cradles a King! In the light of that star Lie the ages impearled; And that song from afar Has swept over the world. Every hearth is aflame, and the beautiful sing In the homes of the nations that Jesus is King! We rejoice in the light, And we echo the song That comes down thro' the night From the heavenly throng. Ay! we shout to the lovely evangel they bring, And we greet in His cradle our Saviour and King! Josiah Gilbert Holland

MY GIFT

Nor crown, nor robe, nor spice I bring As offering unto Christ, my King. Yet have I brought a gift the Child May not despise, however small; For here I lay my heart today, And it is full of love to all. Take Thou the poor but loyal thing, My only tribute, Christ, my King! Eugene Field

THE EARTH HAS GROWN OLD

The Earth has grown old with its burden of care But at Christmas it always is young; The heart of the jewel burns lustrous and fair, And its soul, full of music, breaks forth on the air When the song of the angels is sung. It is coming, Old Earth, it is coming tonight! On the snowflakes which cover thy sod The feet of the Christ-child fall gentle and white And the voice of the Christ-child tells out with delight That mankind are the children of God. Phillips Brooks

FOR THEM

Before you bid, for Christmas' sake, Your guests to sit at meat, Oh please to save a little cake For them that have no treat. Before you go down party-dressed In silver gown or gold, Oh please to send a little vest To them that still go cold. Before you give your girl and boy Gay gifts to be undone, Oh please to spare a little toy To them that will have none. Before you gather round the tree To dance the day about, Oh please to give a little glee To them that go without. Eleanor Farjeon

THAT HOLY THING

They all were looking for a king To slay their foes and lift them high; Thou cam'st, a little baby thing That made a woman cry. O Son of Man, to right my lot Naught but thy presence can avail; Yet on the road thy wheels are not, Nor on the sea thy sail! My how or why thou wilt not heed, But come down thine own secret stair, That thou mayst answer all my need— Yea, every bygone prayer. George MacDonald

PEACE ON EARTH

Shepherds there were who in the fields by night Kept watch, not wisting that a chorus bright Of angels would to them the news convey— The dawning of the world's most potent day. Countless the nights of darkness and of fear The world has watched through, but the message clear Of prophets, martyrs, saints, and poets brought The healing word for which it blindly sought. Visions from God—through men must come the word, Till the whole earth to action deeply stirred From war and dread and hatred wins release, And hails once more as King the Prince of Peace. Helen Wieand Cole

THAT HOLY STAR

O Father, may that holy Star Grow every year more bright, And send its glorious beam afar To fill the world with light. William Cullen Bryant

THE MIRACLE

Into each man's life comes the miracle— The wonder of manger and star; But 'tis only the wise men see the light, And the shepherds who watch afar; And only the wise men follow its gleam Through a desert of dusty days, And the purple murk of appalling nights, And the terror of Herod-ways; And only the shepherds hear the song Of "Glory to God on High;" For their hearts are rich with humility, And tuned to the heavenly cry. Yet His star is hung for all to see, And each has the right to bring The gift of his soul in the palm of his hand To the manger that cradles the King. For to all of the people of East and West Come the tidings of joy each year, But few are the shepherds and wise men With the faith to see and to hear. Into each man's life comes the miracle— The joy of the Christ Child's birth— But human love alone can bring A second Peace to the earth. Claire S. Boyer

THE PRINCE OF PEACE

Hark! the glad sound! the Saviour comes, The Saviour promised long: Let every heart prepare a throne, And every voice a song. He comes, the prisoners to release In Satan's bondage held; The gates of brass before Him burst, The iron fetters yield. He comes, from the thick films of vice To clear the mental ray, And on the eyeballs of the blind To pour celestial day. He comes, the broken heart to bind, The bleeding soul to cure, And with the treasures of His grace To enrich the humble poor. Our glad hosannas, Prince of Peace, Thy welcome shall proclaim, And Heaven's eternal arches ring With Thy beloved name. Philip Doddridge

THE CHRISTMAS SPIRIT

I am the Christmas Spirit. I enter the home of poverty, causing pale-faced children to open their eyes wide in pleased wonder. I cause the miser's clutched hand to relax, and thus paint a bright spot on his soul. I cause the aged to renew their youth and to laugh in the glad old way. I keep romance alive in the heart of childhood, and brighten sleep with dreams woven of magic. I cause eager feet to climb dark stairways with filled baskets, leaving behind hearts amazed at the goodness of the world. I cause the prodigal to pause a moment on his wild, wasteful way, and send to anxious love some little token that releases glad tears—tears which wash away the hard lines of sorrow. I enter dark prison cells, reminding scarred manhood of what might have been, and pointing forward to good days yet to come. I come softly into the still, white home of pain, and lips that are too weak to speak just tremble in silent, eloquent gratitude. In a thousand ways I cause the weary world to look up into the face of God and for a little moment forget the things that are small and wretched. I am the Christmas Spirit. Author Unknown

WHAT CHILD IS THIS?

What Child is this who laid to rest On Mary's lap is sleeping, Whom angels greet with anthems sweet While shepherds watch are keeping? This, this is Christ the King Whom shepherds guard and angels sing, Haste, haste to bring Him laud, The Babe, the Son of Mary. Why lies He in such mean estate Where ox and ass are feeding? Good Christian fear, for sinners here The silent word is pleading. Nails, spear shall pierce Him through. The cross He bore for me, for you. Hail, hail, the Lord made flesh, The Babe, the Son of Mary. So bring Him incense, gold and myrrh, Come peasant, king to own Him. The King of kings salvation brings, Let loving hearts enthrone Him. Raise, raise the song on high, The virgin sings her lullaby, Joy, joy for Christ is born. The Babe, the Son of Mary. W. C. Dix

GIFTS OF THE FIRST CHRISTMAS

Adorned with carven gems and gold The sages bore from eastern lands Gifts for the tiny new-come King. Came He with empty hands?— Stronger than frankincense and myrrh, There followed Him across the dark The dawn-clean breath of better life To fan the immortal spark. And the stars greyed in the slow dawn; The shimmer of the gold grew dim Beside the deep far-shining light That poured from Him. Carlton Culmsee Additional poems that are appropriate for Christmas appear in the topic "Jesus Christ: His Birth and Life" and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
