Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Courage

COURAGE

Courage is armor A blind man wears; The calloused scar Of outlived despairs: Courage is Fear That has said its prayers. Karle Wilson Baker

INVICTUS

Out of the night that covers me, Black as the pit from pole to pole, I thank whatever gods may be For my unconquerable soul. In the fell clutch of circumstance I have not winced nor cried aloud. Under the bludgeonings of chance My head is bloody, but unbowed. Beyond this place of wrath and tears Looms but the horror of the shade, And yet the menace of the years Finds and shall find me unafraid. It matters not how strait the gate, How charged with punishments the scroll, I am the master of my fate: I am the captain of my soul. William Ernest Henley

THE SOUL'S CAPTAIN

An Answer to "Invictus"

Art thou in truth? Then what of him who bought thee with his blood? Who plunged into devouring seas And snatched thee from the flood? Who bore for all our fallen race What none but him could bear— The God who died that man might live And endless glory share? Of what avail thy vaunted strength Apart from his vast might? Pray that his light may pierce the gloom That thou mayest see aright. Men are as bubbles on the wave, As leaves upon the tree, Thou, captain of thy soul! Forsooth, Who gave that place to thee? Free will is thine—free agency, To wield for right or wrong; But thou must answer unto him To whom all souls belong. Bend to the dust that "head unbowed," Small part of life's great whole, And see in him and him alone, The captain of thy soul. Orson F. Whitney

MY CAPTAIN

An Answer to "Invictus"

Out of the light that dazzles me, Bright as the sun from pole to pole, I thank the God I know to be For Christ the conqueror of my soul. Since His the sway of circumstance, I would not wince nor cry aloud. Under that rule which men call chance My head with joy is humbly bowed. Beyond this place of sin and tears That life with Him! And His the aid, Despite the menace of the years, Keeps, and shall keep me, unafraid. I have no fear, though strait the gate, He cleared from punishment the scroll. Christ is the Master of my fate, Christ is the Captain of my soul. Dorothea Day

From MY PRAYER

We know the paths wherein our feet should press; Across our hearts are written Thy decrees; Yet now, O Lord, be merciful to bless With more than these. Grant us the will to fashion as we feel, Grant us the strength to labor as we know, Grant us the purpose, ribb'd and edged with steel, To strike the blow. Knowledge we ask not—knowledge Thou hast lent; But, Lord, the will—there lies our bitter need. Give us to build above the deep intent The deed, the deed. John Drinkwater

COURAGE

I'd like to think that I can look at death and smile and say, All I have left now is my final breath, take that away And you must either leave me dust or dreams or in far flight The soul that wanders where the stardust streams through endless night. I'd rather think that I can look at life with this to say, Send what you will of struggle or of strife, blue skies or gray, I'll stand against the final charge of hate by peak and pit And nothing in the steel clad fist of fate can make me quit. Grantland Rice

OPPORTUNITY

This I beheld, or dreamed it in a dream: There spread a cloud of dust along a plain; And underneath the cloud, or in it, raged A furious battle, and men yelled, and swords Shocked upon swords and shields. A prince's banner Wavered, then staggered backward, hemmed by foes. A craven hung along the battle's edge, And thought, "Had I a sword of keener steel— That blue blade that the king's son bears,—but this Blunt thing!" he snapped and flung it from his hand, And lowering crept away and left the field. Then came the king's son, wounded, sore bestead, And weaponless, and saw the broken sword, Hilt-buried in the dry and trodden sand, And ran and snatched it, and with battle-shout Lifted afresh he hewed his enemy down, And saved a great cause that heroic day. Edward Rowland Sill

BUILD A LITTLE FENCE OF TRUST

Build a little fence of trust Around today; Fill the space with loving works, And therein stay; Look not through the sheltering bars Upon tomorrow, God will help thee bear what comes Of joy or sorrow. Mary Frances Butts

GOD MAKE ME A MAN

Give me the strength to stand for right When other folks have left the fight. Give me the courage of the man Who knows that if he will, he can. Teach me to see in every face The good, the kind and not the base. Make me sincere in word and deed Blot out from me all shame and greed Help me to guard my troubled soul By constant, active self-control. Clean up my thoughts, my work, my play And keep me pure from day to day. O make of me a man. Harlan Goldsbury Metcalf

RIGHT MUST WIN

From "On the Field"

O it is hard to work for God, To rise and take His part Upon this battle-field of earth, And not sometimes lose heart! He hides Himself so wondrously, As though there were no God; He is least seen when all the powers Of ill are most abroad. Or He deserts us at the hour The fight is all but lost; And seems to leave us to ourselves Just when we need Him most. Ill masters good, good seems to change To ill with greatest ease; And, worst of all, the good with good Is at cross purposes. It is not so, but so it looks, And we lose courage then; And doubts will come if God hath kept His promises to men. Workman of God! oh, lose not heart, But learn what God is like, And in the darkest battle-field, Thou shalt know where to strike. Thrice blest is he to whom is given The instinct that can tell That God is on the field when He Is most invisible. Blest too is he who can divine Where real right doth lie, And dares to take the side that seems Wrong to man's blindfold eye. Muse on His justice, downcast soul, Muse, and take better heart; Back with thine angel to the field, And bravely do thy part. For right is right, since God is God, And right the day must win; To doubt would be disloyalty, To falter would be sin. Frederick William Faber

WAITING

Serene, I fold my hands and wait, Nor care for wind, or tide, or sea; I rave no more 'gainst Time or Fate, For, lo! my own shall come to me. I stay my haste, I make delays, For what avails this eager pace? I stand amid the eternal ways, And what is mine shall know my face. Asleep, awake, by night or day, The friends I seek are seeking me, No wind can drive my bark astray, Nor change the tide of destiny. What matter if I stand alone? I wait with joy the coming years; My heart shall reap where it has sown, And garner up its fruits of tears. The waters know their own and draw The brook that springs in yonder height: So flows the good with equal law Unto the soul of pure delight. . . . The stars come nightly to the sky; The tidal wave unto the sea; Nor time, nor space, nor deep, nor high, Can keep my own away from me. John Burroughs Additional poems about courage appear in the topics "Adversity," "Death and Immortality," "Patriotism," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
