Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Death and Immortality

SHE IS NOT DEAD

She is not dead,—the child of our affection,— But gone unto that school Where she no longer needs our poor protection, And Christ himself doth rule. In that great cloister's stillness and seclusion, By guardian angels led, Safe from temptation, safe from sin's pollution, She lives, whom we call dead. Day after day we think what she is doing In those bright realms of air; Year after year, her tender steps pursuing, Behold her grown more fair. Thus do we walk with her, and keep unbroken The bond which nature gives, Thinking that our remembrance, though unspoken, May reach her where she lives. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

TIME

Time is Too slow for those who wait, Too swift for those who fear, Too long for those who grieve, Too short for those who rejoice; But for those who love, Time is Eternity. Author Unknown

LITTLE BOY BLUE

p50 The little toy dog is covered with dust, But sturdy and staunch he stands; And the little toy soldier is red with rust, And his musket moulds in his hands. Time was when the little toy dog was new, And the soldier was passing fair, And that was the time when our Little Boy Blue Kissed them and put them there. "Now, don't you go till I come," he said, "And don't you make any noise!" So toddling off to his trundle-bed He dreamt of the pretty toys. And as he was dreaming, an angel song Awakened our Little Boy Blue,— Oh, the years are many, the years are long, But the little toy friends are true! Ay, faithful to Little Boy Blue they stand, Each in the same old place, Awaiting the touch of a little hand, The smile of a little face. And they wonder, as waiting these long years through, In the dust of that little chair, What has become of our Little Boy Blue Since he kissed them and put them there. Eugene Field

BREAK, BREAK, BREAK

Break, break, break On thy cold gray stones, O Sea! And I would that my tongue could utter The thoughts that arise in me. O well for the fisherman's boy, That he shouts with his sister at play! O well for the sailor lad, That he sings in his boat on the bay! And the stately ships go on To their haven under the hill; But O for the touch of a vanish'd hand, And the sound of a voice that is still! Break, break, break At the foot of thy crags, O Sea! But the tender grace of a day that is dead Will never come back to me. Alfred, Lord Tennyson

From WE ARE SEVEN

A simple Child, That lightly draws its breath, And feels its life in every limb, What should it know of death? I met a little cottage Girl: She was eight years old, she said: Her hair was thick with many a curl That clustered round her head. She had a rustic, woodland air, And she was wildly clad: Her eyes were fair, and very fair: —Her beauty made me glad. "Sisters and brothers, little Maid, How many may you be?" "How many? Seven in all," she said, And wondering looked at me. "And where are they? I pray you tell." She answered, "Seven are we; And two of us at Conway dwell, And two are gone to sea. "Two of us in the church-yard lie, My sister and my brother; And, in the church-yard cottage, I Dwell near them with my mother."

* * *

"How many are you, then," said I, "If they two are in heaven?" Quick was the little Maid's reply, "O Master! we are seven." "But they are dead; those two are dead! Their spirits are in heaven!" 'Twas throwing words away; for still The little Maid would have her will, And said, "Nay, we are seven!" William Wordsworth

AT FIRST WHEN YOU WERE GONE

At first when you were gone I turned my face From life and sat upon a lonely place Apart from men, bewailed but nursed my sorrow And, loving yesterday, I loathed tomorrow. Then suddenly you said, "O foolish one, Awake, there are no dead—I am your own!" And then above my sorrow and my strife I found the Resurrection and the Life. Robert Norwood

CHRISTUS CONSOLATOR

Beside the dead I knelt in prayer, And felt a presence as I prayed. Lo! it was Jesus standing there. He smiled, "Be not afraid." "Lord, thou hast conquered death, we know; Restore again to life," I said, "This one who died an hour ago." He smiled, "She is not dead." "Asleep, then, as thyself didst say, Yet thou canst lift the lids that keep Her prisoned eyes from ours away." He smiled, "She doth not sleep." "Nay, then, though haply she doth wake And look upon some fairer dawn, Restore her to our hearts that ache." He smiled, "She is not gone." "Yea, Lord we feel that she is free, And moves upon some higher sphere; We are bereft; she is with thee." He smiled, "And I am here!" "Dear God! how can we know that they Still walk unseen with us and thee, Nor sleep, nor wander far away?" He smiled, "Abide in me." Rossiter Raymond

SERVANT OF GOD, WELL DONE

"Servant of God, well done; Rest from thy loved employ; The battle fought, the victory won, Enter thy Master's joy." The voice at midnight came; He started up to hear, A mortal arrow pierced his frame: He fell,—but felt no fear. Tranquil amidst alarms, It found him in the field, A veteran slumbering on his arms, Beneath his red-cross shield: His sword was in his hand, Still warm with recent fight; Ready that moment, at command, Through rock and steel to smite. At midnight came the cry, "To meet thy God prepare!" He woke,—and caught his Captain's eye; Then, strong in faith and prayer, His spirit, with a bound, Burst its encumbering clay; His tent, at sunrise, on the ground, A darkened ruin lay. The pains of death are past, Labor and sorrow cease; And life's long warfare closed at last, His soul is found in peace. Soldier of Christ! well done; Praise be thy new employ; And while eternal ages run, Rest in thy Saviour's joy. James Montgomery

WHENCE THIS PLEASING HOPE

Whence this pleasing hope, this fond desire, This longing for immortality? 'Tis the divinity that stirs within us; 'Tis heaven itself that points out an hereafter, And intimates eternity to man. Joseph Addison

BEYOND THIS VALE OF TEARS

Beyond this vale of tears, There is a life above, Unmeasured by the flight of years; And all that life is love. James Montgomery

HEAVEN

Think of Stepping on shore, and finding it Heaven! Of taking hold of a hand, and finding it God's hand. Of breathing a new air, and finding it celestial air. Of feeling invigorated, and finding it immortality. Of passing from storm to tempest to an unbroken calm. Of waking up, and finding it Home. Author Unknown

UPHILL

Does the road wind uphill all the way? Yes, to the very end. Will the day's journey take the whole long day? From morn to night, my friend. But is there for the night a resting-place? A roof for when the slow dark hours begin. May not the darkness hide it from my face? You cannot miss that inn. Shall I meet other wayfarers at night? Those who have gone before. Then must I knock, or call when just in sight? They will not keep you standing at that door. Shall I find comfort, travel-sore and weak? Of labor you shall find the sum. Will there be beds for me and all who seek? Yea, beds for all who come. Christina Rossetti

DEATH, BE NOT PROUD

Death, be not proud, though some have called thee Mighty and dreadful, for thou art not so; For those whom thou think'st thou dost overthrow Die not, poor Death; nor yet canst thou kill me. From rest and sleep, which but thy pictures be, Much pleasure; then from thee much more must flow; And soonest our best men with thee do go— Rest of their bones and souls' delivery! Thou art slave to fate, chance, kings, and desperate men, And dost with poison, war, and sickness dwell; And poppy or charms can make us sleep as well And better than thy stroke. Why swell'st thou then? One short sleep past, we wake eternally, And Death shall be no more: Death, thou shalt die! John Donne

From SNOW-BOUND

And yet, dear heart! remembering thee, Am I not richer than of old? Safe in thy immortality, What change can reach the wealth I hold? What chance can mar the pearl and gold Thy love hath left in trust for me? And while in life's long afternoon, Where cool and long the shadows grow, I walk to meet the night that soon Shall shape and shadow overflow, I cannot feel that thou art far, Since near at need the angels are; And when the sunset gates unbar, Shall I not see thee waiting stand, And, white against the evening star, The welcome of thy beckoning hand? John Greenleaf Whittier

DEAREST SISTER

Dearest sister, thou hast left us, And thy loss we deeply feel, Yet 'tis God that has bereft us, He can all our sorrows heal. Yet again we hope to see thee, When death's gloomy night has fled, Then on earth with joy to greet thee, Where no bitter tears are shed. Anne Sawyer

From THE CHAMBERED NAUTILUS

Build thee more stately mansions, O my soul, As the swift seasons roll! Leave thy low-vaulted past! Let each new temple, nobler than the last, Shut thee from heaven with a dome more vast, Till thou at length art free, Leaving thine outgrown shell by life's unresting sea! Oliver Wendell Holmes

WHAT OF DEATH?

Ay! it will come,—the bitter hour!—but bringing A better love beyond, more subtle-sweet; A higher road to tread, with happier singing, And no cross-ways to part familiar feet! Sir Edwin Arnold

PROSPICE

Fear death?—to feel the fog in my throat, The mist in my face, When the snows begin, and the blasts denote I am nearing the place, The power of the night, the press of the storm, The post of the foe; Where he stands, the Arch Fear in a visible form, Yet the strong man must go. For the journey is done and the summit attained, And the barriers fall, Though a battle's to fight ere the [great prize] be gained, The reward of it all. I was ever a fighter, so—one fight more, The best and the last! I would hate that death bandaged my eyes, and forbore, And bade me creep past. No! let me taste the whole of it, fare like my peers, The heroes of old, Bear the brunt, in a minute pay glad life's arrears Of pain, darkness, and cold. For sudden the worst turns the best to the brave, The black minute's at end, And the elements' rage, the fiend-voices that rave, Shall dwindle, shall blend, Shall change, shall become first a peace out of pain, Then a light, then thy breast, O thou soul of my soul! I shall clasp thee again, And with God be the rest! Robert Browning

FAREWELL, DEAR SISTER

Farewell, dear sister, we shall meet no more Till we arrive on Canaan's happy shore; There we shall meet at our Redeemer's seat, And cast our crowns of victory at His feet. J. Bailey

CONSOLATION

He is not dead, this friend; not dead, But, in the path we mortals tread, Gone some few, trifling steps ahead, And nearer to the end; So that you, too, once past the bend, Shall meet again, as face to face, this friend You fancy dead. Robert Louis Stevenson

THE CHARIOT

Because I could not stop for Death, He kindly stopped for me; The carriage held but just ourselves And Immortality. We slowly drove, he knew no haste, And I had put away My labor, and my leisure too, For his civility. We passed the school where children played, Their lessons scarcely done; We passed the fields of gazing grain, We passed the setting sun. We paused before a house that seemed A swelling on the ground; The roof was scarcely visible, The cornice but a mound. Since then 'tis centuries; but each Feels shorter than the day I first surmised the horses' heads Were toward eternity. Emily Dickinson

BE YE ALSO READY

From "Thanatopsis"

So live, that when thy summons comes to join The innumerable caravan, which moves To that mysterious realm, where each shall take His chamber in the silent halls of death, Thou go not, like the quarry-slave at night, Scourged to his dungeon, but, sustained and soothed By an unfaltering trust, approach thy grave, Like one who wraps the drapery of his couch About him, and lies down to pleasant dreams. William Cullen Bryant

NATURE

As a fond mother, when the day is o'er, Leads by the hand her little child to bed, Half willing, half reluctant to be led, And leave his broken playthings on the floor, Still gazing at them through the open door, Nor wholly reassured and comforted By promises of others in their stead, Which, though more splendid, may not please him more; So Nature deals with us, and takes away Our playthings one by one, and by the hand Leads us to rest so gently, that we go Scarce knowing if we wish to go or stay, Being too full of sleep to understand How far the unknown transcends the what we know. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

WHEN SINKS THE SOUL

When sinks the soul, subdued by toil to slumber, Its closing eyes look up to thee in prayer, Sweet the repose beneath thy [arms] o'ershading But sweeter still to wake and find thee there. So shall it be at last in that bright morning When the soul waketh, and life's shadows flee, O in that hour, fairer than daylight's dawning, Shall rise the glorious thought, I am with thee— Still, still with thee. Harriet Beecher Stowe

WELCOME

Here in this world He bids us come, There in the next He shall bid us welcome. John Donne

WHEN EARTH'S LAST PICTURE IS PAINTED

When Earth's last picture is painted, and the tubes are twisted and dried, When the oldest colours have faded, and the youngest critic has died, We shall rest, and, faith, we shall need it—lie down for an aeon or two, Till the Master of All Good Workmen shall put us to work anew. And those that were good shall be happy: they shall sit in a golden chair; They shall splash at a ten-league canvas with brushes of comets' hair; They shall find real saints to draw from—Magdalene, Peter, and Paul; They shall work for an age at a sitting, and never be tired at all! And only the Master shall praise us, and only the Master shall blame; And no one shall work for money, and no one shall work for fame, But each for the joy of the working, and each, in his separate star, Shall draw the Thing as he sees It for the God of Things as They Are! Rudyard Kipling

BENJAMIN FRANKLIN'S EPITAPH

Like the cover of an old book, Its contents torn out And stripped of its lettering and gilding, Lies here food for worms. But the work shall not be lost, For it will—as he believes—appear once more In a new and more elegant edition, Revised and corrected by the Author. Benjamin Franklin

CROSSING THE BAR

Sunset and evening star, And one clear call for me, And may there be no moaning of the bar, When I put out to sea. But such a tide as moving seems asleep, Too full for sound and foam, When that which drew from out the boundless deep Turns again home. Twilight and evening bell, And after that the dark! And may there be no sadness of farewell, When I embark; For tho' from out our bourne of Time and Place The flood may bear me far, I hope to see my Pilot face to face When I have crossed the bar. Alfred, Lord Tennyson Additional poems about death and immortality appear in the topics "Faith," "Jesus Christ: Our Savior," "Memorial Day," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
