Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Divine Nature

From ODE ON INTIMATIONS OF IMMORTALITY

Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting: The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star, Hath had elsewhere its setting, And cometh from afar: Not in entire forgetfulness, And not in utter nakedness, But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God, who is our home. William Wordsworth

MY THREE WHITE DRESSES

My mom bought me a white dress, Not red or pink or blue. She said it was a special dress Like very other few. There has been just one before, A dress now put away, That I wore some time ago Upon my blessing day. As a little baby clothed In my first white dress, My dad held me in his arms, There to name and bless. So pure and clean was I just then, With time to grow and learn About the Father's plan for me; My glory I must earn. Now I've reached the age to judge The wrong road from the right, And I am here to be baptized In this dress of white. So once again I'm free from sin; The path is clear to me. I'll grasp the rod and hold on tight, I vow with certainty. Just as mud would stain my dress, Sin would stain my soul. The key is to repent or bleach, For whiteness is my goal. And if I try my very best, Then richly blessed I'll be, Wearing inside God's holy house White dress number three. So today I make this pledge: I'll strive to choose the right Through this sacred baptism ordinance In my second dress of white. Linda Gay Perry Nelson

MY MIND TO ME A KINGDOM IS

My mind to me a kingdom is, Such present joys therein I find, That it excels all other bliss That earth affords or grows by kind. Sir Edward Dyer

THE IMAGE OF GOD

O Lord! who seest from yon starry height, Centred in one the future and the past, Fashioned in thine own image, see how fast The world obscures in me what once was bright! Eternal sun! the warmth which thou hast given, To cheer life's flowery April, fast decays; Yet in the hoary winter of my days, Forever green shall be my trust in heaven. Celestial King! oh, let thy presence pass Before my spirit, and an image fair Shall meet that look of mercy from on high, As the reflected image in a glass Doth meet the look of him who seeks it there, And owes its being to the gazer's eye. Francesco de Aldana, Trans. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

I WOULD BE TRUE

I would be true, for there are those who trust me; I would be pure, for there are those who care; I would be strong, for there is much to suffer; I would be brave, for there is much to dare. I would be friend of all—the foe, the friendless; I would be giving, and forget the gift; I would be humble, for I know my weakness; I would look up—and laugh, and love, and lift. Howard Arnold Walter

MAN'S DESTINY

Hast thou not been unwisely bold, Man's destiny to thus unfold? To raise, promote such high desire, Such vast ambition thus inspire? Still, 'tis no phantom that we trace Man's ultimatum in life's race; This royal path has long been trod By righteous men, each now a God: As Abra'm, Isaac, Jacob, too, First babes, then men—to gods they grew. As man now is, our God once was; As now God is, so man may be,— Which doth unfold man's destiny. For John declares: When Christ we see Like unto him we'll truly be. And he who has this hope within, Will purify himself from sin. Who keep this object grand in view, To folly, sin, will bid adieu, Nor wallow in the mire anew; Nor ever seek to carve his name High on the shaft of worldly fame; But here his ultimatum trace: The head of all his spirit-race. Ah, well: that taught by you, dear Paul, 'Though much amazed, we see it all; Our Father God, has ope'd our eyes, We cannot view it otherwise. The boy, like to his father grown, Has but attained unto his own; To grow to sire from state of son, Is not 'gainst Nature's course to run. A son of God, like God to be, Would not be robbing Deity; And he who has this hope within Will purify himself from sin. You're right, St. John, supremely right: Whoe'er essays to climb this height, Will cleanse himself of sin entire— Or else 'twere needless to aspire. Lorenzo Snow

A PRAYER FOR EVERY DAY

Make me too brave to lie or be unkind. Make me too understanding, too, to mind The little hurts companions give, and friends, The careless hurts that no one quite intends. Make me too thoughtful to hurt others so. Help me to know The inmost hearts of those for whom I care, Their secret wishes, all the loads they bear, That I may add my courage to their own. May I make lonely folks feel less alone, And happy ones a little happier yet. May I forget What ought to be forgotten; and recall Unfailing, all That ought to be recalled, each kindly thing, Forgetting what might sting. To all upon my way, Day after day, Let me be joy, be hope! Let my life sing! Mary Carolyn Davies

THE BIRD LET LOOSE

The bird let loose in eastern skies, When hastening fondly home, Ne'er stoops to earth her wing, nor flies Where idle warblers roam; But high she shoots through air and light, Above all low delay, Where nothing earthly bounds her flight, Nor shadow dims her way. So grant me, God, from every care And stain of passion free, Aloft, through Virtue's purer air, To hold my course to thee! No sin to cloud, no lure to stay My soul, as home she springs;— Thy sunshine on her joyful way, Thy freedom in her wings! Thomas Moore

SHE WALKS IN BEAUTY

She walks in beauty, like the night Of cloudless climes and starry skies; And all that's best of dark and bright Meet in her aspect and her eyes: Thus mellow'd to that tender light Which heaven to gaudy day denies. One shade the more, one ray the less, Had half impair'd the nameless grace Which waves in every raven tress, Or softly lightens o'er her face; Where thoughts serenely sweet express How pure, how dear their dwelling-place. And on that cheek, and o'er that brow, So soft, so calm, yet eloquent, The smiles that win, the tints that glow, But tell of days in goodness spent, A mind at peace with all below, A heart whose love is innocent! Lord Byron Additional poems about divine nature appear in the topics "Character," "Integrity," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
