Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Easter

TOMB, THOU SHALT NOT HOLD HIM LONGER

Tomb, thou shalt not hold him longer; Death is strong, but Life is stronger; Stronger than the dark, the light; Stronger than the wrong, the right; Faith and Hope triumphant say Christ will rise on Easter Day. Phillips Brooks

From AN EASTER CANTICLE

In every trembling bud and bloom That cleaves the earth, a flowery sword, I see Thee come from out the tomb, Thou risen Lord.

* * *

Thou art not dead! Thou art the whole Of life that quickens in the sod; Green April is Thy very soul, Thou great Lord God. Charles Hanson Towne

RESURRECTION

In this brown seed, so dry and hard, I see a flower in my door yard. You, chrysalis in winding sheet, Are butterfly all dainty sweet. All life is warmed by spring's sweet breath, And Christ our Lord has conquered death. Agnes W. Storer

ON A GLOOMY EASTER

I hear the robins singing in the rain. The longed-for Spring is hushed so drearily That hungry lips cry often wearily, "Oh, if the blessed sun would shine again!" I hear the robins singing in the rain. The misty world lies waiting for the dawn; The wind sobs at my window and is gone, And in the silence come old throbs of pain. But still the robins sing on in the rain, Not waiting for the morning sun to break, Nor listening for the violets to wake, Nor fearing lest the snow may fall again. My heart sings with the robins in the rain, For I remember it is Easter morn, And life and love and peace are all new born, And joy has triumphed over loss and pain. Sing on, brave robins, sing on in the rain! You know behind the clouds the sun must shine, You know that death means only life divine And all our losses turn to heavenly gain. I lie and listen to you in the rain. Better than Easter bells that do not cease, Your message from the heart of God's great peace, And to his arms I turn and sleep again. Alice Freeman Palmer

IF EASTER BE NOT TRUE

If Easter be not true, Then all the lilies low must lie; The Flanders poppies fade and die; The spring must lose her fairest bloom For Christ were still within the tomb— If Easter be not true. If Easter be not true, Then faith must mount on broken wing; Then hope no more immortal spring; Then hope must lose her mighty urge; Life prove a phantom, death a dirge— If Easter be not true. If Easter be not true, 'Twere foolishness the cross to bear; He died in vain who suffered there; What matter though we laugh or cry, Be good or evil, live or die, If Easter be not true? If Easter be not true— But it is true, and Christ is risen! And mortal spirit from its prison Of sin and death with him may rise! Worthwhile the struggle, sure the prize, Since Easter, aye, is true! Henry H. Barstow

EASTER

Sing, soul of mine, this day of days. The Lord is risen. Toward the sunrising set thy face. The Lord is risen. Behold he giveth strength and grace; For darkness, light; for mourning, praise; For sin, his holiness; for conflict, peace. Arise, O soul, this Easter Day! Forget the tomb of yesterday, For thou from bondage art set free; Thou sharest in his victory And life eternal is for thee, Because the Lord is risen. Author Unknown

A SONG AT EASTER

If this bright lily Can live once more, And its white promise Be as before, Why can not the great stone Be moved from His door? If the green grass Ascend and shake Year after year, And blossoms break Again and again For April's sake, Why can not He, From the dark and mould, Show us again His manifold And gleaming glory, A stream of gold? Faint heart, be sure These things must be. See the new bud On the old tree! . . . If flowers can wake, Oh, why not He? Charles Hanson Towne

THE STRIFE IS O'ER

The strife is o'er, the battle done; The victory of life is won; The song of triumph has begun. Alleluia! The powers of death have done their worst, But Christ their legions hath dispersed; Let shouts of holy joy outburst. Alleluia! The three sad days are quickly sped; He rises glorious from the dead; All glory to our risen Head! Alleluia! He closed the yawning gates of hell; The bars from heaven's high portals fell; Let hymns of praise his triumph tell! Alleluia! Lord! by the stripes which wounded thee, From death's dread sting thy servants free, That we may live and sing to thee! Alleluia! Author Unknown, trans. Francis Potts

AN EASTER WISH

May the glad dawn Of Easter morn Bring joy to thee. May the calm eve Of Easter leave A peace divine with thee. May Easter night On thine heart write, O Christ, I live for thee! Author Unknown Additional poems that are appropriate for Easter appear in the topics "Death and Immortality," "Jesus Christ: His Birth and Life," "Jesus Christ: Our Savior," "Jesus Christ: Our Teacher and Friend," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
