Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Example

YOU NEVER TALKED RELIGION

You never talked religion, friend; You never spoke of any creed; You never queried of life's end, There seemed no need. You never chided me for aught, Nor proudly claimed a higher place In principles and yet you taught Of heavenly grace. You passed along life's workaday With God set first—your neighbor next And all things selfish out away— You lived your text. Author Unknown

ACCEPT MY FULL HEART'S THANKS

Your words came just when needed. Like a breeze, Blowing and bringing from the wide salt sea Some cooling spray, to meadow scorched with heat And choked with dust and clouds of sifted sand . . . So words of thine came over miles to me, Fresh from the mighty sea, a true friend's heart, And brought me hope, and strength, and swept away The dusty webs that human spiders spun Across my path. Friend—and the word means much— So few there are who reach like thee, a hand Up over all the barking curs of spite And give the clasp, when most its need is felt, Friend, newly found, accept my full heart's thanks. Ella Wheeler Wilcox

BE SUCH A MAN

Be such a man, and live such a life, That if every man were such as you, And every life a life like yours, This earth would be God's Paradise. Phillips Brooks

THE GLORY OF LOVE IS BRIGHTER

The glory of love is brighter When the glory of self is dim; And they have most compelled me Who most have pointed to Him; They have held me, stirred me, swayed me— I have hung on their every word Till I fain would rise and follow Not them, not them, but their Lord. Ruby T. Weyburn

THE CALF-PATH

One day through the primeval wood A calf walked home as good calves should; But made a trail all bent askew, A crooked path as all calves do. The trail was taken up next day By a lone dog that passed that way; And then a wise bellwether sheep Pursued the trail o'er vale and steep, And drew the flock behind him, too, As good bellwethers always do. And from that day, o'er hill and glade, Through those old woods a path was made. And many men wound in and out, And dodged and turned and bent about, And uttered words of righteous wrath Because 'twas such a crooked path; . . . The forest path became a lane That bent and turned and turned again: This crooked lane became a road, Where many a poor horse with his load Toiled on beneath the burning sun, And traveled some three miles in one. . . . The years passed on in swiftness fleet, The road became a village street; And this, before men were aware, A city's crowded thoroughfare. . . . Each day a hundred thousand rout Followed this zigzag calf about And o'er his crooked journey went The traffic of a continent. A hundred thousand men were led By one calf near three centuries dead. They followed still his crooked way, And lost one hundred years a day; For thus such reverence is lent To well-established precedent. For men are prone to go it blind Along the calf-path of the mind, And work away from sun to sun To do what other men have done. They follow in the beaten track, And out and in, and forth and back, And still their devious course pursue, To keep the path that others do. They keep the path a sacred groove, Along which all their lives they move; But how the wise old wood-gods laugh, Who saw the first primeval calf. Sam Walter Foss

YOUR OWN VERSION

You are writing a Gospel, A chapter each day, By deeds that you do, By words that you say. Men read what you write, Whether faithless or true; Say, what is the Gospel According to you? Paul Gilbert

SERMON WITHOUT WORDS

Saint Francis came to preach. With smiles he met The friendless, fed the poor, freed a trapped bird, Led home a child. Although he spoke no word, His text, God's love, the town did not forget. Elizabeth Patton Moss

BRIGHTLY BEAMS OUR FATHER'S MERCY

Brightly beams our Father's mercy From his lighthouse evermore, But to us he gives the keeping Of the lights along the shore. Dark the night of sin has settled; Loud the angry billows roar. Eager eyes are watching, longing, For the lights along the shore. Trim your feeble lamp, my brother; Some poor sailor, tempest-tossed, Trying now to make the harbor, In the darkness may be lost. Let the lower lights be burning; Send a gleam across the wave. Some poor fainting, struggling seaman You may rescue, you may save. Philip Paul Bliss

IF . . .

If a child lives with criticism, he learns to condemn. If a child lives with hostility, he learns to fight. If a child lives with fears, he learns to be apprehensive. If a child lives with pity, he learns to feel sorry for himself. If a child lives with jealousy, he learns to feel guilty. If a child lives with encouragement, he learns to be confident. If a child lives with tolerance, he learns to be patient. If a child lives with praise, he learns to be appreciative. If a child lives with acceptance, he learns to love. If a child lives with approval, he learns to like himself. If a child lives with recognition, he learns to have a goal. If a child lives with fairness, he learns what justice is. If a child lives with honesty, he learns what truth is. If a child lives with security, he learns to have faith in himself and in those about him. If a child lives with friendliness, he learns that the world is a good place in which to live. The Watchman-Examiner

PARENTS MAY TELL

Parents may tell But never teach Unless they practice What they preach. Author Unknown Additional poems about example appear in the topics "Character," "Friendship," "Teaching," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
