Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Faith

I NEVER SAW A MOOR

I never saw a moor, I never saw the sea; Yet know I how the heather looks, And what a wave must be. I never spoke with God, Nor visited in heaven; Yet certain am I of the spot As if the chart were given. Emily Dickinson

O WORLD

O world, thou choosest not the better part! It is not wisdom to be only wise, And on the inward vision close the eyes; But it is wisdom to believe the heart. Columbus found a world and had no chart, Save one that faith deciphered in the skies. To trust the soul's invincible surmise Was all his science and his only art. Our knowledge is a torch of smoky pine That lights the pathway but one step ahead Across a void of mystery and dread. Bid, then, the tender light of faith to shine By which alone the mortal heart is led Unto the thinking of the thought divine. George Santayana

FAITH

I believe in the world and its bigness and splendor: That most of the hearts beating round us are tender; That days are but footsteps and years are but miles That lead us to beauty and singing and smiles: That roses that blossom and toilers that plod Are filled with the glorious spirit of God. I believe in the purpose of everything living: That taking is but the forerunner of giving; That strangers are friends that we some day may meet; And not all the bitter can equal the sweet; That creeds are but colors, and no man has said That God loves the yellow rose more than the red. I believe in the path that to-day I am treading, That I shall come safe through the dangers I'm dreading; That even the scoffer shall turn from his ways And some day be won back to trust and to praise; That the lead on the tree and the thing we call Man Are sharing alike in His infinite plan. I believe that all things that are living and breathing Some richness of beauty to earth are bequeathing; That all that goes out of this world leaves behind Some duty accomplished for mortals to find; That the humblest of creatures our praise is deserving, For it, with the wisest, the Master is serving. Edgar A. Guest

IF YOU TRUST

If you trust, you will not worry; If you worry, you do not trust. Author Unknown

PASSIVE FAITH

Passive Faith but praises in the light, When sun doth shine. Active Faith will praise in darkest night— Which faith is thine? Author Unknown

I RAISED MY EYES

I raised my eyes to yonder heights And longed for lifting wings To bear me to their sunlit crests, As on my spirit sings. And though my feet must keep the paths That wind along the valley's floor, Yet after every upward glance I'm stronger than before. Author Unknown

STRONG SON OF GOD

From In Memoriam

Strong Son of God, immortal Love, Whom we, that have not seen thy face, By faith, and faith alone, embrace, Believing where we cannot prove;

* * *

We have but faith: we cannot know, For knowledge is of things we see; And yet we trust it comes from thee, A beam in darkness: let it grow. Alfred, Lord Tennyson

EYE'S NOT SEEN THE UNTOLD TREASURES

Eye's not seen the untold treasures, Which the Father hath in store, Teeming with surpassing pleasures, Even life for evermore! Author Unknown

DO YOUR DUTY

Do your duty, that is best, Leave unto the Lord the rest. Author Unknown

RELIGIO LAICI

Dim as the borrow'd beams of moon and stars To lonely, weary, wand'ring travelers, Is Reason to the soul; and, as on high Those rolling fires discover but the sky, Not light us here, so reason's glimmering ray Was lent, not to assure our doubtful way, But guide us upward to a better day. And as those nightly tapers disappear, When day's bright lord ascends our hemisphere; So pale grows Reason at Religion's sight; So dies, and so dissolves in supernatural light. John Dryden

TRUST IN GOD AND DO THE RIGHT

Courage, brother, do not stumble, Though thy path is dark as night; There's a star to guide the humble— Trust in God and do the right. Let the road be long and dreary, And its ending out of sight, Foot it bravely—strong or weary, Trust in God and do the right. Perish "policy" and cunning, Perish all that fears the light; Whether losing, whether winning, Trust in God and do the right. Some will hate thee, some will love thee, Some will flatter, some will slight, Turn from man, and look above thee, Trust in God and do the right. Simple rule and safest guiding, Inward peace and inward light, Star upon our path abiding, Trust in God and do the right. Author Unknown

BALLAD OF THE TEMPEST

We were crowded in the cabin, Not a soul would dare to sleep,— It was midnight on the waters, And a storm was on the deep. 'Tis a fearful thing in winter To be shattered by the blast, And to hear the rattling trumpet Thunder, "Cut away the mast!" So we shuddered there in silence,— For the stoutest held his breath, While the hungry sea was roaring And the breakers talked with death. As thus we sat in darkness, Each one busy with his prayers, "We are lost!" the captain shouted, As he staggered down the stairs. But his little daughter whispered, As she took his icy hand, "Isn't God upon the ocean, Just the same as on the land?" Then we kissed the little maiden, And we spake in better cheer, And we anchored safe in harbor When the morn was shining clear. James Thomas Fields

WHICHEVER WAY THE WIND DOTH BLOW

Whichever way the wind doth blow Some heart is glad to have it so; Then blow it east or blow it west, The wind that blows, that wind is best. My little craft sails not alone; A thousand fleets from every zone Are out upon a thousand seas; And what for me were favouring breeze Might dash another, with the shock Of doom, upon some hidden rock. And so I do not dare to pray For winds to waft me on my way, But leave it to a Higher Will To stay or speed me; trusting still That all is well, and sure that He Who launched my bark will sail with me Through storm and calm, and will not fail Whatever breezes may prevail To land me, every peril past, Within His sheltering Heaven at last. Then whatsoever wind doth blow, My heart is glad to have it so; And blow it east or blow it west, The wind that blows, that wind is best. Caroline Atherton Mason

BE STILL, MY SOUL

Be still, my soul: The Lord is on thy side; With patience bear thy cross of grief or pain. Leave to thy God to order and provide; In ev'ry change he faithful will remain. Be still, my soul: Thy best, thy heav'nly Friend Thru thorny ways leads to a joyful end. Be still, my soul: Thy God doth undertake To guide the future as he has the past. Thy hope, thy confidence let nothing shake; All now mysterious shall be bright at last. Be still, my soul: The waves and winds still know His voice who ruled them while he dwelt below. Be still, my soul: The hour is hast'ning on When we shall be forever with the Lord, When disappointment, grief, and fear are gone, Sorrow forgot, love's purest joys restored. Be still, my soul: When change and tears are past, All safe and blessed we shall meet at last. Katharina von Schlegel, trans. Jane Borthwick

IF FAITH PRODUCE NOT WORKS

If faith produce not works, I see That faith is not a living tree. Thus faith and works together grow, No separate life they e'er may know. They're soul and body, hand and heart, What God hath joined, let no man part. Author Unknown

SO KEEP YOUR FAITH IN GOD ABOVE

So keep your faith in God above, And faith in the righteous truth; It shall bring you back to the absent love, And the joys of a vanished youth. You shall smile once more when your tears are dried, Meet trouble and swiftly rout it, For faith is the strength of the soul inside, And lost is the man without it. Author Unknown

FAITH

I will not doubt, though all my ships at sea Come drifting home with broken masts and sails; I shall believe the Hand which never fails, From seeming evil worketh good to me; And, though I weep because those sails are battered, Still will I cry, while my best hopes lie shattered, "I trust in Thee." I will not doubt, though all my prayers return Unanswered from the still, white realm above; I shall believe it is an all-wise Love Which has refused those things for which I yearn; And though, at times, I cannot keep from grieving, Yet the pure ardor of my fixed believing Undimmed shall burn. I will not doubt, though sorrows fall like rain, And troubles swarm like bees about a hive; I shall believe the heights for which I strive, Are only reached by anguish and by pain; And, though I groan and tremble with my crosses, I yet shall see, through my severest losses, The greater gain. I will not doubt; well anchored in the faith, Like some stanch ship, my soul braves every gale, So strong its courage that it will not fail To breast the mighty, unknown sea of death. Oh, may I cry when body parts with spirit, "I do not doubt," so listening worlds may hear it With my last breath. Ella Wheeler Wilcox Additional poems about faith appear in the topics "Adversity," "God," "Hope," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
