Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Fatherhood

THAT BOY

He wants to be like his dad! you men, Did you ever think, as you pause, That the boy who watches your every move Is building a set of laws? He's molding a life you're the model for, And whether it's good or bad Depends upon the kind of example set To the boy who'd be like his dad. Would you have him go everywhere you go? Have him do just the things you do? And see everything that your eyes behold, And woo all the gods you woo? When you see the worship that shines in the eyes Of your lovable little lad, Could you rest content if he gets his wish And grows to be like his dad? It's a job that none but yourself can fill; It's a charge you must answer for; It's a duty to show him the road to tread Ere he reaches his manhood's door. It's a debt you owe for the greatest joy On this earth to be had: The pleasure of having a boy to raise Who wants to be like his dad! Author Unknown

HIS EXAMPLE

There are little eyes upon you, and they're watching night and day; There are little ears that quickly take in every word you say; There are little hands all eager to do everything you do, And a little boy that's dreaming of the day he'll be like you. You're the little fellow's idol, you're the wisest of the wise; In his little mind about you no suspicions ever rise; He believes in you devoutly, holds that all you say and do He will say and do in your way when he's grown up just like you. Oh, it sometimes makes me shudder when I hear my boy repeat Some careless phrase I've uttered in the language of the street; And it sets my heart to grieving when some little fault I see And I know beyond all doubting that he picked it up from me. There's a wide-eyed little fellow who believes you're always right, And his ears are always open and he watches day and night; You are setting an example every day in all you do For the little boy who's waiting to grow up to be like you. Edgar A. Guest

TO MY UNBORN SON

"My son!" What simple, beautiful words! "My boy!" What a wonderful phrase! We're counting the months till you come to us— The months, and the weeks, and the days! "The new little stranger," some babes are called, But that's not what you're going to be; With double my virtues and half of my faults, You can't be a stranger to me! Your mother is straight as a sapling plant, The cleanest and best of her clan— You're bone of her bone, and flesh of her flesh, And, by heaven, we'll make you a man! Soon I shall take you in two strong arms— You that shall howl for joy— With a simple, passionate, wonderful pride Because you are just—my boy! And you shall lie in your mother's arms, And croon at your mother's breast, And I shall thank God I am there to shield The two that I love the best. A wonderful thing is a breaking wave, And sweet is the scent of spring, But the silent voice of an unborn babe Is God's most beautiful thing. We're listening now to that silent voice And waiting, your mother and I— Waiting to welcome that fruit of our love When you come to us by and by. We're hungry to show you a wonderful world With wonderful things to be done, We're aching to give you the best of us both And we're lonely for you—my son! Cyril Morton Thorne

TWO PRAYERS

Last night my little boy confessed to me Some childish wrong; And kneeling at my knee, He prayed with tears— "Dear God, make me a man Like Daddy—wise and strong; I know you can." Then while he slept I knelt beside his bed, Confessed my sins, And prayed with low-bowed head— "O God, make me a child Like my child here— Pure, guileless, Trusting Thee with faith sincere." Andrew Gillies

WHAT MAKES A DAD?

God took the strength of a mountain, The majesty of a tree, The warmth of a summer sun, The calm of a quiet sea, The generous soul of nature, The comforting arm of night, The wisdom of the ages, The power of the eagles' flight, The joy of a morning in spring, The faith of a mustard seed, The patience of eternity, The depth of a family need. Then God combined these qualities; There was nothing more to add. He knew His masterpiece was complete, And so He called it Dad. Author Unknown

FINE

Isn't it fine when the day is done, And the petty battles are lost or won, When the gold is made and the ink is dried, To quit the struggle and turn aside To spend an hour with your boy in play, And let him race all of your cares away? Isn't it fine when the day's gone well, When you have glorious tales to tell, And your heart is light and your head is high, For nothing has happened to make you sigh, To hurry homewards to share the joy That your work has won with a little boy? Isn't it fine, whether good or bad Has come to the hopes and the plans you had, And the day is over, to find him there, Thinking you splendid and just and fair, Ready to chase all your griefs away, And soothe your soul with an hour of play? Oh, whether the day's been long or brief, Whether it's brought to me joy or grief, Whether I've failed, or whether I've won, It shall matter not when the work is done;I shall count it fine if I end each day With a little boy in an hour of play. Edgar A. Guest

TO BE HONEST

To be honest, to be kind; To earn a little and to spend a little less; To make upon the whole a family happier for his presence; To renounce when that shall be necessary and not to be embittered; To keep a few friends, but those without capitulation,— Above all, on the same grim conditions, to keep friends with himself— Here is a task for all that a man has of fortitude and delicacy. Robert Louis Stevenson

I FOLLOW A FAMOUS FATHER

I follow a famous father, His honor is mine to wear; He gave me a name that was free from shame, A name he was proud to bear. I follow a famous father, And him I must keep in mind; Though his form is gone, I must carry on The name that he left behind. Edgar A. Guest

ONLY A DAD

Only a dad with a tired face, Coming home from the daily race, Bringing little of gold or fame To show how well he has played the game, But glad in his heart that his own rejoice To see him come home and to hear his voice. Only a dad with a brood of four, One of ten million or more Plodding along in the daily strife, Bearing the whips and the scorns of life, With never a whimper of pain or hate, For the sake of those who at home await. Only a dad, neither rich nor proud, Merely one of the surging crowd, Toiling, striving from day to day, Facing whatever may come his way, Silent whenever the harsh condemn, And bearing it all for the love of them. Only a dad, but he gives his all To smooth the way for his children small, Doing with courage stern and grim The deeds that his father did for him. This is the line that for him I pen: Only a dad, but the best of men. Edgar A. Guest

A DAD'S GREATEST JOB

I may never be as clever as my neighbor down the street. I may never be as wealthy as some other men I meet. I may never have the glory that some other men have had. But I've got to be successful as a little fellow's dad. There are certain dreams I cherish That I'd like to see come true. There are things I would accomplish ere my working time is through. But the task my heart is set on is to guide a little lad And make myself successful as that little fellow's dad. It's the one job that I dream of, It's the task I think of most. If I fail that growing youngster, I'd have nothing else to boast. I may never come to glory. I may never gather gold. Men may count me as a failure When my business life is told. But if he who follows after shall be manly, I'll be glad, For I'll know I've been successful as a little fellow's dad. For though wealth and fame I'd gather all my future would be sad, If I failed to be successful as that little fellow's dad. Author Unknown

IF WITH PLEASURE YOU ARE VIEWING

If with pleasure you are viewing Anything your child is doing, If you like him, if you love him, Let him know. Don't withhold appreciation Until others give expression— If he wins your commendation Tell him so. More than fame and more than money Is a disposition sunny, And some hearty warm approval Makes one glad. So if you think some praise is due him, Now's the time to give it to him; Tie him close with loving language From his dad. Author Unknown

WHAT IS THIS GIFT?

What is this gift you will give your boy? A glamorous game, a tinseled toy, A whittling knife, a puzzle pack, A train that runs on a curving track? A Boy Scout book, a real live pet? No, there's plenty of time for such things yet. Give him a day for his very own— Just your boy and his dad alone: A walk in the woods, a game in the park, A fishing trip from dawn to dark; Give him the gift to thrill any lad: The total companionship of his very own dad. Games are outgrown, and toys decay, But he'll never forget if you give him a day! Author Unknown

YE WHO ARE CALLED TO LABOR

Ye who are called to labor and minister for God, Blest with the royal priesthood, appointed by his word To preach among the nations the news of gospel grace, And publish on the mountains salvation, truth, and peace: Oh, let not vain ambition nor worldly glory stain Your minds so pure and holy; acquit yourselves like men. While lifting up your voices like trumpets long and loud, Say to the slumb'ring nations: "Prepare to meet your God!" Then cease from all light speeches, lightmindedness, and pride; Pray always without ceasing and in the truth abide. The Comforter will teach you, his richest blessings send. Your Savior will be with you forever to the end. Rich blessings there await you, and God will give you faith. You shall be crowned with glory and triumph over death, And soon you'll come to Zion, and, bearing each his sheaf, No more shall taste of sorrow, but glorious crowns receive. Mary Judd Page

THOUGHTS OF A FATHER

We've never seen the Father here, but we have known the Son, The finest type of manhood since the world was first begun. And, summing up the works of God, I write with reverent pen, The greatest is the Son He sent to cheer the lives of men. Through Him we learned the ways of God and found the Father's love; The Son it was who won us back to Him who reigns above. The Lord did not come down himself to prove to men His worth, He sought our worship through the Child He placed upon the earth. How can I best express my life? Wherein does greatness lie? How can I long remembrance win, since I am born to die? Both fame and gold are selfish things; their charms may quickly flee, But I'm the father of a boy who came to speak for me. In him lies all I hope to be; his splendor shall be mine; I shall have done man's greatest work if only he is fine. If some day he shall help the world long after I am dead, In all that men shall say of him my praises shall be said. It matters not what I may win of fleeting gold or fame, My hope of joy depends alone on what my boy shall claim. My story must be told through him; for him I work and plan, Man's greatest duty is to be the father of a man. Edgar A. Guest Additional poems about fatherhood appear in the topics "Example," "Home and Family," "Teaching," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
