Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Forgiveness

TO KNOW ALL IS TO FORGIVE ALL

If I knew you and you knew me— If both of us could clearly see, And with an inner sight divine The meaning of your heart and mine— I'm sure that we would differ less And clasp our hands in friendliness; Our thoughts would pleasantly agree If I knew you, and you knew me. Nixon Waterman

FORBEARANCE

The kindest and the happiest pair Will find occasion to forbear; And something, every day they live, To pity, and perhaps forgive. William Cowper

THE LAND OF BEGINNING AGAIN

I wish that there were some wonderful place In the Land of Beginning Again: Where all our mistakes and all our heartaches And all of our poor selfish grief Could be dropped like a shabby old coat at the door And never put on again. I wish we could come on it all unaware, Like the hunter who finds a lost trail; And I wish that the one whom our blindness had done The greatest injustice of all Could be there at the gates like an old friend that waits For the comrade he's gladdest to hail. We would find all the things we intended to do But forgot, and remembered too late: Little praises unspoken, little promises broken, And all of the thousand and one Little duties neglected that might have perfected The day for one less fortunate. It wouldn't be possible not to be kind In the Land of Beginning Again, And the ones we misjudged and the ones whom we grudged Their moments of victory here, Would find in the grasp of our loving hand-clasp More than penitent lips could explain. For what had been hardest we'd know had been best, And what had seemed loss would be gain; For there isn't a sting that will not take wing When we've faced it and laughed it away; And I think that the laughter is most what we're after In the Land of Beginning Again. So I wish that there were some wonderful place Called the Land of Beginning Again, Where all our mistakes and all our heartaches And all of our poor selfish grief Could be dropped like a shabby old coat at the door And never put on again. Louise Fletcher Tarkington

LET EACH MAN LEARN TO KNOW HIMSELF

Let each man learn to know himself; To gain this knowledge, let him labor, Improve those failings in himself Which he condemns so in his neighbor. How lenient our own faults we view, And conscience' voice adroitly smother; But oh! how harshly we review The self-same errors in another! And if you meet an erring one Whose deeds are blamable or thoughtless, Consider, ere you cast the stone, If you yourself be pure and faultless. Oh! list to that small voice within, Whose whisperings oft make men confounded, And trumpet not another's sin, You'd blush deep if your own were sounded. And in self-judgment, if you find Your deeds to others are superior, To you has Providence been kind, As you should be to those inferior; Example sheds a genial ray Of light which men are apt to borrow; So, first improve yourself today, And then improve your friends tomorrow. Author Unknown

FORGIVENESS

My heart was heavy, for its trust had been Abused, its kindness answered with foul wrong; So, turning gloomily from my fellow-men One summer Sabbath day I strolled among The green mounds of the village burial-place; Where, pondering how all human love and hate Find one sad level; and how, soon or late, Wronged and wrongdoer, each with meekened face, And cold hands folded over a still heart, Pass the green threshold of our common grave, Whither all footsteps tend, whence none depart, Awed for myself, and pitying my race, Our common sorrow, like a mighty wave, Swept all my pride away, and trembling I forgave! John Greenleaf Whittier

EVENING PRAYER

If I have wounded any soul today, If I have caused one foot to go astray, If I have walked in my own willful way— Good Lord, forgive! If I have uttered idle words or vain, If I have turned aside from want or pain, Lest I myself should suffer through the strain— Good Lord, forgive! If I have craved for joys that are not mine, If I have let my wayward heart repine, Dwelling on things of earth, not things divine— Good Lord, forgive! If I have been perverse, or hard, or cold, If I have longed for shelter in Thy fold When Thou hast given me some part to hold— Good Lord, forgive! Forgive the sins I have confessed to Thee, Forgive the secret sins I do not see, That which I know not, Father, teach Thou me— Help me to live. C. Maud Battersby Additional poems about forgiveness appear in the topics "Character," "Friendship," "Self-Mastery," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
