Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Friendship

THE ARROW AND THE SONG

I shot an arrow into the air, It fell to earth, I knew not where; For, so swiftly it flew, the sight Could not follow it in its flight. I breathed a song into the air, It fell to earth, I knew not where; For who has sight so keen and strong, That it can follow the flight of song? Long, long afterward, in an oak, I found the arrow, still unbroke; And the song, from beginning to end, I found again in the heart of a friend. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

ALTHOUGH WE TREASURE NEWER FRIENDS

Although we treasure newer friends, We cannot forget the old. The new ones are like silver, The old ones purest gold. Author Unknown

PEOPLE LIKED HIM

People liked him, not because He was rich or known to fame; He had never won applause As a star in any game. His was not a brilliant style; His was not a forceful way. But he had a gentle smile And a kindly word to say. Edgar A. Guest

AROUND THE CORNER

Around the corner I have a friend, In this great city which has no end; Yet, days go by and weeks rush on, And before I know it a year has gone. And I never see my old friend's face; For life is a swift and terrible race. He knows I like him just as well As in the days when I rang his bell And he rang mine. We were younger then And now we are busy, tired men: Tired with playing the foolish game; Tired with trying to make a name; "Tomorrow," I say, "I will call on Jim, Just to show I'm thinking of him." But tomorrow comes and tomorrow goes; And the distance between us grows and grows Around the corner! Yet miles away . . . "Here's a telegram, sir—'Jim died today.'" And that's what we get—and deserve in the end— Around the corner, a vanished friend. Charles Hanson Towne

A MILE WITH ME

O who will walk a mile with me Along life's merry way? A comrade blithe and full of glee, Who dares to laugh out loud and free, And let his frolic fancy play, Like a happy child, through the flowers gay That fill the field and fringe the way Where he walks a mile with me. And who will walk a mile with me Along life's weary way?A friend whose heart has eyes to see The stars shine out o'er the darkening lea, And the quiet rest at the end o' the day,— A friend who knows, and dares to say, The brave, sweet words that cheer the way Where he walks a mile with me. With such a comrade, such a friend, I fain would walk till journey's end, Through summer sunshine, winter rain, And then?—Farewell, we shall meet again! Henry van Dyke

THE CALL OF LOVE

Far above earth's tumult, The call of love we hear, Shall its gentle pleading Fall on a heedless ear? O hear the call of love, O hear the call of love. The call of love is to mercy And pardon, and peace, The call of love is to service That never shall cease, Till we shall enter That land of promise Where true joys abound, Then onward press, my comrades, We are gaining We are gaining ground. Not from far off country, Or land across the sea, Comes with earnest pleading The call of love to me. He who is my neighbor, And needs a cheering word, In his faintest whisper That call of love is heard. C. Austin Miles

FRIENDSHIP

Oh, the comfort—the inexpressible comfort of feeling safe with a person, Having neither to weigh thoughts, Nor measure words—but pouring them All right out—just as they are— Chaff and grain together— Certain that a faithful hand will Take and sift them— Keep what is worth keeping— And with the breath of kindness Blow the rest away. Dinah Maria Mulock Craik

THE FRIEND WHO JUST STANDS BY

When trouble comes your soul to try, You love the friend who just "stands by." Perhaps there's nothing he can do— The thing is strictly up to you; For there are troubles all your own, And paths the soul must tread alone; Times when love cannot smooth the road Nor friendship lift the heavy load, But just to know you have a friend Who will "stand by" until the end, Whose sympathy through all endures, Whose warm handclasp is always yours— It helps, someway, to pull you through, Although there's nothing he can do. And so with fervent heart you cry, "God bless the friend who just 'stands by'!" B. Y. Williams

ONE SMILE

One smile can glorify the day, One word new hope impart; The least disciple need not say There are no alms to give away If love be in the heart. Author Unknown

OUTWITTED

He drew a circle that shut me out— Heretic, rebel, a thing to flout. But Love and I had the wit to win: We drew a circle that took him in! Edwin Markham

TO A FRIEND

You entered my life in a casual way, And saw at a glance what I needed; There were others who passed me or met me each day, But never a one of them heeded. Perhaps you were thinking of other folks more, Or chance simply seemed to decry it; I know there were many such chances before, But the others—well, they didn't see it. You said just the thing that I wished you would say, And you made me believe that you meant it; I held up my head in the old gallant way, And resolved you should never repent it. There are times when encouragement means such a lot, And a word is enough to convey it; There were others who could have, as easy as not— But, just the same, they didn't say it. There may have been someone who could have done more To help me along, though I doubt it; What I needed was cheering, and always before They had let me plod onward without it. You helped to refashion the dream of my heart, And made me turn eagerly to it; There were others who might have (I question that part)— But, after all, they didn't do it! Grace Stricker Dawson

ABOU BEN ADHEM

Abou Ben Adhem (may his tribe increase!) Awoke one night from a deep dream of peace, And saw, within the moonlight in his room, Making it rich, and like a lily in bloom, An Angel writing in a book of gold: Exceeding peace had made Ben Adhem bold, And to the Presence in the room he said, "What writest thou?" The Vision raised its head, And with a look made of all sweet accord Answered, "The names of those who love the Lord." "And is mine one?" said Abou. "Nay, not so," Replied the Angel. Abou spoke more low, But cheerily still; and said, "I pray thee, then, Write me as one that loves his fellow men." The Angel wrote, and vanished. The next night It came again with a great wakening light, And showed the names whom love of God had blessed, And, lo! Ben Adhem's name led all the rest! Leigh Hunt Additional poems about friendship appear in the topics "Good Works," "Love," "Service," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
