Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Good Works

THE COMMON ROAD

I want to travel the common road With the great crowd surging by, Where there's many a laugh and many a load, And many a smile and sigh. I want to be on the common way With its endless tramping feet, In the summer bright and winter gray, In the noonday sun and heat. In the cool of evening with shadows nigh, At dawn, when the sun breaks clear, I want the great crowd passing by, To [know] what they see and hear. I want to be one of the common herd, Not live in a sheltered way, Want to be thrilled, want to be stirred By the great crowd day by day; To glimpse the restful valleys deep, To toil up the rugged hill, To see the brooks which shyly creep, To have the torrents thrill. I want to laugh with the common man Wherever he chance to be, I want to aid him when I can Whenever there's need of me. I want to lend a helping hand Over the rough and steep To a child too young to understand— To comfort those who weep. I want to live and work and plan With the great crowd surging by, To mingle with the common man, No better or worse than I. Silas H. Perkins

BROTHERHOOD

O brother man! fold to thy heart thy brother. Where pity dwells, the peace of God is there; To worship rightly is to love each other, Each smile a hymn, each kindly deed a prayer. John Greenleaf Whittier

LEND A HAND

I am only one, but I am one; I can't do everything, but I can do something. What I can do, that I ought to do; What I ought to do, By the grace of God I will do! Edward Everett Hale

MY DOOR IS ON THE LATCH

My door is on the latch to-night, The hearth fire is aglow. I seem to hear swift passing feet, The Christ Child in the snow. My heart is open wide to-night For stranger, kith or kin. I would not bar a single door Where Love might enter in! Kate Douglas Wiggin

THE QUALITY OF MERCY

The quality of mercy is not strained, It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven Upon the place beneath. It is twice blessed, It blesseth him that gives, and him that takes, 'Tis mightiest in the mightiest, it becomes The throned monarch better than his crown. . . . It is enthroned in the hearts of kings, It is an attribute of God himself. William Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice 4.1.184-89, 194-95

THE SIN OF OMISSION

It isn't the thing you do; It's the thing you leave undone, Which gives you a bit of heartache At the setting of the sun. The tender word forgotten, The letter you did not write, The flower you might have sent, Are your haunting ghosts at night. The stone you might have lifted Out of a brother's way, The bit of heartsome counsel You were hurried too much to say; The loving touch of the hand, The gentle and winsome tone, That you had no time or thought for With troubles enough of your own. The little acts of kindness, So easily out of mind; Those chances to be helpful Which everyone may find— No, it's not the thing you do, It's the thing you leave undone, Which gives you the bit of heartache At the setting of the sun. Margaret E. Sangster

LOOK UP

Look up and not down. Look forward and not back. Look out and not in. Lend a hand. Edward Everett Hale

IF YOU CAN SIT AT SET OF SUN

If you can sit at set of sun And count the deeds that you have done And counting find One self-denying act, one word That eased the heart of him that heard— One glance most kind, Which fell like sunshine where he went, Then you may count that day well spent. But if, thru all the livelong day, You've cheered no heart, by yea or nay, If through it all, You've nothing done that you can trace That brought the sunshine to one face— No act most small That helped some soul and nothing cost— Then count that day as worse than lost. Robert Browning

IF I CAN STOP ONE HEART FROM BREAKING

If I can stop one Heart from breaking, I shall not live in vain; If I can ease one Life the Aching, Or cool one pain, Or help one fainting Robin Unto his Nest again, I shall not live in vain. Emily Dickinson

THE PURE, THE BRIGHT, THE BEAUTIFUL

The pure, the bright, the beautiful That stirred our hearts in youth, The impulses to wordless prayer, The streams of love and truth, The longing after something lost, The spirit's yearning cry, The striving after better hopes— These things can never die. The timid hand stretched forth to aid A brother in his need; A kindly word in grief's dark hour That proves a friend indeed; The plea for mercy softly breathed, When justice threatens high, The sorrow of a contrite heart— These things shall never die. Let nothing pass, for every hand Must find some work to do, Lose not a chance to waken love— Be firm and just and true. So shall a light that cannot fade Beam on thee from on high, And angel voices say to thee— "These things shall never die." Charles Dickens

THE HOUSE BY THE SIDE OF THE ROAD

There are hermit souls that live withdrawn In the place of their self-content; There are souls like stars, that dwell apart, In a fellowless firmament; There are pioneer souls that blaze their paths Where highways never ran— But let me live by the side of the road And be a friend to man. Let me live in a house by the side of the road Where the race of men go by— The men who are good and the men who are bad, As good and as bad as I. I would not sit in the scorner's seat Or hurl the cynic's ban— Let me live in a house by the side of the road And be a friend to man. I see from my house by the side of the road, By the side of the highway of life, The men who press with the ardor of hope, The men who are faint with the strife, But I turn not away from their smiles nor their tears. Both parts of an infinite plan— Let me live in a house by the side of the road And be a friend to man. I know there are brook-gladdened meadows ahead, And mountains of wearisome height; That the road passes on through the long afternoon And stretches away to the night. And still I rejoice when the travelers rejoice And weep with the strangers that moan, Nor live in my house by the side of the road Like a man who dwells alone. Let me live in my house by the side of the road, It's here the race of men go by— They are good, they are bad, they are weak, they are strong, Wise, foolish—so am I. Then why should I sit in the scorner's seat, Or hurl the cynic's ban? Let me live in my house by the side of the road And be a friend to man. Sam Walter Foss

I HAVE WEPT IN THE NIGHT

I have wept in the night For the shortness of sight That to somebody's need made me blind; But I never have yet Felt a tinge of regret For being a little too kind. Author Unknown

DO ALL THE GOOD YOU CAN

Do all the good you can, By all the means you can, In all the ways you can, In all the places you can, At all the times you can, To all the people you can, As long as ever you can. John Wesley

EVERY TASK, HOWEVER SIMPLE

Every task, however simple Sets the soul that does it, free; Every deed of love and mercy Done to man, is done to me. Henry van Dyke Additional poems about good works appear in the topics "Character," "Example," "Friendship," "Service," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
