Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Gossip and Criticism

IF YOU KNOW A TALL MAN

If you know a tall man out ahead of the crowd, A leader of men marching fearless and proud, And you know a tale which the mere telling aloud Would cause his proud head in shame to be bowed, It's a pretty good plan to forget it. If you know of a skeleton hidden away in a closet, Guarded and kept from the day in the dark, Whose showing, whose sudden display, Would cause grief and sorrow and lifelong dismay, It's a pretty good plan to forget it. If you know of a spot in the life of a friend, We all have such spots concealed world without end, Which the shame of its telling no grieving could mend, It's a pretty good thing to forget it. If you know of a thing that would darken the joy Of a man or a woman, a girl or a boy, That would sadden or in the least way Annoy a fellow or cause gladness to stray, It's a pretty good plan to forget it. Author Unknown

BOYS FLYING KITES

Boys flying kites haul in their white-winged birds; You can call back your kites, but you can't call back your words. "Careful with fire" is good advice, we know; "Careful with words" is ten times doubly so. Thoughts unexpressed will often fall back dead. But God Himself can't kill them, once they are said! Will Carleton

THREE GATES

If you are tempted to reveal A tale to you someone has told About another, make it pass, Before you speak, three gates of gold. These narrow gates: First, "Is it true?" Then, "Is it needful?" In your mind Give truthful answer. And the next Is last and narrowest, "Is it kind?" And if to reach your lips at last It passes through these gateways three, Then you may tell the tale, nor fear What the result of speech may be. Author Unknown

HEARSAY

In every town, in every street, In nearly every house, you meet A little imp, who wriggles in With half a sneer and half a grin, And climbs upon your rocking chair, Or creeps upon you anywhere; And when he gets you very near, Just whispers something in your ear— Some rumor of another's shame— And "Little Hearsay" is his name. You understand, this little elf He doesn't say he knows himself, He doesn't claim it's really true— He only whispers it to you, Because he knows you'll go and tell Some other whisperer as well. And if he says he's only heard, Declare you don't believe a word, And tell him you will not repeat The silly chatter of the street. However gossips smile and smirk, Refuse to do their devil's work. Author Unknown

YOU NEVER CAN TELL

You never can tell when you send a word Like an arrow shot from a bow By an archer blind, be it cruel or kind, Just where it may chance to go. It may pierce the breast of your dearest friend, Tipped with its poison or balm, To a stranger's heart in life's great mart It may carry its pain or its calm. You never can tell when you do an act Just what the result will be, But with every deed you are sowing a seed, Though the harvest you may not see. Each kindly act is an acorn dropped In God's productive soil; You may not know, but the tree shall grow With shelter for those who toil. You never can tell what your thoughts will do In bringing you hate or love, For thoughts are things, and their airy wings Are swifter than carrier doves. They follow the law of the universe— Each thing must create its kind, And they speed o'er the track to bring you back Whatever went out from your mind. Ella Wheeler Wilcox

THREE THINGS COME NOT BACK

Remember three things come not back: The arrow sent upon its track— It will not swerve, it will not stay Its speed; it flies to wound, or slay. The spoken word so soon forgot By thee; but it has perished not; In other hearts 'tis living still And doing work for good or ill. And the lost opportunity That cometh back no more to thee, In vain thou sweepest, in vain dost yearn, Those three will nevermore return. Author Unknown

SHOULD YOU FEEL INCLINED TO CENSURE

Should you feel inclined to censure Faults you may in others view, Ask your own heart, ere you venture, If you have not failings, too. Let not friendly vows be broken; Rather strive a friend to gain. Many words in anger spoken Find their passage home again. Do not, then, in idle pleasure Trifle with a brother's fame; Guard it as a valued treasure, Sacred as your own good name. Do not form opinions blindly; Hastiness to trouble tends; Those of whom we thought unkindly Oft become our warmest friends. Author Unknown

LET SOMETHING GOOD BE SAID

When over the fair fame of friend or foe The shadow of disgrace shall fall, instead Of words of blame, or proof of thus and so, Let something good be said. Forget not that no fellow-being yet May fall so low but love may lift his head: Even the cheek of shame with tears is wet, If something good be said. No generous heart may vainly turn aside In ways of sympathy; no soul so dead But may awaken strong and glorified, If something good be said. And so I charge ye, by the thorny crown, And by the cross on which the Saviour bled, And by your own soul's hope of fair renown, Let something good be said! James Whitcomb Riley

ON FILE

If an unkind word appears, File the thing away. If some novelty in jeers, File the thing away. If some clever little bit Of a sharp and pointed wit, Carrying a sting with it— File the thing away. If some bit of gossip come, File the thing away. Scandalously spicy crumb, File the thing away. If suspicion comes to you That your neighbor isn't true Let me tell you what to do— File the thing away. Do this for a little while, Then go out and burn the file. John Kendrick Bangs

A WISE OLD OWL

A wise old owl lived in an oak; The more he saw the less he spoke; The less he spoke the more he heard: Why can't we all be like that bird? Author Unknown

I KNOW SOMETHING GOOD ABOUT YOU

Wouldn't this old world be better, If the folks we meet would say— "I know something good about you!" And treat us just that way? Wouldn't it be fine and dandy If each handclasp, fond and true, Carried with it this assurance— "I know something good about you!" Wouldn't life be lots more happy If the good that's in us all Were the only thing about us That folks bothered to recall? Wouldn't life be lots more happy If we praised the good we see? For there's such a lot of goodness In the worst of you and me! Wouldn't it be nice to practice That fine way of thinking, too? You know something good about me, I know something good about you. Author Unknown Additional poems about gossip and criticism appear in the topics "Friendship," "Judging," "Love," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
