Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Gratitude

I WANDERED LONELY AS A CLOUD

I wandered lonely as a cloud That floats on high o'er vales and hills, When all at once I saw a crowd, A host, of golden daffodils, Beside the lake, beneath the trees, Fluttering and dancing in the breeze. Continuous as the stars that shine And twinkle on the milky way, They stretched in never-ending line Along the margin of a bay; Ten thousand saw I at a glance Tossing their heads in sprightly dance. The waves beside them danced, but they Outdid the sparkling waves in glee; A poet could not but be gay, In such a jocund company; I gazed—and gazed—but little thought What wealth the show to me had brought: For oft, when on my couch I lie In vacant or in pensive mood, They flash upon that inward eye Which is the bliss of solitude; And then my heart with pleasure fills, And dances with the daffodils. William Wordsworth

GRATITUDE

O God! We give our thanks to thee, For thy redeeming love for us, Thy loving watch, on land or sea, For all that's grand and glorious. The verdant vales and mountains high, And songsters in the leafy bowers, For sun and moon, and starlit sky, The fragrance of a thousand flowers. We thank thee for the gospel's light To guide us mortals here below, The snow-clad peaks, so pure and white, From which the crystal waters flow. For thy protecting care and love And all the good we hear and see: For all thy blessings from above, We give, Oh God, our thanks to thee. Joseph D. Olson

PRAISE TO THE LORD, THE ALMIGHTY

Praise to the Lord, the Almighty, the King of creation! O my soul, praise him, for he is thy health and salvation! Join the great throng, Psaltery, organ, and song, Sounding in glad adoration! Praise to the Lord! Over all things he gloriously reigneth. Borne as on eagle wings, safely his Saints he sustaineth. Hast thou not seen How all thou needest hath been Granted in what he ordaineth? Praise to the Lord, who doth prosper thy way and defend thee. Surely his goodness and mercy shall ever attend thee. Ponder anew What the Almighty can do, Who with his love doth befriend thee. Praise to the Lord! Oh, let all that is in me adore him! All that hath breath, join with Abraham's seed to adore him! Let the "amen" Sum all our praises again, Now as we worship before him. Joachim Neander

OH, GOD, I THANK THEE

Oh, God, I thank thee for each sight Of beauty that thy world doth give. For sunny sky and air and light, Oh, God, I thank thee that I live. That life I consecrate to thee And ever as the day is born On wings of joy my soul doth flee And thank thee for another morn. Another morn in which to cast Some silent deed of love abroad, That great'ning as it journeys past May do some earnest work for God. Author Unknown

THE WORLD IS MINE!

Today upon a bus I saw a lovely maid with golden hair; I envied her—she seemed so gay—and I wished I were as fair. When suddenly she rose to leave, I saw her hobble down the aisle; She had one foot and wore a crutch, but as she passed, a smile. Oh, God, forgive me when I whine. I have two feet; the world is mine! And then I stopped to buy some sweets. The lad who sold them had such charm. I talked with him; he said to me, "It's nice to talk with folks like you. You see," he said, "I'm blind." Oh, God, forgive me when I whine. I have two eyes; the world is mine! Then walking down the street, I saw a child with eyes of blue. He stood and watched the others play; It seemed he knew not what to do. I stopped for a moment, then I said, "Why don't you join the others, dear?"He looked ahead without a word, And then I knew he could not hear. Oh, God, forgive me when I whine. I have two ears; the world is mine! With feet to take me where I'd go, With eyes to see the sunset's glow, With ears to hear what I would know, Oh, God, forgive me when I whine. I'm blessed, indeed! The world is mine! Author Unknown

HOW SHARPER THAN A SERPENT'S TOOTH

How sharper than a serpent's tooth it is To have a thankless child! William Shakespeare, King Lear, 1.4.310-11

NO LONGER FORWARD

No longer forward nor behind I look in hope or fear; But grateful, take the good I find The best of now and here. John Greenleaf Whittier

From A LITTLE TE DEUM OF THE COMMONPLACE

For all things beautiful, and good, and true; For things that seemed not good yet turned to good; For all the sweet compulsions of Thy will That chastened, tried, and wrought us to Thy shape; For things unnumbered that we take of right, And value first when they are withheld; For light and air; sweet sense of sound and smell; For ears to hear the heavenly harmonies; For eyes to see the unseen in the seen; For vision of the Worker in the work; For hearts to apprehend Thee everywhere;— We thank Thee, Lord! John Oxenham

THE UNDISCOVERED COUNTRY

Lord, for the erring thought Not unto evil wrought: Lord, for the wicked will Betrayed and baffled still: For the heart from itself kept, Our thanksgiving accept. For ignorant hopes that were Broken to our blind prayer: For pain, death, sorrow sent Unto our chastisement: For all loss of seeming good, Quicken our gratitude. William Dean Howells

FOR SUNLIT HOURS

For sunlit hours and visions clear, For all remembered faces dear, For comrades of a single day, Who sent us stronger on our way, For friends who shared the year's long road, And bore with us the common load, For hours that levied heavy tolls, But brought us nearer to our goals, For insights won through toil and tears, We thank the Keeper of our years. Clyde McGee Additional poems about gratitude appear in the topics "Happiness," "Humility," "Thanksgiving," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
