Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Happiness

LITTLE THINGS

Little drops of water, Little grains of sand, Make the mighty ocean And the pleasant land. . . . Little deeds of kindness, Little words of love, Help to make earth happy Like the heaven above. Julia Fletcher Carney

THE DOOR OF HAPPINESS

All wondering and eager-eyed, Within her portico, I made my plea of Hostess Life, One morning long ago. "Pray, show me this great house of thine, Nor close a single door, For many rooms and curious things And treasures great and small Within this spacious mansion lie, And I would see them all." Then Hostess Life turned silently Her searching gaze on me, And with no word she reached her hand, And offered up the key. It opened first the Door of Hope, And long I lingered there, Until I spied the Room of Dreams, Just higher by a stair,And then a door, whereon the word "Happiness" was writ, But when I tried the little key, I could not make it fit. It unlocked the door of "Pleasure's Room," Where ev'rything seemed so bright, But after I had stayed a while, It somehow lost its light; And wandering down the little hall, I came upon a room Marked "Duty," and entered it To find myself in gloom. Along its shadowy walls I groped My weary way about, And found that from dull Duty's Room The door of Toil led out. It led out into another room, Whereon a crimson stain Marked sullenly against the dark The words "The Room of Pain." But oh! the light, the light, the light! That spilled down from above! And upward wound the stairs of Faith, Right to the Tower of Love. And when I came forth from that place, I tried the little key, And lo! the Door of Happiness Swung open wide and free. Author Unknown

O HEART OF MINE, WE SHOULDN'T WORRY SO!

O heart of mine, we shouldn't Worry so! What we've missed of calm we couldn't Have, you know! What we've met of stormy pain, And of sorrow's driving rain, We can better meet again, If it blow! We have erred in that dark hour We have known, When our tears fell with the shower, All alone!— Were not shine and shower blent As the gracious Master meant?— Let us temper our content With His own. For, we know, not every morrow Can be sad; So, forgetting all the sorrow We have had, Let us fold away our fears, And put by our foolish tears, And through all the coming years Just be glad. James Whitcomb Riley

MATINS

Flowers rejoice when night is done, Lift their heads to greet the sun; Sweetest looks and odours raise, In a silent hymn of praise. So my heart would turn away From the darkness to the day; Lying open in God's sight Like a flower in the light. Henry van Dyke

EPIGRAM ON HIS FAMILY ARMS

Live while you live, the epicure would say, And seize the pleasures of the present day; Live while you live, the sacred preacher cries, And give to God each moment as it flies. Lord, in my view let both united be; I live in pleasure when I live to Thee. Philip Doddridge

THESE ARE THE GIFTS I ASK

These are the gifts I ask of Thee, Spirit serene: Strength for the daily task, Courage to face the road, Good cheer to help me bear the traveler's load, And, for the hours of rest that come between, An inward joy of all things heard and seen. Henry van Dyke

WHEN LIFE SEEMS JUST A DREARY GRIND

When life seems just a dreary grind, And things seem fated to annoy, Say something nice to someone else And watch the world light up with joy. Author Unknown

SOLITUDE

Laugh and the world laughs with you, Weep and you weep alone; For the sad old earth must borrow its mirth, But has troubles enough of its own. Ella Wheeler Wilcox

HOW HAPPY IS THE LITTLE STONE

How happy is the little stone That rambles in the road alone, And doesn't care about careers, And exigencies never fears; Whose coat of elemental brown A passing Universe put on; And independent as the sun, Associates or glows alone, Fulfilling absolute decree In casual simplicity. Emily Dickinson

SUNSHINE AND MUSIC

A laugh is just like sunshine. It freshens all the day, It tips the peak of life with light, And drives the clouds away. The soul grows glad that hears it And feels its courage strong. A laugh is just like sunshine For cheering folks along. A laugh is just like music. It lingers in the heart, And where its melody is heard The ills of life depart; And happy thoughts come crowding Its joyful notes to greet: A laugh is just like music For making living sweet. Author Unknown

OUT IN THE FIELDS WITH GOD

The little cares that fretted me, I lost them yesterday Among the fields above the sea, Among the winds at play; Among the lowing of the herds, The rustling of the trees, Among the singing of the birds, The humming of the bees. The foolish fears of what may happen I cast them all away Among the clover-scented grass, Among the new-mown hay; Among the husking of the corn Where drowsy poppies nod, Where ill thoughts die and good are born, Out in the fields with God. Elizabeth Barrett Browning

MY CROWN IS IN MY HEART

My crown is in my heart, not on my head; Not deck'd with diamonds and Indian stones, Nor to be seen: my crown is call'd content; A crown it is that seldom kings enjoy. William Shakespeare, King Henry VI 3.3.1.62-65

CLOUDS AND SUNSHINE

The way at times may dark and dreary seem, No ray of sunshine on our path may beam, The dark clouds hover o'er us like a pall, And gloom and sadness seem to compass all, But still with honest purpose toil we on; And if our course be upright, firm and true, Far in the east, the golden light shall dawn And the bright smile of God come bursting through. Author Unknown Additional poems about happiness appear in the topics "Character," "Friendship," "Home and Family," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
