Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Home and Family

MORNING PRAYER

When little things would irk me, and I grow Impatient with my dear one, make me know How in a moment joy can take its flight And happiness be quenched in endless night. Keep this thought with me all the livelong day That I may guard the harsh words I might say When I would fret and grumble, fiery hot, At trifles that tomorrow are forgot— Let me remember, Lord, how it would be If these, my loved ones, were not here with me. Ella Wheeler Wilcox

STAY, STAY AT HOME

Stay, stay at home, my heart, and rest; Home-keeping hearts are happiest, For those that wander they know not where Are full of trouble and full of care; To stay at home is best. Weary and homesick and distressed, They wander east, they wander west, And are baffled and beaten and blown about By the winds of the wilderness of doubt; To stay at home is best. Then stay at home, my heart, and rest; The bird is safest in its nest, Over all that flutter their wings and fly A hawk is hovering in the sky; To stay at home is best. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

WE ARE ALL HERE!

We are all here! Father, mother, sister, brother, All who hold each other dear. Each chair is filled— We're all at home. . . . We're all—all here. Author Unknown

TOGETHER

You and I by this lamp with these Few books shut out the world. Our knees Touch almost in this little space. But I am glad. I see your face. The silences are long, but each Hears the other without speech. And in this simple scene there is The essence of all subtleties, The freedom from all fret and smart, The one sure sabbath of the heart. The world—we cannot conquer it, Nor change the minds of fools one whit. Here, here alone do we create Beauty and peace inviolate; Here night by night and hour by hour We build a high impregnable tower Whence may shine, now and again, A light to light the feet of men When they see the rays thereof: And this is marriage, this is love. Ludwig Lewisohn

BEFORE IT IS TOO LATE

If you have a tender message, Or a loving word to say, Do not wait till you forget it, But whisper it today; The tender word unspoken, The letter never sent, The long forgotten messages, The wealth of love unspent— For these some hearts are breaking, For these some loved ones wait; So show them that you care for them Before it is too late. Frank Herbert Sweet

'MID PLEASURES AND PALACES

'Mid pleasures and palaces though we may roam, Be it ever so humble, there's no place like home; A charm from the sky seems to hallow us there, Which, seek through the world, is ne'er met with elsewhere. An exile from home, splendor dazzles in vain; Oh, give me my lowly thatched cottage again! The birds singing gaily, that came at my call— Give me them—and the peace of mind, dearer than all! I gaze on the moon as I tread the drear wild, And feel that my mother now thinks of her child, As she looks on that moon from our own cottage door Thro' the woodbine, whose fragrance shall cheer me no more. How sweet 'tis to sit 'neath a fond father's smile, And the caress of a mother to soothe and beguile! Let others delight 'mid new pleasure to roam, But give me, oh, give me, the pleasures of home, To thee I'll return, overburdened with care; The heart's dearest solace will smile on me there; No more from that cottage again will I roam; Be it ever so humble, there's no place like home. Home, home, sweet, sweet home! There's no place like home, oh, there's no place like home! John Howard Payne

MY WIFE

Helping and loving and guiding, Urging when that were best, Watching and guarding, whispering still, Win you can—and you must, you will! Author Unknown

WHERE IS MY WANDERING BOY TONIGHT?

Where is my wandering boy tonight? The boy of my tend'rest care: The boy that was once my joy and light, The child of my love and prayer. Once he was pure as the morning dew, As he knelt at his mother's knee; No face was so bright, no heart more true, And none was as sweet as he. Oh, could I see him now, my boy, As fair as in olden time, When prattle and smile made home a joy, And life was a merry chime. Go, for my wandering boy tonight, Go search for him where you will: But bring him to me with all his blight, and tell him I love him still. Oh, where is my boy tonight? Where is my boy tonight? My heart o'erflows, for I love him, he knows, Oh, where is my boy tonight? Author Unknown

NO PLACE TO GO

The happiest nights I ever know Are those when I've No place to go,And the missus says When the day is through: "To-night we haven't A thing to do." Oh, the joy of it, And the peace untold Of sitting 'round In my slippers old, With my [favorite] book In my easy chair, Knowing I needn't Go anywhere. Needn't hurry My evening meal Nor force the smiles That I do not feel, But can grab a book From a near-by shelf, And drop all sham And be myself. Oh, the joy of it, Oh, the comfort rare, Nothing on this earth To it can compare. And I'm sorry for him Who doesn't know The joy of having No place to go. Edgar A. Guest

WE NEED NOT POWER

We need not power or splendor, Wide halls, or lordly dome; The good, the true, the tender— These form the wealth of home. Author Unknown

SO LONG AS THERE ARE HOMES

So long as there are homes to which men turn at close of day; So long as there are homes where children are, where women stay— If love and loyalty and faith be found across those sills— A stricken nation can recover from its gravest ills. So long as there are homes where fires burn and there is bread; So long as there are homes where lamps are lit and prayers are said; Although a people falter through the dark—and nations grope, With God Himself back of these little homes, we have sure hope. Author Unknown

From WHICH SHALL IT BE?

"Which shall it be? Which shall it be?" I looked at John, John looked at me, And when I found that I must speak, My voice seemed strangely low and weak: "Tell me again what Robert said," And then I, listening, bent my head. "This is his letter: 'I will give A house and land while you shall live, If, in return, from out your seven, One child to me forever is given.'" I looked at John's old garments worn; I thought of all that he had borne Of poverty, and work, and care, Which I, though willing, could not share; I thought of seven young mouths to feed, Of seven little children's need, And then of this. "Come, John," said I, "We'll choose among them as they lie Asleep." So, walking hand in hand, Dear John and I surveyed our band. First to the cradle lightly stepped, Where the new nameless baby slept. "Shall it be Baby?" whispered John. I took his hand, and hurried on To Lily's crib. Her father lay His rough hand down in a loving way, When dream or whisper made her stir, And huskily he said: "Not her!" We stooped beside the trundle bed, And one long ray of lamplight shed Athwart the boyish faces there, In sleep so beautiful and fair; I saw on Jamie's rough, red cheek A tear undried. E'er John could speak, "He's but a baby, too," said I, And kissed him as we hurried by. Pale, patient, Robbie's angel face Still in his sleep bore suffering's trace. "No, for a thousand crowns, not him!" We whispered, while our eyes were dim. Poor Dick! bad Dick! our wayward son— Turbulent, restless, idle one— Could he be spared? Nay, He who gave Bade us befriend him to the grave; Only a mother's heart could be Patient enough for such as he; "And so," said John, "I would not dare To send him from her bedside prayer." Then stole we softly up above, And knelt by Mary, child of love. "Perhaps for her 'twould better be," I said to John. Quite silently He lifted up a curl that lay Across her cheek in a wilful way, And shook his head: "Nay, love, not thee," The while my heart beat audibly. Only one more, our eldest lad, Trusty and truthful, good and glad, So like his father. "No, John, no! I cannot, will not, let him go." And so we wrote, in courteous way, We could not give one child away; And afterward toil lighter seemed, Thinking of that of which we dreamed, Happy in truth that not one face Was missed from its accustomed place; Thankful to work for all the seven, Trusting the rest to One in heaven. Ethel Lynn Beers, adapted

PRAYER OF PARENTHOOD

I thank Thee, Oh God, for being, For what, and for why I am; For wedded companionship without end; For a life blended with lives that through me come— Help me, O God, to know these lives as they are: To companion them each day and hour, to live before them that faith that carries on, and on—even toward divinity. That mine may be that joy unutterable— A sweet, uplifting presence to each life through mine, And unto Thee be all praise forever. Amen. Author Unknown

IF THERE IS RIGHTEOUSNESS

If there is righteousness in the heart, There will be beauty in the character. If there is beauty in the character, There will be harmony in the home. If there is harmony in the home, There will be order in the nation. If there is order in the nation, There will be peace in the world. Author Unknown

A HOUSE IS BUILT OF STICKS

A house is built of sticks and stones and tiles and posts and piers, But a home is built of loving deeds that stand a thousand years. Victor Hugo

THE STICK-TOGETHER FAMILIES

The stick-together families are happier by far Than the brothers and the sisters who take separate highways are. The gladdest people living are the wholesome folks who make A circle at the fireside that no power but death can break. And the finest of conventions ever held beneath the sun Are the little family gatherings when the busy day is done. There are rich folk, there are poor folk, who imagine they are wise, And they're very quick to shatter all the little family ties. Each goes searching after pleasure in his own selected way, Each with strangers likes to wander, and with strangers likes to play. But it's bitterness they harvest, and it's empty joy they find, For the children that are wisest are the stick-together kind. There are some who seem to fancy that for gladness they must roam, That for smiles that are the brightest they must wander far from home. That the strange friend is the true friend, and they travel far astray And they waste their lives in striving for a joy that's far away, But the gladdest sort of people, when the busy day is done, Are the brothers and the sisters who together share their fun. It's the stick-together family that wins the joys of earth, That hears the sweetest music and that finds the finest mirth; It's the old home roof that shelters all the charm that life can give; There you find the gladdest play-ground, there the happiest spot to live. And, O weary, wandering brother, if contentment you would win, Come you back unto the fireside and be comrade with your kin. Edgar A. Guest

THERE ARE THREE WORDS

There are three words that sweetly blend, That on the heart are graven; A precious, soothing balm they lend: They're mother, home and heaven. Author Unknown

Additional poems about home and family appear in the topics "Fatherhood," "Love," "Motherhood," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
