Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Hope

HOPE

Hope, like a gleaming taper's light, Adorns and cheers our way; And still, as darker grows the night, Emits a brighter ray. Oliver Goldsmith

HE HAD HIS DREAM

He had his dream, and all through life, Worked up to it through toil and strife. Afloat fore'er before his eyes, It colored for him all his skies: The storm-cloud dark Above his bark, The calm and listless vault of blue Took on its hopeful hue, It tinctured every passing beam— He had his dream. He labored hard and failed at last, His sails too weak to bear the blast, The raging tempests tore away And sent his beating bark astray. But what cared he For wind or sea! He said, "The tempest will be short, My bark will come to port." He saw through every cloud a gleam— He had his dream. Paul Laurence Dunbar

A NEW EARTH

P.144-145 God grant us wisdom in these coming days, And eyes unsealed, that we clear visions see Of that new world that He would have us build, To life's ennoblement and His high ministry. God give us sense—God-sense of life's new needs, And souls aflame with new-born chivalries— To cope with those black growths that foul the ways,— To cleanse our poisoned founts with God-born energies. To pledge our souls to nobler, loftier life, To win the world to His fair sanctities, To bind the nations in a pact of peace, And free the soul of life for finer loyalties. Not since Christ died upon His lonely cross Has time such prospect held of life's new birth; Not since the world of chaos first was born Has man so clearly visaged hope of a new earth. Not of our own might can we hope to rise Above the ruts and soilures of the past, But, with His help who did the first earth build, With hearts courageous we may fairer build this last. John Oxenham

LIFE'S LESSONS

I learn, as the years roll onward And leave the past behind, That much I had counted sorrow But proves that God is kind; That many a flower I had longed for Had hidden a thorn of pain, And many a rugged bypath Led to fields of ripened grain. The clouds that cover the sunshine They can not banish the sun; And the earth shines out the brighter When the weary rain is done. We must stand in the deepest shadow To see the clearest light; And often through wrong's own darkness Comes the very strength of light. The sweetest rest is at even, After a wearisome day, When the heavy burden of labor Has borne from our hearts away; And those who have never known sorrow Can not know the infinite peace That falls on the troubled spirit When it sees at last release. We must live through the dreary winter If we would value the spring; And the woods must be cold and silent Before the robins sing. The flowers must be buried in darkness Before they can bud and bloom, And the sweetest, warmest sunshine Comes after the storm and gloom. Author Unknown

MY GRANDAD

My grandad, viewing earth's worn cogs, Said things are going to the dogs. His grandad in his house of logs, Said things are going to the dogs. His grandad in the Flemish bogs, Said things are going to the dogs. His grandad in his old skin togs, Said things are going to the dogs. There's one thing I have to state: The dogs have had a good long wait! Author Unknown

THE LARGER TRUST

From In Memoriam

O yet we trust that somehow good Will be the final goal of ill,

* * *

That nothing walks with aimless feet, That not one life shall be destroyed Or cast as rubbish to the void, When God hath made the pile complete; That not a worm is cloven in vain; That not a moth with vain desire Is shriveled in a fruitless fire, But subserves another's gain. Behold, we know not anything; I can but trust that good will fall At last—far off—at last, to all, And every winter change to spring. Alfred, Lord Tennyson

UNDER THE STORM AND THE CLOUD

Under the storm and the cloud today, And today the hard peril and pain, Tomorrow the stone shall be rolled away, For the sunshine shall follow the rain. Merciful Father, I will not complain, I know that the sunshine shall follow the rain. Author Unknown

THE LOST CHORD

Seated one day at the Organ, I was weary and ill at ease, And my fingers wandered idly Over the noisy keys. I know not what I was playing, Or what I was dreaming then; But I struck one chord of music, Like the sound of a great Amen. It flooded the crimson twilight, Like the close of an angel's Psalm, And it lay on my fevered spirit With a touch of infinite calm. It quieted pain and sorrow, Like love overcoming strife; It seemed the harmonious echo From our discordant life. It linked all perplexed meanings Into one perfect peace, And trembled away into silence As if it were loth to cease. I have sought but I seek it vainly, That one lost chord divine, Which came from the soul of the Organ And entered into mine. It may be that Death's bright angel Will speak in that chord again— It may be that only in Heaven I shall hear that great Amen. Adelaide Anne Procter

FAREWELL, LIFE

Written during Sickness

Farewell, life! my senses swim, And the world is growing dim; Thronging shadows cloud the light, Like the advent of the night,— Colder, colder, colder still, Upward steals a vapor chill; Strong the earthly odor grows,— I smell the mould above the rose! Welcome, life! the spirit strives! Strength returns and hope revives; Cloudy fears and shapes forlorn Fly like shadows at the morn,— O'er the earth there comes a bloom; Sunny light for sullen gloom, Warm perfume for vapor cold,— I smell the rose above the mould! Thomas Hood

TO THE FRINGED GENTIAN

Thou blossom, bright with autumn dew, And colored with the heaven's own blue, That openest when the quiet light Succeeds the keen and frosty night; Thou comest not when violets lean O'er wandering brooks and springs unseen, Or columbines, in purple dressed, Nod o'er the ground-bird's hidden nest. Thou waitest late, and com'st alone, When woods are bare and birds are flown, And frosts and shortening days are portend The aged Year is near his end. Then doth thy sweet and quiet eye Look through its fringes to the sky, Blue—blue—as if that sky let fall A flower from its cerulean wall. I would that thus, when I shall see The hour of death draw near to me, Hope, blossoming within my heart, May look to heaven as I depart. William Cullen Bryant

THE GOAL

I care not that the storm sways all the trees, And floods the plain and blinds my trusting sight; I only care that o'er the land and seas Comes somewhere Love's perpetual peace and light. I care not that sharp thorns grow thick below, And wound my hands and scar my anxious feet; I only care to know God's roses grow, And I may somewhere find their odor sweet. I care not if they be not white, but red, Red as the blood-drops from a wounded heart; I only care to ease my aching head With faith that somewhere God hath done His part. I care not if, in years of such despair, I reach in vain and seize no purpose vast; I only care that I sometime, somewhere, May find a meaning, shining at the last. Frank Wakely Gunsaulus Additional poems about hope appear in the topics "Courage," "Faith," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
