Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Humility and Pride

THE SHEPHERD BOY'S SONG

He that is down need fear no fall, He that is low, no pride; He that is humble, ever shall Have God to be his guide. I am content with what I have, Little be it, or much: And, Lord, contentment still I crave, Because thou savest such. Fulness to such, a burden is, That go on pilgrimage; Here little, and hereafter bliss, Is best from age to age. John Bunyan

From RECESSIONAL

God of our fathers, known of old, Lord of our far-flung battle-line, Beneath whose awful Hand we hold Dominion over palm and pine— Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet, Lest we forget—lest we forget! The tumult and the shouting dies; The Captains and the Kings depart: Still stands Thine ancient sacrifice, An humble and a contrite heart. Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet, Lest we forget—lest we forget! Far called, our navies melt away; On dune and head-land sinks the fire: Lo, all our pomp of yesterday Is one with Nineveh and Tyre! Judge of the Nations, spare us yet, Lest we forget—lest we forget! Rudyard Kipling

OZYMANDIAS

I met a traveller from an antique land Who said: Two vast and trunkless legs of stone Stand in the desert. Near them, on the sand, Half sunk, a shattered visage lies, whose frown, And wrinkled lip, and sneer of cold command, Tell that its sculptor well those passions read Which yet survive, stamped on these lifeless things, The hand that mocked them, and the heart that fed: And on the pedestal these words appear: "My name is Ozymandias, king of kings: Look on my works, ye Mighty and despair!" Nothing beside remains. Round the decay Of that colossal wreck, boundless and bare The lone and level sands stretch far away. Percy Bysshe Shelley

"FATHER, WHERE SHALL I WORK TODAY?"

"Father, where shall I work today?" And my love flowed warm and free. Then he pointed out a tiny spot And said, "Tend that for me." I answered quickly, "Oh no, not that! Why, no one would ever see, No matter how well my work was done. Not that little place for me." And the word he spoke, it was not stern; He answered me tenderly: "Ah, little one, search that heart of thine; Art thou working for them or for me? Nazareth was a little place, And so was Galilee." Meade MacGuire

PRAYER

Father, I scarcely dare to pray, So clear I see, now it is done,That I have wasted half my day, And left my work but just begun. So clear I see that things I thought Were right or harmless were a sin; So clear I see that I have sought, Unconscious, selfish aims to win. So clear I see that I have hurt The souls I might have helped to save; That I have slothful been, inert, Deaf to the calls Thy leaders gave. In outskirts of Thy kingdom vast, Father, the humblest spot give me; Set me the lowliest task Thou hast; Let me, repentant, work for Thee! Helen Hunt Jackson

THE HAPPIEST HEART

Who drives the horse of the sun Shall lord it but a day. Better the lowly deed were done And kept the humble way. The rust will find the sword of fame; The dust will hide the crowd, Aye, none shall nail so high his name Time will not tear it down. The happiest heart that ever beat Was in some quiet breast That found the common daylight sweet And left to heaven the rest. John Vance Cheney

THE LOWEST PLACE

Give me the lowest place, not that I dare Ask for that lowest place, but Thou hast died That I might live and share Thy glory by Thy side. Give me the lowest place; or if for me That lowest place too high, make one more low Where I may sit and see My God and love Thee so. Christina Rossetti

THE SIMPLE THINGS

I would not be too wise—so very wise That I must sneer at simple songs and creeds, And let the glare of wisdom blind my eyes To humble people and their humble needs. I would not care to climb so high that I Could never hear the children at their play, Could only see the people passing by, And never hear the cheering words they say. I would not know too much—too much to smile At trivial errors of the heart and hand, Nor be too proud to play the friend the while. Nor cease to help and know and understand. I would not care to sit upon a throne, Or build my house upon a mountain-top, Where I must dwell in glory all alone And never friend come in or poor man stop. God grant that I may live upon this earth And face the tasks which every morning brings And never lose the glory and the worth Of humble service and the simple things. Edgar A. Guest

TRUE GREATNESS

That man is great, and he alone, Who serves a greatness not his own, For neither praise nor pelf: Content to know and be unknown: Whole in himself. Owen Meredith, Lord Bulwer-Lytton

TWO WENT UP TO THE TEMPLE TO PRAY

Two went to pray? O, rather say, One went to brag, the other to pray; One stands up close and treads on high, Where the other dares not lend his eye; One nearer to God's altar trod, The other to the altar's God. Richard Crashaw

Additional poems about humility and pride appear in the topics "Character," "Courage," "Integrity," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
