Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Individual Worth

WHERE DID YOU COME FROM?

Where did you come from, Baby dear? Out of the everywhere into here. Where did you get your eyes so blue? Out of the sky as I came through. What makes the light in them sparkle and spin? Some of the starry spikes left in. Where did you get that little tear? I found it waiting when I got here. What makes your forehead so smooth and high? A soft hand stroked it as I went by. What makes your cheek like a warm white rose? I saw something better than anyone knows. Whence that three-corner'd smile of bliss? Three angels gave me at once a kiss. Where did you get this pearly ear? God spoke, and it came out to hear. . . . How did they all come just to be you? God thought of me, and so I grew. But how did you come to us, you dear? God thought of you, and so I am here. George MacDonald

TOUCHING SHOULDERS

There's a comforting thought at the close of the day, When I'm weary and lonely and sad, That sort of grips hold of my crusty old heart And bids it be merry and glad. It gets in my soul and it drives out the blues, And finally thrills through and through. It is just a sweet memory that chants the refrain: "I'm glad I touch shoulders with you!" Did you know you were brave, did you know you were strong? Did you know there was one leaning hard? Did you know that I waited and listened and prayed, And was cheered by your simplest word? Did you know that I longed for that smile on your face, For the sound of your voice ringing true? Did you know I grew stronger and better because I had merely touched shoulders with you? I am glad that I live, that I battle and strive For the place that I know I must fill; I am thankful for sorrows, I'll meet with a grin What fortune may send, good or ill. I may not have wealth, I may not be great, But I know I shall always be true, For I have in my life that courage you gave When once I rubbed shoulders with you. Author Unknown

BEAUTIFUL THINGS

Beautiful faces are those that wear— It matters little if dark or fair— Whole-souled honesty printed there. Beautiful eyes are those that show, Like crystal panes where hearthfires glow, Beautiful thoughts that burn below. Beautiful lips are those whose words Leap from the heart like songs of birds, Yet whose utterance prudence girds. Beautiful hands are those that do Work that is honest and brave and true, Moment by moment the long day through. Beautiful feet are those that go On kindly ministries to and fro, Down lowliest ways, if God wills it so. Beautiful shoulders are those that bear Ceaseless burdens of homely care With patient grace and daily prayer. Beautiful lives are those that bless Silent rivers of happiness, Whose hidden fountains but few may guess. Beautiful twilight at set of sun, Beautiful goal with race well won, Beautiful rest with work well done. Beautiful graves where grasses creep, Where brown leaves fall, where drifts lie deep Over worn-out hands—oh! beautiful sleep! Ellen P. Allerton

REWARD

Who does God's work will get God's pay, However long may seem the day, However weary be the way. No mortal hand God's hand can stay; He may not pay as others pay, In gold, or lands, or raiment gay, In goods that perish and decay; But God's high wisdom knows a way, And this is sure, let come what may— Who does God's work will get God's pay. Author Unknown

TRUE WORTH

True worth is being, not seeming; In doing each day that goes by Some little good—not in the dreaming Of great things to do by-and-by. For whatever men say in blindness, And spite of the fancies of youth, There's nothing so kingly as kindness, And nothing so royal as truth. Alice Cary

WEIGHING THE BABY

How many pounds does the baby weigh— Baby who came but a month ago? How many pounds from the crowning curl To the rosy point of the restless toe? Grandfather ties the 'kerchief knot, Tenderly guides the swinging weight, And carefully over his glasses peers To read the record: "Only eight." Softly the echo goes around: The father laughs at the tiny girl; The fair young mother sings the words, While grandmother smooths the golden curl. And stooping above the precious thing, Nestles a kiss, within a prayer. Murmuring softly, "Little one, Grandfather didn't weigh you fair." Nobody weighed the baby's smile, Or the love that came with the helpless one; Nobody weighed the threads of care, From which a woman's life is spun. Nobody weighed the baby's soul For here on earth, no weights there be That would avail. God only knows Its value in eternity. Ethel Lynn Beers

O MY FATHER

O my Father, thou that dwellest In the high and glorious place, When shall I regain thy presence And again behold thy face? In thy holy habitation, Did my spirit once reside? In my first primeval childhood, Was I nurtured near thy side? For a wise and glorious purpose Thou hast placed me here on earth And withheld the recollection Of my former friends and birth; Yet ofttimes a secret something Whispered, "You're a stranger here," And I felt that I had wandered From a more exalted sphere. I had learned to call thee Father, Thru thy Spirit from on high, But, until the key of knowledge Was restored, I knew not why. In the heav'ns are parents single? No, the thought makes reason stare! Truth is reason; truth eternal Tells me I've a mother there. When I leave this frail existence, When I lay this mortal by, Father, Mother, may I meet you In your royal courts on high? Then, at length, when I've completed All you sent me forth to do, With your mutual approbation Let me come and dwell with you. Eliza R. Snow

Additional poems about individual worth appear in the topics "Character," "Divine Nature," "Integrity," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
