Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Integrity

THE MAN IN THE GLASS

When you get what you want in your struggle for self And the world thinks you king for a day, Just go to the mirror and look at yourself, And see what that man has to say. For it isn't your father, your mother, or wife Who judgment upon you must pass; The fellow whose verdict counts most in your life Is the one staring back from the glass. You may be like Jack Horner and chisel a plum And think you're a wonderful guy; But the man in the glass says youre only a bum If you can't look him straight in the eye. He's the fellow to please, never mind all the rest; For he's with you clear to the end. And you've passed your most dangerous, difficult test If the man in the glass is your friend. You may fool the whole world down the pathway of years And get pats on the back as you pass; But your final reward will be heartaches and tears If you've cheated the man in the glass. Author Unknown

GOOD NAME

Good name in man or woman, dear my lord, Is the immediate jewel of their souls. Who steals my purse steals trash—'tis something, nothing, 'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to thousands; But he that filches from me my good name Robs me of that which not enriches him And makes me poor indeed. William Shakespeare, Othello 3.3.155-61

A REAL MAN

Men are of two kinds, and he Was of the kind I'd like to be. Some preach their virtues, and a few Express their lives by what they do. That sort was he. No flowery phrase Or glibly spoken words of praise Won friends for him. He wasn't cheap Or shallow, but his course ran deep, And it was pure. You know the kind. Not many in a life you find Whose deeds outrun their words so far That more than what they seem they are. There are two kinds of lies as well: The kind you live, the ones you tell. Back through his years from age to youth He never acted one untruth. Out in the open light he fought And didn't care what others thought Nor what they said about his fight If he believed that he was right. The only deeds he ever hid Were acts of kindness that he did. What speech he had was plain and blunt. His was an unattractive front. Yet children loved him; babe and boy Played with the strength he could employ, Without one fear, and they are fleet To sense injustice and deceit. No back door gossip linked his name With any shady tale of shame. He did not have to compromise With evil-doers, shrewd and wise, And let them ply their vicious trade Because of some past escapade. Men are of two kinds, and he Was of the kind I'd like to be. No door at which he ever knocked Against his manly form was locked. If ever man on earth was free And independent, it was he. No broken pledge lost him respect, He met all men with head erect, And when he passed I think there went A soul to yonder firmament So white, so splendid and so fine It came almost to God's design. Edgar A. Guest

GOD GRANT ME THIS

God grant me this: the right to come at night Back to my loved ones, head erect and true; Beaten and bruised and from a losing fight, Let me be proud in what I've tried to do. Let me come home defeated if I must, But clean of hands, and honor unimpaired, Still holding firmly to my children's trust, Still worthy of the faith which they have shared. God grant me this: what e'er the fates decree, Or do I win or lose life's little game, I still would keep my children proud of me, Nor once regret that they must bear my name. Edgar A. Guest

MY NAME IS LEGION

Within my earthly temple there's a crowd; There's one of us that's humble, one that's proud, There's one that's broken-hearted for his sins, There's one that unrepentant sits and grins; There's one that loves his neighbor as himself, And one that cares for naught but fame and pelf. From much corroding care I should be free If I could once determine which is me! Edward Sanford Martin

IF I WERE A VOICE

If I were a voice, a persuasive voice, That could travel the wide world through, I would fly on the beams of the morning light, And speak to men with a gentle might, And tell them to be true. I'd fly o'er land and sea, Wherever a human heart might be, Telling a tale, or singing a song, In praise of the Right and in blame of the Wrong. Charles Mackay

TO THINE OWN SELF BE TRUE

To thine own self be true, And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou canst not then be false to any man. William Shakespeare, Hamlet 1.3.78-80

YOU OUGHT TO BE FINE

You ought to be fine for the sake of the folks Who think you are fine. If others have faith in you doubly you're bound To stick to the line. It's not only on you that dishonor descends: You can't hurt yourself without hurting your friends. You ought to be true for the sake of the folks Who believe you are true. You never should stoop to a deed that your friends Think you wouldn't do. If you're false to yourself, be the blemish but small, You have injured your friends; you've been false to them all. For friendship, my boy, is a bond between men That is founded on truth; It believes in the best of the ones that it loves, Whether old man or youth;And the stern rule it lays down for me and for you Is to be what our friends think we are, through and through. Author Unknown

A HEART UNTAINTED

What stronger breastplate than a heart untainted! Thrice is he arm'd that hath his quarrel just, And he but naked, though locked up in steel, Whose conscience with injustice is corrupted. William Shakespeare, King Henry VI 2.3.2.232-35 Additional poems about integrity appear in the topics "Character," "Courage," "Example," "Self-Mastery," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
