Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Jesus Christ: His Birth and Life

A STATURE MINGLING STRENGTH WITH GRACE

A stature mingling strength with grace Of meek though Godlike mien, The glory of whose countenance Outshone the noonday sheen. Whiter his hair than ocean spray, Or frost of alpine hill. He spake:—attention grew more grave, The stillness e'en more still. "Father!"—the voice like music fell, Clear as the murmuring flow Of mountain streamlet trickling down From heights of virgin snow. "Father," it said, "since one must die, Thy children to redeem, Whilst earth, as yet unformed and void, With pulsing life shall teem; "And mighty Michael foremost fall, That mortal man may be, And chosen Savior Thou must send, Lo, here am I—send me! I ask, I seek no recompense, Save that which then were mine; Mine be the willing sacrifice, The endless glory Thine." Orson F. Whitney

WHAT CAN I GIVE HIM?

What can I give Him, Poor as I am? If I were a shepherd I would bring a lamb. If I were a Wise Man I would do my part, Yet what can I give Him? Give my heart. Christina Rossetti

THE PEACE-GIVER

Thou whose birth on earth Angels sang to men, While Thy stars made mirth, Saviour, at Thy birth, This day born again; As this night was bright With Thy cradle-ray, Very Light of Light, Turn the wild world's night To Thy perfect day. Thou the Word and Lord In all time and space Heard, beheld, adored, With all ages poured Forth before Thy face, Lord, what worth in earth Drew Thee down to die? What therein was worth, Lord, Thy death and birth? What beneath Thy sky? Thou whose face gives grace As the sun's doth heat, Let Thy sunbright face Lighten time and space Here beneath Thy feet. Bid our peace increase, Thou that madest morn; Bid oppression cease; Bid the night be peace; Bid the day be born. Algernon Charles Swinburne

LOVE DIVINE, ALL LOVE EXCELLING

Love divine, all love excelling, Joy of heav'n to earth come down! Fix in us Thy humble dwelling; All Thy faithful mercies crown. Jesus, Thou art all compassion, Pure unbounded love Thou art; Visit us with Thy salvation; Enter every trusting heart. John Wesley

A HYMN ON THE NATIVITY OF MY SAVIOUR

I sing the birth was born tonight, The author both of life and light; The angels so did sound it. And like the ravished shepherds said, Who saw the light and were afraid, Yet searched, and true they found it. Ben Jonson

THO' CHRIST A THOUSAND TIMES BE BORN

Tho' Christ a thousand times in Bethlehem be born, If He's not born in thee, thy soul is still forlorn. Johannes Scheffler

THE LAMB

From Songs of Innocence

Little Lamb, who made thee? Dost thou know who made thee? Gave thee life, and bid thee feed By the stream and o'er the mead; Gave thee clothing of delight, Softest clothing, woolly, bright; Gave thee such a tender voice, Making all the vales rejoice? Little Lamb, I'll tell thee, Little Lamb, I'll tell thee, He is called by thy name, For he calls himself a Lamb; He is meek, and he is mild; He became a little child. I a child, and thou a lamb, We are called by his name. Little Lamb, God bless thee! Little Lamb, God bless thee! William Blake

A CHILD'S OFFERING

The wise may bring their learning, The rich may bring their wealth, And some may bring their greatness, And some bring strength and health; We, too, would bring our treasures To offer to the King; We have no wealth or learning: What shall we children bring? We'll bring Him hearts that love Him; We'll bring Him thankful praise, And young souls meekly striving To walk in holy ways: And these shall be the treasures We offer to the King, And these are gifts that even The poorest child may bring. We'll bring the little duties We have to do each day; We'll try our best to please Him, At home, at school, at play: And better are these treasures To offer to our King, Than richest gifts without them; Yet these a child may bring. Author Unknown

THE THREE KINGS

Three Kings came riding from far away, Melchior and Gaspar and Baltasar; Three Wise Men out of the East were they, And they travelled by night and they slept by day, For their guide was a beautiful, wonderful star. The star was so beautiful, large, and clear, That all the other stars of the sky Became a white mist in the atmosphere, And by this they knew that the coming was near Of the Prince foretold in the prophecy. Three caskets they bore on their saddlebows, Three caskets of gold with golden keys; Their robes were of crimson silk with rows Of bells and pomegranates and furbelows, Their turbans like blossoming almond-trees. And so the Three Kings rode into the West, Through the dusk of night, over hill and dell, And sometimes they nodded with beard on breast, And sometimes talked, as they paused to rest, With the people they met at some wayside well. "Of the child that is born," said Baltasar, "Good people, I pray you, tell us the news; For we in the East have seen his star, And have ridden fast, and have ridden far, To find and worship the King of the Jews." And the people answered, "You ask in vain; We know of no king but Herod the Great!" They thought the Wise Men were men insane, As they spurred their horses across the plain, Like riders in haste, and who cannot wait. And when they came to Jerusalem, Herod, the Great, who had heard this thing, Sent for the Wise Men and questioned them; And said, "Go down unto Bethlehem, And bring me tidings of this new king." So they rode away; and the star stood still, The only one in the gray of morn; Yes, it stopped,—it stood still of its own free will, Right over Bethlehem on the hill, The city of David, where Christ was born. And the Three Kings rode through the gate and the guard, Through the silent street, till their horses turned And neighed as they entered the great inn yard; But the windows were closed, and the doors were barred, And only a light in the stable burned. And cradled there in the scented hay, In the air made sweet by the breath of kine, The little child in the manger lay, The child, that would be king one day Of a kingdom not human but divine. His mother Mary of Nazareth Sat watching beside his place of rest, Watching the even flow of his breath, For the joy of life and the terror of death Were mingled together in her breast. They laid their offerings at his feet: The gold was their tribute to a King, The frankincense, with its odor sweet, Was for the Priest, the Paraclete, The myrrh for the body's burying. And the mother wondered and bowed her head, And sat as still as a statue of stone; Her heart was troubled yet comforted, Remembering what the Angel had said Of an endless reign and of David's throne. Then the Kings rode out of the city gate, With a clatter of hoofs in proud array; But they went not back to Herod the Great, For they knew his malice and feared his hate, And returned to their homes by another way. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

HOW SIMPLE

How simple we must grow! How simple they who came! The shepherds looked at God Long before any man. He sees God nevermore Not there, nor here on earth Who does not long within To be a shepherd first. Angelus Silesius

A CHRISTMAS CAROL

Before the paling of the stars, Before the winter morn, Before the earliest cock-crow Jesus Christ was born: Born in a stable, Cradled in a manger, In the world His hands had made Born a stranger. . . . Jesus on His mother's breast In the stable cold, Spotless Lamb of God was He, Shepherd of the fold: Let us kneel with Mary maid, With Joseph bent and hoary, With saint and angel, ox and ass, To hail the King of Glory. Christina Rossetti

GIFTS OF THE FIRST CHRISTMAS

Adorned with carven gems and gold The sages bore from eastern lands Gifts for the tiny new-come King. Came He with empty hands?— Stronger than frankincense and myrrh, There followed Him across the dark The dawn-clean breath of better life To fan the immortal spark. And the stars greyed in the slow dawn; The shimmer of the gold grew dim Beside the deep far-shining light That poured for Him. Carlton Culmsee

I THINK WHEN I READ THAT SWEET STORY

I think when I read that sweet story of old, When Jesus was here among men, How he called little children like lambs to his fold; I should like to have been with him then. I wish that his hands had been placed on my head, That his arms had been thrown around me, That I might have seen his kind look when he said, "Let the little ones come unto me." Jemima Luke

MY MASTER

My Master was so very poor, A manger was His cradling place; So very rich my Master was Kings came from far To gain His grace. My Master was so very poor And with the poor He broke the bread; So very rich my Master was That multitudes By Him were fed. My Master was so very poor They nailed Him naked to a cross; So very rich my Master was He gave His all And knew no loss. Harry Lee

HIS MOTHER KEPT ALL THESE SAYINGS IN HER HEART

As o'er the cradle of her Son The blessed Mary hung, And chanted to the Anointed One The psalms that David sung, What joy her bosom must have known, As, with a sweet surprise, She marked the boundless love that shone Within his infant eyes. But deeper was her joy to hear, Even in his ripening youth, And treasure up, from year to year, His words of grace and truth. Oh, may we keep his words like her In all their life and power, And to the law of love refer The acts of every hour. William Cullen Bryant

Additional poems about the birth and life of Jesus Christ appear in the topics "Christmas," "Easter," "Jesus Christ: Our Savior," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
