Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Jesus Christ: Our Savior

IN THE GARDEN

My sins, my sins, my Savior! Their guilt I never knew Till with thee in the desert I near thy passion drew; Till with thee in the garden I heard thy pleading prayer, And saw the sweat-drops bloody That told thy sorrow there. J. B. S. Monsell

HIS HANDS

The hands of Christ Seem very frail, For they were broken By a nail. But only they reach Heaven at last Whom these frail, broken Hands hold fast. John Richard Moreland

TO THIS END

And hast Thou help for such as me, Sin-weary, stained, forlorn? "Yea then,—if not for such as thee To what end was I born?" But I have strayed so far away, So oft forgotten Thee. "No smallest thing that thou hast done But was all known to Me." And I have followed other gods, And brought Thy name to scorn. "It was to win thee back from them I wore the crown of thorn." And, spite of all, Thou canst forgive, And still attend my cry? "Dear heart, for this end I did live, To this end did I die." And if I fall away again, And bring Thy Love to shame? "I'll find thee out where'er thou art, And still thy love will claim." All this for me, whose constant lack Doth cause Thee constant pain? "For this I lived, for this I died, For this I live again." John Oxenham

GOOD FRIDAY

You drove the nails in his white, white feet; I pierced each tender hand: And we laughed as we lifted the cross on high— Too wise to understand. You gave him the gall and vinegar; I thrust the lance in his side; Yet they say it was years and years ago That the Saviour was crucified. Edgar Daniel Kramer

HELP US, O GOD, TO REALIZE

Help us, O God, to realize The great atoning sacrifice, The gift of thy Beloved Son, The Prince of Life, the Holy One. Author Unknown

FAIREST LORD JESUS

Fairest Lord Jesus Ruler of all nature O thou of God and man the Son! Thee will I cherish, Thee will I honor, Thou my soul's glory, joy and crown. Fair are the meadows, Fairer still the woodlands, Robed in the blooming garb of spring; Jesus is fairer, Jesus is purer, Who makes the woeful heart to sing. Fair is the sunshine, Fairer still the moonlight, And all the twinkling, starry host; Jesus shines fairer, Jesus shines purer, Than all the angels heaven can boast. Author Unknown, Twelfth Century

KILLED IN ACTION

"Killed in action . . . in the line of duty." Blind went her eyes with pain. . . . A moan of mortal agony, Then all became still again. "Oh God! . . . my God! . . . where were you When my son was being slain?" And the scalding tears of bitterness Drenched her cheeks like the summer rain. But a soft voice seemed to whisper In the twilight's afterglow, "I had a son . . . at Calvary . . . Two thousand years ago." Author Unknown

LOVE SO AMAZING, SO DIVINE

When I survey the wondrous cross On which the Prince of glory died, My richest gain I count but loss, And pour contempt on all my pride. Forbid it, Lord, that I should boast, Save in the death of Christ, my God! All the vain things that charm me most, I sacrifice them to his blood. . . . Were the whole realm of nature mine, That were a present far too small; Love, so amazing, so divine, Demands my soul, my life, my all! Isaac Watts

Additional poems about Jesus Christ, our Savior, appear in the topics "Death and Immortality," "Easter," "Jesus Christ: Our Teacher and Friend," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
