Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Jesus Christ: Our Teacher and Friend

IN HIS STEPS

The road is rough, I said, Dear Lord, there are stones that hurt me so. And he said, Dear child, I understand, I walked it long ago. But there is a cool green path, I said, Let me walk there for a time. No child, He gently answered me, The green road does not climb. My burden, I said, is far too great; How can I bear it so? My child, said he, I remember weight. I carried my cross, you know. But, I said, I wish there were friends with me Who would make my way their own. Ah, yes, he said, Gethsemane Was hard to face alone. And so I climbed the stony path, Content at last to know That where my Master had not gone I would not need to go. And strangely then I found new friends; The burden grew less sore As I remembered—long ago He went that way before. Leona B. Gates

I'VE FOUND A FRIEND

I've found a friend, oh, such a friend, So kind, and true, and tender, So wise a counselor and guide, So mighty a defender. I've found a friend, oh, such a friend. He bled, he died to save me, And not alone the gift of life, But his own self he gave me. I've found a friend, oh, such a friend. All power to him is given To guide me on my onward course And bring me safe to heaven. J. G. Small

COME, THOU FOUNT OF EVERY BLESSING

Come, thou Fount of every blessing; Tune my heart to sing thy grace; Streams of mercy, never ceasing, Call for songs of loudest praise. Teach me some melodious sonnet, Sung by flaming tongues above; Praise the mount; I'm fixed upon it: Mount of thy redeeming love. O to grace how great a debtor Daily I'm constrained to be! Let thy goodness, as a fetter, Bind my wandering heart to thee. Prone to wander, Lord, I feel it, Prone to leave the God I love; Here's my heart, O take and seal it; Seal it for thy courts above. Robert Robinson

THE KING OF LOVE

The King of love my Shepherd is, Whose goodness faileth never; I nothing lack if I am His, And He is mine forever. Where streams of living water flow My ransomed soul He leadeth, And where the verdant pastures grow With food celestial feedeth. Perverse and foolish oft I strayed, But yet in love He sought me, And on His shoulder gently laid, And home rejoicing brought me. In death's dark vale I fear no ill, With Thee, dear Lord, beside me; Thy rod and staff my comfort still, Thy life before to guide me. Thou spread'st a table in my sight; Thy suff'ring grace bestoweth; And O what transport of delight From Thy pure chalice floweth. And so, through all the length of day, Thy goodness faileth never; Good Shepherd, may I sing Thy praise Within Thy house forever. Henry W. Baker

From THE VISION OF SIR LAUNFAL

"Lo, it is I, be not afraid! In many climes, without avail, Thou hast spent thy life for the Holy Grail; Behold, it is here—this cup which thou Didst fill at the streamlet for me but now; This crust is my body broken for thee, The water his blood that died on the tree; The holy supper is kept, indeed, In whatso we share with another's need; Not what we give, but what we share, For the gift without the giver is bare; Who gives himself with his alms feeds three— Himself, his hungering neighbor, and Me." James Russell Lowell

HIS GRACE IS GREAT ENOUGH

His grace is great enough to meet the great things— The crashing waves that overwhelm the soul, The roaring winds that leave us stunned and breathless, The sudden storms beyond our life's control. His grace is great enough to meet the small things— The little pin-prick troubles that annoy, The insect worries, buzzing and persistent, The squeaking wheels that grate upon our joy. Annie Johnson Flint

THE TOUCH OF THE MASTER'S HAND

'Twas battered and scarred, and the auctioneer Thought it scarcely worth his while To waste much time on the old violin, But held it up with a smile: "What am I bidden, good folks," he cried, "Who'll start the bidding for me?" "A dollar, a dollar"; then, "Two!" "Only two? Two dollars, and who'll make it three? Three dollars, once; three dollars, twice; Going for three—" But no, From the room, far back, a gray-haired man Came forward and picked up the bow; Then, wiping the dust from the old violin, And tightening the loose strings, He played a melody pure and sweet As a caroling angel sings. The music ceased, and the auctioneer, With a voice that was quiet and low, Said, "What am I bid for the old violin?" And he held it up with the bow. "A thousand dollars, and who'll make it two? Two thousand! And who'll make it three? Three thousand, once, three thousand, twice, And going, and gone!" said he. The people cheered, but some of them cried, "We do not quite understand What changed its worth." Swift came the reply: "The touch of a master's hand." And many a man with life out of tune, And battered and scarred with sin, Is auctioned cheap to the thoughtless crowd, Much like the old violin. A "mess of pottage," a glass of wine, A game—and he travels on. He's "going" once, and "going" twice, He's "going" and almost "gone." But the Master comes, and the foolish crowd Never can quite understand The worth of a soul and the change that's wrought By the touch of the Master's hand. Myra Brooks Welch

Additional poems about Jesus Christ as our teacher and friend appear in the topics "Example," "Good Works," "Jesus Christ: Our Savior," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
