Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Jesus Christ: The Second Coming

ADAM-ONDI-AHMAN

This earth was once a garden place, With all her glories common, And men did live a holy race, And worship Jesus face to face, In Adam-ondi-Ahman. We read that Enoch walked with God, Above the pow'r of mammon, While Zion spread herself abroad, And Saints and angels sang aloud, In Adam-ondi-Ahman. Her land was good and greatly blest, Beyond all Israel's Canaan; Her fame was known from east to west, Her peace was great, and pure the rest Of Adam-ondi-Ahman. Hosanna to such days to come, The Savior's second coming, When all the earth in glorious bloom Affords the Saints a holy home, Like Adam-ondi-Ahman. William W. Phelps

THE PRINCE OF PEACE

The Prince of Peace His banner spreads, His wayward folk to lead From war's embattled hates and dreads, Its bulwarked ire and greed. O marshal us, the sons of sires Who braved the cannon's roar,To venture all that peace requires As they dared death for war. Lead on, O Christ! That haunting song No centuries can dim, Which long ago the heavenly throng Sang over Bethlehem. Cast down our rancor, fear, and pride, Exalt goodwill again! Our worship doth Thy name deride, Bring we not peace to men. Thy pardon, Lord, for war's dark shame, Its death-strewn, bloody fields! Yet thanks to Thee for souls aflame Who dared with swords and shields; O Christ, who died to give men life, Bring that victorious hour, When man shall use for peace, not strife, His valor, skill, and power. Cleanse all our hearts from our disgrace— We love not world, but clan! Make clear our eyes to see our race One family of man. Rend Thou our little temple veils That cloak the truth divine, Until Thy mighty word prevails, That cries, "All souls are mine." Harry Emerson Fosdick

LOOKING FORWARD

I dream of a glorious future, Of a bright and better day When every living creature God's mandates will obey; When no one will go hungry Nor plead for daily bread; No hearts be overburdened With anguish, fear, and dread. When every man will find a friend In every other man, And each will seek the good of all According to God's plan; When enmity shall disappear, And wars be waged no more, But peace and love and beauty Abound from shore to shore; When no weapons of destruction, Designed by human hands, Shall terrify the nations Or devastate their lands; When no homeless, starving children Shall wander here and there, 'Mid scenes of desolation And moans of wild despair. O Father, send repentance That we may sense our shame And realize with penitence We have ourselves to blame. Hasten, Lord, the promised day, When wickedness shall end And Christ shall reign in glory, Our Brother and our Friend. Then will the hills and valleys sing, All peoples bend the knee And listen to the words of God On glories yet to be! Ruth May Fox

COME, LET US ANEW

Come, let us anew our journey pursue, Roll round with the year, And never stand still till the Master appear. His adorable will let us gladly fulfill, And our talents improve By the patience of hope and the labor of love. Our life as a dream, our time as a stream Glide swiftly away, And the fugitive moment refuses to stay; For the arrow is flown and the moments are gone. The millennial year Presses on to our view, and eternity's here. Oh, that each in the day of His coming may say, "I have fought my way thru; I have finished the work thou didst give me to do." Oh, that each from his Lord may receive the glad word: "Well and faithfully done; Enter into my joy and sit down on my throne." Charles Wesley

THY KINGDOM COME

Thy kingdom come—on bended knee The passing ages pray; And faithful souls have yearned to see On earth that kingdom's day. But the slow watches of the night Not less to God belong, And for the everlasting right The silent stars are strong. And lo! already on the hills The flags of dawn appear; Gird up your loins, ye prophet souls, Proclaim the day is near: The day in whose clear shining light All wrong shall stand revealed, When justice shall be clothed with might, And every hurt be healed: When knowledge, hand in hand with peace, Shall walk the earth abroad,— The day of perfect righteousness, The promised day of God. Frederick L. Hosmer

SOFTLY BEAMS THE SACRED DAWNING

Softly beams the sacred dawning Of the great millennial morn, And to Saints gives welcome warning That the day is hast'ning on. Splendid, rising o'er the mountains, Glowing with celestial cheer, Streaming from eternal fountains, Rays of living light appear. Swiftly flee the clouds of darkness; Speedily the mists retire; Nature's universal blackness Is consumed by heav'nly fire. Yea, the fair sabbatic era, When the world will be at rest, Rapidly is drawing nearer; Then all Israel will be blest. John Jaques

THE COMING OF THE LORD

Come suddenly, O Lord, or slowly come: I wait thy will; thy servant ready is: Thou hast prepared thy follower a home,— The heaven in which thou dwellest, too, is his. Come in the morn, at noon, or midnight deep; Come, for thy servant still doth watch and pray: E'en when the world around is sunk in sleep, I wake and long to see thy glorious day. I would not fix the time, the day, nor hour, When thou with all thine angels shalt appear; When in thy kingdom thou shalt come with power,— E'en now, perhaps, the promised day is near! For though in slumber deep the world may lie, And [even some] forget thy great command; Still, year by year, thy coming draweth nigh, And in its power thy kingdom is at hand. Not in some future world alone 't will be, Beyond the grave, beyond the bounds of time; But on the earth thy glory we shall see, And share thy triumph, peaceful, pure, sublime. Lord, help me that I faint not, weary grow, Nor at thy coming slumber, too, and sleep; For thou hast promised, and full well I know Thou wilt to us thy word of promise keep. Jones Very

Additional poems about the Second Coming appear in the topics "Hope," "Jesus Christ: Our Savior," "Zion," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
