Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Judging

IF I HAD KNOWN

If I had known what trouble you were bearing; What griefs were in the silence of your face; I would have been more gentle, and more caring, And tried to give you gladness for a space. I would have brought more warmth into the place, If I had known. If I had known what thoughts despairing drew you; (Why do we never try to understand?) I would have lent a little friendship to you, And slipped my hand within your hand, And made your stay more pleasant in the land, If I had known. Mary Carolyn Davies

A PLEA FOR THOSE WHO ERR

Think gently of the erring one; O let us not forget, However darkly stained by sin, He is our brother yet. Heir of the same inheritance, Child of the selfsame God, He hath but stumbled in the path We have in weakness trod. Speak gently to the erring ones; We yet may lead them back, With holy words, and tones of love, From misery's thorny track. Forget not, brother, thou hast sinned, And sinful yet mayst be; Deal gently with the erring heart, As God has dealt with thee. Henry A. Tuckett

MEN MAY MISJUDGE THY AIM

Men may misjudge thy aim, Think they have cause to blame, Say thou art wrong; Keep on thy quiet way, Christ is the Judge, not they, Fear not; be strong. Author Unknown

WHEN YOU GET TO KNOW A FELLOW

When you get to know a fellow, know his joys and know his cares, When you've come to understand him and the burdens that he bears, When you've learned the fight he's making and the troubles in his way, Then you find that he is different than you thought him yesterday. Then you will find his faults are trivial and there's not so much to blame In the brother that you jeered at when you only knew his name. You are quick to see the blemish in the distant neighbor's style, You can point to all his errors and may sneer at him the while, And your prejudices fatten and your hates more violent grow As you talk about the failure of the man you do not know, But when drawn a little closer, and your hands and shoulders touch, You find the traits you hated really don't amount to much. When you get to know a fellow, know his every mood and whim, You begin to find the texture of the splendid side of him; You begin to understand him, and you cease to scoff and sneer, For with understanding always prejudices disappear. You begin to find his virtues and his faults you cease to tell, For you seldom hate a fellow when you know him very well. When next you start in sneering and your phrases turn to blame, Know more of him you censure than his business and his name; For it's likely that acquaintance would your prejudice dispel And you'd really come to like him if you knew him very well. Then his faults won't really matter, for you'll find a lot to praise. When you get to know a fellow and you understand his ways. Edgar A. Guest

BROKEN FRIENDSHIP

Alas! they had been friends in youth, But whispering tongues can poison truth! And constancy lives in realms above! And life is thorny, and Youth is vain! And to be wroth with one we love, Doth work like madness in the brain! They parted—ne'er to meet again! But never either found another To free the hollow heart from paining! They stood aloof, the scars remaining; Like cliffs which had been rent asunder! A dreary sea now flows between; But neither heat, nor frost, nor thunder, Shall wholly do away, I ween, The marks of that which once had been. Samuel Taylor Coleridge

RETRIBUTION

Though the mills of God grind slowly, Yet they grind exceeding small; Though with patience He stands waiting, With exactness grinds He all. Friedrich von Logau

JUDGE NOT

Pray do not find fault with the man Who limps, or stumbles along the road Unless you've worn the shoes he wears Or struggled beneath his load. There may be tacks in him that hurt Though hidden away from view, Or the burden placed on your back Might cause you to stumble too. Unless you've felt the blow That caused his fall, or felt the shame That only he can know. You may be strong, but still the blows That were his, if dealt to you In selfsame way and selfsame time Might cause you to stagger too. Don't be too harsh with him who sins Or pelt him with word or stone Unless you're sure, yea, doubly sure That you've no sins of your own. For you know, perhaps if tempter's voice Should whisper soft to you, As it did to him that went astray, 'Twould cause you to falter too. Author Unknown

NOT UNDERSTOOD

Not understood. We move along asunder, Our paths grow wider as the seasons creep Along the years; we marvel and we wonder Why life is life, and then we fall asleep, Not understood. Not understood. We gather false impressions And hug them closer as the years go by, Till virtues often seem to us transgressions; And thus men rise and fall and live and die, Not understood. Not understood. Poor souls with stunted vision Oft measure giants by their narrow gauge. The poisoned shafts of falsehood and derision Are oft impelled 'gainst those who mould the age, Not understood. Not understood. The secret springs of action, Which lie beneath the surface and the show, Are disregarded; with self-satisfaction We judge our neighbors as they often go, Not understood. Not understood. How trifles often change us. The thoughtless sentence or the fancied slight Destroys long years of friendships, and estranges us, And on our souls there falls a freezing blight: Not understood. Not understood. How many breasts are aching, For lack of sympathy? Ah! day to day, How many cheerless, lonely hearts are breaking! How many noble spirits pass away, Not understood. O God, that men would see a little clearer, Or judge less harshly where they cannot see! O God, that men would draw a little nearer To one another! They'd be nearer Thee And understood. Thomas Bracken

SO MUCH GOOD

There is so much good in the worst of us, And so much bad in the best of us, That it hardly behooves any of us To talk about the rest of us. Author Unknown

Addition poems about judging appear in the sections "Friendship," "Gossip and Criticism," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
