Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Knowledge and Wisdom

HE WHO KNOWS NOT

He who knows not and knows not that he knows not Is a fool—shun him. He who knows not and knows that he knows not Is simple—teach him. He who knows and knows not that he knows Is asleep—awaken him. He who knows and knows that he knows Is wise—follow him. Persian Proverb

THOUGHTS

You never can tell what thoughts will do In bringing you hate or love, For thoughts are things With their airy wings That are swifter than carrier dove. They follow the law of the universe: Each thing must create its kind; And they sweep o'er the track To bring you back Whatever went out from your mind. Author Unknown

AT TWENTY

At twenty I knew, and I knew I knew— While at thirty, I wasn't sure. At forty I knew that I didn't know A lot I had known before. At fifty I sigh, and wonder how One who had known so much so young, Can know so little now. Daphne Jemmett

LORD OF THE FAR HORIZONS

Lord of the far horizons, Give us the eyes to see Over the verge of sundown The beauty that is to be. Give us the skill to fashion The task of Thy command, Eager to follow the pattern We may not understand. Master of ancient wisdom And the lore lost long ago, Inspire our foolish reason With faith to seek and know. When the skein of truth is tangled, And the lead of sense is blind, Foster the fire to lighten Our unillumined mind. Bliss Carman

THE BLIND MEN AND THE ELEPHANT

It was six men of Indostan To learning much inclined, Who went to see the elephant (Though all of them were blind), That each by observation Might satisfy his mind. The First approached the elephant, And, happening to fall Against his broad and sturdy side, At once began to bawl: "God bless me! but the elephant Is nothing but a wall!" The Second, feeling of the tusk, Cried: "Ho! what have we here So very round and smooth and sharp? To me 'tis mighty clearThis wonder of an elephant Is very like a spear!" The Third approached the animal, And, happening to take The squirming trunk within his hands, Thus boldly up and spake: "I see," quoth he, "the elephant Is very like a snake!" The Fourth reached out his eager hand, And felt about the knee: "What most this wondrous beast is like Is mighty plain," quoth he; "'Tis clear enough the elephant Is very like a tree." The Fifth, who chanced to touch the ear, Said: "E'en the blindest man Can tell what this resembles most; Deny the fact who can, This marvel of an elephant Is very like a fan!" The Sixth no sooner had begun About the beast to grope, Than, seizing on the swinging tail That fell within his scope, "I see," quoth he, "the elephant Is very like a rope!" And so these men of Indostan Disputed loud and long, Each in his own opinion Exceeding stiff and strong, Though each was partly in the right, And all were in the wrong! So, oft in theologic wars The disputants, I ween, Rail on in utter ignorance Of what each other mean, And prate about an elephant Not one of them has seen! John Godfrey Saxe

WISDOM

From The Task

Knowledge and wisdom, far from being one, Have oft times no connection. Knowledge dwells In heads replete with thoughts of other men: Wisdom in minds attentive to their own. Knowledge is proud that he has learn'd so much; Wisdom is humble that he knows no more. William Cowper

BOOKS ARE KEYS

Books are keys to wisdom's treasure; Books are gates to lands of pleasure; Books are paths that upward lead; Books are friends. Come, let us read. Author Unknown

THERE IS NO FRIGATE LIKE A BOOK

There is no frigate like a book To take us lands away, Nor any coursers like a page Of prancing poetry. Emily Dickinson

WHO HATH A BOOK

Who hath a book Has friends at hand, And gold and gear At his command; And rich estates, If he but look, Are held by him Who hath a book. Who hath a book Has but to read And he may be A king indeed; His kingdom is His inglenook; All this is his Who hath a book. Wilbur D. Nesbit

'TIS THE MIND THAT MAKES THE BODY RICH

'Tis the mind that makes the body rich; And as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds, So honor peereth in the meanest habit. William Shakespeare, The Taming of the Shrew 4.3.173-75

Additional poems about knowledge and wisdom appear in the topics "Character," "Example," "Truth," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
