Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Life

GOD IS A FATHER

God is a Father. Man is a brother. Life is a mission And not a career. Author Unknown

CONTENTED LIVING

Nine requisites for contented living: Health enough to make work a pleasure; Wealth enough to support your needs; Strength to battle with difficulties and overcome them; Grace enough to confess your sins and forsake them; Patience enough to toil until some good is accomplished; Charity enough to see some good in your neighbor; Love enough to move you to be useful and helpful to others; Faith enough to make real the things of God; Hope enough to remove all anxious fears concerning the future. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe

MY CREED

To live as gently as I can; To be, no matter where, a man; To take what comes of good or ill, And cling to faith and honor still; To do my best, and let that stand The record of my brain and hand; And then, should failure come to me, Still work and hope for victory. To have no secret place wherein I stoop unseen to shame or sin; To be the same when I'm alone As when my every deed is known; To live undaunted, unafraid Of any step that I have made; To be without pretense or sham Exactly what men think I am. To leave some simple work behind To keep my having lived in mind; If enmity to aught I show, To be an honest, generous foe; To play my little part, nor whine That greater honors are not mine. This I believe is all I need For my philosophy and creed. Edgar A. Guest

WE LIVE IN DEEDS

We live in deeds, not years; in thought, not breath; In feelings, not in figures on a dial. We should count time by heart-throbs. He most lives Who thinks most, feels the noblest, acts the best. Life's but a means unto an end; that end Beginning, mean, and end of all things—God. Philip James Bailey

TALK HAPPINESS

Talk happiness. The world is sad enough Without your woe. No path is wholly rough; Look for the places that are smooth and clear, And speak of those, to rest the weary ear Of Earth, so hurt by one continuous strain Of human discontent and grief and pain. Talk faith. The world is better off without Your uttered ignorance and morbid doubt. If you have faith in God, or man, or self, Say so. If not, push back upon the shelf Of silence, all your thoughts, till faith shall come; No one will grieve because your lips are dumb. Talk health. The dreary, never-ending tale Of mortal maladies is more than stale. One cannot charm, or interest, or please By harping on that minor chord, disease. Say you are well, or all is well with you, And God shall hear your words and make them true. Ella Wheeler Wilcox

From THE POWER OF LITTLES

Great events, we often find, On little things depend, And very small beginnings Have oft a mighty end. . . . Our life is made entirely Of moments multiplied, As little streamlets, joining, Form the ocean's tide. Author Unknown

A PSALM OF LIFE

What the Heart of the Young Man Said to the Psalmist

Tell me not, in mournful numbers, Life is but an empty dream!— For the soul is dead that slumbers, And things are not what they seem. Life is real! Life is earnest! And the grave is not its goal; Dust thou art, to dust returnest, Was not spoken of the soul. Not enjoyment, and not sorrow, Is our destined end or way; But to act, that each to-morrow Find us farther than to-day. Art is long, and Time is fleeting, And our hearts, though stout and brave, Still, like muffled drums, are beating Funeral marches to the grave. In the world's broad field of battle, In the bivouac of Life, Be not like dumb, driven cattle! Be a hero in the strife! Trust no Future, howe'er pleasant! Let the dead Past bury its dead! Act,—act in the living Present! Heart within, and God o'erhead! Lives of great men all remind us We can make our lives sublime, And, departing, leave behind us Footprints on the sands of time; Footprints, that perhaps another, Sailing o'er life's solemn main, A forlorn and shipwrecked brother, Seeing, shall take heart again. Let us, then, be up and doing, With a heart for any fate; Still achieving, still pursuing, Learn to labor and to wait. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

ALL THE WORLD'S A STAGE

All the world's a stage, And all the men and women merely players: They have their exits and their entrances; And one man in his time plays many parts. William Shakespeare, As You Like It 2.7.139-42

LIFE'S BOOK

No matter what else you are doing, From cradle days through to the end, You are writing your life's secret story, Each night sees another page penned. Each month ends a thirty-page chapter; Each year, the end of a part; And never an act is misstated, Nor even a wish of the heart. Each morn when you wake, the book opens, Revealing a page clean and white; What thoughts and what words and what doings Will cover its surface by night! God leaves that to you—you the writer— And never one word will grow dim Until someday you write the word "finish" And give back your life's book to Him. Author Unknown

LET ME BUT LIVE MY LIFE

Let me but live my life from year to year, With forward face and unreluctant soul. Not hurrying to, nor turning from the goal; Not mourning for the things that disappear In the dim past, nor holding back in fear From what the future veils; but with a whole And happy heart, that pays its toll To youth and age, and travels on with cheer. So let the way wind up the hill or down, O'er rough or smooth, the journey will be joy; Still seeking what I sought when but a boy, New friendship, high adventure, and a crown, I shall grow old, but never lose life's zest, Because the road's last turn will be the best. Henry van Dyke

Additional poems about life appear in the topics "Adversity," "Success," "Work," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
