Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Motherhood

MOTHER'S LOVE

Her love is like an island In life's ocean, vast and wide, A peaceful, quiet shelter From the wind, and rain, and tide. 'Tis bound on the north by Hope, By Patience on the west, By tender Counsel on the south, And on the east by Rest. Above it like a beacon light Shine Faith, and Truth, and Prayer; And through the changing scenes of life, I find a haven there. Author Unknown

WHICH LOVED BEST?

"I love you, Mother," said little John; Then, forgetting his work, his cap went on, And he was off to the garden swing, And left her the water and wood to bring. "I love you, Mother," said rosy Nell— "I love you better than tongue can tell"; Then she teased and pouted full half the day, Till her mother rejoiced when she went to play. "I love you, Mother," said little Fan; "Today I'll help you all I can; How glad I am that school doesn't keep!" So she rocked the babe till it fell asleep. Then, stepping softly, she fetched the broom, And swept the floor and tidied the room; Busy and happy all day was she, Helpful and happy as child could be. "I love you, Mother," again they said, Three little children going to bed; How do you think that Mother guessed Which of them really loved her best? Joy Allison

MOTHER

Sometimes when I get home from school And mother isn't there, And though I know she'll be back soon And I don't really care, Still all the furniture looks queer, The house seems hushed and sad: And then I hear her coming in, And, oh boy, am I glad! Esther Hull Doolittle

I FEEL

I feel that, in the Heavens above, The angels, whispering to one another, Can find, among their burning terms of love, None so devotional as that of Mother. Edgar Allan Poe

THE NAME OF MOTHER

The holiest words my tongue can frame, The noblest thoughts my soul can claim, Unworthy are to praise the name More precious than all other. An infant, when her love first came, A man, I find it still the same, Reverently I breathe her name, The blessed name of mother. George Griffith Fether

THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE IS THE HAND THAT RULES THE WORLD

They say that man is mighty, He governs land and sea; He wields a mighty scepter O'er lesser powers that be; But a mightier power and stronger Man from his throne has hurled; For the hand that rocks the cradle Is the hand that rules the world. Blessing on the hand of women! Angels guard its strength and grace, In the palace, cottage, hovel, Oh, no matter where the place; Would that never storms assailed it, Rainbows ever gently curled; For the hand that rocks the cradle Is the hand that rules the world. . . . Woman, how divine your mission Here upon our natal sod! Keep, oh, keep the young heart open Always to the breath of God! All true trophies of the ages Are from mother-love impearled; For the hand that rocks the cradle Is the hand that rules the world. William Ross Wallace

MY MOTHER

Who fed me from her gentle breast And hushed me in her arms to rest, And on my cheek sweet kisses pressed? My mother. When sleep forsook my open eye, Who was it sung sweet lullaby And rocked me that I should not cry? My mother. Who sat and watched my infant head When sleeping in my cradle bed, And tears of sweet affection shed? My mother. When pain and sickness made me cry, Who gazed upon my heavy eye And wept, for fear that I should die? My mother. Who ran to help me when I fell And would some pretty story tell, Or kiss the part to make it well? My mother. Who taught my infant lips to pray, To love God's holy word and day, And walk in wisdom's pleasant way? My mother. And can I ever cease to be Affectionate and kind to thee Who wast so very kind to me,— My mother. Oh no, the thought I cannot bear; And if God please my life to spare I hope I shall reward thy care, My mother. When thou art feeble, old and gray, My healthy arm shall be thy stay, And I will soothe thy pains away, My mother. And when I see thee hang thy head, 'Twill be my turn to watch thy bed, And tears of sweet affection shed,— My mother. Jane Taylor

MOTHERS

Mothers are people who cook things Like breakfast or lunch or a snack; Dexterous people who hook things Which button or zip up the back. Mothers are people who blow things, Balloons and kisses and noses; Green-thumbish people who grow things Like ivy and puppies and roses. Mothers are people who send things Like letters and strawberry tarts; Magical people who mend things Like blue jeans and elbows and hearts. Mothers are people who find things Like mittens and homework and germs; Fussbudget people who mind things Like cusswords and snowballs and worms. Mothers are people who sweep things Like porches and cobwebs and rugs. Softhearted people who keep things Like artwork, report cards, and hugs. Mothers are people who nurse things, A boy or a girl or a spouse. And all in all there are worse things Than mothers to have in your house. Author Unknown

TRIBUTE TO A MOTHER

Faith that withstood the shocks of toil and time; Hope that defied despair; Patience that conquered care; And loyalty, whose courage was sublime; The great deep heart that was a home for all— Just, eloquent, and strong In protest against wrong; Wide charity, that knew no sin, no fall; The Spartan spirit that made life so grand, Mating poor daily needs With high, heroic deeds, That wrested happiness from Fate's hard hand. Louisa May Alcott

FAITH

"Keep this for me." What child has not said this, And placed a treasure in his Mother's hand With strict injunction she should keep it safe Till he return? He knows with her it will be safe; No troubled thought or anxious fear besets his mind, And off he runs light-hearted to his play. If children can so trust, why cannot we, And place our treasures, too, in God's safe hand; Our hopes, ambitions, needs, and those we love, Just see them, in his all embracing care, And say with joyous heart, "They are with Thee." Author Unknown

MOTHER'S DAY

Let every day be Mother's Day! Make roses grow along her way And beauty everywhere. Oh, never let her eyes be wet With tears of sorrow or regret, And never cease to care! Come, grown up children, and rejoice That you can hear your mother's voice! A day for her! For you she gave Long years of love and service brave; For you her youth was spent. There was no weight of hurt to care Too heavy for her strength to bear; She followed where you went; Her courage and her love sublime You could depend on all the time. No day or night she set apart On which to open wide her heart And welcome you within; There was no hour you would not be First in her thought and memory, Though you were black with sin! Though skies were gray or skies were blue Not once has she forgotten you. Let every day be Mother's Day! With love and roses strew her way, And smiles of joy and pride! Come, grown up children, to the knee Where long ago you used to be And never turn aside; Oh, never let her eyes grow wet With tears, because her babes forget. Edgar A. Guest

THE BRAVEST BATTLE

The bravest battle that ever was fought, Shall I tell you where and when, On the maps of the world you will find it not; It was fought by the mothers of men. Nay, not with cannon or battle shot, With sword or braver pen; Nay, not with eloquent word or thought, From the mouths of wonderful men. But deep in a woman's walled-up heart— Of woman that would not yield, But patiently, silently bore her part— Lo! there in that battlefield. No marshaling troop, no bivouac song; No banners to gleam and wave; And oh! these battles they last so long— From babyhood to the grave! Yet, faithful still as a bridge of stars, She fights in her walled-up town— Fights on and on in the endless wars, Then silent, unseen—goes down. Joaquin Miller

MOTHERHOOD IS . . .

The purest joy the heart can feel, The strongest bond that love can seal, The deepest truth that life can teach, The greatest height the soul can reach. Flora S. Horne

TWO TEMPLES

A builder builded a temple, He wrought it with grace and skill; Pillars and groins and arches All fashioned to work his will. Men said, as they saw its beauty, "It shall never know decay; Great is thy skill, O builder! Thy fame shall endure for aye." A mother builded a temple With loving and infinite care, Planning each arch with patience, Laying each stone with prayer. None praised her unceasing efforts, None knew of her wondrous plan, For the temple the mother builded Was unseen by the eyes of man. Gone is the builder's temple, Crumpled into the dust; Low lies each stately pillar, Food for consuming rust. But the temple the mother builded Will last while the ages roll,For that beautiful unseen temple Was a child's immortal soul. Hattie Vose Hall

TRUE COURAGE

The wife who girds her husband's sword, 'Mid little ones who weep or wonder, And bravely speaks the cheering word, What though her heart be rent asunder, Doomed nightly in her dreams to hear The bolts of death around him rattle, Has shed as sacred blood as e'er Was poured upon a field of battle. The mother who conceals her grief, While to her breast her son she presses, Then breathes a few brave words and brief, Kissing the patriot brow she blesses; With no one but her secret God to know The pain that weighs upon her; Sheds holy blood as e'er the sod Received on freedom's field of honor. Author Unknown

WATCHING FOR US

She always leaned to watch for us, Anxious if we were late, In winter by the window, In summer by the gate; And though we mocked her tenderly, Who had such foolish care, The long way home would seem more safe Because she waited there. Her thoughts were all so full of us— She never could forget! And so I think that where she is She must be watching yet. Waiting till we come home to her, Anxious if we are late— Watching from heaven's window, Leaning from heaven's gate. Margaret Widdemer

BACKWARD

Backward, turn backward, O Time, in your flight, Make me a child again just for tonight! Mother, come back from the echoless shore, Take me again to your heart, as of yore; Kiss from my forehead the furrows of care, Smooth the few silver threads out of my hair; Over my slumbers your loving watch keep, Rock me to sleep, Mother, rock me to sleep. Elizabeth Akers Allen

Additional poems about motherhood appear in the topics "Home and Family," "Love," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
