Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Nature

THIS IS MY FATHER'S WORLD

This is my Father's world, And to my listening ears All nature sings, and round me rings The music of the spheres. This is my Father's world: I rest me in the thought Of rocks and trees, of skies and seas; His hand the wonders wrought. This is my Father's world, The birds their carols raise, The morning light, the lily white, Declare their Maker's praise. This is my Father's world: He shines in all that's fair; In the rustling grass I hear Him pass, He speaks to me everywhere. Maltbie D. Babcock

THE YEAR'S AT THE SPRING

The year's at the spring And day's at the morn; Morning's at seven: The hillside's dew-pearled; The lark's on the wing; The snail's on the thorn; God's in his heaven— All's right with the world! Robert Browning

From THE VISION OF SIR LAUNFAL

Every clod feels a stir of might, An instinct within it that reaches and towers, And groping blindly above it for light, Climbs to a soul in grass and flowers. James Russell Lowell

AT COOL OF DAY

At cool of day, with God I walk My garden's grateful shade; I hear his voice among the trees And I am not afraid. Caroline Atherton Mason

GOD'S BOOK

God spreads a book before my eyes, As I go tramping hill and dell, And oh, my heart is made most wise By what His wind-blown pages tell. Though men declare I am a clown, Whose dreams have made him worse than fey, The while I wander up and down, I give no heed to what they say. I turn me from their foolish words To read the kindliness of God Within His book of singing birds, Of trees and brooks and fragrant sod. Edgar Daniel Kramer

MY HEART LEAPS UP

My heart leaps up when I behold A rainbow in the sky: So was it when my life began; So is it now I am a man; So be it when I shall grow old, Or let me die! The Child is father of the Man; And I could wish my days to be Bound each to each by natural piety. William Wordsworth

THE SILENT PLACES

I have come back from the mountains, And the beauty of forest ways, From the pine-trail winding at sunset To the crags in the purple haze. I have come back from the prairies, And the free-born winds of the west, Where my soul reached out to heaven, And found in the starlight rest. I have come back to the city, With its clang and its screech and its din; Its halls are filled with madness, And its eyes are blind with sin. I think of the peaks white-crested, And the sage on the sweeping plain, And the vastness, and the silence, And the whisper of God again. I will go back to my mountains, Back to the prairies I've trod; Some day I shall stand in that silence And speak once more with my God. Harold M. Hildreth

FLOWER IN THE CRANNIED WALL

Flower in the crannied wall, I pluck you out of the crannies, I hold you here, root and all, in my hand, Little flower—but if I could understand What you are, root and all, and all in all, I should know what God and man is. Alfred, Lord Tennyson

EARTH'S COMMON THINGS

Seek not afar for beauty. Lo! it glows In dew-wet grasses all about thy feet; In birds, in sunshine, childish faces sweet, In stars and mountain summits topped with snows. Go not abroad for happiness. For see, It is a flower that blossoms at thy door! Bring love and justice home, and then no more Thou'lt wonder in what dwelling joy may be. Dream not of noble service elsewhere wrought; The simple duty that awaits thy hand Is God's voice uttering a divine command, Life's common deeds build all that saints have thought. In wonder-workings, or some bush aflame, Men look for God and fancy Him concealed; But in earth's common things He stands revealed While grass and flowers and stars spell out His name. Minot J. Savage

From AUGURIES OF INNOCENCE

To see a World in a Grain of Sand And a Heaven in a Wild Flower, Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand And Eternity in an hour. William Blake

NATURE'S CREED

I believe in the brook as it wanders From hillside into glade; I believe in the breeze as it whispers When evening's shadows fade. I believe in the roar of the river As it dashes from high cascade; I believe in the cry of the tempest 'Mid the thunder's cannonade. I believe in the light of shining stars, I believe in the sun and the moon; I believe in the flash of lightning, I believe in the night-bird's croon. I believe in the faith of the flowers, I believe in the rock and sod, For in all of these appeareth clear The handiwork of God. Author Unknown

EARTH'S CRAMMED WITH HEAVEN

Earth's crammed with Heaven And every common bush afire with God. But only he who sees takes off his shoes. Elizabeth Barrett Browning

RAIN

Rain was made for our delight. A million little dancing feet Down a patent-leather street On a dusty summer night. Sprites of silver at their play, Down the canyon walls they chase, Gay and gentle, to erase The tired faces of the day. To close in sleep the city's eyes, Singing at a window pane A murmuring and soft refrain Of earth's own ancient lullabies. Bianca Bradbury

I FIND EARTH NOT GRAY

I find earth not gray, but rosey, Heaven not grim, but fair of hue. Do I stoop? I pluck a posey; Do I stand and stare? All's blue. Robert Browning

THE LORD GOD PLANTED A GARDEN

The Lord God planted a garden In the first white days of the world, And he set there an angel warden In a garment of light enfurled. So near to the peace of Heaven, That the hawk might nest with the wren, For there in the cool of the even' God walked with the first of men. The kiss of the sun for pardon, The song of the birds for mirth— One is nearer God's heart in a garden Than anywhere else on earth. Dorothy Frances Gurney

TREES

I think that I shall never see A poem lovely as a tree. A tree whose hungry mouth is pressed Against the earth's sweet flowing breast; A tree that looks at God all day, And lifts her leafy arms to pray; A tree that may in Summer wear A nest of robins in her hair; Upon whose bosom snow has lain; Who intimately lives with rain. Poems are made by fools like me, But only God can make a tree. Joyce Kilmer

Additional poems about nature appear in the topics "God," "Happiness," "Life," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
