Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

New Year

THE NEW LEAF

He came to my desk with quivering lip— The lesson was done. "Dear Teacher, I want a new leaf," he said, "I have spoiled this one." I took the old leaf, stained and blotted, And gave him a new one, all unspotted, And into his sad eyes smiled: "Do better now, my child!" I went to the Throne with a quivering soul— The old year was done. "Dear Father, hast Thou a new leaf for me? I have spoiled this one." He took the old leaf, stained and blotted, And gave me a new one, all unspotted, And into my sad heart smiled: "Do better now, my child!" Helen Field Fisher

THE MESSAGE OF THE NEW YEAR

I asked the New Year for some message sweet, Some rule of life with which to guide my feet; I asked, and paused: he answered soft and low, "God's will to know." "Will knowledge then suffice, New Year?" I cried; And, ere the question into silence died, The answer came, "Nay, but remember, too, God's will to do." Once more I asked, "Is there no more to tell?" And once again the answer sweetly fell, "Yes! this thing, all other things above: God's will to love." Author Unknown

RING OUT, WILD BELLS

From In Memoriam

Ring out, wild bells, to the wild sky, The flying cloud, the frosty light: The year is dying in the night; Ring out, wild bells, and let him die. Ring out the old; ring in the new, Ring, happy bells, across the snow: The year is going, let him go; Ring out the false, ring in the true. Ring out the grief that saps the mind, For those that here we see no more; Ring out the feud of rich and poor, Ring in redress to all mankind. Ring out a slowly dying cause, And ancient forms of party strife; Ring in the nobler modes of life, With sweeter manners, purer laws. Ring out the want, the care, the sin, The faithless coldness of the times; Ring out, ring out my mournful rhymes, But ring the fuller minstrel in. Ring out false pride in place and blood, The civic slander and the spite; Ring in the love of truth and right, Ring in the common love of good. Ring out old shapes of foul disease; Ring out the narrowing lust of gold; Ring out the thousand wars of old, Ring in the thousand years of peace. Ring in the valiant men and free, The larger heart, the kindlier hand; Ring out the darkness of the land, Ring in the Christ that is to be. Alfred, Lord Tennyson

THE NEW YEAR

A flower unblown; a book unread; A tree with fruit unharvested; A path untrod; a house whose rooms Lack yet the heart's divine perfumes: A landscape whose wide border lies In silent shade, 'neath silent skies; A treasure with its gifts concealed— This is the year that for you waits Beyond tomorrow's mystic gates. Horatio Nelson Powers

OLD YEARS AND NEW

Old years and new years, all blended into one, The best of what there is to be, the best of what is gone— Let's bury all the failures in the dim and dusty past And keep the smiles of friendship and laughter to the last. Old years and new years, life's in the making still; We haven't come to glory yet, but there's the hope we will; The dead old year was twelve months long, but now from it we're free, And what's one year of good or bad to all the years to be? Old years and new years, we need them one and all To reach the dome of character and build its sheltering wall; Past failures tried the souls of us, but if their tests we stood, The sum of what we are to be may yet be counted good. Edgar A. Guest

NEW YEAR

How burn the stars unchanging in the midnight skies, As on the earth the old year dies! Like leaves before the storm, so haste our lives away; Eternal God, to Thee we pray. For all Thy mercies past we lift our hearts in praise, Thy care that crowned our fleeting days; Our follies and our sins, O Lord, remember not, Lost hours when we Thy love forgot. From age to age Thy love endures; Thou art our God. Send now Thy flaming truth abroad, That with the New Year's dawning right may conquer wrong, Grief yield to joy, and tears to song! John J. Moment

A LITTLE PRAYER

That I may not in blindness grope, But that I may with vision clear Know when to speak a word of hope Or add a little wholesome cheer. That tempered winds may softly blow Where little children, thinly clad, Sit dreaming, when the flame is low, Of comforts they have never had. That through the year which lies ahead No heart shall ache, no cheek be wet, For any word that I have said Or profit I have tried to get. S. E. Kiser

JANUARY

We pause beside this door: Thy year, O God, how shall we enter in? The footsteps of a Child Sound close beside us. Listen, he will speak! His birthday bells have hardly rung a week, Yet has he trod the worlds press undefiled. Enter through me, he saith, nor wander more; For lo! I am the Door. Lucy Larcom

1996 Deseret Book Co.
