Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Opportunity

USE WELL THE MOMENT

Use well the moment; what the hour Brings for thy use is in thy power; And what thou best canst understand Is just the thing lies nearest to thy hand. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe

OPPORTUNITY

They do me wrong who say I come no more When once I knock and fail to find you in; For every day I stand outside your door And bid you wake, and rise to fight and win. Wail not for precious chances passed away! Weep not for golden ages on the wane! Each night I burn the records of the day— At sunrise every soul is born again! Dost thou behold thy lost youth all aghast? Dost reel from righteous retribution's blow? Then turn from blotted archives of the past And find the future's pages white as snow. Art thou a mourner? Rouse thee from thy spell; Art thou a sinner? Sins may be forgiven; Each morning gives thee wings to fly from hell, Each night a star to guide thy feet to heaven. Laugh like a boy at splendors that have sped, To vanished joys be blind and deaf and dumb; My judgments seal the dead past with the dead, But never bind a moment yet to come. Though deep in mire, wring not your hands and weep; I lend my arm to all who say, "I can!"No shame-faced outcast ever sank so deep, But yet might rise again and be a man! Walter Malone

OF ALL SAD WORDS

Of all sad words of tongue or pen, The saddest are these: "It might have been." John Greenleaf Whittier

THERE IS A TIDE

There is a tide in the affairs of men Which taken at the flood leads on to fortune; Omitted, all the voyage of their life Is bound in shallows and in miseries. On such a full sea are we now afloat, And we must take the current when it serves, Or lose our ventures. William Shakespeare, Julius Caesar 4.3.218-23

SALUTATION OF THE DAWN

Look to this day, For it is life, the very life of life! In its brief course be all the verities And realities of your existence. The glory of action, The bliss of growth, The splendor of beauty. For yesterday is but a dream And tomorrow is only a vision; But today, well-lived, makes Every yesterday a dream of happiness And every tomorrow a vision of hope. Look well, therefore, to this day. Such is the salutation of the dawn. Author Unknown

TAKE A LESSON

Take the lesson to thyself, Loving heart and true; Golden years are fleeting by, Youth is passing, too. Learn to make the most of life; Lose no happy day. Time will never bring thee back Chances swept away. Leave no tender word unsaid; Love while life shall last: "The mill will never grind With the water that has passed." Take the proverb to thine heart, Take! oh hold it fast: "The mill will never grind With the water that has passed!" Author Unknown

Additional poems about opportunity appear in the topics "Choice and Accountability," "Life," "Success," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
