Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Patriotism

LORD, WHILE FOR ALL MANKIND WE PRAY

Lord, while for all mankind we pray, Of every clime and coast, O hear us for our native land, The land we love the most. O guard our shores from every foe; With peace our borders bless; With prosperous times our cities crown, Our fields with plenteousness. Unite us in the sacred love Of knowledge, truth, and Thee, And let our hills and valleys shout The songs of liberty. Lord of the nations, thus to Thee Our country we commend; Be Thou her refuge and her trust, Her everlasting friend. John R. Wreford

A FATHER'S TRIBUTE

I don't know what they'll put him at, or what his post may be; I cannot guess the task that waits for him across the sea, But I have known him through the years, and when there's work to do, I know he'll meet his duty well, I'll swear that he'll be true. I sometimes fear that he may die, but never that he'll shirk; If death shall want him death must go and take him at his work; This splendid sacrifice he makes is filled with terrors grim, And I have many thoughts of fear, but not one fear of him. The foe may rob my life of joy, the foe may take my all, And desolate my days shall be if he shall have to fall, But this I know, whate'er may be the grief that I must face, Upon his record there will be no blemish of disgrace. His days have all been splendid days, there lies no broken trust Along the pathway of his youth to molder in the dust; Honor and truth have marked his ways, in him I can be glad; He is as fine and true a son as ever a father had. Edgar A. Guest

From THE NEW COLOSSUS

Give me your tired, your poor, Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free; The wretched refuse of your teeming shore. Send these, the homeless, tempest-tossed to me, I lift my lamp beside the golden door. Emma Lazarus

GOD BLESS OUR NATIVE LAND

God bless our native land; Firm may she ever stand Through storm and night: When the wild tempests rave, Ruler of wind and wave, Thou who art strong to save, Be Thou her might! For her our prayer shall be, Our fathers' God, to Thee, On whom we wait: Be her walls, holiness, Her rulers, righteousness, In all her homes be peace, God save the State! Not for this land alone, But be God's mercies shown From shore to shore; And may the nations see That men should brothers be, And form one family The wide world o'er. Siegfried A. Mahlmann and William E. Hickson

BREATHES THERE THE MAN

From The Lay of the Last Minstrel

Breathes there the man, with soul so dead, Who never to himself hath said, This is my own, my native land! Whose heart hath ne'er within him burned, As home his footsteps he hath turned, From wandering on a foreign strand? If such there breathe, go, mark him well! For him no minstrel raptures swell; High though his titles, proud his name, Boundless his wealth, as wish can claim— Despite those titles, power and pelf, The wretch, concentered all in self, Living, shall forfeit fair renown, And, doubly dying, shall go down To the vile dust from whence he sprung, Unwept, unhonored and unsung. Sir Walter Scott

VICTORY

(Found on the body of an Australian soldier)

Ye that have faith to look with fearless eyes Beyond the tragedy of a world at strife, And know that out of death and night shall rise The dawn of ampler life: Rejoice, whatever anguish rend the heart, That God has given you the priceless dower To live in these great times and have your part In Freedom's crowning hour, That ye may tell your sons who see the light High in the heavens—their heritage to take— "I saw the powers of darkness take their flight; I saw the morning break." Author Unknown

THE FLAG WITHOUT A STAIN

For years and years I've waved o'er my people, O'er land and sea, o'er church tower and steeple; Foremost in battle proudly I reign, Triumphant now o'er thee, without one stain. O, how I trembled when called alone to stand, But brave hearts sustained me to wave o'er the land. O, my America! O, my America! Proudly I wave o'er thee, Sweet land of Liberty. No flag on earth shall insult this nation, Justice and right shall e'er be our relation. No creed or sect shall here ever reign. While floats the Stars and Stripes, without one stain. Stars that were blotted are shining once again, The Angel of Peace has wiped out the stain. Author Unknown

WHAT MAKES A NATION GREAT?

Not serried ranks with flags unfurled, Not armored ships that gird the world, Not hoarded wealth nor busy mills, Not cattle on a thousand hills, Not sages wise, nor schools nor laws, Not boasted deeds in freedom's cause— All these may be, and yet the state In the eye of God be far from great. That land is great which knows the Lord, Whose songs are guided by His word; Where justice rules 'twixt man and man, Where love controls in art and plan; Where, breathing in his native air, Each soul finds joy in praise and prayer— Thus may our country, good and great, Be God's delight—man's best estate. Alexander Blackburn

Additional poems about patriotism appear in the topics "Courage," "Peace," "Thanksgiving," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
