Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Peace

PRAYER FOR PEACE

O God, whose will is life and peace For all the sons of men, Let not our human hates release The sword's dread power again. Forgive our narrowness of mind; Destroy false pride, we plead: Deliver us and all mankind From selfishness and greed. O God, whose ways shall lead to peace, Enlighten us, we pray; Dispel our darkness and increase The light along our way. Illumine those who lead the lands That they may make at length The laws of right to guide the hands That wield the nations' strength. O God, who callest us to peace, We join with everyone Who does his part that wars may cease And justice may be done. Enable us to take the way The Prince of Peace hath trod; Create the will to build each day The family of God. Rolland W. Schloerb

COME UNTO HIM

I wander through the still of night, When solitude is ev'rywhere— Alone, beneath the starry light, And yet I know that God is there. I kneel upon the grass and pray; An answer comes without a voice. It takes my burden all away And makes my aching heart rejoice. When I am filled with strong desire And ask a boon of him, I see No miracle of living fire, But what I ask flows into me. And when the tempest rages high I feel no arm around me thrust, But ev'ry storm goes rolling by When I repose in him my trust. It matters not what may befall, What threat'ning hand hangs over me; He is my rampart through it all, My refuge from mine enemy. Come unto him all ye depressed, Ye erring souls whose eyes are dim, Ye weary ones who long for rest. Come unto him! Come unto him! Theodore E. Curtis

DROP THY STILL DEWS

Drop thy still dews of quietness till all our striving cease; Take from our souls the strain and stress, And let our ordered lives confess The beauty of thy Peace. John Greenleaf Whittier

COME, YE DISCONSOLATE

Come, ye disconsolate, where'er ye languish; Come to the mercy seat, fervently kneel. Here bring your wounded hearts; here tell your anguish. Earth has no sorrow that heav'n cannot heal. Joy of the desolate, Light of the straying, Hope of the penitent, fadeless and pure! Here speaks the Comforter, tenderly saying, "Earth has no sorrow that heav'n cannot cure." Here see the Bread of Life; see waters flowing Forth from the throne of God, pure from above. Come to the feast of love; come, every knowing Earth has no sorrow but heav'n can remove. Thomas Moore third stanza, Thomas Hastings

MAKE MY MORTAL DREAMS COME TRUE

Make my mortal dreams come true, With the work I fain would do; Clothe with life the weak intent, Let me be the thing I meant; Let my find in Thy employ, Peace that dearer is than joy. John Greenleaf Whittier

THE STORM OF LIFE

As the bird trims to the gale, I trim myself to the storm of time, I man the rudder, reef the sail, Obey the voice at eve obeyed at prime: "Lowly faithful, banish fear, Right onward drive unharmed; The port, well worth the cruise, is near, And every wave is charmed." Ralph Waldo Emerson

HE HEARS WITH GLADDENED HEART

He hears with gladdened heart the thunder Peal, and loves the falling dew; He knows the earth above and under— Sits and is content to view. He sits beside the dying ember, God for hope and man for friend, Content to see, glad to remember, Expectant of a certain end. Robert Louis Stevenson

LET US HAVE PEACE

The earth is weary of our foolish wars. Her hills and shores were shaped for lovely things, Yet all our years are spent in bickerings Beneath the astonished stars. April by April laden with beauty comes, Autumn by Autumn turns our toil to gain, But hand at sword hilt, still we start and strain To catch the beat of drums. Knowledge to knowledge adding, skill to skill, We strive for others' good as for our own— And then, like cavemen snarling with a bone, We turn and rend and kill. . . . With life so fair, and all too short a lease Upon our special star! Nay, love and trust, Not blood and thunder shall redeem our dust. Let us have peace! Nancy Byrd Turner

Additional poems about peace appear in the topics "Jesus Christ: The Second Coming," "Patriotism," "Zion," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
