Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Perseverance

THE CHAMPION

The average runner sprints Until the breath in him is gone; But the champion has the iron will; That makes him carry on. For rest, the average runner begs, When limp his muscles grow; But the champion runs on leaden legs His spirit makes him go. The average man's complacent When he does his best to score; But the champion does his best And then he does a little more. Author Unknown

GOOD TIMBER

The tree that never had to fight For sun and sky and air and light, But stood out in the open plain And always got its share of rain, Never became a forest king But lived and died a scrubby thing. The man who never had to toil To gain and farm his patch of soil, Who never had to win his share Of sun and sky and light and air, Never became a manly man But lived and died as he began. Good timber does not grow with ease, The stronger wind, the stronger trees, The further sky, the greater length, The more the storm, the more the strength. By sun and cold, by rain and snow, In trees and men good timbers grow. Where thickest lies the forest growth We find the patriarchs of both. And they hold counsel with the stars Whose broken branches show the scars Of many winds and much of strife This is the common law of life. Douglas Malloch as quoted in Sterling W. Sill, Making the Most of Yourself

BILL BROWN MADE A MILLION

Bill Brown made a million—Bill Brown! Think of that! A boy, you remember, as poor as a rat; He hoed for the neighbors, did jobs by the day, But Bill made a million, or near it, they say. You can't understand it? Well, neither could I, And then I remembered, and now I know why: The bell might be ringing, the dinner horn blow, But Bill always hoed to the end of the row. Bill worked for my father, you maybe recall; He wasn't a wonder—not that, not at all; He couldn't out-hoe me, or cover more ground, Or hoe any cleaner, or beat me around. In fact, I was better in one way that I know: One toot from the kitchen and home I would go; But Bill always hoed to the end of the row. We used to get hungry out there in the corn. When you talk about music, what equals a horn? A horn yellin' dinner, tomatoes and beans, And pork and potatoes and gravy and greens? I ain't blamin' no one for quittin' on time, To stop with the whistle, that ain't a crime. But as for the million—well, this much I know: That Bill always hoed to the end of the row. Author Unknown

HEAVEN IS NOT REACHED AT A SINGLE BOUND

Heaven is not reached at a single bound; But we build the ladder by which we rise From the lowly earth to the vaulted skies, And we mount its summit round by round. I count this thing to be grandly true: That a noble deed is a step toward God, Lifting the soul from the common clod To a purer air and a broader view. We rise by the things that are under feet; By what we have mastered of good and gain; By the pride deposed and the passion slain, And the vanquished ills that we hourly meet. We hope, we aspire, we resolve, we trust, When the morning calls us to life and light, But our hearts grow weary, and, ere the night, Our lives are trailing the sordid dust. We hope, we resolve, we aspire, we pray, And we think that we mount the air on wings Beyond the recall of sensual things, While our feet still cling to the heavy clay. Wings for the angels, but feet for men! We may borrow the wings to find the way— We may hope, and resolve, and aspire, and pray; But our feet must rise, or we fall again. Only in dreams is a ladder thrown From the weary earth to the sapphire walls; But the dreams depart, and the vision falls, And the sleeper wakes on his pillow of stone. Heaven is not reached at a single bound; But we build the ladder by which we rise From the lowly earth to the vaulted skies, And we mount to its summit, round by round. Josiah Gilbert Holland

ALWAYS FINISH

If a task is once begun Never leave it till it's done. Be the labor great or small, Do it well or not at all. Author Unknown

YOU

You can do as much as you think you can, But you'll never accomplish more; If you're afraid of yourself, young man, There's little for you in store. For failure comes from the inside first; It's there if you only knew it. And you can win, though you face the worst, If you feel you're going to do it! Edgar A. Guest

IT'S THE STEADY, CONSTANT DRIVING

It's the steady, constant driving To the goal for which you're striving, Not the speed with which you travel That will make the victory sure. It's the everlasting gaining, Without whimper or complaining At the burdens you are bearing, Or the woes you must endure. It's the holding to a purpose And the never giving in; It's the cutting down the distance By the little that you win. It's the iron will to do it And the steady sticking to it. So, whate'er your task, go to it And life's purpose you will win. Author Unknown

IF

If you can keep your head when all about you Are losing theirs and blaming it on you, If you can trust yourself when all men doubt you, But make allowance for their doubting too; If you can wait and not be tired by waiting, Or being lied about, don't deal in lies, Or being hated, don't give way to hating, And yet don't look too good, nor talk too wise: If you can dream—and not make dreams your master; If you can think—and not make thoughts your aim; If you can meet with Triumph and Disaster And treat those two impostors just the same; If you can bear to hear the truth you've spoken Twisted by knaves to make a trap for fools, Or watch the things you gave your life to, broken, And stoop and build 'em up with worn-out tools: If you can make one heap of all your winnings And risk it on one turn of pitch-and-toss, And lose, and start again at your beginnings And never breathe a word about your loss; If you can force your heart and nerve and sinew To serve your turn long after they are gone, And so hold on when there is nothing in you Except the Will which says to them: "Hold on!" If you can talk with crowds and keep your virtue, Or walk with Kings—nor lose the common touch, If neither foes nor loving friends can hurt you, If all men count with you, but none too much; If you can fill the unforgiving minute With sixty seconds' worth of distance run, Yours is the Earth and everything that's in it, And—which is more—you'll be a Man, my son! Rudyard Kipling

IF YOU CAN SMILE

If you can smile when things go wrong And say, "It doesn't matter," If you can laugh off care and woe And trouble makes you fatter; If you can keep a happy face When all around are blue— Then have your head examined, Bud, There's something wrong with you! For one thing I've arrived at: There are no "ands" or "buts"; The guy that's grinning all the time Must be completely nuts. Author Unknown

THE QUITTER

Fate handed the quitter a bump, and he dropped; The road seemed too rough to go, so he stopped. He thought of his hurt, and there came to his mind The easier path he was leaving behind. "Oh, it's all much too hard," said the quitter right then; "I'll stop where I am and not try it again." He sat by the road and he made up his tale To tell when men asked why he happened to fail. A thousand excuses flew up to his tongue, And these on the thread of his story he strung, But the truth of the matter he didn't admit; He never once said, "I was frightened and quit." Whenever the quitter sits down by the road And drops from the struggle to lighten his load, He can always recall to his own peace of mind A string of excuses for falling behind; But somehow or other he can't think of one Good reason for battling and going right on. Oh, when the bump comes and fate hands you a jar, Don't baby yourself, boy, whoever you are; Don't pity yourself and talk over your woes; Don't think up excuses for dodging the blows. But stick to the battle and see the thing through. And don't be a quitter, whatever you do. Author Unknown

AN INSPIRATION

However the battle is ended, Though proudly the victor comes, With fluttering flags and prancing steeds And echo of rolling drums, Still truth proclaims the motto, In letters of living light, No question is ever settled Until it is settled right. Though the heel of the strong oppressor May grind the weak in the dust; And the voices of fame with one acclaim May call him great and just; Let those who applaud take warning And keep this motto in sight— No question is ever settled Until it is settled right. Let those who have failed take courage, Though the enemy seems to have won; Though his ranks are strong, if he be in the wrong, The battle is not yet done; For sure as the morning follows The darkest hour of the night, No question is ever settled Until it is settled right. O man, bowed down with labor, O woman, young, yet old; O heart, oppressed in the toiler's breast, And crushed by the power of gold,Keep on with your weary battle Against triumphant might; No question is ever settled Until it is settled right. Ella Wheeler Wilcox

NEVER GIVE UP!

Never give up! If adversity presses, Providence wisely has mingled the cup, And the best counsel, in all your distresses, Is the stout watchword of "Never give up!" Martin F. Tupper

YOU MAY BE WHAT YOU WILL TO BE

You may be what you will to be; Let cowards find their false content In that poor word environment, But spirit scorns it and is free. It conquers time; it masters space; It cows the boastful trickster chance, And bids the tyrant circumstance Uncrown and fill a servant's place. The human will—that force unseen, The offspring of a deathless soul— Can hew its way to any goal, Though walls of granite intervene. Author Unknown

STICK TO YOUR TASK

Stick to your task till it sticks to you; Beginners are many, but enders are few. Honor, power, place, and praise Will come, in time, to the one who stays. Stick to your task till it stick to you; Bend at it, sweat at it, smile at it too; For out of the bend and the sweat and the smile Will come life's victories, after awhile. Author Unknown

SAY NOT THE STRUGGLE NOUGHT AVAILETH

Say not the struggle nought availeth, The labour and the wounds are vain, The enemy faints not, nor faileth, And as things have been, they remain. If hopes were dupes, fears may be liars; It may be, in yon smoke concealed, Your comrades chase e'en now the fliers, And, but for you, possess the field. For while the tired waves, vainly breaking, Seem here no painful inch to gain, Far back, through creeks and inlets making, Comes silent, flooding in, the main. And not by eastern windows only, When daylight comes, comes in the light, In front, the sun climbs slow, how slowly, But westward, look, the land is bright. Arthur Hugh Clough

QUESTION NOT

Question not, but live and labor, Till your goal be won, Helping every feeble neighbor, Seeking help from none; Life is mostly froth and bubble, Two things stand like stone— Kindness in another's trouble, Courage in our own. Adam Lindsay Gordon

THE OYSTER

There once was an oyster Whose story I'll tell, Who found that some sand Had worked under his shell. Just one little grain But it gave him a pain, For oysters have feelings That are very plain. Now did he berate This working of fate, That left him in such a Deplorable state? Did he curse the government, Call for an election, And say that the sea Should have some protection? No! He said to himself As he sat on the shelf, "Since I cannot remove it, I think I'll improve it." Well, years passed by, As years always do, Till he came to his destiny, Oyster stew! But the small grain of sand That bothered him so Was a beautiful pearl All richly aglow. Now this tale has a moral, For isn't it grand, What an oyster can do With a small grain of sand? And what couldn't we do If we'd only begin With all of the things That get under our skin? Author Unknown

WHEN YOU WANT A THING BAD ENOUGH

When you want a thing bad enough to go out and fight for it, To work day and night for it, To give up your peace and your sleep and your time for it; If only the desire of it makes your aim strong enough never to tire of it; If life seems all empty and useless without it, And all that you dream and you scheme is about it; If gladly you'll sweat for it, fret for it, plan for it, Pray with all your strength for it; If you'll simply go after the thing that you want with all your capacity, Strength and sagacity; faith, hope, and confidence, stern pertinacity; If neither poverty nor cold nor famish nor gaunt Nor sickness or pain to body or brain can turn you away From the aim that you want; If dogged and grim, you besiege and beset it, you'll get it! Author Unknown

Additional poems about perseverance appear in the topics "Adversity," "Courage," "Success," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
