Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Pioneers

HANDCART TRAIL

My boy, I walked across the plains, Where now the cars rush by; I walked across the barrier plains, Where now the airships fly! You cannot know how far it is, With hills and deserts whirling past. My steps have measured every rod, My body bedded on the sod! You cannot know how far it is; You hear the throbbing motor's sound. I've listened to the cart wheels creak— The tramp and tramp of bandaged feet! I know how far it is. Vesta Pierce Crawford

OLD WAGON WHEELS

Round after round on their weary way The wagon wheels cry out; With creaks and groans and slides and bumps They jostle and lag and pout. They rumble and roar o'er the flinty ridge; They mire in the shifting sand; They crush the sage and cactus plants To conquer a virgin land. They slip and slide down the steep hillside, Or crash through the deep ravine, But their precious load they must safely bring To yon valley's silver stream. At night they rest in mud, hub deep, Cooled by the valley's breeze, But by early dawn they roll along, Refreshed, new conquests to seize. Round after round and day after day, They hold till their journey's o'er; They carry their precious burden on Till it rests at the master's door. Old wagon wheels, your day has gone, And you lie by the way to rot. The modern age rolls swiftly past, Your service and strength matter not. But the world owes much to your shriveling hulk, For the part you have played in the stride, And side by side with the pioneers, You may rest with a conqueror's pride. Hannah S. Burningham

COME, COME, YE SAINTS

Come, come, ye Saints, no toil nor labor fear; But with joy wend your way. Though hard to you this journey may appear, Grace shall be as your day. 'Tis better far for us to strive Our useless cares from us to drive; Do this, and joy your hearts will swell— All is well! All is well! Why should we mourn or think our lot is hard? 'Tis not so; all is right. Why should we think to earn a great reward If we now shun the fight? Gird up your loins; fresh courage take. Our God will never us forsake; And soon we'll have this tale to tell— All is well! All is well! We'll find the place which God for us prepared, Far away in the West, Where none shall come to hurt or make afraid; There the Saints will be blessed. We'll make the air with music ring, Shout praises to our God and King; Above the rest these words we'll tell— All is well! All is well! And should we die before our journey's through, Happy day! All is well! We then are free from toil and sorrow, too; With the just we shall dwell! But if our lives are spared again To see the Saints their rest obtain, Oh, how we'll make this chorus swell— All is well! All is well! William Clayton

From MY WESTERN HOME

Her valleys a mile above sea-line! A mile more her mountains rise sheer! Wealth abounds in glorious snow-banks, And health in a clear atmosphere. Gray-green on blue landscapes, rank sagebrush Fringes tilled fields of farm crops On deep, fertile stretches of plow-land Wet by cool streams from the "tops." With unshaken faith in her future, Big souls, clear minds, and hard hands: With eyes raised to God in the heavens, Toiled strong men, who reclaimed these lands. But much still remains to be done here— Aye, much that will measure each man As truly as trials of the pioneer trails— Youth must further what brave men began! So with sons of our sons and their sons Shall the task of state-building rest. May the God of these mountains and deserts Show the builders the way to build best! P. V. Cardon

PRAIRIE SUNFLOWER LEGEND

In our prairie country, this legend doth prevail: That sunflowers were planted to mark the Mormon trail, So, others following, these flowers would blaze the way, A guide to future travelers of that early day. If that is how they came here, gratitude we owe, For the cheery blossoms that on the prairie grow; Like a ray of sunshine in a darkened room, They light the dull brown prairie with their yellow bloom. Through the fair Platte Valley, from every canyon side, They gaily greet the tourists as they motor ride, Cherish then the sunflowers and the legend, too, Forgetting not to render thanks where thanks are due. It is a pretty story of a kindly deed that grew, Multiplied, and scattered by every breeze that blew. Let us profit by the legend, plant for those to come, Dropping seeds of kindness as we journey onward home. Josephine Cheney Back

THE PIONEERS

Dust and heat, a trackless waste, Moving covered wagon train, Dull, slow thud of oxen hoof, Hunger, danger, thirst, and pain. Onward, on, inspired band, Hearts that burn with truth and light; Blazing sun and dust by day, Hidden dangers feared by night. Westward ho, to hills and vales, Westward ho, to promised land, Sagebrush, rocks, and dead salt sea, Alkali and oaken sand. Faith to light their dreary way, Truth to brighten miles they trod; In the shelter of the Rockies They were free to worship God. Author Unknown

THE NAMELESS SAINTS

What was his name? I do not know his name. I only know he heard God's voice and came, Brought all he had across the sea To live and work for God and me; Felled the ungracious oak; Dragged from the soil With horrid toil The thrice-gnarled roots and stubborn rock; With plenty piled the haggard mountain-side; And at the end, without memorial, died. No blaring trumpets sounded out his fame, He lived,—he died,—I do not know his name. No form of bronze and no memorial stones Show me the place where lie his mouldering bones. Only a cheerful city stands Builded by his hardened hands. Only ten thousand homes Where every day The cheerful play Of love and hope and courage comes. These are his monuments, and these alone, There is no form of bronze and no memorial stone. And I? Is there some desert or some pathless sea Where Thou, good God of angels, wilt send me? Some oak for me to rend; some sod, Some rock for me to break; Some handful of His corn to take And scatter far afield, Till it, in turn, shall yield Its hundredfold Of grains of gold To feed the waiting children of my God? Show me the desert, Father, or the sea. Is it Thine enterprise? Great God, send me. And though this body lie where ocean rolls, Count me among all Faithful Saints. Edward Everett Hale

PIONEERS

For the first man to climb the hill And seek a prospect wider still; For the first man to brave the sea Not scared by its immensity; For he who, conquering craven fear, First found in fire a friend to cheer; For he who first from stubborn stone Wrought tool and weapon of his own; For those the first with patient toil To break the clod and till the soil; For all such men, since men began, We thank our God who made the man. Author Unknown

THE WINTRY DAY, DESCENDING TO ITS CLOSE

The wintry day, descending to its close, Invites all wearied nature to repose, And shades of night are falling dense and fast, Like sable curtains closing o'er the past. Pale through the gloom the newly fallen snow Wraps in a shroud the silent earth below As tho 'twere mercy's hand had spread the pall, A symbol of forgiveness unto all. I cannot go to rest, but linger still In meditation at my windowsill, While, like the twinkling stars in heaven's dome, Come one by one sweet memories of home. And wouldst thou ask me where my fance roves To reproduce the happy scenes it loves, Where hope and memory together dwell And paint the pictured beauties that I tell? Away beyond the prairies of the West, Where exiled Saints in solitude were blest, Where industry the seal of wealth has set Amid the peaceful vales of Deseret, Unheeding still the fiercest blasts that blow, With tops encrusted by eternal snow, The tow'ring peaks that shield the tender sod Stand, types of freedom reared by nature's God. The wilderness, that naught before would yield, Is now become a fertile, fruitful field. Where roamed at will the fearless Indian band, The templed cities of the Saints now stand. And sweet religion in its purity Invites all men to its security. There is my home, the spot I love so well, Whose worth and beauty pen nor tongue can tell. Orson F. Whitney

THE PIONEER TRAIL

O, I am the Trail of Pioneers, That long, long trail of bygone years— The trail first trod by their weary feet, As they trudged through the snow or the summer's heat: I am that trail whose winding way They followed hopefully, day after day. I know their story of want and woe, And the courage and faith it required to go, With tottering sire and helpless child, Over trackless plains to the mountains wild; I know what heartaches o'erflowed each breast As they journeyed to the distant West. I seem to hear, through a mist of rain, Their sobs of sorrow, their moans of pain, To feel the touch of their bleeding feet As they plodded along through the mud and sleet; And I seem to hear an anguished prayer, Heavenward went through the windswept air— A plea for wisdom and strength to save Someone beloved from an unmarked grave. I can never forget the songs they sang As the campfire leapt with a flaming tongue; 'Midst hunger and cold their voices swell In a song of courage that "all is well." They eagerly looked to their journey's end, And believed that God was their staunchest friend. O brave, undaunted Pioneers! To you the plaudits, the praise, the cheers. All honor to you and your leaders bold; You left a heritage better than gold. May your children's children follow you And walk in the trails of the brave and true. Mrs. Parley Nelson

PIONEER CABIN

Little log cabin of long ago Bravely weathering rain or snow, Peacefully basking in summer sun, Gradually turning from gray to dun; Worn old logs of yesterday Falling apart in slow decay, Door ajar and windows wide Seeming to beckon me inside— When your sagging roof of sod was new And your logs were strong and beams were true And the dusty stones of your hearth were bright With the dancing gleam of your firelight, When windows were hung with curtains gay And spotless panes caught the sun's first ray— Did you nearly burst with joy and pride For the life and warmth aglow inside? Did your floor resound with the echo sweet Of the happy patter of baby feet? Or your sturdy walls—did they listen in On children's laughter and noisy din? And what of her who was mistress here— Did she love it all and hold it dear? Was she brave and strong with courage true In spite of the endless tasks to do? Or sometimes, perhaps, at the close of day When her noisy brood was tucked away, Did she sit and sigh? Or didn't she mind The luxuries she had left behind? I hope she was happy to make the best Of you, little cabin out in the West. Please, won't you speak? I'm sure you know, Little log cabin of long ago! Kathryn F. Clyde

Additional poems about pioneers appear elsewhere in this book.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
