Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Self-Mastery

YOUR TASK

"Your task, to build a better world," God said. I answered, "How? This world is such a large, vast place, So complicated now. And I so small and useless am, There's nothing I can do." But God in all his wisdom said, "Just build a better you." Author Unknown

SELF-MASTERY

What tho I conquer my enemies, And lay up store and pelf, I am a conqueror poor indeed, Till I subdue myself. What tho I read and learn by heart Whole books while I am young, I am a linguist in disgrace, Who cannot guard my tongue. What tho on campus I excel A champ in meet and fight If trained efficient still I can't Control an appetite. What tho exemptions write my name High on the honor roll Electives, solids fail me if I learn no self-control. And tho I graduate and soar And life is good to me, My heart shall write me failure till I learn self-mastery. A. Bertha Kleinman

IMMORTAL LIFE IS SOMETHING TO BE EARNED

Immortal life is something to be earned, By slow, self-conquest, comradeship with pain, And patient seeking after higher truths. We cannot follow our own wayward wills And feed our baser appetites and give Loose reins to foolish tempers, year on year, And then cry, "Lord, forgive me, I believe—" And straightway bathe in glory. Men must learn God's system is too great a thing for that; The spark divine dwells in each soul, and we Can fan it to a steady flame of light, Whose lustre gilds the pathway of the tomb And shines on through eternity, or else Neglect it till it simmers down to death And leaves us but the darkness of the grave. Each conquered passion feeds the living flame; Each well-borne sorrow is a step toward God. Faith cannot rescue, and no blood redeem The soul that will not reason and resolve. Lean on thyself, yet prop thyself with prayer, For these are spirits, messengers of light, Who come at call and fortify thy strength, Make friends with thee and with thine inner self, Cast out all envy, bitterness, and hate, And keep the mind's fair tabernacle pure; Shake hands with Pain, give greeting unto Grief, Those angels in disguise; and thy glad soul, From light to light, from star to shining star, Shall climb and claim blest immortality. Ella Wheeler Wilcox

HIGHER YET AND HIGHER

Higher yet and higher, Out of clouds in night, Nearer yet and nearer, Rising to the light. Author Unknown

FORBEARANCE

Hast thou named all the birds without a gun? Loved the wood-rose, and left it on its stalk? At rich men's tables eaten bread and pulse? Unarmed, faced danger with a heart of trust? And loved so well a high behavior, In man or maid, that thou from speech refrained, Nobility more nobly to repay? O, be my friend, and teach me to be thine! Ralph Waldo Emerson

SCHOOL THY FEELINGS

School thy feelings, O my brother; Train thy warm, impulsive soul. Do not its emotions smother, But let wisdom's voice control. School thy feelings; there is power In the cool, collected mind. Passion shatters reason's tower, Makes the clearest vision blind. School thy feelings; condemnation Never pass on friend or foe, Though the tide of accusation Like a flood of truth may flow. Hear defense before deciding, And a ray of light may gleam, Showing thee what filth is hiding Underneath the shallow stream. Should affliction's acrid vial Burst o'er thy unsheltered head, School thy feelings to the trial; Half its bitterness hath fled. Art thou falsely, basely, slandered? Does the world begin to frown? Gauge thy wrath by wisdom's standard; Keep thy rising anger down. Rest thyself on this assurance: Time's a friend to innocence, And the patient, calm endurance Wins respect and aids defense. Noblest minds have finest feelings; Quiv'ring strings a breath can move; And the gospel's sweet revealings Tune them with the key of love. Hearts so sensitively molded Strongly fortified should be, Trained to firmness and enfolded In a calm tranquility. Wound not willfully another; Conquer haste with reason's might; School thy feelings, sister, brother; Train them in the path of right. School thy feelings, O my brother; Train thy warm, impulsive soul. Do not its emotions smother, But let wisdom's voice control. Charles W. Penrose

I DO NOT ASK FOR ANY CROWN

I do not ask for any crown But that which all may win; Nor try to conquer any world Except the one within. Louisa May Alcott

A LITTLE EXPLAINED

A little explained, A little endured, A little passed over, And the quarrel is cured. Author Unknown

NOW 'TIS THE SPRING

Now 'tis the spring, and weeds are shallow-rooted; Suffer them now and they'll o'ergrow the garden. William Shakespeare, King Henry VI 2.3.1.31-32

MAN-MAKING

We are all blind until we see That in the human plan Nothing is worth the making if It does not make the man. Why build these cities glorious If man unbuilded goes? In vain we build the world, unless The builder also grows. Edwin Markham

Additional poems about self-mastery appear in the topics "Character," "Choice and Accountability," "Perseverance," "Success," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
