Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Sharing the Gospel

HAPPY IS HE WHO WALKS THE PATH OF PEACE

Happy is he who walks the path of peace, With faith to guide his steps day after day; But happier, his earthly joys increase, Who leads another in the perfect way. Herbert Hershey

OTHER SHEEP I HAVE

Look from the sphere of endless day, Oh, God of mercy and of night! In pity look on those who stray, Benighted, in this land of light. In peopled vale, in lonely glen, In crowded mart by stream or sea, How many of the sons of men Hear not the message sent from thee. Send forth thy heralds, Lord, to call The thoughtless young, the hardened old, A wandering flock, and bring them all To the Good Shepherd's peaceful fold. Send them thy mighty word to speak Till faith shall dawn and doubt depart, To awe the bold, to stay the weak, And bind and heal the broken heart. Then all these wastes, a dreary scene, On which, with sorrowing eyes, we gaze, Shall grow with living waters green, And lift to heaven the voice of praise. William Cullen Bryant

GO, YE MESSENGERS OF GLORY

Go, ye messengers of glory; Run, ye legates of the skies. Go and tell the pleasing story That a glorious angel flies, Great and mighty, Great and mighty, With a message from the skies. Go to ev'ry tribe and nation; Visit ev'ry land and clime. Sound to all the proclamation; Tell to all the truth sublime: That the gospel, That the gospel Does in ancient glory shine. Go, to all the gospel carry; Let the joyful news abound. Go till ev'ry nation hear you, Jew and Gentile greet the sound. Let the gospel, Let the gospel Echo all the earth around. Bearing seed of heav'nly virtue, Scatter it o'er all the earth. Go! Jehovah will support you; Gather all the sheaves of worth. Then, with Jesus, Then, with Jesus Reign in glory on the earth. John Taylor

THE VOICE OF GOD AGAIN IS HEARD

The voice of God again is heard, The silence has been broken, The curse of darkness is withdrawn, The Lord from heav'n hath spoken. Rejoice ye living and ye dead! Rejoice, for your salvation Begins anew this happy morn Of final dispensation. O messengers of truth, go forth, Proclaim the gospel story, Go forth the nations to prepare, To greet the King of Glory. Shout we hosanna, shout again, Till all creation blending Shall join in one great grand Amen Of anthems never ending. Evan Stephens

JOSEPH SMITH, OUR PROPHET

He came to earth, our Prophet dear, The holy gospel to restore; He came, and angels hovered near, Appearing to him o'er and o'er. The Lord had sent him from the skies A heavenly mission to fulfill; He came to find the sacred prize Hid in Cumorah's lonely hill. He came, and Saints rose up to hear The heavenly message he had brought; The world will yet his name revere, And will accept the truths he taught. He boldly strove God's word to teach, And to obey his full command, To every nation it shall reach, And firm and mighty it shall stand. Then let the Saints of latter days Unfurl his standard to the world, The highest tribute to him raise Till hate and envy down are hurled. The Savior died that we might live, The Prophet died to prove his worth;Both love and reverence we will give, And bless the day of Joseph's birth. Annie Malin

TESTIMONY OF DAVID WHITMER

He lifted up his voice, and thus replied: My written statement I have ne'er denied; I saw the angel, and I heard his voice, And wond'rous things, that made my heart rejoice. This interview was sought with earnest prayer, The Prophet and three witnesses were there; But Martin, conscience-struck, declined to stay, And wandered off alone, to watch and pray. I do not know the angel's rank, or name, Who on this great and glorious mission came; I know that he was clothed with power and might, And was surrounded with effulgent light. No tongue can tell the glory and the power That was revealed to us in that blest hour; The plates of brass and gold the angel took And placed before us like an open book. We saw the fine engravings on them, too, And heard the voice declare the book is true; No power on earth could from our minds efface The glorious visions of this trysting-place. We've done, as then commanded we should do, And testified the "Mormon Book" is true; And was translated by the power given The Prophet Joseph by the God of Heaven. Thousands of people have been here to see The "copy" Oliver has left with me; The characters, moreover, Martin took Professor Anthon—words of sacred book. Some visit me who Mormonism hate, Some ranking low, and some of high estate; I tell them all, as now I say to you, The Book of Mormon is of God, and true. In yonder room I have preserved with care The printer's copy, and the words so rare, The very words from Nephi's sacred book, That Martin to Professor Anthon took. If this be not the truth, there is no truth, And I have been mistaken from my youth; If I'm mistaken, you may know from thence That there's no God, no law, no life, no sense. I know there is a God—I've heard His voice, And in His power and truth do still rejoice; Though fools may ridicule and laugh today They yet shall know the truth of what I say. I've suffered persecution at the hands Of hireling preachers, and their Christian bands; I've braved their hatred and have them withstood, While thirsting for the youthful Prophet's blood. They came, four hundred strong, with visage bold, And said, "Deny this story you have told; And by our sacred honor, we'll engage To save you from the mob's infuriate rage." A mighty power came on me, and I spake In words that made the guilty mobbers quake; And trembling seized the surging crowd, and fear, But left unharmed, I felt that God was near. James H. Hunt, based on an interview with David Whitmer in 1883

PRAISE TO THE MAN

Praise to the man who communed with Jehovah! Jesus anointed that Prophet and Seer. Blessed to open the last dispensation, Kings shall extol him, and nations revere. Praise to his mem'ry, he died as a martyr; Honored and blest be his ever great name! Long shall his blood, which was shed by assassins, Plead unto heav'n while the earth lauds his fame. Great is his glory and endless his priesthood. Ever and ever the keys he will hold. Faithful and true, he will enter his kingdom, Crowned in the midst of the prophets of old. Sacrifice brings forth the blessings of heaven; Earth must atone for the blood of that man. Wake up the world for the conflict of justice. Millions shall know "Brother Joseph" again. Hail to the Prophet, ascended to heaven! Traitors and tyrants now fight him in vain. Mingling with Gods, he can plan for his brethren; Death cannot conquer the hero again. William W. Phelps

OBEDIENCE

I said: "Let me walk in the fields." He said: "No, walk in the town." I said: "There are no flowers there." He said: "No flowers, but a crown." I said: "But the skies are black; There is nothing but noise and din." And He wept as He sent me back— "There is more," He said; "there is sin." I said: "But the air is thick, And fogs are veiling the sun." He answered: "Yet souls are sick, And souls in the dark undone!" I said: "I shall miss the light, And friends will miss me, they say." He answered: "Choose tonight If I am to miss you or they." I pleaded for time to be given. He said: "Is it hard to decide? It will not seem so hard in heaven To have followed the steps of your Guide." I cast one look at the fields, Then set my face to the town; He said, "My child, do you yield? Will you leave the flowers for the crown?" Then into His hand went mine; And into my heart came He; And I walk in a light divine, The path I had feared to see. George MacDonald

A MORMON BOY

My father is a Mormon true, And when I am a man, I want to be like him, and do Just all the good I can. My faults I'll try to overcome, And while I life enjoy, With pride I'll lift my head and say, I am a Mormon boy. A Mormon boy, a Mormon boy, I am a Mormon boy. I might be envied by a king, For I am a Mormon boy. Evan Stephens

CALLED TO SERVE

Called to serve Him, heav'nly King of glory, Chosen e'er to witness for his name, Far and wide we tell the Father's story, Far and wide his love proclaim. Called to know the richness of his blessing— Sons and daughters, children of a King— Glad of heart, his holy name confessing, Praises unto him we bring. Onward, ever onward, as we glory in his name; Onward, ever onward, as we glory in his name; Forward, pressing forward, as a triumph song we sing. God our strength will be; press forward ever, Called to serve our King. Grace Gordon, alt.

THE WORLD'S GREAT HEART IS ACHING

The world's great heart is aching, Aching fiercely in the night; And God alone can heal it, And God alone give light; And the ones to take that message— To bear the living word Are you and I, my brothers And my sisters who have heard. Author Unknown

ARISE, O GLORIOUS ZION

Arise, O glorious Zion, Thou joy of latter days, Whom countless Saints rely on To gain a resting place. Arise and shine in splendor Amid the world's deep night, For God, thy sure defender, Is now thy life and light. From Zion's favored dwelling The gospel issues forth, The covenant revealing To gather all the earth; And Saints, the message bringing To all the sons of men, With the redeemed shall, singing, To Zion come again. Thru painful tribulation We walk the narrow road And battle with temptation To gain that blest abode. But patient, firm endurance, With glory in our view, The Spirit's bright assurance Will bring us conq'rors through. Oh, grant, Eternal Father, That we may faithful be, With all the just to gather, And thy salvation see! Then, with the hosts of heaven, We'll sing th'immortal theme: To him be glory given, Whose blood did us redeem. William G. Mills

From FOREIGN MISSIONS IN BATTLE ARRAY

An endless line of splendor, These troops with heaven for home, They gird the earth with valor, They heed their King's command. Onward the line advances, Shaking the hills with power, Slaying the hidden demons, The lions that devour. No bloodshed in the wrestling,— But souls new-born arise— The nations growing kinder, The child-hearts growing wise. What is the final ending? The issue, can we know? Will Christ outlive Mohammed? Will Kali's altar go? This is our faith tremendous,— Our wild hope, who shall scorn,— That in the name of Jesus The world shall be reborn! Vachel Lindsay

COME, ALL YE SONS OF GOD

Come, all ye sons of God who have received the priesthood; Go spread the gospel wide and gather in his people. The latter-day work has begun, To gather scattered Israel in, And bring them back to Zion to praise the Lamb. Come, all ye scattered sheep, and listen to your Shepherd, While you the blessings reap which long have been predicted. By prophets long it's been foretold, He'll gather you into his fold, And bring you home to Zion to praise the Lamb. Repent and be baptized, and have your sins remitted, And get the Spirit's zeal; oh, then you'll be united. Go cast upon him all your care; He will regard your humble prayer, And bring you home to Zion to praise the Lamb. And when your grief is o'er and ended your affliction, Your spirits then will soar to await the Resurrection; And then his presence you'll enjoy, In heav'nly bliss your time employ, A thousand years in Zion to praise the Lamb. Thomas Davenport

WHAT'S HALLOWED GROUND?

What's hallowed ground? 'Tis what gives birth To sacred thoughts in souls of worth; Peace, independence, truth go forth earth's compass round And your priesthood shall make all earth hallowed ground. Thomas Campbell

WHAT WAS WITNESSED IN THE HEAVENS?

What was witnessed in the heavens? Why, an angel earthward bound. Had he something with him bringing? Yes, the gospel, joyful sound! It was to be preached in power On the earth, the angel said, To all men, all tongues and nations That upon its face are spread. Had we not before the gospel? Yes, it came of old to men. Then what is this latter gospel? 'Tis the first one come again. This was preached by Paul and Peter And by Jesus Christ, the Head. This we latter Saints are preaching; We their footsteps wish to tread. Where so long has been the gospel? Did it pass from earth away? Yes, 'twas taken back to heaven Till should dawn a brighter day. What became of those departed, Knowing not the gospel plan? In the spirit world they'll hear it; God is just to ev'ry man. John S. Davis

HOW SWEET 'TWILL BE AT EVENING

How sweet 'twill be at evening If you and I can say, Good Master, we've been seeking The lambs that went astray. Heartsore and faint from hunger, We heard them making moan, And lo, we've come at nightfall Bringing them safely home. Author Unknown

I'LL GO WHERE YOU WANT ME TO GO

It may not be on the mountain height Or over the stormy sea, It may not be at the battle's front My Lord will have need of me. But if, by a still, small voice he calls To paths that I do not know, I'll answer, dear Lord, with my hand in thine: I'll go where you want me to go. Perhaps today there are loving words Which Jesus would have me speak; There may be now in the paths of sin Some wand'rer whom I should seek. O Savior, if thou wilt be my guide, Tho dark and rugged the way, My voice shall echo the message sweet: I'll say what you want me to say. There's surely somewhere a lowly place In earth's harvest fields so wide Where I may labor through life's short day For Jesus, the Crucified. So trusting my all to thy tender care, And knowing thou lovest me, I'll do thy will with a heart sincere: I'll be what you want me to be. I'll go where you want me to go, dear Lord, Over mountain or plain or sea; I'll say what you want me to say, dear Lord; I'll be what you want me to be. Mary Brown

Additional poems that relate to sharing the gospel appear in "Example," "Faith," "Friendship," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
