Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Sin and Repentance

WHAT WIN I?

What win I, if I gain the thing I seek? A dream, a breath, a froth of fleeting joy. Who buys a minute's mirth to wail a week? Or sells eternity to get a toy? For one sweet grape who will the vine destroy? William Shakespeare, Lucrece

ALL THE WATER IN THE WORLD

All the water in the world, However hard it tried, Could never sink the smallest ship Unless it got inside. And all the evil in the world, The blackest kind of sin, Can never hurt you the least bit Unless you let it in. Author Unknown

A FENCE OR AN AMBULANCE

'Twas a dangerous cliff, as they freely confessed, Though to walk near its crest was so pleasant; But over its terrible edge there had slipped A duke and full many a peasant. So the people said something would have to be done, But their project did not at all tally; Some said, "Put a fence around the edge of the cliff," Some, "An ambulance down in the valley." But the cry for the ambulance carried the day, For it spread through the neighboring city; A fence may be useful or not, it is true, But each heart became brimful of pity For those who slipped over that dangerous cliff; And the dwellers in highway and alley Gave pounds or gave pence, not to put up a fence, But an ambulance down in the valley. "For the cliff is all right, if you're careful," they said, "And, if folks even slip and are dropping, It isn't the slipping that hurts them so much, As the shock down below when they're stopping." So day after day, as these mishaps occurred, Quick forth would these rescuers sally To pick up the victims who fell off the cliff, With their ambulance down in the valley. Then an old sage remarked: "It's a marvel to me That people give far more attention To repairing results than to stopping the cause, When they'd much better aim at prevention. Let us stop at its source all this mischief," cried he, "Come, neighbors and friends, let us rally; If the cliff we will fence we might almost dispense With the ambulance down in the valley." "Oh, he's a fanatic," the others rejoined, "Dispense with the ambulance? Never! He'd dispense with all charities, too, if he could; No! No! We'll support them forever. Aren't we picking up folks just as fast as they fall? And shall this man dictate to us? Shall he? Why should people of sense stop to put up a fence, While the ambulance works in the valley?" But a sensible few, who are practical too, Will not bear with such nonsense much longer; They believe that prevention is better than cure, And their party will soon be the stronger. Encourage them then, with your purse, voice, and pen, And while other philanthropists dally, They will scorn all pretense and put up a stout fence On the cliff that hangs over the valley. Better guide well the young than reclaim them when old, For the voice of true wisdom is calling, "To rescue the fallen is good, but 'tis best To prevent other people from falling." Better close up the source of temptation and crime Than deliver from dungeon or galley; Better put a strong fence round the top of the cliff Than an ambulance down in the valley. Joseph Malins

THE DEVIL CAN CITE SCRIPTURE

The Devil can cite Scripture for his purpose. An evil soul producing holy witness Is like a villain with a smiling cheek, A goodly apple rotten at the heart. Oh, what a goodly outside falsehood hath! William Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice 1.3.1.99-103

VICE IS A MONSTER

Vice is a monster of so frightful mien, As, to be hated, needs but to be seen; Yet seen too oft, familiar with her face, We first endure, then pity, then embrace. Alexander Pope

WITH THOUGHTLESS AND IMPATIENT HANDS

With thoughtless and impatient hands We tangle up the plans The Lord hath wrought. And when we cry in pain He saith, "Be quiet, man, while I untie the knot." Author Unknown

DROP, DROP, SLOW TEARS

Drop, drop, slow tears, And bathe those beauteous feet Which brought from heaven The news and prince of peace! Cease not, wet eyes, His mercies to entreat; To cry for vengeance Sin doth never cease; In your deep floods Drown all my faults and fears; Nor let his eye See sin but through my tears. Phineas Fletcher

From THE WORLD IS TOO MUCH WITH US

The world is too much with us; late and soon, Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers: Little we see in Nature that is ours; We have given our hearts away, a sordid boon! William Wordsworth

WHEN I PUT ON MY WORN-OUT TWEEDS

When I put on my worn-out tweeds And with my hands pull garden weeds, The likeness always comes to mind, 'Tween weeds and sins of human kind. For weeds will grow up anywhere In ground that's either foul or fair, And when you pull them, you're not through; They'll grow right up again for you. Some weeds have roots so great in length That pulling them is a test of strength, And they should be removed with care Or they'll kill good plants anywhere. It makes no difference where you go There's no place that the weeds can't grow; Some folks keep weeding, others won't, Some folks have gardens, others don't. So weeds and sin are quite the same In growth and action, not in name; But different is their origin: God makes the weeds, we make the sin. Author Unknown

MEN TAKE THE PURE IDEALS

Men take the pure ideals of their souls And lock them fast away, And never dream that things so beautiful Are fit for every day! So counterfeits pass current in their lives, And stones they use for bread, And starvingly and fearfully they walk Through life among the dead, Though never yet was pure ideal Too fair for them to make their Real. Author Unknown

FOR EACH DESCENT

For each descent from fair truth's lofty way, For each gross error which delays the soul, By that soul's gloom and loneliness we pay, And by the retarded journey to its goal. Author Unknown

Additional poems about sin and repentance appear in the topics "Choice and Accountability," "Forgiveness," "Jesus Christ: Our Savior," "Self-Mastery," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
