Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Success

THE MAN WHO THINKS HE CAN

If you think you are beaten, you are; If you think you dare not, you don't. If you like to win, but think you can't, It's almost a cinch you won't. If you think you'll lose, you're lost, For out in the world we find Success begins with a fellow's will; It's all in the state of mind. If you think you're outclassed, you are; You've got to think high to rise. You've got to be sure of yourself before You can ever win a prize. Life's battles don't always go To the stronger or faster man; But soon or late the man who wins Is the man who thinks he can. Walter D. Wintle

DON'T QUIT

When things go wrong, as they sometimes will, When the road you're treading seems all uphill, When the funds are low and the debts are high, And you want to smile, but you have to sigh, When care is pressing you down a bit, Rest, if you must—but don't you quit. Life is queer with its twists and turns, As every one of us sometimes learns, And many a failure turns about When he might have won had he stuck it out; Don't give up, though the pace seems slow— You might succeed with another blow. Often the goal is nearer than It seems to a faint and faltering man, Often the struggler has given up When he might have captured the victor's cup. And he learned too late, when the night slipped down, How close he was to the golden crown. Success is failure turned inside out— The silver tint of the clouds of doubt— And you never can tell how close you are, It may be near when it seems afar; So stick to the fight when you're hardest hit— It's when things seem worst that you mustn't quit. Author Unknown

SAID THE PIEMAN

The story of Simon called Simple Is one everybody has read; It is sweet, it is sad, and it tells of a lad Who wasn't quite right in the head. When he sought to buy pie of the pieman, Poor Simon was hopeful but rash, For he childishly thought that a pie could be bought Without any transfer of cash. But we mustn't speak harshly of Simon, Who was simply ahead of his time— Today he could buy a whole carload of pie By merely investing a dime. The up-to-date salesman would land him— Or, rather more likely, his wife— By letting him pay a few cents right away And installments the rest of his life. It's the way they sell pins and pianos, And paintings, potatoes and pants— For a few dollars down you can buy the whole town— As a prospect you haven't a chance. The fact that you're broke doesn't matter, Your only escape is to die—And as long as they take all the money you make, You might as well spend it for pie! Author Unknown

GREATLY BEGIN!

Greatly begin! though thou have time But for a line, be that sublime— Not failure, but low aim is crime. James Russell Lowell

CAN'T

Can't is the worst word that is written or spoken Doing more harm here than slander or lies. It has many a strong spirit broken, And with it many a good purpose dies. It springs from the lips of the thoughtless each morning, And robs us of courage we need through the day: It rings in our ears like a timely sent warning, And leaves when we falter and fall by the way. Can't is the father of feeble endeavor, The parent of terror and half-hearted work; It weakens the efforts of artisans clever, And makes of the toiler an indolent shirk. It poisons the soul of a man with a vision, It stifles in infancy many a plan; It greets honest toiling with open derision And mocks at the hopes and the dreams of a man. Can't is a word that none should speak without blushing; To utter it should be a symbol of shame; Ambition and courage it daily is crushing; It blights a man's purpose and shatters his aim. Despise it with all of your hatred of error, Refuse it the lodgment it seeks in your brain; Arm against it as a creature of terror, And all that you dream of you some day shall gain. Can't is a word that is doom to ambition, An enemy ambushed to shatter your will; Its prey is forever the man with a mission, And bows but to courage, and patience, and skill. Hate it with hatred that is deep and undying, For once it is welcomed 'twill break any man; Whatever the goal you are seeking, keep trying, And answer this demon by saying "I can." Edgar A. Guest

THERE IS NO THING WE CANNOT OVERCOME

There is no thing we cannot overcome; Say not thy evil instinct is inherited, Or that some trait unborn makes thy life forlorn; Back of thy parents and grandparents lies The great Eternal Will! That, too, is thine inheritance:— Strong—beautiful—divine, Some Lever of Success for one who tries. Author Unknown

MY WAGE

I bargained with Life for a penny, And Life would pay no more, However I begged at evening When I counted my scanty store; For Life is a just employer, He gives you what you ask, But once you have set the wages, Why, you must bear the task. I worked for a menial's hire, Only to learn, dismayed, That any wage I had asked of Life, Life would have paid. Jessie B. Rittenhouse

WHAT IS SUCCESS?

It's doing your work the best you can, And being just to your fellow man; It's making money, but holding friends, And staying true to your aims and ends; It's figuring how and learning why, And looking forward and thinking high, And dreaming a little and doing much; It's keeping always in closest touch With what is finest in word and deed; It's being thorough, yet making speed, It's daring blithely the field of chance While making labor a brave romance. It's going onward despite defeat, And fighting staunchly, but keeping sweet; It's being clean and it's playing fair; It's laughing lightly at Dame Despair; It's looking up to the stars above, And thinking deeply of life and love; It's struggling on with the will to win But taking loss with a cheerful grin; It's sharing sorrow, and work, and mirth And making better this good old earth; It's serving, striving, through stain and stress; It's doing your noblest—that's success. Author Unknown

Additional poems about success appear in the topics "Character," "Opportunity," "Perseverance," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
