Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Teaching

I TOOK A PIECE OF PLASTIC CLAY

I took a piece of plastic clay And idly fashioned it one day— And as my fingers pressed it, still It moved and yielded to my will. I came again when days were past; The bit of clay was hard at last. The form I gave it, still it bore, And I could change that form no more! I took a piece of living clay, And gently fashioned it day by day, And molded with my power and art A young child's soft and yielding heart. I came again when years were gone: It was a man I looked upon. He still that early impress bore, And I could fashion it never more. Author Unknown

THE ECHO

'Twas a sheep not a lamb That strayed away in the parable Jesus told, A grown-up sheep that strayed away From the ninety and nine in the fold. And why for the sheep should we seek And earnestly hope and pray? Because there is danger when sheep go wrong: They lead the lambs astray. Lambs will follow the sheep, you know, Wherever the sheep may stray. When sheep go wrong, It won't take long till the lambs are as wrong as they. And so with the sheep we earnestly plead For the sake of the lambs today, For when the sheep are lost What a terrible cost The lambs will have to pay. C. C. Miller

MY CHUM

He stood at the crossroads all alone, The sunlight in his face. He had no thought for the world unknown— He was set for a manly race. But the roads stretched east and the roads stretched west, And the lad knew not which road was best, So he chose the road that led him down, And he lost the race and the victor's crown. He was caught at last in an angry snare Because no one stood at the crossroads there To show him the better road. Another day at the self-same place, A boy with high hopes stood. He, too, was set for a manly race; He, too, was seeking the things that were good. But one was there who the roads did know. And that one showed him which way to go. So he turned from the road that would lead him down, And he won the race and the victor's crown. He walks today the highway fair Because one stood at the crossroads there To show him the better way. Author Unknown

IF WE WORK UPON MARBLE

If we work upon marble it will perish; If we work upon brass time will efface it; If we work upon immortal souls, If we imbue them with principles,With the just fear of the Creator and love of fellowmen, We engrave on those tablets something which will brighten all eternity. Daniel Webster

THE TEACHER

Lord, who am I to teach the way To little children day by day, So prone myself to go astray? I teach them knowledge, but I know How faint they flicker and how low The candles of my knowledge grow. I teach them power to will and do, But only now to learn anew My own great weakness through and through. I teach them love for all mankind And all God's creatures, but I find My love comes lagging far behind. Lord, if their guide I still must be, Oh, let the little children see The teacher leaning hard on Thee. Leslie Pinckney Hill

A DIAMOND IN THE ROUGH

A diamond in the rough is a diamond, sure enough, And before it ever sparkled it was made of diamond stuff. But someone had to find it or it never would be found, And someone had to grind it or it never would be ground. But it's found, and when it's ground, And when it's burnished bright, That diamond's everlastingly giving out its light. O teachers of our young folk, Don't say you've done enough;It may be that your rudest is A diamond in the rough. Author Unknown

FINDING GOD

I helped a little child to see That God had made a willow tree And God became more real to me. I tried to lead a child through play To grow more Christlike every day, And I myself became that way. I joined a junior child in prayer And as we bowed in worship there I felt the dear Lord's loving care. Lord, keep us ever quick to see By guiding children we find thee. Author Unknown

I SAW TOMORROW PASSING

I saw tomorrow passing on little children's feet And on their forms and faces her prophecies complete. And then I saw tomorrow look at me through little children's eyes. And I thought how carefully I must teach if I am wise! Author Unknown

Additional poems about teaching appear in the topics "Children," "Example," "Home and Family," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
