Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Temples

A DAY IN THE TEMPLE

The fretful cares of yesterday, I left behind me on the way To this most peaceful, quiet spot; So, pardon me if I am not Inclined to whisper or to chat And gossip about this and that, About things being said and done In every land beneath the sun. I come here to meditate, And try to help, ere it's too late, Some soul who's passed this mortal sphere, Who had no chance to enter here. Worry not o'er life's swift paces; Stand ye now in holy places, When plagues visit every nation Spreading thereon desolation. Ye Saints of God should now rejoice And praise Him with a mighty voice, And sing aloud your songs of love For His rich blessings from above. David Astin

HOW BEAUTIFUL THY TEMPLES, LORD

How beautiful thy temples, Lord! Each one a sacred shrine, Where faithful Saints, with one accord, Engage in work divine. How beautiful some aid to give To dear ones we call dead, But who indeed as spirits live; They've only gone ahead. How beautiful thy message, Lord, The gospel, pure and true, In these our days to earth restored And taught to men anew. How beautiful its faith and hope; All mankind it would save, Including in its aim and scope The souls beyond the grave. How beautiful thy promise, Lord, That we may grow in truth, And live, exalted by thy word, In endless, glorious youth. With loved ones sealed in holiness By sacred temple rites, Worlds without end we may progress From heights to greater heights. Frank I. Kooyman

THOU, WHOSE UNMEASURED TEMPLE STANDS

Thou, whose unmeasured temple stands, Built over earth and sea, Accept the walls that human hands Have raised, O God, to Thee. And let the Comforter and Friend, Thy Holy Spirit, meet With those who here in worship bend Before Thy mercy seat. May they who err be guided here To find the better way; And they who mourn, and they who fear, Be strengthened as they pray. May faith grow firm, and love grow warm, And pure devotion rise, While round these hallowed walls the storm Of earth-born passion dies. William Cullen Bryant

HOLY TEMPLES ON MOUNT ZION

Holy temples on Mount Zion In a lofty splendor shine, Avenues to exaltation, Symbols of a love divine. And their kindly portals beckon To serenity and prayer, Valiant children of the promise, Pledged to sacred service there. Merciful and gracious Father, Purify our hearts, we pray; Bless our mission of redemption In thy hallowed house each day, Till at length our faithful kindred, Sealed with us eternally In celestial bonds of union, Sing hosannas unto thee. Sing aloud, ye heav'nly chorus, Anthems of eternal praise To the glorious King Immanuel! Sing with Saints of latter days! Let the mountains shout for gladness, And the valleys joyful be, While the stars acclaim in rapture, For the prisoners shall go free. Archibald F. Bennett

SANCTUARY

On these white walls, this House of Prayer, The light of heaven falls everywhere. And as we pass its sacred gate Three lessons glorious await: Have faith and let your faith inspire Your fellowmen with holy fire; Have hope and let its presence glow That all the power of God may know; Have love and let it steadfast be Like unto Christ's at Calvary. C. Frank Steele

GOD IS IN HIS HOLY TEMPLE

God is in his holy temple. Earthly thoughts, be silent now, While with rev'rence we assemble And before his presence bow. He is with us, now and ever, When we call upon his name, Aiding ev'ry good endeavor, Guiding ev'ry upward aim. God is in his holy temple, In the pure and holy mind, In the rev'rent heart and simple, In the soul from sin refined. Banish then each base emotion. Lift us up, O Lord, to thee; Let our souls, in pure devotion, Temples for thy worship be. Author Unknown

IN THE SHADOW OF THE TEMPLE

I walked today in Temple Square With slow, unhurried gait. I think the flowers are fairer there; The seasons seem to wait. I gazed about this peaceful place And fell beneath its spell. The sun gleamed on Moroni's face; I heard a distant bell. And as I walked beneath the spires, My soul within me stirred! I heard the singing of the choir; I felt a hungering for his word. My earthly ears are not attuned To holy realms on high, But I am sure I faintly heard The rush of angels in the sky. Could this be just a minute taste Of heaven's encircling clime? If this should really be the case, I must make haste to make it mine! Marion Amy Knight

HEARTS MUST BE PURE

Hearts must be pure to come within these walls, Where spreads a feast unknown to festive halls. Freely partake, for freely God hath given, And taste the holy joys that tell of heaven. Here learn of Him who triumphed o'er the grave, And unto men the keys, the kingdom gave; Joined here by powers that past and present bind The living and the dead perfection find. Orson F. Whitney

TEMPLE MARRIAGE

I stood before the gates of God's great dome And heard him whisper softly, "Come to me." I cried aloud, "O Lord, I come to thee! Yet give me strength to walk most proudly home. I give thee promise nevermore to roam, I give thee pledge of faith's fidelity; I seek no less than immortality, Yet, give me strength to walk most proudly home! "Do all who stand here make this covenant? Do all who come here lift their souls to God? I find the world less free, yet less content To tread their way on this thrice-trodden sod. Let none who walk the lesser road lament: And strengthen those who seek the steep ascent." Gail Alyn Peters

BEHOLD, THE MOUNTAIN OF THE LORD

Behold, the mountain of the Lord In latter days shall rise On mountaintops, above the hills, And draw the wond'ring eyes. To this shall joyful nations come; All tribes and tongues shall flow. "Up to the hill of God," they'll say, "And to his house we'll go." The rays that shine from Zion's hill Shall lighten ev'ry land; The King who reigns in Salem's tow'r Shall all the world command. Among the nations he shall judge; His judgments truth shall guide; His scepter shall protect the just And quell the sinner's pride. No strife shall rage, nor hostile feuds Disturb those peaceful years; To plowshares men shall beat their swords, To pruning hooks their spears. No longer host encount'ring host Shall crowds of slain deplore; They'll hang the trumpet in the hall And study war no more. Come, then, O house of Jacob, come, To worship at His shrine, And, walking in the light of God, With holy beauties shine. Come, then, O house of Jacob, come, To worship at His shrine,And, walking in the light of God, With holy beauties shine. Michael Bruce

1996 Deseret Book Co.
