Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Thanksgiving

OVER THE RIVER AND THROUGH THE WOODS

Over the river and through the woods, To grandmother's house we go; The horse knows the way To carry the sleigh, Through the white and drifted snow. Over the river and through the woods, Oh, how the wind doth blow! It stings the toes And bites the nose As over the ground we go. Over the river and through the woods, Now grandmother's house I spy! Hurrah for the fun! Is the pudding done? Hurrah for the pumpkin pie! Author Unknown

THE PILGRIM FATHERS

O God, beneath Thy guiding hand Our exiled fathers crossed the sea; And when they trod the wintry strand, With prayer and psalm they worshipped Thee. Thou heard'st, well pleased, the song, the prayer: Thy blessing came; and still its power Shall onward through all ages bear The memory of that holy hour. Laws, freedom, truth, and faith in God Came with those exiles o'er the waves, And where their pilgrim feet have trod, The God they trusted guards their graves. And here Thy name, O, God of love, Their children's children shall adore,Till these eternal hills remove, And spring adorns the earth no more. Leonard Bacon

LANDING OF THE PILGRIM FATHERS

The breaking waves dashed high On a stern and rockbound coast, And the woods against a stormy sky Their giant branches tossed; And the heavy night hung dark The hills and waters o'er, When a band of exiles moored their bark On the wild New England shore. Not as the conqueror comes, They, the truehearted, came; Not with roll of stirring drums, And the trumpet that sings of fame; Not as the flying come, In silence and in fear— They shook the depths of the desert's gloom With their hymns of lofty cheer. . . . What sought they thus afar? Bright jewels of the mine? The wealth of seas? the spoils of war? They sought a faith's pure shrine! Aye, call it holy ground, The soil where first they trod: They have left unstained what there they found— Freedom to worship God! Felicia D. Hemans

HEARTHSIDE SEASON

Loud in the night the ripe nuts fall, Crackling like frost in heavy beams: And bolder sounds the coyote's call To trouble the watch-dog's close-curled dreams. High on the garden's grape-vined wall A predatory green eye gleams. This is the time of the heaping bin, Of the granary's wealth and the cellar's store, The season for locking the firelight in And letting the winter storm wind roar. These are the days of tales to spin In happy talk round the fire once more. Frances Hall

GREAT KING OF HEAVEN

Great King of heav'n, our hearts we raise To thee in prayer, to thee in praise. The vales exult, the hills acclaim, And all thy works revere thy name. O Israel's God! Thine arm is strong. To thee all earth and skies belong, And with one voice in one glad chord, With myriad echoes, praise the Lord. Carrie Stockdale Thomas

Additional poems appropriate for the Thanksgiving holiday appear in the topics "God," "Gratitude," "Prayer and Worship," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
