Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Truth

MAGNA EST VERITAS

Here, in this little Bay, Full of tumultuous life and great repose, Where, twice a day, The purposeless, glad ocean comes and goes, Under high cliffs, and far from the huge town, I sit me down. For want of me the world's course will not fail: When all its work is done, the lie shall rot; The truth is great, and shall prevail, When none cares whether it prevail or not. Coventry Patmore

HAMMER AND ANVIL

Look forth and tell me what they do On Life's broad field. Oh still they fight, The false forever with the true, The wrong forever with the right. And still God's faithful ones, as men Who hold a fortress strong and high, Cry out in confidence again, And find a comfort in the cry: "Hammer away, ye hostile hands, Your hammers break, God's anvil stands." Older than pyramids or sphinx, Old as the stars themselves, the word Whereby, when other courage sinks, The courage born of Heaven is stirred. For, when God made the world and knew That good and evil could not blend, He planned, however men might do, What should be, would be in the end, And, though as thick as ocean sands They rain the blows, the anvil stands. Oh, many a time has this vain world Essayed to thwart the mighty plan; Its fleets and armies have been hurled Against the common rights of man. But wrecked Armadas, Waterloos, Empires abandoned to decay, Proclaim the truth they did not choose— What broken hammers strew the way! Though all the world together bands To smite it, still the anvil stands. Thou knowest that thy cause is just? Then rest in that; thy cause is sure. Thy word is true; oh, then it must In spite of slanderous tongues endure. As toward the crag the billow rides, Then falls back, shattered, to its place; As fans the breeze, the mountain sides, Nor moves the mountain from its base— So, in all times and in all lands Men's hammers break. God's anvil stands. Samuel Valentine Cole

OH SAY, WHAT IS TRUTH?

Oh say, what is truth? 'Tis the fairest gem That the riches of worlds can produce, And priceless the value of truth will be when The proud monarch's costliest diadem Is counted but dross and refuse. Yes, say, what is truth? 'Tis the brightest prize To which mortals or Gods can aspire. Go search in the depths where it glittering lies, Or ascend in pursuit to the loftiest skies: 'Tis an aim for the noblest desire. The sceptre may fall from the despot's grasp When with winds of stern justice he copes. But the pillar of truth will endure to the last, And its firm-rooted bulwarks outstand the rude blast And the wreck of the fell tyrant's hopes. Then say, what is truth? 'Tis the last and the first, For the limits of time it steps o'er. Tho the heavens depart and the earth's fountains burst, Truth, the sum of existence, will weather the worst, Eternal, unchanged, evermore. John Jaques

TRUTH FOREVER ON THE SCAFFOLD

Truth forever on the scaffold; Wrong forever on the throne; Yet the scaffold sways the future And beyond the dim unknown, Standeth God among the shadows Keeping watch above his own. James Russell Lowell

TRUTH HAS SUCH A FACE

Truth has such a face and such a mien, As to be lov'd needs only to be seen. John Dryden

IF YOU COULD HIE TO KOLOB

If you could hie to Kolob In the twinkling of an eye, And then continue onward With that same speed to fly, Do you think that you could ever, Through all eternity, Find out the generation Where Gods began to be? Or see the grand beginning, Where space did not extend? Or view the last creation, Where Gods and matter end? Methinks the Spirit whispers, "No man has found 'pure space,' Nor seen the outside curtains, Where nothing has a place." The works of God continue, And worlds and lives abound; Improvement and progression Have one eternal round. There is no end to matter; There is no end to space; There is no end to spirit; There is no end to race. There is no end to virtue; There is no end to might; There is no end to wisdom; There is no end to light. There is no end to union; There is no end to youth; There is no end to priesthood; There is no end to truth. There is no end to glory; There is no end to love; There is no end to being; There is no death above. There is no end to glory; There is no end to love; There is no end to being; There is no death above. William W. Phelps

FROM THE COWARDICE

From the cowardice that shrinks from new truth, From the laziness that is content with half-truth, From the arrogance that thinks it knows all truth, O God of truth, deliver us. Author Unknown

IT FORTIFIES MY SOUL TO KNOW

It fortifies my soul to know That though I perish, Truth is so; That howso'er I stray and range, Whate'er I do, Thou dost not change. I steadier step when I recall That if I slip, Thou dost not fall. Arthur Hugh Clough

Additional poems about truth appear in the topics "God," "Integrity," "Knowledge and Wisdom," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
