Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Work

THAT IS YOUR PLACE

Just where you stand in the conflict, that is your place; Just where you think that you are useless, hide not your face; God placed you there for a purpose, whate'er it be; Think He has chosen you for it; work loyally. Author Unknown

DUTY

I slept and dreamed that life was Beauty: I woke and found that life was Duty: Was then thy dream a shadowy lie? Toil on, sad heart, courageously, And thou shalt find thy dream to be A noonday light and truth to thee. Ellen S. Hooper

LIFTING AND LEANING

There are two kinds of people on earth today, Just two kinds of people, no more, I say. Not the good and the bad, for 'tis well understood The good are half bad and the bad are half good. Not the happy and sad, for the swift-flying years Bring each man his laughter and each man his tears. Not the rich and the poor, for to count a man's wealth You must first know the state of his conscience and health. Not the humble and proud, for in life's busy span Who puts on vain airs is not counted a man. No! the two kinds of people on earth I mean Are the people who lift and the people who lean. Wherever you go you will find the world's masses Are ever divided in just these two classes. And, strangely enough, you will find, too, I ween, There is only one lifter to twenty who lean. In which class are you? Are you easing the load Of overtaxed lifters who toil down the road? Or are you a leaner who lets others bear Your portion of worry and labor and care? Ella Wheeler Wilcox

HORSE SENSE

A horse can't pull while kicking. This fact I merely mention. And he can't kick while pulling, Which is my chief contention. Let's imitate the good old horse And lead a life that's fitting; Just pull an honest load, and then There'll be no time for kicking. Author Unknown

AS A MAN SOWETH

We must not hope to be mowers, And to gather the ripe gold ears, Unless we have first been sowers And watered the furrows with tears. It is not just as we take it, This mystical world of ours, Life's field will yield as we make it A harvest of thorns or of flowers. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe

DO THY WORK

Do thy work, it shall succeed In thine or another's day; And if denied the victor's mead, Thou shalt not lack the toiler's pay. John Greenleaf Whittier

IT COULDN'T BE DONE

Somebody said that it couldn't be done, But he with a chuckle replied That "maybe it couldn't," but he would be one Who wouldn't say so till he'd tried. So he buckled right in with the trace of a grin On his face. If he worried he hid it. He started to sing as he tackled the thing That couldn't be done, and he did it. Somebody scoffed: "Oh, you'll never do that; At least no one ever has done it"; But he took off his coat and he took off his hat, And the first thing we knew he'd begun it. With a lift of his chin and a bit of a grin, Without any doubting or quiddit, He started to sing as he tackled the thing That couldn't be done, and he did it! There are thousands to tell you it cannot be done. There are thousands to prophesy failure; There are thousands to point out to you, one by one, The dangers that wait to assail you. But just buckle in with a bit of a grin, Just take off your coat and go to it; Just start to sing as you tackle the thing That "cannot be done," and you'll do it. Edgar A. Guest

THE MAN THAT WANTS A GARDEN FAIR

The man that wants a garden fair, One small or very big, With flowers growing here and there, Must bend his back and dig. The things are very few in life, That wishes can attain. Whatever we want of any worth We've got to work to gain. It matters not what goal we seek, Its secret here reposes, We've got to work from week to week, To get results or roses. Author Unknown

From THE THREE BEST THINGS

Let me but do my work from day to day, In field or forest, at the desk or loom; In roaring market place or tranquil room; Let me but find it in my heart to say, When vagrant wishes beckon me astray, "This is my work; my blessing, not my doom. Of all who live, I am the one by whom This work can best be done in the right way." Then shall I see it not too great nor small, To suit my spirit and to prove my powers; Then shall I cheerful greet the laboring hours, And cheerful turn when the long shadows fall At eventide, to play and love and rest, Because I know for me my work is best. Henry van Dyke

THE MAN WHO DOES HIS BEST

A man must earn his hour of peace, Must pay for it, with hours of strife and care, Must win by toil the evening's sweet release, The rest that may be portioned for his share. The idler never knows it, never can. Peace is the glory of the happy man, And man must win contentment for his soul, Must battle for it bravely day by day. The peace he seeks is not a nearby goal. To claim it he must tread a rugged way. The shirker never knows a tranquil peace, Peace but rewards the man who does his best. Author Unknown

TRUE NOBILITY

Who does his task from day to day And meets whatever comes his way, Believing God has willed it so, Has found real greatness here below. Who guards his post, no matter where, Believing God must need him there, Although but lowly toil it be, Has risen to nobility. For great and low there's but one test; 'Tis that each man shall do his best. Who works with all the strength he can Shall never die in debt to man. Edgar A. Guest

WHO AM I?

I am the foundation of all prosperity. I am that from which all blessings flow. Everything that is of value in this world springs from me. I am the salt that gives life its savor. I am the sole support of the poor. And the rich who think they can do without me live futile lives—fill premature graves. I have made America. I have built her matchless industries, laid her incomparable railroads, created her citizens, and reared her skyscrapers. I am the friend of every worthy youth. If he makes my acquaintance when he is young and keeps me by his side throughout his life, I can do more for him than the richest parent. I keep bodies clean and fit, minds alert; and when neglected, both bodies and minds grow fat and sluggish. I am even the parent of genius itself. I am represented by every paper that flies from the press, in every loaf of bread that springs from the oven, in every train that crosses the continent, and in every ship that steams the ocean. Fools hate me; wise men love me. The man who keeps his hand in mine through life never dies—because that which he has created with my help lives on after he is gone. The man who shirks me and scorns my aid never lives— Never really lives , even though he may continue to breathe. Who am I? What am I? I am Work! Author Unknown

From THE LADDER OF ST. AUGUSTINE

The heights by great men reached and kept Were not attained by sudden flight, But they, while their companions slept, Were toiling upward in the night. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

Additional poems about work appear in the topics "Character," "Good Works," "Perseverance," "Success," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
