Jay A. Parry, Linda Ririe Gundry, Jack M. Lyon, Devan Jensen, Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Zion

THE SPRING OF GOD From "In April Once"

Across the edges of the world there blows a wind Mysterious with perfume of a Spring; A Spring that is not of the kindling earth, That's more than scent of bloom or gleam of bud; The Spring of God in flower! Down there where neither sun nor air came through, I felt it blow across my dungeon walls— The wind before the footsteps of the Lord! It bloweth now across the world; It strangely stirs the hearts of men; wars cease; Rare deeds familiar grow; fastings and prayers, Forgiveness, poverty; temples are built On visioned impulses, and children march On journeys with no end. Far off, far off He comes, And we are swept upon our knees As meadow grasses kneeling to the wind. William A. Percy

NINETY AND NINE

Ninety and nine are with dreams content; But the hope of a world made new Is the hundredth man who is grimly bent On making the dream come true. Ted Olsen

GLORIOUS THINGS ARE SUNG OF ZION

Glorious things are sung of Zion, Enoch's city seen of old, Where the righteous, being perfect, Walked with God in streets of gold. Love and virtue, faith and wisdom, Grace and gifts were all combined. As himself each loved his neighbor; All were one in heart and mind. There they shunn'd the pow'r of Satan And observed celestial laws; For in Adam-ondi-Ahman Zion rose where Eden was. When beyond the pow'r of evil, So that none could covet wealth, One continual feast of blessings Crown'd their days with peace and health. Then the tow'rs of Zion glittered Like the sun in yonder skies, And the wicked stood and trembled, Filled with wonder and surprise. Then their faith and works were perfect; Lo, they followed their great Head! So the city went to heaven, And the world said, "Zion's fled!" When the Lord returns with Zion, And we hear the watchman cry, Then we'll surely be united, And we'll all see eye to eye. Then we'll mingle with the angels, And the Lord will bless his own. Then the earth will be as Eden, And we'll know as we are known. William W. Phelps

PARADISE

Once in a dream I saw the flowers That bud and bloom in Paradise; More fair are they than waking eyes Have seen in all this world of ours. And faint the perfume-bearing rose, And faint the lily on its stem, And faint the perfect violet, Compared with them. I heard the songs of paradise; Each bird sat singing in its place; A tender song so full of grace It soared like incense to the skies. Each bird sat singing to its mate Soft cooing notes among the trees: The nightingale herself were cold To such as these. I saw the fourfold River flow, And deep it was, with golden sand; It flowed between a mossy land With murmured music grave and low. It hath refreshment for all thirst, For fainting spirits strength and rest: Earth holds not such a draught as this From east to west. The Tree of Life stood budding there, Abundant with its twelvefold fruits; Eternal sap sustains its roots, Its shadowing branches fill the air. Its leaves are healing for the world, Its fruit the hungry world can feed Sweeter than honey to the taste And balm indeed. I saw the Gate called Beautiful; And looked, but scarce could look within; I saw the golden streets begin, And outskirts of the glassy pool. Oh harps, oh crowns of plenteous stars, Oh green palm-branches, many-leaved— Eye hath not seen, nor ear hath heard, Nor heart conceived. I hope to see these things again, But not as once in dreams by night; To see them with my very sight, And touch and handle and attain: To have all heaven beneath my feet For narrow way that once they trod; To have my part with all the saints And with my God. Christina Rossetti

THE NEW AGE

When navies are forgotten And fleets are useless things, When the dove shall warm her bosom Beneath the eagle's wings; When the memory of battles At last is strange and old, When nations have one banner And creeds have found one fold; When the Hand that sprinkles midnight With its dust of powdered suns Has hushed this tiny tumult Of sects, and swords, and guns, Then hate's last note of discord In all God's world shall cease In the conquest which is service, In the victory which is peace! Frederick Lawrence Knowles

HAIL TO THE BRIGHTNESS OF ZION'S GLAD MORNING!

Hail to the brightness of Zion's glad morning! Joy to the lands that in darkness have lain! Hushed be the accents of sorrow and mourning. Zion in triumph begins her glad reign. Hail to the brightness of Zion's glad morning, Long by the prophets of Israel foretold! Hail to the millions from bondage returning! Gentiles and Jews the glad vision behold. Lo! in the desert the flowers are springing; Streams, ever copious, are gliding along. Loud from the mountaintops echoes are ringing; Wastes rise in verdure and mingle in song. Hark! from all lands, from the isles of the ocean, Praise to Jehovah ascending on high. Fallen the engines of war and commotion; Shouts of salvation are rending the sky. Thomas Hastings

FROM ALL THAT DWELL BELOW THE SKIES

From all that dwell below the skies, Let the Creator's praise arise; Let the Redeemer's name be sung Through ev'ry land, by ev'ry tongue. In ev'ry land begin the song; To ev'ry land the strains belong. In cheerful sounds all voices raise And fill the world with loudest praise. Your lofty themes, ye mortals, bring; In songs of praise divinely sing. The great salvation loud proclaim, And shout for joy the Savior's name. Eternal are thy mercies, Lord; Eternal truth attends thy word. Thy praise shall sound from shore to shore, Till suns shall rise and set no more. Isaac Watts

THE CITY OF OUR HOPES

Hail the glorious Golden City, Pictured by the seers of old! Everlasting light shines o'er it, Wondrous tales of it are told:Only righteous men and women Dwell within its gleaming wall; Wrong is banished from its borders, Justice reigns supreme o'er all. We are builders of that city; All our joys and all our groans Help to rear its shining ramparts; All our lives are building stones Whether humble or exalted, All are called to task divine; All must aid alike to carry Forward one sublime design. And the work that we have builded, Oft with bleeding hands and tears, Oft in error, oft in anguish, Will not perish with our years: It will live and shine transfigured In the final reign of Right; It will merge into the splendors Of the City of the Light. Felix Adler

Additional poems about Zion appear in the topics "Jesus Christ: The Second Coming," "Sharing the Gospel," and elsewhere.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
