Tetsuko lived by a high mountain in Japan. She was excited because she was going to school for the very first time. But as she was dressing in her new school uniform, her stomach began to hurt. She didn’t feel like eating breakfast, and she began to cry.

Okasan (Mother) asked, “What is the matter, Tetsuko? Do you feel sick?”

“Yes. My stomach hurts, and I don’t think I will be able to go to school today,” she sobbed.

Otosan (Father) took her hand in his and said, “I think I know what might be wrong with you. This is your first day of school. You will be away from home all day, and you don’t know what to expect. I had the same feeling when I started my job. Would you like me to give you a special father’s blessing?”

Tetsuko nodded.

Otosan placed his hands upon her head and gave her a blessing. He thanked Heavenly Father for her and for the happiness she brought them. He blessed her to feel better, to not be afraid, and to feel peace in her heart.

Tetsuko left for school. That afternoon she ran into the house, calling, “Okasan! I’m home. It was fun at school. My teacher is nice, and I met some new friends.”

Her mother said, “I’m happy you had such a good day and that Otosan was able to give you a special blessing.”

Our Heavenly Father gave his authority to certain men so that his work could be done. It is called the priesthood. Priesthood means the power and authority to act for our Heavenly Father.

How would things be different if we didn’t have the priesthood? The Church would not have been organized; no one could be baptized or receive the gift of the Holy Ghost; no one could receive the blessings of the temple; and no one could return to live with Heavenly Father. Through the priesthood, all of Heavenly Father’s children can be blessed.

Color the figures on page 11. Remove the page from the magazine and mount it on heavy paper. Then cut the figures out and use them to share the story of Tetsuko with your family and friends during a family home evening. Talk about the priesthood authority that Tetsuko’s father used to bless her. To use the figures on a flannel board, paste a small piece of flannel or sandpaper on the back of each one.

1.  Find pictures in the meetinghouse library or Church magazines that show priesthood ordinances (for example, a baby being blessed, someone being baptized, the sacrament being administered). Give a picture to each class and have them discuss the priesthood ordinance shown and how it blesses them.

2.  Ask the children how the priesthood can bless their families. Write on the chalkboard the things they say.

3.  Have children draw a picture to illustrate the following terms to add to their “My Articles of Faith Book” (see Sharing Time, February 1995, page 12): priesthood—the power and authority to act for our Heavenly Father; authority—the right to use or give power; laying on of hands—part of the ordinance when a priesthood blessing is given.
