Mark E. Petersen, Jaredites ( 1984)

A HIDDEN PEOPLE

The Jaredite nation is unknown in world history to any but Latter-day Saints. It was hidden by the Almighty from all other peoples. Its life span probably covered nearly twenty centuries, from shortly after the Flood to possibly 400 to 500 B.C.

This mysterious people left their mark on two hemispheres and produced populations of untold millions. They originated in a heavenly miracle and expired in degradation and civil war. An early American nation for most of its existence, its roots went back to the Tower of Babel in ancient Mesopotamia, affirming that there was such a tower, despite the doubts of some scholars. These people came from it!

There was a confounding of the languages there also. These Jaredites lived through it, although their own speech was not affected.

And there was a dispersion by divine decree. These people took an important part in it. Like later dispersions, it grew out of wickedness, a senseless rebellion against God. Jared and his family were exceptions, however. In this dispersion they were moved from Babel to the choicest land on earth, because they loved the Lord and sought to serve him.

But God had placed firm conditions on the occupancy of that promised land. He pronounced both a blessing and a curse upon it. If those dwelling there would serve the Lord, he would prosper them. If they rebelled against him, they would face the threat of utter destruction. This is a lesson that the Jaredite nation never learned.

At various periods in their lives they enjoyed the rich fruits of obedience, but when sin finally triumphed, they collapsed in the throes of corruption and rebellion. They should have known—we all should understand—that no person or nation can fight God and win.

Theirs was a suicidal history. When at last they turned completely away from the Lord, they fell under his threat of certain destruction. Their fratricidal wars wiped out every family and every city—men, women, and children alike—leaving not a semblance of life to tell the tale.

The last survivor was the king himself, and he lived only long enough to see his realm decimated in wars. He died with nothing but a desperate memory of what it once was and a lingering glimpse of what it might have been.

This ancient nation dwelt in America for possibly two millennia, totally undiscovered by the rest of the world. It was born by itself, lived by itself, and died by itself. It had no foreign foe and suffered no attack from without.

The Jaredites sowed and nurtured the seeds of their own destruction. Yet over the years came periods of great prosperity when they became very wealthy and built many cities as they spread out in the land. They had productive mines of gold, silver, and other metals, and they trafficked in many forms of manufactured goods.

At times the Jaredites were granted some of the most remarkable spiritual manifestations known to man. No nation ever had greater promise for the future.

But dying by its own hand, the Jaredite nation moldered into dust, unseen, unheralded, unmourned, the price of rebellion against the God of this land who had personal relationships with its leaders but whom they subsequently refused to serve.

The eventual discovery of the Jaredite remains came by sheer accident, years after the final call to battle faded into silence. The Lord had brought to this continent another people who established a city called Zarahemla and also colonized much of the surrounding area. One group built a city deep in the wilderness. After some years of isolation they yearned to return to their relatives and friends in Zarahemla, but they had forgotten the way back. Though they sent out an expedition to determine the direction to travel, it failed. In its journey, however, the search party came upon the last battleground of the Jaredites. All members of the party were appalled at what they saw.

The expedition, after traveling through a region of "many waters," discovered "a land which was covered with bones of men, and of beasts, and was also covered with ruins of buildings of every kind, having discovered a land which had been peopled with a people who were as numerous as the hosts of Israel."

To prove that the things they had said were true, they brought back twenty-four plates of gold, filled with engravings, as well as large breastplates of brass and copper, and swords, the blades of which were "cankered with rust." No one in the land was able to interpret the language or the engravings on the plates. (Mosiah 8:8-11.)

Carrying their newfound records with them, the search party returned home. When later this colony did rejoin the people of Zarahemla, their leader, a man named Limhi, delivered the mysterious gold plates to Mosiah, the king of Zarahemla. Mosiah, who also was a prophet, had received from the Lord a Urim and Thummim by which he was able to translate from one language to another.

News of the discovery of the twenty-four plates soon circulated among the people of Zarahemla, and they were "desirous beyond measure to know concerning those people who had been destroyed."

Mosiah translated the records "by the means of those two stones which were fastened into the two rims of a bow. Now these things were prepared from the beginning, and were handed down from generation to generation, for the purpose of interpreting languages; and they have been kept and preserved by the hand of the Lord, that he should discover to every creature who should possess the land the iniquities and abominations of his people; and whosoever has these things is called seer, after the manner of old times.

"Now after Mosiah had finished translating these records, behold, it gave an account of the people who were destroyed, from the time that they were destroyed back to the building of the great tower, at the time the Lord confounded the language of the people and they were scattered abroad upon the face of all the earth, yea, and even from that time back until the creation of Adam.

"Now this account did cause the people of Mosiah to mourn exceedingly, yea, they were filled with sorrow; nevertheless it gave them much knowledge, in the which they did rejoice." (Mosiah 28:2-18.)

The Lord made known the history of the Jaredites to Mosiah's people as a lesson for them in the hope that they would not make the same mistake and rebel against him.

When the prophet Alma later gave these same twenty-four plates to his son Helaman for safekeeping, he explained this fact to him, saying:

"And now, I will speak unto you concerning those twenty-four plates, that ye keep them, that the mysteries and the works of darkness, and their secret works, or the secret works of those people who have been destroyed, may be made manifest unto this people; yea, all their murders, and robbings, and their plunderings, and all their wickedness and abominations, may be made manifest unto this people; yea, and that ye preserve these interpreters.

"For behold, the Lord saw that his people began to work in darkness, yea, work secret murders and abominations; therefore the Lord said, if they did not repent they should be destroyed from off the face of the earth." (Alma 37:21-22.)

These plates had been prepared by a Jaredite prophet named Ether, who, having witnessed the last battles of his people, recorded them on the plates; then he too was taken from the scene. He had fulfilled the Lord's purpose by describing how a mysterious and isolated people had lived through many centuries on the choicest area in the world, only to perish by their own hands.
