Mark E. Petersen, Jaredites ( 1984)

THE TOWER OF BABEL

Following the Flood, the descendants of Noah multiplied rapidly. They drifted east from the resting place of the ark and found a plain in the land of Shinar, where they settled down. The Bible tells us:

"They said one to another, Go to, let us make brick, and burn them throughly. And they had brick for stone, and slime had they for morter.

"And they said, Go to, let us build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven; and let us make a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.

"And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower, which the children of men builded. And the Lord said, Behold, the people is one, and they have all one language; and this they begin to do: and now nothing will be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do. Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may not understand one another's speech.

"So the Lord scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth: and they left off to build the city. Therefore is the name of it called Babel; because the Lord did there confound the language of all the earth: and from thence did the Lord scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth." (Gen. 11:2-9.)

In the Prophet Joseph Smith's revision of this passage, the latter part of it reads:

"And the Lord said, Behold the people are the same, and they all have the same language; and this tower they begin to build, and now, nothing will be restrained from them, which they have imagined, except I, the Lord, confound their language, that they may not understand one another's speech. So I, the Lord, will scatter them abroad from thence, upon all the face of the land, and unto every quarter of the earth.

"And they were confounded, and left off to build the city, and they hearkened not unto the Lord, therefore, is the name of it called Babel, because the Lord was displeased with their works, and did there confound the language of all the earth; and from thence did the Lord scatter them abroad upon the face thereof." (JST Gen. 11:5-6.)

In regard to the name Babel, the Jewish Masoretic text says, "Therefore the name of it was called Babel because the Lord there confounded the language of all the earth, and from thence did the Lord scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth."

The rendering by the Roman Catholic Jerusalem Bible is very interesting:

"Throughout the earth men spoke the same language, with the same language, with the same vocabulary. Now as they moved eastward they found a plain in the land of Shinar where they settled. They said to one another, `Come, let us make bricks and bake them in the fire.'—For stone they used bricks, and for mortar they used bitumen.—`Come,' they said, `let us build ourselves a town and a tower with its top reaching heaven. Let us make a name for ourselves, so that we may not be scattered about the whole earth.

"Now Yahweh came down to see the town and the tower that the sons of man had built. `So they are all a single people with a single language!' said Yahweh. `This is but the start of their undertakings! There will be nothing too hard for them to do. Come, let us go down and confuse their language on the spot so that they can no longer understand one another.' Yahweh scattered them thence over the whole face of the earth, and they stopped building the town. It was named Babel therefore, because there Yahweh confused the language of the whole earth. It was from there that Yahweh scattered them over the whole face of the earth."

The name Babylon is derived from Babel. Well-known throughout both modern and ancient scripture, it is synonymous with evil, confusion, and "the great and abominable church."

The ancient city of Babylon supposedly was located beside the Euphrates River about 55 miles south of modern Baghdad. It is believed to have existed from the fourth millennium B.C. Under Hammurabi (1950 B.C.), the old Babylonian empire reached its zenith.

The plain of Shinar, where the tower was built, is sometimes called the plains of Babylonia.

Zikkurats, or stage towers, were characteristic features of the architecture of both Assyria and Babylonia in ancient times. Ruins of such towers have been found at Borsippa, near what is believed to be the site of old Babylon. Efforts have been made through tradition to associate these ruins with the tower of Babel, but such efforts have been unsuccessful.

There are other points of interest in the related scriptures. In Genesis, some passages use a plural form in reference to the acts of God. For example, God said, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness." (Gen. 1:26.)

Following the fall of Adam, he spoke, saying, "Behold, he is become as one of us." (Gen. 3:22.)

Similarly, regarding the Tower of Babel he declared, "Let us go down, and there confound their language." (Gen. 11:7.) Note the plural form that is used.

In the Book of Abraham we also find the plural form in the description of the various steps in creation: "And then the Lord said: Let us go down. And they went down at the beginning, and they, that is the Gods, organized and formed the heavens and the earth. And they (the Gods) said: Let there be light; and there was light. And they (the Gods) comprehended the light, for it was bright; and they divided the light, or caused it to be divided, from the darkness." (Abr. 4:1, 3-4.)

This plural form appears throughout Abraham's record of creation.

Note now how the Prophet Joseph Smith shed light on this matter. In his revision of the fall of Adam, we read: "And I the Lord God said unto mine Only Begotten, Behold, the man is become as one of us." (JST Gen. 3:28.) The mystery of the plural form is solved, and the language used regarding Babel becomes quite clear.

Since all versions of the Bible give essentially the same information as the King James Translation, and since the Book of Mormon provides adequate corroboration to the account, there is little if any reason for the believer in Holy Writ to doubt the story of Babel. There was such a tower, and there was a confusion of tongues in connection with it. The hundreds of languages and dialects existing today give evidence of it.

There was also a dispersion of the descendants of Noah, the Jaredites being an important part of it. Their voyage to America became evidence of the fact, and we have their written history to sustain it, the book of Ether in the Book of Mormon.
