Mark E. Petersen, Jaredites ( 1984)

A PRAYER TO BE SPARED

The predicted scattering of the people to all parts of the world seemingly was known well in advance of the fact, since it appears to have been one reason for constructing the tower. The builders planned to erect both a city and a tower, "lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth." (Gen. 11:4.)

Prophets may have warned them, since it was customary for the Lord to follow such a practice. But as Joseph Smith's revision indicates, "they hearkened not unto the Lord."

Notice of the confusion of tongues also was known previously at least to Jared and his brother, for they wished to avoid it.

Jared's brother was especially favored of the Lord because of his righteous life. In Ether we read:

"The brother of Jared being a large and mighty man, and a man highly favored of the Lord, Jared, his brother, said unto him: Cry unto the Lord, that he will not confound us that we may not understand our words.

"And it came to pass that the brother of Jared did cry unto the Lord, and the Lord had compassion upon Jared; therefore he did not confound the language of Jared; and Jared and his brother were not confounded."

But this did not satisfy Jared, who desired the same privilege for his friends. He appealed once more to his brother, saying, "Cry again unto the Lord, and it may be that he will turn away his anger from them who are our friends, that he confound not their language.

"And it came to pass that the brother of Jared did cry unto the Lord, and the Lord had compassion upon their friends and their families also, that they were not confounded."

Jared still had further thoughts. He was concerned about the dispersion.

"And it came to pass that Jared spake again unto his brother, saying: Go and inquire of the Lord whether he will drive us out of the land, and if he will drive us out of the land, cry unto him whither we shall go. And who knoweth but the Lord will carry us forth into a land which is choice above all the earth? And if it so be, let us be faithful unto the Lord, that we may receive it for our inheritance.

"And it came to pass that the brother of Jared did cry unto the Lord according to that which had been spoken by the mouth of Jared.

"And it came to pass that the Lord did hear the brother of Jared, and had compassion upon him, and said unto him: Go to and gather together thy flocks, both male and female, of every kind; and also of the seed of the earth of every kind; and thy families; and also Jared thy brother and his family; and also thy friends and their families, and the friends of Jared and their families. And when thou hast done this thou shalt go at the head of them down into the valley which is northward. And there will I meet thee, and I will go before thee into a land which is choice above all the lands of the earth."

The Lord then made a great promise to these men, telling them, "There will I bless thee and thy seed, and raise up unto me of thy seed, and of the seed of thy brother, and they who shall go with thee, a great nation. And there shall be none greater than the nation which I will raise up unto me of thy seed, upon all the face of the earth. And thus I will do unto thee because this long time ye have cried unto me." (Ether 1:34-43.)

But like all other divine blessings, this, too, rested on the obedience of the people. Here was their opportunity. How would the Jaredites respond?

Centuries later the Lord made a similar prediction to the Twelve Tribes of Israel as Moses brought them back from Egypt: "And it shall come to pass, if thou shalt hearken diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and to do all his commandments which I command thee this day, that the Lord thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the earth." (Deut. 28:1.)

In Moses' day, Palestine was a promised land; it still is. The Lord placed conditions on its occupancy, however. He said to ancient Israel:

"Thou shalt therefore keep the commandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which I command thee this day, to do them. Wherefore it shall come to pass, if ye hearken to these judgments, and keep, and do them, that the Lord thy God shall keep unto thee the covenant and the mercy which he sware unto thy fathers. . . . Thou shalt be blessed above all people." (Deut. 7:11-14.)

To further impress this great lesson upon Israel, the Lord declared: "Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse; a blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the Lord your God, which I command you this day: and a curse, if ye will not obey the commandments of the Lord your God, but turn aside out of the way which I command you this day, to go after other gods, which ye have not known." (Deut. 11:26-28.)

Thus we see that the Lord desires his people to advance and prosper in the earth.

He promised the Jaredites they could become the world's greatest nation of that time. He promised Israel the same blessing for their day. And he offers great opportunities to us who live today in the choice land of America. (See Ether 2:9-12.)

But fulfillment of all of God's promises rests upon obedience to his laws. What will be the outcome for us? The Jaredites failed to reach their potential; so did the Twelve Tribes, and for the same reason. Will we profit by their examples?
