Mark E. Petersen, Jaredites ( 1984)

THE JAREDITES PLAN TO LEAVE

The Jaredites' journey to the Promised Land over both land and sea would be a long and tedious undertaking. The sea voyage alone was to last 344 days.

Jared made preparations very much as did Noah, for he was to bring with him some farm animals, seeds of various kinds, birds, and even swarms of bees. The bees were known as "deseret" (Ether 2:3), a name that has become familiar in western America. Live fish were included, too, being carried in a tank specially prepared for the purpose.

The journey was divided into two stages. The first part took the people to the seashore, where they awaited further instructions from the Lord, who would tell them how to cross the ocean.

"And it came to pass that when they had come down into the valley of Nimrod the Lord came down and talked with the brother of Jared; and he was in a cloud, and the brother of Jared saw him not.

"And it came to pass that the Lord commanded them that they should go forth into the wilderness, yea, into that quarter where there never had man been. And it came to pass that the Lord did go before them, and did talk with them as he stood in a cloud, and gave directions whither they should travel."

The journey to the sea coast was described in this way: "It came to pass that they did cross many waters, being directed continually by the hand of the Lord."

Again the Lord impressed upon them that the land to which he was taking them was indeed choice above all others. He "would not suffer that they should stop beyond the sea in the wilderness, but he would that they should come forth even unto the land of promise, which was choice above all other lands, which the Lord God had preserved for a righteous people."

Apparently in traveling to the coast the people had to cross other waters as well as land, and to do so they had to build barges. This gave them experience for later on, when they would build eight barges for the journey over the seas.

The Lord now said:

"Go to work and build, after the manner of barges which ye have hitherto built. And it came to pass that the brother of Jared did go to work, and also his brethren, and built barges after the manner which they had built, according to the instructions of the Lord. And they were small, and they were light upon the water, even like unto the lightness of a fowl upon the water.

"And they were built after a manner that they were exceedingly tight, even that they would hold water like unto a dish; and the bottom thereof was tight like unto a dish; and the sides thereof were tight like unto a dish; and the ends thereof were peaked; and the top thereof was tight like unto a dish; and the length thereof was the length of a tree; and the door thereof, when it was shut, was tight like unto a dish."

When the work was finished, the brother of Jared cried out: "O Lord, I have performed the work which thou hast commanded me, and I have made the barges according as thou hast directed me. And behold, O Lord, in them there is no light; whither shall we steer? And also we shall perish, for in them we cannot breathe, save it is the air which is in them; therefore we shall perish."

The Lord replied, "Behold, thou shalt make a hole in the top, and also in the bottom; and when thou shalt suffer for air thou shalt unstop the hole and receive air. And if it be so that the water come in upon thee, behold, ye shall stop the hole, that ye may not perish in the flood.

"And it came to pass that the brother of Jared did so, according as the Lord had commanded."

Ventilation was now provided, but there was yet the problem of light within the barges. The brother of Jared called on the Lord again: "O Lord, behold I have done even as thou hast commanded me; and I have prepared the vessels for my people, and behold there is no light in them. Behold, O Lord, wilt thou suffer that we shall cross this great water in darkness?

"And the Lord said unto the brother of Jared: What will ye that I should do that ye may have light in your vessels? For behold, ye cannot have windows, for they will be dashed in pieces; neither shall ye take fire with you, for ye shall not go by the light of fire.

"For behold, ye shall be as a whale in the midst of the sea; for the mountain waves shall dash upon you. Nevertheless, I will bring you up again out of the depths of the sea; for the winds have gone forth out of my mouth, and also the rains and the floods have I sent forth.

"And behold, I prepare you against these things; for ye cannot cross this great deep save I prepare you against the waves of the sea, and the winds which have gone forth, and the floods which shall come. Therefore what will ye that I should prepare for you that ye may have light when ye are swallowed up in the depths of the sea?" (Ether 2.)

When the Lord asked, "What will ye that I should do that ye may have light in your vessels," he obviously expected the brother of Jared to exercise some ingenuity on his own part. The Lord would then expand his efforts as need be.
