Mark E. Petersen, Jaredites ( 1984)

ABOVE ALL OTHER LANDS

Our earth is one of the most important planets in the universe and is close to the dearest interests of God. He created it for his own divine purpose, which is, to bring about our immortality and eternal life. (Moses 1:33, 39.) And he made it for his Only Begotten Son, our Savior, for whom it will be a dwelling place on reaching its celestial state.

The earth's destiny is to become like the orb where God dwells. When it is sanctified to be part of the celestial kingdom, it will serve as a Urim and Thummim to the people who dwell upon it. (See D&C 130:8-9.)

Although classed among the small globes in the galaxies, earth is one of the most significant. Jesus came here for his mortal life. No other orb in all creation was so honored. Here he accomplished his atonement, the most important event that has ever happened. Here also he overcame death and brought about the resurrection of all mankind.

In its celestialized form, this earth will become the home of the "church of the Firstborn," of Saints who have earned the highest glory in the mansions of God, to dwell there with Christ in eternity, for it will be his. (See D&C 76:54-70, 94; 130:8)

Just as earth has special significance in the universe, so upon its surface is a particular geographic region of tremendous consequence, a place that is choice above all other parts of the world. It is a consecrated region reserved by the Almighty as the location on which he will bring about most of the greatest events of latter days and where already he has miraculously revealed his hand.

The selection and designation of this choice place came with Creation itself. Here the Lord planted a garden "eastward in Eden" where human life had its beginning. Here was the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, the sanctified gathering place. Here the Lord swept away the people of Noah because they polluted his holy land.

After the flood this region continued to be the choicest area on earth. Its status was not altered by the great deluge. "After the waters had receded from off the face of this land it became a choice land above all other lands, a chosen land of the Lord; wherefore the Lord would have that all men should serve him who dwell upon the face thereof."

So this most choice area had not lost its identity nor its destiny.

On this promised land the Savior ministered and established his church following his resurrection in Palestine. On this promised land he restored his church in latter days preparatory to his second coming. Here will be the location of the New Jerusalem, which will come down from heaven, a holy sanctuary of the Lord.

The earthly New Jerusalem will be built on this continent "unto a remnant of the seed of Joseph. . . . For as Joseph brought his father down into the land of Egypt, even so he died there; wherefore, the Lord brought a remnant of the seed of Joseph out of the land of Jerusalem, that he might be merciful unto the seed of Joseph that they should perish not, even as he was merciful unto the father of Joseph that he should perish not.

"Wherefore, the remnant of the house of Joseph shall be built upon this land; and it shall be a land of their inheritance; and they shall build up a holy city unto the Lord, like unto the Jerusalem of old; and they shall no more be confounded, until the end come when the earth shall pass away.

"And there shall be a new heaven and a new earth; and they shall be like unto the old save the old have passed away, and all things have become new.

"And then cometh the New Jerusalem; and blessed are they who dwell therein, for it is they whose garments are white through the blood of the Lamb; and they are they who are numbered among the remnant of the seed of Joseph, who were of the house of Israel.

"And then also cometh the Jerusalem of old; and the inhabitants thereof, blessed are they, for they have been washed in the blood of the Lamb; and they are they who were scattered and gathered in from the four quarters of the earth, and from the north countries, and are partakers of the fulfilling of the covenant which God made with their father, Abraham." (Ether 13: 2-11.)

In preparation for these great events, it was necessary that a remnant of the tribe of Joseph be brought here in advance. Thus, the Lord led Lehi and his party to this promised land, and Lehi blessed it for his family.

"Behold, said he, I have seen a vision, in which I know that Jerusalem is destroyed; and had we remained in Jerusalem we should also have perished.

"But, said he, notwithstanding our afflictions, we have obtained a land of promise, a land which is choice above all other lands; a land which the Lord God hath covenanted with me should be a land for the inheritance of my seed. Yea, the Lord hath covenanted this land unto me, and to my children forever, and also all those who should be led out of other countries by the hand of the Lord.

"Wherefore, I, Lehi, prophesy according to the workings of the Spirit which is in me, that there shall none come into this land save they shall be brought by the hand of the Lord.

"Wherefore, this land is consecrated unto him whom he shall bring. And if it so be that they shall serve him according to the commandments which he hath given, it shall be a land of liberty unto them; wherefore, they shall never be brought down into captivity; if so, it shall be because of iniquity; for if iniquity shall abound cursed shall be the land for their sakes, but unto the righteous it shall be blessed forever.

"And behold, it is wisdom that this land should be kept as yet from the knowledge of other nations; for behold, many nations would overrun the land, that there would be no place for an inheritance.

"Wherefore, I, Lehi, have obtained a promise, that inasmuch as those whom the Lord God shall bring out of the land of Jerusalem shall keep his commandments, they shall prosper upon the face of this land; and they shall be kept from all other nations, that they may possess this land unto themselves. And if it so be that they shall keep his commandments they shall be blessed upon the face of this land, and there shall be none to molest them, nor to take away the land of their inheritance; and they shall dwell safely forever." (2 Ne. 1:4-9.)

Also in preparation for the great events of latter days, the Lord raised up "a mighty nation of the Gentiles" upon this land as a major step in opening the way for the worldwide preaching of the gospel before the end shall come. The establishment of this nation was seen in vision by Nephi (1 1 Ne. 13) and was predicted by the Savior himself.

"It is wisdom in the Father that they should be established in this land, and be set up as a free people by the power of the Father, that these things might come forth from them unto a remnant of your seed, that the covenant of the Father may be fulfilled which he hath covenanted with his people, O house of Israel." (3 Ne. 21:4.)

In the wisdom of our Heavenly Father, this great Gentile nation was to be brought into being and by his divine decree it must be free—free from domination by any other power, free from monarchs and dictators, having a form of government certain to provide the liberty under which his purposes could be achieved.

These events—all of them—were to be accomplished in this one selected region of the world, this most choice of all lands, America!

Understanding these facts is essential to our knowing why there is a Promised Land.

Since both a free government and a righteous people on whom the Lord could depend are necessary to his planned use of this land, he laid down rules of conduct for whatever people came here to live.

"He had sworn in his wrath unto the brother of Jared, that whoso should possess this land of promise, from that time henceforth and forever, should serve him, the true and only God, or they should be swept off when the fulness of his wrath should come upon them.

"And now, we can behold the decrees of God concerning this land, that it is a land of promise; and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall serve God, or they shall be swept off when the fulness of his wrath shall come upon them. And the fulness of his wrath cometh upon them when they are ripened in iniquity.

"For behold, this is a land which is choice above all other lands; wherefore he that doth possess it shall serve God or shall be swept off; for it is the everlasting decree of God. And it is not until the fulness of iniquity among the children of the land, that they are swept off."

But these rules were not for ancient people alone. They apply to the great nation of the Gentiles just as well.

"And this cometh unto you, O ye Gentiles, that ye may know the decrees of God—that ye may repent, and not continue in your iniquities until the fulness come, that ye may not bring down the fulness of the wrath of God upon you as the inhabitants of the land have hitherto done.

"Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ, who hath been manifested by the things which we have written." (Ether 2:8-12.)

The conditions pertaining to the occupancy of America were stated plainly to the Nephites when they came here to live. (See 2 Ne. 1:4-9.)

The prophet Jacob spoke of the residence of the Gentiles on this land, declaring:

"This land, said God, shall be a land of thine inheritance, and the Gentiles shall be blessed upon the land. And this land shall be a land of liberty unto the Gentiles, and there shall be no kings upon the land, who shall raise up unto the Gentiles. And I will fortify this land against all other nations.

"And he that fighteth against Zion shall perish, saith God. For he that raiseth up a king against me shall perish, for I, the Lord, the king of heaven, will be their king, and I will be a light unto them forever, that hear my words.

"Wherefore, for this cause, that my covenants may be fulfilled which I have made unto the children of men, that I will do unto them while they are in the flesh, I must needs destroy the secret works of darkness, and of murders, and of abominations.

"Wherefore, he that fighteth against Zion, both Jew and Gentile, both bond and free, both male and female, shall perish; for they are they who are the whore of all the earth; for they who are not for me are against me, saith our God. For I will fulfil my promises which I have made unto the children of men, that I will do unto them while they are in the flesh."

The Lord then added this: "Wherefore, I will consecrate this land unto thy seed, and them who shall be numbered among thy seed, forever, for the land of their inheritance; for it is a choice land, saith God unto me, above all other lands, wherefore I will have all men that dwell thereon that they shall worship me, saith God." (2 Ne. 10:10-19.)

America is that choice and promised land. God will not permit any condition to prevent the fulfillment of divine prophecy. His plans for the Promised Land will neither change nor fail.

When the Jaredites ignored the rules of residency here, they were removed. The same was true of the Nephites. It happened to the people of Noah's day. Now, through the restoration of the gospel, comes our opportunity. But we are not to fail. The Lord expects that high degree of devotion from us that will assure our success. We must profit by the lessons of the past. His pattern will not change with respect to America. We must adjust our lives to his plans. With or without any of us, either as individuals or as groups, he will shape the events of these last days so that when he is ready, Zion will be established, and he will reign from this same promised land for a thousand years of Millennium. It will be from the headquarters he will establish here.

Then truly "out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people: and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more." (Isa. 2:3-4.)

Hence it is that he calls and says, "O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord." (Isa. 2:5.)

And hence it is that he requires obedience and righteous living on the part of his people, his chosen people on this his chosen land, for his own announced purpose.
