Mark E. Petersen, Jaredites ( 1984)

THE VOYAGE BEGINS

In many respects the voyage of the Jaredites to America resembled the experience of Noah in the ark. Each voyage lasted about a year. In each case, the people had to build their own ships. Animals and birds were involved, together with all the problems of providing for their care over many months.

As only a miracle made Noah's accomplishment possible, so it was with the Jaredites. The Lord gave similar attention to both. He had his own special purposes in each undertaking, and he assured their certain success.

The brother of Jared brought his luminous stones down from the mountain and placed one in each end of all eight barges. Then there was light.

"And it came to pass that when they had prepared all manner of food, that thereby they might subsist upon the water, and also food for their flocks and herds, and whatsoever beast or animal or fowl that they should carry with them—and it came to pass that when they had done all these things they got aboard of their vessels or barges, and set forth into the sea, commending themselves unto the Lord their God." (Ether 6:4.)

It is not certain how many people actually made this journey. The record says that Jared had four sons. The brother of Jared had both sons and daughters, but the number is not mentioned. "And the friends of Jared and his brother were in number about twenty and two souls; and they also begat sons and daughters before they came to the promised land." (Ether 6:16.) So no definite number was mentioned.

The ships apparently were somewhat like submarines, for they could travel both on the surface of the sea and beneath it. They were not self-propelled, but were totally dependent on divine power to make the journey.

The Lord "caused that there should be a furious wind blow upon the face of the waters, towards the promised land; and thus they were tossed upon the waves of the sea before the wind.

"And it came to pass that they were many times buried in the depths of the sea, because of the mountain waves which broke upon them, and also the great and terrible tempests which were caused by the fierceness of the wind.

"And it came to pass that when they were buried in the deep there was no water that could hurt them, their vessels being tight like unto a dish, and also they were tight like unto the ark of Noah; therefore when they were encompassed about by many waters they did cry unto the Lord, and he did bring them forth again upon the top of the waters.

"And it came to pass that the wind did never cease to blow towards the promised land while they were upon the waters; and thus they were driven forth before the wind. . . . And no monster of the sea could break them, neither whale that could mar them; and they did have light continually, whether it was above the water or under the water."

Knowing that they must rely entirely on the Lord, not only to reach the Promised Land but also to preserve their lives, the people were humble and devoted. "They did sing praises unto the Lord; yea, the brother of Jared did sing praises unto the Lord, and he did thank and praise the Lord all the day long; and when the night came, they did not cease to praise the Lord."

The sea voyage lasted for 344 days, and at last they landed on the shore of the promised land. "When they had set their feet upon the shores of the promised land they bowed themselves down upon the face of the land, and did humble themselves before the Lord, and did shed tears of joy before the Lord, because of the multitude of his tender mercies over them."

Since they had brought seeds of various kinds as well as some animals, the people began to establish farms at once.

Sincerely grateful for their safe passage to America, they worshipped the Lord with great devotion, "and they were taught to walk humbly before the Lord." Since the brother of Jared had such a close relationship with God, it is not surprising that the record adds, "And they were also taught from on high. And it came to pass that they began to spread upon the face of the land, and to multiply and to till the earth; and they did wax strong in the land."
