Mark E. Petersen, Jaredites ( 1984)

THE FIRST JAREDITE KING

Most ancient peoples were accustomed to being governed by kings.

Jared and his brother had provided leadership for their colony from the time they left the tower of Babel. They had been guided by continuous revelation and had therefore provided the group with inspired direction.

When the people saw that both Jared and his brother were nearing the end of their lives, they immediately desired a king to rule over them.

This deeply concerned the brother of Jared, who opposed them, saying, "Surely this thing leadeth into captivity." (Ether 6:23.) He feared the evils that wicked kings could bring upon the people, even as did Mosiah centuries later when he established a free government among the Nephites. (Mosiah 29:17.) It was Mosiah who had declared:

"Now it is better that a man should be judged of God than of man, for the judgments of God are always just, but the judgments of man are not always just.

"Therefore, if it were possible that you could have just men to be your kings, who would establish the laws of God, and judge this people according to his commandments, yea, if ye could have men for your kings who would do even as my father Benjamin did for this people—I say unto you, if this could always be the case then it would be expedient that ye should always have kings to rule over you. . . .

"Now I say unto you, that because all men are not just it is not expedient that ye should have a king or kings to rule over you. For behold, how much iniquity doth one wicked king cause to be committed, yea, and what great destruction! . . .

"And behold, now I say unto you, ye cannot dethrone an iniquitous king save it be through much contention, and the shedding of much blood. For behold, he has his friends in iniquity, and he keepeth his guards about him; and he teareth up the laws of those who have reigned in righteousness before him; and he trampleth under his feet the commandments of God; and he enacteth laws, and sendeth them forth among his people, yea, laws after the manner of his own wickedness; and whosoever doth not obey his laws he causeth to be destroyed; and whosoever doth rebel against him he will send his armies against them to war, and if he can he will destroy them; and thus an unrighteous king doth pervert the ways of all righteousness.

"And now behold I say unto you, it is not expedient that such abominations should come upon you. Therefore, choose you by the voice of this people, judges, that ye may be judged according to the laws which have been given you by our fathers, which are correct, and which were given them by the hand of the Lord.

"Now it is not common that the voice of the people desireth anything contrary to that which is right; but it is common for the lesser part of the people to desire that which is not right; therefore this shall ye observe and make it your law—to do your business by the voice of the people.

"And if the time comes that the voice of the people doth choose iniquity, then is the time that the judgments of God will come upon you; yea, then is the time he will visit you with great destruction even as he has hitherto visited this land." (Mosiah 29:12-13, 16-17, 21-27.)

Mosiah told the Nephites that this promised land should be free. "The sins of many people have been caused by the iniquities of their kings," he said; "therefore their iniquities are answered upon the heads of their kings. And now I desire that this inequality should be no more in this land, especially among this my people; but I desire that this land be a land of liberty, and every man may enjoy his rights and privileges alike, so long as the Lord sees fit that we may live and inherit the land, yea, even as long as any of our posterity remains upon the face of the land." (Mosiah 29:31-32.)

This was a great lesson in the interdependence of righteousness and freedom. Mosiah was a prophet of the Lord, and he spoke with authority.

The brother of Jared was inspired by that same power. He could foresee evil in the establishment of a kingdom among the Jaredites, and so he urged against it. He had been present when the Lord laid down rules for the occupancy of the Promised Land, and he had no desire to avoid them.

The Lord had been explicit in defining his terms. He swore in his wrath "unto the brother of Jared, that whoso should possess this land of promise, from that time henceforth and forever, should serve him, the true and only God, or they should be swept off when the fulness of his wrath should come upon them.

"And now, we can behold the decrees of God concerning this land, that it is a land of promise; and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall serve God, or they shall be swept off when the fulness of his wrath shall come upon them. And the fulness of his wrath cometh upon them when they are ripened in iniquity.

"For behold, this is a land which is choice above all other lands; wherefore he that doth possess it shall serve God or shall be swept off; for it is the everlasting decree of God. And it is not until the fulness of iniquity among the children of the land, that they are swept off." (Ether 2:8-10.)

When the Lord had thus "sworn in his wrath" to the brother of Jared, could his words be easily forgotten?

So it was that Jared's brother opposed Jared and the others in asking for a king. "Surely this thing leadeth into captivity," he warned.

But Jared did not agree. He wished to yield to the desires of the people. He said to his brother, "Suffer them that they may have a king. . . . Choose ye out from among our sons a king, even whom ye will."

The people chose the firstborn of the brother of Jared, whose name was Pagag. "And it came to pass that he refused and would not be their king. And the people would that his father should constrain him, but his father would not; and he commanded them that they should constrain no man to be their king.

"And it came to pass that they chose all the brothers of Pagag, and they would not.

"And it came to pass that neither would the sons of Jared, even all save it were one; and Orihah was anointed to be king over the people." (Ether 6:24-27.)
