Mark E. Petersen, Jaredites ( 1984)

THE FIRST JAREDITE WAR

Ambition to rule over others proved to be one of the fatal stumbling blocks of the rising new leaders of the Jaredites. The lust for power led to intrigue of every kind, even to murder, as sons dethroned their fathers, jealous fathers destroyed their own sons who might be heirs to the throne, and brothers took the lives of each other. Family feuds were common.

Though there were righteous and prosperous periods in the history of the Jaredites, wickedness was the dominating factor over a large part of their existence. The people ignored the decrees of the Lord despite constant reminders by prophets sent from time to time, until eventually the cup of their iniquity overflowed into their final destruction.

Inspired by the saintly example of the brother of Jared, the people at first did serve the Lord. Their gratitude for a safe voyage to America lingered with them, and they worshipped the mighty Being who had brought them there. So it was that the first king of the Jaredites was a righteous man.

When Orihah was anointed as the first king, "the people began to prosper; and they became exceedingly rich.

"And it came to pass that Jared died, and his brother also.

"And it came to pass that Orihah did walk humbly before the Lord, and did remember how great things the Lord had done for his father, and also taught his people how great things the Lord had done for their fathers." (Ether 6:28-30.)

The record says that Orihah "did execute judgment upon the land in righteousness all his days, whose days were exceedingly many. And he begat sons and daughters; yea, he begat thirty and one, among whom were twenty and three sons. And it came to pass that he also begat Kib in his old age. And it came to pass that Kib reigned in his stead; and Kib begat Corihor."

Corihor was a rebel. Gathering his friends about him, he moved away from the main colony and set up a community that he called Nehor. His sons and daughters "were exceedingly fair"; so attractive were they that people left the main colony to become members of Corihor's group. This dissension grew until Corihor "gathered together an army" with which he invaded the land Moron, where his father, the king, lived. He took Kib prisoner and kept him in captivity until the king became very old. In the meantime, Corihor crowned himself and ruled over the land.

In his old age, and while still a prisoner, Kib had a son named Shule, who "waxed strong, and became mighty as to the strength of a man; and he was also mighty in judgment." Shule was angry with Corihor for having kept their father, Kib, in lifelong captivity, so he decided to overthrow Corihor and restore the throne to Kib.

Shule went to a nearby mountain known as Ephraim, and there, according to the record, "he did molten out of the hill, and made swords out of steel for those whom he had drawn away with him; and after he had armed them with swords he returned to the city Nehor, and gave battle unto his brother Corihor, by which means he obtained the kingdom and restored it unto his father Kib."

In gratitude for his son's courage and loyalty, Kib now bestowed the kingdom upon Shule, and Shule "began to reign in the stead of his father. And it came to pass that he did execute judgment in righteousness; and he did spread his kingdom upon all the face of the land, for the people had become exceedingly numerous. And it came to pass that Shule also begat many sons and daughters."

The unusual thing now happened. Corihor repented, and such good relationships with the family were restored that Shule gave Corihor responsibilities in the government.

Corihor continued faithful, but he had a son named Noah, who was as rebellious as his father had formerly been. Noah attacked King Shule, seized control over a portion of the kingdom, and captured the king, who was carried off to prison.

"It came to pass as he was about to put him to death, the sons of Shule crept into the house of Noah by night and slew him, and broke down the door of the prison and brought out their father, and placed him upon his throne in his own kingdom.

"Wherefore, the son of Noah did build up his kingdom in his stead; nevertheless they did not gain power any more over Shule the king, and the people who were under the reign of Shule the king did prosper exceedingly and wax great.

"And the country was divided; and there were two kingdoms, the kingdom of Shule, and the kingdom of Cohor, the son of Noah." (Ether 7:1-20.)

Experiences such as these became typical among the Jaredites, and from generation to generation throughout the history of the nation they were repeated frequently.
