Mark E. Petersen, Jaredites ( 1984)

PROPHETIC WARNINGS

Already the Jaredites were slipping into the pattern that eventually destroyed them. God was forgotten. Greed and avarice characterized their lives, and some of them actually turned to idolatry. War was still with them. Although Noah had been assassinated, one of his sons, named Cohor, assumed his father's role.

Cohor was determined to kill Shule, take his throne, and unite the kingdom under himself. A new war began, and Cohor invaded the kingdom of Shule, but Shule defeated him, killing him.

Cohor had a son, Nimrod, who had opposed his father's ambitions. The son became ruler after Cohor and "gave up the kingdom of Cohor unto Shule, and he did gain favor in the eyes of Shule; wherefore Shule did bestow great favors upon him, and he did do in the kingdom of Shule according to his desires."

Because of the political rebellions and increasing wickedness of the people, the Lord again sent prophets to warn them, "prophesying that the wickedness and idolatry of the people was bringing a curse upon the land, and they should be destroyed if they did not repent."

The people mocked the prophets, reviled them, and persecuted them severely. Shule still tried to govern righteously and, seeing the persecution, "did execute judgment against all those who did revile against the prophets.

"He did execute a law throughout all the land, which gave power unto the prophets that they should go whithersoever they would; and by this cause the people were brought unto repentance. And because the people did repent of their iniquities and idolatries the Lord did spare them, and they began to prosper again in the land. And it came to pass that Shule begat sons and daughters in his old age."

Shule remembered the teachings of his fathers, including the miracle of their coming to the Promised Land, "wherefore he did execute judgment in righteousness all his days." (Ether 7:21-27.) But peace was short-lived. The ambition to rule seemed to be irrepressible.

One of the successors of Shule was Omer, whose son Jared rebelled against him, seeking the throne. (See Ether 8:1-3.)

As an example of the treason and corruption that constantly surrounded the throne, we have statements such as these:

"It came to pass that Hearthom reigned in the stead of his father. And when Hearthom had reigned twenty and four years, behold, the kingdom was taken away from him. And he served many years in captivity, yea, even all the remainder of his days.

"And he begat Heth, and Heth lived in captivity all his days. And Heth begat Aaron, and Aaron dwelt in captivity all his days; and he begat Amnigaddah, and Amnigaddah also dwelt in captivity all his days; and he begat Coriantum, and Coriantum dwelt in captivity all his days; and he begat Com.

"And it came to pass that Com drew away the half of the kingdom. And he reigned over the half of the kingdom forty and two years; and he went to battle against the king, Amgid, and they fought for the space of many years, during which time Com gained power over Amgid, and obtained power over the remainder of the kingdom.

"And in the days of Com there began to be robbers in the land; and they adopted the old plans, and administered oaths after the manner of the ancients, and sought again to destroy the kingdom.

"Now Com did fight against them much; nevertheless, he did not prevail against them." (Ether 10:30-34.)

It seems incredible that people who had had such a spiritual and miraculous beginning would sink to such depths.
