Mark E. Petersen, Jaredites ( 1984)

A SCHEMING PRINCESS

Lust feeds on lust, and it seems to have no bounds when it takes over the human mind.

When King Shule died, his son Omer came to the throne. He was a good man, but he was forced to spend half of his days as a prisoner of his son Jared, who "set his heart upon the kingdom and upon the glory of the world."

Jared, a flatterer, went among the people with cunning words, sowing dissension against his father. Soon half the kingdom followed him. Arming his men, he attacked the palace and took his father captive. The record says that Omer was "in captivity the half of his days." However, he had two loyal sons, Esrom and Coriantumr, who raised an army and attacked their brother Jared. In their night assault they killed all of Jared's guards and made ready to kill him, but he pleaded for his life and promised that, if spared, he would return the kingdom to his father, Omer. This was accomplished, but Jared never gave up his yearning for the throne.

Jared had a scheming daughter who hoped to recover the crown for her father. She devised a plan by which her grandfather, King Omer, would be assassinated, and her own father, Jared, returned to power.

"Now the daughter of Jared was exceedingly fair. And it came to pass that she did talk with her father, and said unto him: Whereby hath my father so much sorrow? Hath he not read the record which our fathers brought across the great deep? Behold, is there not an account concerning them of old, that they by their secret plans did obtain kingdoms and great glory?

"And now, therefore, let my father send for Akish, the son of Kimnor; and behold, I am fair, and I will dance before him, and I will please him, that he will desire me to wife; wherefore if he shall desire of thee that ye shall give unto him me to wife, then shall ye say: I will give her if ye will bring unto me the head of my father, the king."

Jared sent for Akish, who accepted the invitation. The princess danced before him, and "she pleased him, insomuch that he desired her to wife. And it came to pass that he said unto Jared: Give her unto me to wife. And Jared said unto him: I will give her unto you, if ye will bring unto me the head of my father, the king."

Akish was willing.

"It came to pass that Akish gathered in unto the house of Jared all his kinsfolk, and said unto them: Will ye swear unto me that ye will be faithful unto me in the thing which I shall desire of you?

"And it came to pass that they all sware unto him, by the God of heaven, and also by the heavens, and also by the earth, and by their heads, that whoso should vary from the assistance which Akish desired should lose his head; and whoso should divulge whatsoever thing Akish made known unto them, the same should lose his life.

"And it came to pass that thus they did agree with Akish. And Akish did administer unto them the oaths which were given by them of old who also sought power, which had been handed down even from Cain, who was a murderer from the beginning. . . .

"And it was the daughter of Jared who put it into his heart to search up these things of old; and Jared put it into the heart of Akish; wherefore, Akish administered it unto his kindred and friends, leading them away by fair promises to do whatsoever thing he desired.

"And it came to pass that they formed a secret combination, even as they of old; which combination is most abominable and wicked above all, in the sight of God; for the Lord worketh not in secret combinations, neither doth he will that man should shed blood, but in all things hath forbidden it, from the beginning of man."

But the Lord intervened. He warned King Omer in a dream "that he should depart out of the land; wherefore Omer departed out of the land with his family, and traveled many days, and came over and passed by the hill of Shim, and came over by the place where the Nephites were destroyed, and from thence eastward, and came to a place which was called Ablom, by the seashore, and there he pitched his tent, and also his sons and his daughters, and all his household, save it were Jared and his family."

With his father gone, Jared was now anointed king. He prepared at once for the wedding of his daughter and Akish. This did not satisfy Akish. He wanted the throne for himself.

"It came to pass that Akish sought the life of his father-in-law; and he applied unto those whom he had sworn by the oath of the ancients, and they obtained the head of his father-in-law, as he sat upon his throne, giving audience to his people. For so great had been the spreading of this wicked and secret society that it had corrupted the hearts of all the people; therefore Jared was mudered upon his throne, and Akish reigned in his stead."

Akish had a son of whose ability he became very jealous. He cast the young man into prison, where he starved to death. This angered another son, whose name was Nimrah. He gathered his friends about him, and the entire group went over to King Omer, joining forces with him.

Akish had other sons, and they also opposed their father, but they had ambitions of their own. They brought about a rebellion by the use of bribery.

"Now the people of Akish were desirous for gain, even as Akish was desirous for power; wherefore, the sons of Akish did offer them money, by which means they drew away the more part of the people after them.

"And there began to be a war between the sons of Akish and Akish, which lasted for the space of many years, yea, unto the destruction of nearly all the people of the kingdom, yea, even all, save it were thirty souls, and they who fled with the house of Omer.

"Wherefore, Omer was restored again to the land of his inheritance." (Ether 8; 9:1)

Such was the intrigue and wickedness among the Jaredites.
