Mark E. Petersen, Jaredites ( 1984)

THE GOOD KING EMER

In his old age, King Omer had a son named Emer, whom he anointed king to succeed him.

"And after that he had anointed Emer to be king he saw peace in the land for the space of two years, and he died, having seen exceedingly many days, which were full of sorrow. And it came to pass that Emer did reign in his stead, and did fill the steps of his father."

The reign of Emer was a golden age for the Jaredites. In a matter of sixty-two years, the kingdom went from a state of conflict and corruption to one of peace and prosperity, all because the king taught the people to serve the Lord, and He responded in kind.

The Lord removed the curse from the land and permitted the people to become "exceedingly rich—having all manner of fruit, and of grain, and of silks, and of fine linen, and of gold, and of silver, and of precious things; and also all manner of cattle, of oxen, and cows, and of sheep, and of swine, and of goats, and also many other kinds of animals which were useful for the food of man.

"And they also had horses, and asses, and there were elephants and cureloms and cumoms; all of which were useful unto man, and more especially the elephants and cureloms and cumoms.

"And thus the Lord did pour out his blessings upon this land, which was choice above all other lands."

Once again the Lord reminded his people that they were living in a sacred land. "He commanded that whoso should possess the land should possess it unto the Lord, or they should be destroyed when they were ripened in iniquity; for upon such, saith the Lord: I will pour out the fulness of my wrath."

Throughout his days, Emer ruled in righteousness. He was so blessed of the Lord that "he even saw the Son of Righteousness, and did rejoice and glory in his day; and he died in peace."

Emer was succeeded by his son Coriantum, also a righteous man. In his day, Coriantum built "many mighty cities, and did administer that which was good unto his people in all his days." Coriantum lived to be 142 years old, and his wife lived to be 102. They had no children. However, Coriantum married again after his elderly wife died. His new wife, a young woman, gave him both sons and daughters, including Com, who became king after Coriantum. (Ether 9:14-25.)
