Mark E. Petersen, Jaredites ( 1984)

LIB'S RIGHTEOUS REIGN

Lib was one of the great kings of the Jaredites. Though he lived many generations after Emer and Coriantum, Lib's reign is another example of the heights the Jaredites could achieve when they lived righteously. The people grew and prospered greatly under his rule.

Lib arose out of a history of rebellion and captivity, but he did not submit to it himself. An ancestor named Kim, one of the Jaredite kings, lived most of his life in captivity, having been forced from the throne. His son Levi "did serve in captivity after the death of his father, for the space of forty and two years," but then obtained the kingdom for himself by overpowering the usurper.

Levi then did that which "was right in the sight of the Lord; and the people did prosper in the land; and he did live to a good old age, and begat sons and daughters; and he also begat Corom, whom he anointed king in his stead.

"And it came to pass that Corom did that which was good in the sight of the Lord all his days; and he begat many sons and daughters; and after he had seen many days he did pass away, even like unto the rest of the earth; and Kish reigned in his stead.

"And it came to pass that Kish passed away also, and Lib reigned in his stead."

Lib, a hunter, turned "the land southward" into a game preserve. "Wherefore they did go into the land southward, to hunt food for the people of the land, for the land was covered with animals of the forest. And Lib also himself became a great hunter.

"And they built a great city by the narrow neck of land, by the place where the sea divides the land. And they did preserve the land southward for a wilderness, to get game. And the whole face of the land northward was covered with inhabitants."

The entire nation prospered under Lib's rule, again illustrating the truth of the Lord's promise that if they would serve the God of the land, they would be prospered in that land.

"They were exceedingly industrious, and they did buy and sell and traffic one with another, that they might get gain.

"And they did work in all manner of ore, and they did make gold, and silver, and iron, and brass, and all manner of metals; and they did dig it out of the earth; wherefore they did cast up mighty heaps of earth to get ore, of gold, and of silver, and of iron, and of copper. And they did work all manner of fine work.

"And they did have silks, and fine-twined linen; and they did work all manner of cloth, that they might clothe themselves from their nakedness.

"And they did make all manner of tools to till the earth, both to plow and to sow, to reap and to hoe, and also to thrash. And they did make all manner of tools with which they did work their beasts. And they did make all manner of weapons of war. And they did work all manner of work of exceedingly curious workmanship.

"And never could be a people more blessed than were they, and more prospered by the hand of the Lord. And they were in a land that was choice above all lands, for the Lord had spoken it.

"And it came to pass that Lib did live many years, and begat sons and daughters; and he also begat Hearthom." (Ether 10:13-29.)
