Mark E. Petersen, Jaredites ( 1984)

THEY RISE AND FALL

Not all the strong kings among the Jaredites were good men. Some were righteous, of course, but many were warmongers and moral lepers.

Heth, one of the worst of them, fostered evil throughout the realm and killed the prophets when the Lord made attempts to call the people back to repentance.

Heth, who knew the ancient secret combinations, was a murderer. He gathered his friends about him and put them under oath to do his will regardless of what it might be, even to the taking of life in the royal family.

Heth's father, Com, son of Coriantum, had reigned for forty-nine years. Assisted by his secret followers, Heth now coveted the throne and planned to kill his father to obtain it. "And it came to pass that he did dethrone his father, for he slew him with his own sword; and he did reign in his stead."

Under Heth's regime, wickedness spread rapidly throughout the kingdom. Prophets came into the land again, "crying repentance unto them—that they must prepare the way of the Lord or there should come a curse upon the face of the land; yea, even there should be a great famine, in which they should be destroyed if they did not repent."

Neither the people nor the king believed what the prophets told them. Instead, they persecuted them, threw them into prison or into deep pits in the ground, and left them there to die. "They did all these things according to the commandment of the king, Heth," showing to what depths he had plunged.

Then came the famine, and many in the kingdom died of starvation, "for there was no rain upon the face of the earth."

The Lord sent a second curse upon them, an influx of poisonous serpents that attacked the people and caused tremendous fear among them. The snakes also attacked the livestock, which began to flee "towards the land southward" to escape. When the livestock died from poisonous bites, the people ate their carcasses in an attempt to avoid starving from the famine. But the Lord sealed up the passage to the land southward by allowing the poisonous serpents to hedge up that way, and whoever tried to pass was attacked.

One who died in this famine was King Heth himself, "and all his household save it were Shez."

When the people saw how desperate was their situation from both famine and serpents, they began to remember what the prophets had said, and they turned again to the Lord.

"It came to pass that when they had humbled themselves sufficiently before the Lord he did send rain upon the face of the earth; and the people began to revive again, and there began to be fruit in the north countries, and in all the countries round about. And the Lord did show forth his power unto them in preserving them from famine."

Shez, son of Heth, now became king. Determined to serve the Lord, he "began to build up again a broken people. And it came to pass that Shez did remember the destruction of his fathers, and he did build up a righteous kingdom; for he remembered what the Lord had done in bringing Jared and his brother across the deep; and he did walk in the ways of the Lord; and he begat sons and daughters."

Shez had a son named Shez, who rose up against him, seizing the kingdom. But he was killed "by the hand of a robber, because of his exceeding riches." With his death, the rebellion ended, and the father regained the throne. "And it came to pass that his father did build up many cities upon the face of the land."

When Shez died, his next son, Riplakish, obtained the crown. This son was corrupt and gave affront to the Lord from the beginning of his reign. He had many wives and concubines and coveted wealth, which he spent in lavish living. He was cruel to his subjects, exacting heavy taxes and forcing labor from them.

Riplakish not only erected costly buildings but also many prisons, "and whoso would not be subject unto taxes he did cast into prison; and whoso was not able to pay taxes he did cast into prison; and he did cause that they should labor continually for their support; and whoso refused to labor he did cause to be put to death.

"Wherefore he did obtain all his fine work, yea, even his fine gold he did cause to be refined in prison; and all manner of fine workmanship he did cause to be wrought in prison. And it came to pass that he did afflict the people with his whoredoms and abominations."

In the uprising against the wicked rule of Riplakish, the king himself was killed, and his entire family was driven out of the land. (Ether 9:25-10:8
