Mark E. Petersen, Jaredites ( 1984)

OTHER REBELLIONS

Many years later a persuasive man named Morianton coveted the throne. A descendant of Riplakish, he organized a rebellion to seize the kingdom.

In that day there were many outcasts from among the main body of the people, people who were bitter against the ruling power. Morianton went among them, stirring them up to fight and organizing them into an army. When he felt they were strong enough, his forces attacked and gained power over many cities.

"The war became exceedingly sore, and did last for the space of many years." Finally Morianton "did gain power over all the land, and did establish himself king over all the land."

But Morianton was different from some of his predecessors. In order to gain favor with the people he had conquered, he immediately lowered their taxes and reduced other demands upon them. This pleased his subjects, and they willingly crowned him king.

The record says that although Morianton seemed to "do justice" to the people, he did not do so "unto himself because of his many whoredoms; wherefore he was cut off from the presence of the Lord.

"And it came to pass that Morianton built up many cities, and the people became exceedingly rich under his reign, both in buildings, and in gold and silver, and in raising grain, and in flocks, and herds, and such things which had been restored unto them. And Morianton did live to an exceedingly great age." (Ether 10:9-12.) He it was who begat Kim, the first of a line of captive kings and great-great-grandfather of Lib, the righteous king.

In spite of Lib's reign in which the people served the Lord, the Jaredites had established for themselves a pattern of captivity and rebellion. Hearthom, the son of Lib, was brought into captivity, and four generations of his descendants were kept captive. Not until the rebellion of Com was the kingdom restored to the line of Hearthom, and for a period the Jaredites had another righteous king.

War followed swiftly, though, as Com's sons, Shiblom and his brother, fought each other. Conditions were terrible: "There began to be wars and contentions in all the land, and also many famines and pestilences, insomuch that there was a great destruction, such an one as never had been known upon the face of the earth; and all this came to pass in the days of Shiblom."

Shiblom was finally slain, and Seth, the son of Shiblom, was imprisoned. Ahah, the son of Seth, regained the kingdom, but he and his son Ethem, the next king, were extremely wicked rulers.

In the days of King Ethem, the Lord sent many prophets again among the people. "Yea, they did prophesy that the Lord would utterly destroy them from off the face of the earth except they repented of their iniquities."

However, the people "hardened their hearts, and would not hearken" to the words of the prophets. "And the prophets mourned and withdrew from among the people."

Ethem's successor was his son Moron, who also was a wicked man.

"It came to pass that there arose a rebellion among the people, because of that secret combination which was built up to get power and gain; and there arose a mighty man among them in iniquity, and gave battle unto Moron, in which he did overthrow the half of the kingdom; and he did maintain the half of the kingdom for many years. And it came to pass that Moron did overthrow him, and did obtain the kingdom again.

"And it came to pass that there arose another mighty man; and he was a descendant of the brother of Jared. And it came to pass that he did overthrow Moron and obtain the kingdom; wherefore, Moron dwelt in captivity all the remainder of his days; and he begat Coriantor. And it came to pass that Coriantor dwelt in captivity all his days.

"And in the days of Coriantor there also came many prophets, and prophesied of great and marvelous things, and cried repentance unto the people, and except they should repent the Lord God would execute judgment against them to their utter destruction; and that the Lord God would send or bring forth another people to possess the land, by his power, after the manner by which he brought their fathers.

"And they did reject all the words of the prophets, because of their secret society and wicked abominations." (Ether 11.)

And so the nation went from one kind of iniquity to another, establishing the pattern for their final destruction. They became like the Nephites after them, a tragic example of the fruits of disobedience.
