Mark E. Petersen, Jaredites ( 1984)

THE PROPHET ETHER

The days of the Jaredites were fast coming to a close when the Lord raised up Ether, the last of their prophets.

The son of King Coriantor, Ether was apparently born while his father was a prisoner, for the record says he "dwelt in captivity all his days." His grandfather, King Moron, had been overthrown by a usurper "and dwelt in captivity all the remainder of his days." (Ether 11:17-19.) It was one more in a long series of similar episodes where it seemed no ruler was secure on his throne.

Ether started his ministry during Coriantumr's reign, when he "began to prophesy unto the people, for he could not be restrained because of the Spirit of the Lord which was in him. For he did cry from the morning, even until the going down of the sun, exhorting the people to believe in God unto repentance lest they should be destroyed, saying unto them that by faith all things are fulfilled."

Ether warned the people to repent lest destruction should come upon them, but he also preached of a better world, a happier life to be obtained by faith in God. Wherefore, he said, "whoso believeth in God might with surety hope for a better world, yea, even a place at the right hand of God, which hope cometh of faith, maketh an anchor to the souls of men, which would make them sure and steadfast, always abounding in good works, being led to glorify God.

"And it came to pass that Ether did prophesy great and marvelous things unto the people, which they did not believe, because they saw them not."

The people's unbelief did not deter Ether. Filled with the spirit of revelation, he told them of the greatness of the Promised Land and the blessings that were yet to come upon it. He described the coming of Lehi's family, which would be a remnant of the tribe of Joseph who was sold into Egypt, and explained that this land would be an inheritance for them.

Ether spoke of the New Jerusalem to come in the last days, and of the new heaven and new earth mentioned in prophecy, adding, "and they shall be like unto the old save the old have passed away, and all things have become new."

He spoke of those who would live in the New Jerusalem: "Blessed are they, for they have been washed in the blood of the Lamb; and they are they who were scattered and gathered in from the four quarters of the earth, and from the north countries, and are partakers of the fulfilling of the covenant which God made with their father, Abraham. And when these things come, bringeth to pass the scripture which saith, there are they who were first, who shall be last; and there are they who were last, who shall be first."

But this was all wasted on the wicked Jaredites, who cast Ether out of their midst. Therefore, "he hid himself in the cavity of a rock by day, and by night he went forth viewing the things which should come upon the people. And as he dwelt in the cavity of the rock he made the remainder of this record, viewing the destructions which came upon the people, by night."

A great war broke out in the same year that Ether was rejected by the people, as secret combinations of men planned to overthrow King Coriantumr. The scripture says: "Now Coriantumr, having studied, himself, in all the arts of war and all the cunning of the world, wherefore he gave battle unto them who sought to destroy him.

"But he repented not, neither his fair sons nor daughters; neither the fair sons and daughters of Cohor; neither the fair sons and daughters of Corihor; and in fine, there were none of the fair sons and daughters upon the face of the whole earth who repented of their sins.

"Wherefore, it came to pass that in the first year that Ether dwelt in the cavity of a rock, there were many people who were slain by the sword of those secret combinations, fighting against Coriantumr that they might obtain the kingdom."

In the second year of this war, the Lord directed Ether to "go and prophesy unto Coriantumr that, if he would repent, and all his household, the Lord would give unto him his kingdom and spare the people—

"Otherwise they should be destroyed, and all his household save it were himself. And he should only live to see the fulfilling of the prophecies which had been spoken concerning another people receiving the land for their inheritance; and Coriantumr should receive a burial by them; and every soul should be destroyed save it were Coriantumr."

But the king would not listen. "It came to pass that Coriantumr repented not, neither his household, neither the people; and the wars ceased not; and they sought to kill Ether, but he fled from before them and hid again in the cavity of the rock."

Further uprisings occurred and heavy losses resulted from the conflicts. One aggressor, Shared by name, attacked Coriantumr in battle and dethroned him. After four years, Coriantumr's sons defeated Shared and restored their father to the throne. But Shared returned to fight against Coriantumr in a battle that lasted three days.

"It came to pass that Coriantumr beat [Shared], and did pursue him until he came to the plains of Heshlon. And it came to pass that Shared gave him battle again upon the plains; and behold, he did beat Coriantumr, and drove him back again to the valley of Gilgal. And Coriantumr gave Shared battle again in the valley of Gilgal, in which he beat Shared and slew him. And Shared wounded Coriantumr in his thigh, that he did not go to battle again for the space of two years, in which time all the people upon the face of the land were shedding blood, and there was none to restrain them."

During this same period, and epidemic of crime developed among the Jaredites. The record says, "There were robbers, and in fine, all manner of wickedness upon all the face of the land."

A great curse came upon the land "because of the iniquity of the people, in which, if a man should lay his tool or his sword upon his shelf, or upon the place whither he would keep it, behold, upon the morrow, he could not find it, so great was the curse upon the land.

"Wherefore every man did cleave unto that which was his own, with his hands, and would not borrow neither would he lend; and every man kept the hilt of his sword in his right hand, in the defence of his property and his own life and of his wives and children."

After two years Shared's brother "gave battle unto Coriantumr, in which Coriantumr did beat him and did pursue him to the wilderness of Akish. And it came to pass that the brother of Shared did give battle unto him in the wilderness of Akish; and the battle became exceedingly sore, and many thousands fell by the sword."

When mention is made of the heavy loss of life in these wars, it should be remembered that the fighting was hand-to-hand combat with each warrior protecting his own life and surviving only by destroying his opponent.

Once again, Coriantumr lost his kingdom. He "did lay siege to the wilderness; and the brother of Shared did march forth out of the wilderness by night, and slew a part of the army of Coriantumr, as they were drunken. And he came forth to the land of Moron, and placed himself upon the throne of Coriantumr." Meanwhile, "Coriantumr dwelt with his army in the wilderness for the space of two years."

A brother of Shared, whose name was Gilead, now set himself up as king, but "it came to pass that his high priest murdered him as he sat upon his throne."

Then came Lib, "a man of great stature, more than any other man among all the people." He attacked Coriantumr's army and forced it to flee, but in the next encounter, Lib was killed.

Lib's brother Shiz next took arms, and "it came to pass that Shiz pursued after Coriantumr, and he did overthrow many cities, and he did slay both women and children, and he did burn the cities. And there went a fear of Shiz throughout all the land; yea, a cry went forth throughout the land—Who can stand before the army of Shiz? Behold, he sweepeth the earth before him!"

Shiz was the final great enemy of Coriantumr, the man with whom he fought the last battle. He had "sworn to avenge himself upon Coriantumr of the blood of his brother, who had been slain, and the word of the Lord which came to Ether that Coriantumr should not fall by the sword.

"And thus we see that the Lord did visit them in the fulness of his wrath, and their wickedness and abominations had prepared a way for their everlasting destruction. . . .

"And it came to pass that the people began to flock together in armies, throughout all the face of the land. And they were divided; and a part of them fled to the army of Shiz, and a part of them fled to the army of Coriantumr.

"And so great and lasting had been the war, and so long had been the scene of bloodshed and carnage, that the whole face of the land was covered with the bodies of the dead. And so swift and speedy was the war that there was none left to bury the dead, but they did march forth from the shedding of blood to the shedding of blood, leaving the bodies of both men, women, and children strewed upon the face of the land, to become a prey to the worms of the flesh.

"And the scent thereof went forth upon the face of the land, even upon all the face of the land; wherefore the people became troubled by day and by night, because of the scent thereof."

Ether was commanded of the Lord to observe and record these death throes of the Jaredites, and this he did while hiding "in the cavity of a rock." (Ether 13; 14.)
