Part One—Our Place In History

Article One: The Saturday Evening of Time

Article Two: The Watch On The Tower

Article Three: Concerning Names and Vocations

Article Four: The Choice Seer

Article Five: The Land of Zion

Part Two—Seership and Prophecy

Article Six: What Joseph Beheld

Article Seven: What Joseph Foretold

Article Eight: Looking Westward

Article Nine: The Place of Safety

Part Three.—A Marvel and a Wonder

Article Ten: The Wisdom That Perishes

Article Eleven: The God Story

Article Twelve: The Great Vicissitudes

Article Thirteen: The Gospel Dispensations

Part Four.—A Glance Down the Ages

Article Fourteen: The Adamic Age

Article Fifteen: Enoch and His City

Article Sixteen: Noah and the Deluge

Article Seventeen: Abraham and the House of Israel

Article Eighteen: Moses and Aaron

Article Nineteen: To the Ends of the Earth

Part Five.—In Time's Meridian

Article Twenty: The Lamb of God

Article Twenty-one: The Special Witnesses

Part Six.—The Era of Restitution

Article Twenty-two: The Call of the Shepherd

Article Twenty-three: The Zion of Latter Days

Article Twenty-four: Redemption by Power

Article Twenty-five: Clearing the Way

Article Twenty-six: God's Hand Upon the Nations

Article Twenty-seven: The Consummation

Part Seven.—Powers and Principles

Article Twenty-eight: The Priesthood

Article Twenty-nine: Church Government

Article Thirty: The Law of Obedience

Article Thirty-one: The Divine Doorway

Article Thirty-two: The Second Birth

Article Thirty-three: Meaning and Mode of Baptism

Article Thirty-four: The Gospel's Accessories

Article Thirty-five: What Are Miracles?

Article Thirty-six: The Mainspring of Power

Part Eight.—Beyond the Horizon

Article Thirty-seven: The Spirit World

Article Thirty-eight: Spirit Promptings

Article Thirty-nine: Do the Dead Return?

Article Forty: The Goal Eternal

### NAMES AND ABBREVIATIONS

The usual Bible abbreviations are retained.

Hist. Ch. stands for History of the Church.

D. & C. for Doctrine and Covenants.

Nephi, Jacob, Omni, Mormon, Mosiah, Alma and Ether, will be recognized as names belonging to the Book of Mormon.

The Book of Moses, shortened to Moses, and the Book of Abraham, abbreviated to Abr., will be found within the lids of the Pearl of Great Price.

Other abbreviations, such as vol. for volume, p. or pp. for page or pages, v. or vv. for verse or verses and ib. for ibid (the same) are in such common use as scarcely to require mention.
