Concerning Names and Vocations.

Is Not This The Farmer's Son?—Some such paraphrase was probably in the mind, possibly upon the lips, of more than one opponent of the religion termed "Mormonism," when its supposed author, Joseph Smith, started out upon his remarkable career. And it was deemed by them, no doubt, a sufficient answer to his extraordinary claims.

True and False Standards.—"A tree is known by its fruit." This proverb, accepted by the wise and just almost as a truism, seems to have no place in the philosophy of some people, especially when a servant of the Lord is the object of their critical contemplation. "What do men say of him?" is frequently the only criterion by which such a character is judged. And is it not manifestly unfair? When a prophet comes from God with a message for mankind, what matters the name given to that message, or to that messenger, by those unfriendly to the cause he represents?

"The Carpenter's Son."—Those who rejected the Man of Nazareth when he proclaimed himself the Son of God, doubtless thought they had disposed of him effectually by referring to him sneeringly as "The carpenter's son;" this slight, with others put upon him by his neighbors, causing Jesus to remark: "A prophet is not without honor save in his own country and in his own house."[1]

Effect of Nearness.—His nearness was against him. There was no "distance" to "lend enchantment to the view." His name and humble vocation made his marvelous claims seem impossible. It could not be that God would make a prophet out of a carpenter's son—a prophet mightier than Moses or any of the ancient seers—and give to him such a common name as Jesus, another form of Joshua.[2] It was unbelievable, absurd, to most. Therefore were they justified, as they supposed, in withholding from him recognition and honor. "And He did not many mighty works there, because of their unbelief."

History Repeats.—As with the carpenter's, so with the farmer's son—each was objected to upon similar grounds. Nor was it a new thing in human experience. That which called forth criticism had occurred many times in other ages when God had raised up prophets and seers. Probably most of them were selected from among the plain people, and were comparatively unknown to men when the Lord called them.

Moses an Exception.—Moses was a signal exception. He had been reared as a prince in the palace of the king of Egypt; but that was because Pharaoh's daughter, having found the homeless infant at the water's edge, thenceforth had charge of him and his education. Prince he was, regardless of that princely training; but he was not the only prince in Israel. They were "a nation of kings and priests," though most of them walked in ways that were lowly.

A Herdsman Prophet.—Prophets are not chosen for their worldly culture or their social position. A plain-going farmer, no less than a college professor, may be gifted with prophetic power and be called to exercise it for the good of his fellows. Amos, according to his own statement, "was no prophet," nor "a prophet's son." That is to say, he had not been trained in any school of the prophets, such as existed in Old Testament times.[3] He was not, like Jeremiah, the son of a priest.[4] He was a herdsman and a fruit-gatherer when the word of the Lord came to him: "Go, prophesy unto my people Israel."[5]

Prophets Foreordained.—A prophet's name, his place of birth, and the character of his everyday calling, are matters of little moment compared with other things pertaining to him. What of his state and standing before he came on earth? This is a far more important consideration. God's prophets are chosen before they are born,[6] and are sent into the world as He needs them. Their aims are high and holy. They desire the welfare and happiness of the race. Yet almost invariably their motives are misunderstood, and they and their followers are opposed and persecuted.

The Vital Question.—Does this man come from God? That is the only question worthy of immediate attention, when a prophet, or one professing to be such appears. And his word alone need not be taken as conclusive. There are ways and means of testing a prophet's claim—and that, too, without awaiting the fulfillment or non-fulfillment of some prediction by or concerning him. Honest, prayerful men and women, with even moderate discernment, need not be deceived by any pious or impious pretender. God would not leave his children at the mercy of imposters. The sheep have a right to be protected from the wolves.

"Try the Spirits."—"Many false prophets are gone out into the world."[7] But there is a Spirit that discerns between true and false, between spurious and genuine, and anyone who seeks it aright may have "the inspiration of the Almighty," which giveth to the spirit of man "understanding."[8] Moreover, the Letter as well as the Spirit is a guide. What has been revealed in times past helps to interpret what is now revealed. Truth is always consistent with itself. Heaven-inspired men do not contradict one another. Their teachings harmonize and are dependable. The spirit of contention is essentially evil.[9] "To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them."[10]

"Old Joe Smith."—Were these tests applied to Joseph Smith in the early part of the nineteenth century? Yes, by some; and they received the promised testimony of the Truth, the absolute evidence of the divinity of this Prophet's mission. But by far the greater number of those to whom he fain would have ministered, rejected him summarily and without investigation. To them he was only "Joe Smith"—"Old Joe Smith"—old indeed in wisdom, though young in earthly years, yielding up his life as a martyr at the early age of thirty-eight. His claim to being an oracle of God was deemed preposterous, blasphemous; and his religion, the pure Gospel of Christ, was denounced as the world's worst delusion and snare.

Badges of Honor.—But bad names, wrongly bestowed, hurt the giver, rather than the receiver. Blame and ridicule, when applied to the righteous, are badges of honor, worn by true prophets and true principles in all ages. It does not do away with a man of God to pelt him with nicknames and opprobrious epithets. Persecution may end his earthly career, but it cannot confute his claim nor invalidate his testimony. The name of the martyred modern Seer, despite the clouds of calumny enveloping it, shines out from amidst the darkness that comprehended him not. His glorious Lord and Master, crucified as an imposter, put to death for maintaining that he was more than the world believed him to be, gave the only Name given under heaven whereby men can be saved.

### Footnotes
