The Land of Zion.

The Angel Moroni.—Three years after that wonderful vision in the Grove, the youthful Seer received a visitation from an angel, a messenger from the presence of the Lord. This Angel gave his name as Moroni, and declared that while in mortal life he had ministered as a prophet to an ancient people called Nephites, a branch of the house of Israel—not the Lost Tribes, as is frequently asserted by the uninformed, but a portion of the tribe of Joseph, mixed with a remnant of the tribe of Judah. The former had crossed over from Jerusalem about the year 600 B. C.; the others a few years later. These blended colonies had inhabited the Americas down to about the beginning of the fourth century of the Christian era, when the civilized though degenerate Nephites were destroyed by a savage faction known as Lamanites, ancestors of the American Indians.

The Book of Mormon.—The Angel further stated that a record of the Nephites would be found in a hill not far from Joseph's home—a hill anciently called Cumorah; and upon that spot, four years afterward, Moroni delivered the record into his hands. It was a book of metallic plates "having the appearance of gold," and covered with strange characters, "small and beautifully engraved"—characters known to the Nephites as "the reformed Egyptian."[1]

By means of "interpreters," discovered with the plates, and consisting of "two stones in silver bows," the youth translated the unsealed portion of the record and, with the assistance of a few friends, published to the world the Book of Mormon. It was so named for its compiler, the Nephite prophet Mormon, whose son and survivor, Moroni, had buried the plates where Joseph Smith found them. The date of discovery was September 22nd, 1823.[2]

The Hill Cumorah is situated between Palmyra and Manchester, in the State of New York. For their belief in the Book of Mormon, the Latter-day Saints were termed "Mormons," and their religion "Mormonism." It proclaims itself the restored fulness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

History and Prophecy.—The Book of Mormon is a sacred history of pre-historic America, and a prophecy of the wondrous future of this chosen land. It tells not only of the Nephites and Lamanites, but also of a more ancient people, the Jaredites, who came from the Tower of Babel at the time of the confusion of tongues. Becoming extinct, the Jaredites were succeeded by the Israelitish colony, led from Jerusalem by a prophet named Lehi, whose sons Nephi and Laman became, respectively, the heads of the two nations that sprang from him and were called after their names. The Jewish remnant that mixt with the descendants of Lehi was headed by Mulek, one of the sons of King Zedekiah, whom the Babylonian conqueror, Nebuchadnezzar, overthrew.

The New Jerusalem.—The Jaredites, as well as the Nephites, had a knowledge of the Christ and of the principles of his Gospel, revealed to them prior to his coming. To both these nations it was made known that America is the Land of Zion, the place for the New Jerusalem, a holy city to be built "unto the remnant of the seed of Joseph."[3] Likewise was it shown to them that the Old Jerusalem would be rebuilt "unto the house of Israel" in the last days. All this before the Savior's second advent—the glorious mornbreak of the Millennium.

A Nursing Mother.—Among the many interesting features of the Book of Mormon, is an ancient prophecy of the discovery of America by Columbus; the migration of the Pilgrim Fathers and others to these western shores; the war for American Independence, and the founding of the republic of the United States, a nation destined long before its birth to play the part of a nursing mother to the restored Church of Christ.[4]

And let me interject, that whatever may be said of the persecutions suffered by the Latter-day Saints under the Stars and Stripes in various States of the Union—persecutions inflicted, not because of the Flag, nor of the Constitution, nor of the genius of the American Government, but in spite of them—persecutions inflicted by lawless force, by mob violence, ever to be execrated and condemned by every true patriot—whatever may be said of such deplorable happenings, still must our noble Nation be credited with what it has done in the direction of fulfilling its God-given mission. It is extremely doubtful that in any other land, or in any other nation upon this land, would the Lord's people have been treated with the same degree of consideration. In no other country on earth, without special divine interposition in its behalf, would this great and marvelous work have been permitted to come forth.

A Land of Liberty.—America, according to Nephite prophecy, is to be a land of liberty to the Gentiles—modern peoples, not of Israel, now possessing it—provided they serve the God of the Land, who is Jesus Christ. So long as they shall follow righteousness, and maintain the pure principles upon which this Government was founded, just so long will they prosper and enjoy the favor of Heaven. America, if true to her mission, is promised divine protection, and will be invulnerable to every foe. God "will fortify this land against all other nations," and they who "fight against Zion shall perish."[5]

The Alternative.—If, however, the Gentiles, lifted up in pride, shall harden their hearts and reject the fulness of Christ's Gospel, Liberty's perfect law, another destiny, and a sad one, awaits them. No king but Christ shall reign upon Zion's Land. No people occupying this choice ground can practice evil with impunity. The nation founded here must be a righteous nation, or like the Jaredites and the Nephites, who perished because of their wickedness, it will be swept from the face of the land when the cup of its iniquity is full. So the God of Heaven hath decreed.[6]

Joseph's Blessing.—Another name for America, authorized by the Book of Mormon, is the Land of Joseph, referred to by the Patriarch Jacob in blessing his twelve sons,[7] and by the Prophet Moses in his farewell benediction upon the twelve tribes of Israel.[8] Jacob's allusion to Joseph as "a fruitful bough by a well, whose branches run over the wall," was fulfilled in the migration of Lehi and his companions from Asia to America over the Pacific Ocean. It is hardly necessary to add, in further exegetical comment, that one of the main features of these western continents are those mighty mountain ranges, the Andes and the Rockies, well termed by the Hebrew Patriarch "the everlasting hills," nature's depositories for "the precious things of the earth"—gold, silver, and other minerals—and for "the precious things of heaven"—the sacred records that have already been discovered, and others that are yet to come forth.

Joseph and Judah.—The Book of Mormon has a divine mission in connection with the Hebrew Scriptures, "unto the confounding of false doctrines and laying down of contentions."[9] It is "The Stick of Joseph," referred to by the Prophet Ezekiel, that was to be one with "The Stick of Judah" (The Bible) "in the hand of Ephraim." They were also to be one in the hand of Jehovah, symbolizing the reunion of the two great branches of the Israelitish race, after many centuries of separation. "And I will make them one nation in the land upon the mountains of Israel," saith the Lord, "and David my servant shall be king over them."[10]

Zion and Jerusalem.—David's ancient empire, which parted in twain, forming the Kingdom of Judah and the Kingdom of Israel, may it not have been a foreshadowing of God's greater empire of the last days, which will consist of two grand divisions—two in one? Here upon the Land of Zion, "a land choice above all other lands,"[11] the children of Joseph, the descendants of Ephraim, are even now assembling to make preparation for Messiah's advent. The Jews will greet him at Jerusalem. Christ's Kingdom will have two capitals, one in the Old World, one in the New; one in America, the other in Palestine. "For out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem."[12]

### Footnotes
