Stephen E. Robinson, Following Christ: The Parable of the Divers and More Good News ( 1995)

Preface

Some time ago I wrote a book about first principles of the gospel that some members of the Church have found helpful. That book, Believing Christ: The Parable of the Bicycle and Other Good News, describes what it means to have faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and to be justified by faith in him through the gospel covenant, the fullness of which has been restored in these latter days. However, as many readers have pointed out, our lives do not end once we enter the covenant. Having been born again, we are then faced with the anticlimactic necessity of living again. Perhaps the greatest spiritual frustration many people encounter is that without exception we mortals are converted long before we can be perfected. That means all of us must limp along for a considerable period of time in which our commitment and desire are not matched by our actual performance, and in which we must simply trust God to take care of us—warts and all. That condition is not limited to the spiritually inept but is the common lot of everyone in the Church. So the next logical question is, "If God doesn't require me to be absolutely perfect immediately upon conversion, what does he expect of me, and how am I supposed to come up with it? Now that I've been born again, what do I do with the rest of my life—and how do I do it?"

One of the scriptural terms most often used for what God expects of the converted is endurance. Having entered the covenant of grace at baptism, we are asked to endure in it until the end of our lives. Thus the phrase enduring to the end adequately describes our covenant obligation between our conversion and our death.

Where Believing Christ dealt with entering the covenant, this book will focus on staying in the covenant. The former book dealt with believing Christ and coming to Christ; the present volume deals with following and worshipping Christ. If being truly converted is to accept Christ as Lord and to make him the Lord of our lives, then this must somehow be reflected in our lives—but how? How does being born again translate into behavior after our conversion? After all, faith and works are not the polar opposites some theologians would make them; rather, in the covenant they are yokefellows or two sides of the same coin. It is a little silly to talk endlessly about coming to Christ without ever mentioning where we are once we've gotten there. The other side of the coin—the role of works in the gospel of Christ—is the subject of this book.
