Stephen E. Robinson, Following Christ: The Parable of the Divers and More Good News ( 1995)

Chapter One

Getting to the Kingdom

What must I do to get into the kingdom of God? On this point the scriptures are surprisingly clear and explicit. For example, in the Gospel of John, Jesus is recorded to have said, "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life" (John 3:16, emphasis added). In Mark's Gospel, as the resurrected Jesus sent his apostles out to preach to the world, he taught them that "he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved" (Mark 16:16, emphasis added). Consider the following from the Book of Mormon: "The Father commandeth all men, everywhere, to repent and believe in me. And whoso believeth in me, and is baptized, the same shall be saved; and they are they who shall inherit the kingdom of God" (3 Nephi 11:32-33, emphasis added). The vital significance of these and many other similar passages of scripture that could be cited on this subject often escapes us. It is this: The critical elements referred to in these scriptures concerning being saved, or receiving everlasting life, or inheriting the kingdom of God are all elements associated not with the distant future or with how we live the rest of our lives; rather, they are things we do to enter the covenant of the gospel. They come at the beginning of one's life in Christ and membership in the Church. In other words, to "get right with God" and become heirs of salvation is to come unto Christ and enter the covenant of his gospel. This is done by having faith in Christ, repenting of our sins, and being baptized by immersion for the remission of sins. We then receive from God the wonderful gift of the Holy Ghost. The primary focus is therefore not upon the coming judgment day but rather upon our initial conversion to Christ.

With this perspective in mind, consider these words of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price: "The Lord God called upon men by the Holy Ghost everywhere and commanded them that they should repent; and as many as believed in the Son, and repented of their sins, should be saved; and as many as believed not and repented not, should be damned; and the words went forth out of the mouth of God in a firm decree; wherefore they must be fulfilled" (Moses 5:14-15; emphasis added). Believing, repenting, being baptized, receiving the Holy Spirit—clearly, these are the elements most directly associated in the scriptures with being saved, entering the kingdom, or receiving eternal life. And all of them come at the beginning of our life in Christ—not at the end.

Latter-day Saints have hesitated to use the term being saved, as many Protestants do, as an equivalent for "being converted" or "coming to Christ," since we understand that as long as we live, this salvation is conditional upon our enduring to the end. Since some Christians would dispute that there is such a condition, it is worth reading the Savior's own words in Matthew 24:13: "But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved" (see also Matthew 10:22; Mark 13:13; 2 Nephi 31:15). Hence Latter-day Saints hesitate to speak of salvation as a "done deal" in this life (not trusting themselves to remain faithful, I suppose). Latter-day Saints have generally reserved the term saved only for our status after the judgment, when that status is an accomplished fact rather than merely a divine promise conditioned on our "enduring." Other Christians prefer to use saved for the status conferred upon us at the time we enter the covenant, which is equally proper and scriptural. [^1] Either way, it is true that while converted believers remain faithful, they are indeed also "saved" in the present tense, though saved conditionally, according to the Savior himself, upon their enduring to the end (Matthew 10:22, 24:13, etc.).

Consider further Moses 6:59: " . . . even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory." Here again we are instructed that the critical threshold we cross to be "born again into the kingdom of heaven," to be "sanctified," and to enjoy "eternal life" and "glory" is being baptized and receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost—that is, entering the gospel covenant. Once these steps have been taken, we become part of Christ. We are part of his metaphorical body, the Church (1 Corinthians 12:27), and we are justified through the grace of Jesus Christ our Savior. In other words, even though we are still personally imperfect, we are declared to be innocent because he is innocent and we are part of him.

Through faith, repentance, and baptism, we are incorporated into Christ and receive a new joint identity; we are no longer just ourselves—we are now Christ, and he is us—just as a husband and wife become one through the covenant of marriage. Just as a wife normally takes her husband's name and becomes heir to his property, so we take Christ's name upon us and become heirs of his kingdom through his death. Having thus become joined together in one, we become a new, composite creature (2 Corinthians 5:17) composed of a finite part (us) and an infinite part (Christ). Since Christ is infinite, it is his character that defines the nature of this new creature and that determines the verdict to be pronounced upon us at the judgment. Therefore, as long as we remain one with Christ in this new joint relationship—in the covenant of the gospel—we are, for the time being, justified and redeemed on account of his righteousness (2 Nephi 2:3) because we have become part of him, and his righteousness is therefore ours too. In the gospel partnership, since we are one with Christ, we receive credit for what Christ has done, and it is his infinite merit rather than our own flawed performance that finally secures a "not guilty" verdict for the new creature we have become in and with Christ. This whole process is called "justification by faith in Christ" (D&C 20:30; Galatians 2:16). [^2]

Once justified in this manner through our faith in Christ, we are sanctified or made holy by receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost (3 Nephi 27:20; Alma 13:12), and those who have been so sanctified are called Saints (from the Latin sancti or "holy ones"). The word sanctified means "made holy." Having been declared innocent (justified by faith), we are then worthy to receive the Holy Ghost and are made holy (sanctified) by receiving that gift. All members of the Church in good faith have received the gift of the Holy Ghost and been sanctified by receiving it; that is why they are referred to collectively as "the Saints." Thus Paul addresses his first epistle to the Corinthians "to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints" (1 Corinthians 1:2). Those who have been sanctified or made holy through Christ in these latter days are specifically called "Latter-day Saints." Thus for us members, even our designation as Saints acknowledges that we have already been made holy through the atonement of Christ though we are still in the flesh and are still struggling with mortality.

Strictly speaking, what we do to enter the kingdom is to have faith in Jesus Christ, repent, and submit to baptism. What God does to show his involvement in the process and to complete the covenant is to give us the Holy Ghost. Thus we emphasize it is the gift of the Holy Ghost we receive at confirmation, and this gift is God's token to us that the covenant of baptism we have entered into is accepted by him. If we truly receive the Holy Ghost and enjoy that great gift, it is proof that we are truly in the covenant and in the kingdom from that moment—justified by our faith in Christ and sanctified by the gift of the Holy Ghost.

So the great divide between the saved and the unsaved, between those who inherit the kingdom and those who do not, between those who are right with God and those who are not, isn't just who is "good" and who is "bad," for technically speaking we are all bad in some degree (Romans 3:23; Mosiah 2:21). Rather, the great divide is whether we accept or reject the covenant with the Savior Jesus Christ, the only being in eternity who can make us innocent by incorporating us into his infinite, perfect, and sinless self. And this great divide is crossed when we first make the covenant and enter the Church of Jesus Christ. Since Christ is already in the kingdom of God, when we come unto him we also of necessity come into it.

What I want to emphasize in this regard ought to be self-evident, but apparently a lot of us miss it. For members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, these critical steps, which are equivalent to entering into the kingdom, are already behind us. They are history. Therefore we are not waiting to see what some future verdict will decide. If we are in the covenant, the verdict is already in, and so are we. Since having faith, repenting, being baptized, and receiving the Holy Ghost all take place before we are counted members of the Church, those who are already members in good faith are already in the kingdom. We are in it now. For most of the readers of this book, the glorious threshold has already been crossed, and the doors of the kingdom have already closed gently behind us! If we are truly in his church, then we are truly in his kingdom. [^3]

Yet many of the Latter-day Saints who already believe in Christ, have already begun their repentance, have already been baptized, and have already received the gift of the Holy Ghost—in short, have already entered into the covenant—many of these people continue to think and act as though the determination of whether they are in or out of the kingdom; saved or damned; celestial, terrestrial, or telestial is somehow still in the future. They have been influenced by the common traditions of the world. Too many of the Saints see their mortal lives in the Church as a kind of porch or anteroom outside the kingdom doors. If they work hard enough in this life, they feel, the doors will eventually open up and admit them at some future time. Horsefeathers! Having been handed the good news of salvation, these people decline to open the envelope but continue to twist in the wind, wondering from day to day if they are being "good enough" to qualify for what they in fact already possess. They are like defendants in a court case who have been found innocent but who weren't paying attention when the verdict was read and somehow missed it. So hours later they're still sitting alone in the courtroom, wringing their hands and praying for acquittal—long after the judge and the jury have rendered their verdict and gone home.

Those members who think their place in the kingdom is not yet established either did not enter the Church in good faith in the first place or else came to Christ honestly but did not understand what happened when they believed, repented, were baptized, and received the gift of the Holy Ghost—that they passed through the strait and narrow gate and now stand, conditionally, in the kingdom of God. There is more to be done, but we are through the gate. The gate was faith, repentance, and baptism: "For the gate by which ye should enter is repentance and baptism by water" (2 Nephi 31:17). As the Lord revealed to Emma Smith through the Prophet Joseph, "All those who receive my gospel are sons and daughters in my kingdom" (D&C 25:1, emphasis added). And God cannot lie.

Perhaps one reason so many people miss this is that (as is so often the case) there is an ambiguity here in the way a term is used in scripture. Sometimes, but not always, "the kingdom" or "the kingdom of God" means the future kingdom, the physical reality of coming glory. That is the sense, for example, in 1 Corinthians 15:50, 2 Nephi 10:25, Alma 41:4, and D&C 6:13. But in other passages "the kingdom" is a collective noun for the society of the Saints and is therefore usually equivalent with "the Church," as in the phrase "the Church and kingdom of God." This is the meaning, for example, in Luke 11:20, D&C 35:27, and D&C 115:19. In this sense the kingdom isn't real estate, but it is here among us nevertheless (see Luke 17:21 where "within" should be translated "among"). The Doctrine and Covenants makes a useful distinction in section 65:6 between "the kingdom of God" (the present kingdom of which we are members through baptism) and "the kingdom of heaven" (the future political kingdom to be established in glory). However, these are not two different kingdoms but rather two aspects of the same kingdom. Further, this special distinction in terms can't be pressed too far, for it is not always observed in scripture. [^4] I like the distinction made by the Topical Guide in listing the references to "kingdom" under two headings, "Kingdom of God, in Heaven" and "Kingdom of God, on Earth." This recognizes both the present and future aspects of the one, single "Kingdom of God." On the one hand, the kingdom is present here and now as the Church and as the fellowship of the Saints. On the other hand, as a political and geographical reality it must wait until the second coming of our Lord.

Just as the kingdom is here in one sense but in one sense not yet here, so on the one hand (since God's promise is sure and certain), my place in the coming kingdom is sure and certain (unless I choose to leave), but on the other hand, my glorification hasn't actually happened yet. Though I am already redeemed from the Fall through Christ, I must still suffer the effects of the Fall in this life. So in one sense I am already redeemed or "saved"—the atonement has been completed and the victory is won—but in another sense I am not completely saved yet, since I still struggle with mortality, will surely die, and will not be actually glorified until later. Understood as the society of those who are going to receive celestial glory (if they are true and faithful), the kingdom is here now, and we are "saved" now; understood as the society of those who have received celestial glory, the kingdom is obviously still in the future.

I doubt that Latter-day Saints ever will, or even should, adopt Protestant terminology and begin regularly talking about "being saved" in the present tense. There is a risk that other Protestant interpretations might come along with their terminology. Nevertheless, we must understand that conditional salvation is a present reality—that we can be certain now of what God has promised for the future. After all, Latter-day Saints appropriately talk about "being sealed" in the present tense even though we know these sealings are conditioned on our faithfulness and will not be fully actualized until later. I suggest that being saved can be similarly understood. We are "saved" now in the same way that most of us are "sealed" now—on condition of continued faithfulness. And assuming that we will be faithful, we can refer to ourselves as "saved" even though the full actualization of this promise will not occur until the resurrection, just as we commonly refer to ourselves as "sealed" in the same way. [^5]

Perhaps I can illustrate the ambiguous already-here-but-not-yet-here nature of the kingdom or of "being saved" with an example. I recently took my young daughter, Mary, fishing, and it was important to me that she catch a fish. So I cast the line in for her, and when I felt a bite, I solidly set the hook. Then I stripped some line off the reel and handed the pole to Mary. I waited a few seconds, then suggested that she reel in slowly. After a few turns of the handle she felt the fish tugging on her line, and shrieking with delight she hauled it to the bank.

Now, my question is this: At what point in time was the fish actually caught? Did I catch it when I set the hook and made the outcome sure and certain, or did Mary catch it when she physically pulled the fish out onto the bank? A case can rightly be made either way. Similarly, when do we inherit the kingdom—when are we "saved"? Is it when the hook is set—that is, when the determinative events have taken place that make the final outcome certain on the single condition of endurance (the atonement of Christ and my entering the covenant), or is it when we actually rise in celestial glory and receive what was so certainly promised? A case can rightly be made either way.

The bottom line is that for those of us who have come to Christ, the hook is set, and God intends to reel us in. So, unless we wilfully cut the line, we may properly anticipate with joy the coming of what is promised. We are members now of a kingdom that is coming, and unless we choose to commit spiritual suicide, we are entitled to consider ourselves saved. I suspect that properly understanding this great truth would help many of the Latter-day Saints more readily feel the "joy," "rejoicing," "confidence," and "hope" the good news of the gospel is supposed to bring.

Several years ago some friends of mine adopted an older child from the Third World who had lived a very difficult life before coming to the United States. For a long time their greatest frustration in dealing with their new daughter was her crippling insecurity: she couldn't believe she was safe. She paid slavish, obsessive attention to every word her new parents uttered for fear she would make a mistake and be sent back "there" because of it. She was so terrified of what her parents might do if she weren't "good," if she weren't perfect, that she could not for a long time enter into the relationship of love and trust they desired to have with her. They couldn't make suggestions for her improvement, or constructively criticize, or show any kind of irritation or impatience with her whatever without sending the poor girl into a panic, tearfully begging for forgiveness and for "just one more chance." It was heart-wrenching to see. Over and over they tried to reassure her that she could have all the "chances" she needed; that their decision to adopt her was eternal, irrevocable, and no longer open to reevaluation; that she was part of their family now and need not fear she would ever be sent away. "Please trust us," they would plead. "Don't you know that only you can break the bond that now holds us together? It will never be severed on our side. Your place with us is secure. As long as you want to stay, this is your home." Still, it took years for her to fully realize that she wasn't being evaluated for possible deportation every time she made a mistake.

Well, spiritually some of us are just like her. We've been so traumatized by our experiences in the world that we have a hard time accepting the love of God and believing we could possibly have a place in his family. Already recipients of his love and already adopted his sons and daughters, some of us are still trying to earn his affection and get into the family. Our inability to accept his merciful gifts and tender mercies gets in the way of the better relationship we might have with God if we only knew our proper place in his love and in his kingdom and then progressed from there.

I wonder if those of us who have been reborn sons and daughters of God through the atonement of Christ don't frustrate our Heavenly Father when we panic at our every mistake for fear he will stop loving us and send us back to the world. I can almost hear him entreating us, "Please trust me. Don't you know that only you can break the bond that now holds us together? It will never be severed on my side. Your place with me is secure. As long as you want to stay, this is your home." Again, we need to believe what the Lord told Emma Smith: "All those who receive my gospel are sons and daughters in my kingdom (D&C 25:1)." And it must be so, for God cannot lie.

As we raise our own children, we don't say, "That was a real good job, young man. If you keep that up, you just might earn yourself a place in this family! Conceivably (now don't get your hopes too high, boy), you could even become our son." No, that's not how we do it. First the family relationship is created, and then that relationship becomes the basis for subsequent training. Without such a relationship, we have no right to impose any training upon or expect any obedience from anyone. I suspect it is no different with God. When we come to Christ with broken hearts and contrite spirits, he encircles us in the arms of his love (2 Nephi 1:15) and adopts us as his sons and daughters. Then, as a loving parent, he teaches us how to become what he is. But the bond, the relationship entered into by our own desire, precedes the training and is what justifies the training and discipline he gives us and makes it bearable.

Relative to the kingdom of God, most people are "out until they're in." That is, they are not members of the kingdom until they accept the gospel and enter into the covenant relationship. But in stark contrast to this, the members of the Church are "in until they're out." That is, all who are in the covenant are God's children now, and they will remain in the kingdom until they choose to leave. And if we accept his training and his discipline—if we endure to the end—we will still be his children at the great day. [^6]

Perhaps the best analogy is that favorite of the scriptures: Christ as the bridegroom, the Church as the bride, and the gospel covenant as a marriage. When, then, is this marriage performed? When do we and the Savior become one by covenant? Not at some future judgment, but at baptism! We're not just living together; we are in the Church, and the Church is the bride, so it must follow that we enjoy the marriage relationship now. Having been joined to the bridegroom by the gospel covenant, we cannot go through life like common-law partners, hoping that someday he will marry us and make the arrangement legitimate. We're already married—and he expects us to know it and to act like it!

Now it is true that we can decide we no longer want to stay in the covenant and in the kingdom. We can rebel against God, violate our agreement with him, and exercise our option to leave. We can file for divorce from Christ. But that decision is not up to God; it is up to us. He will never send us away while we are trying to do his will—even though we may at times do it rather badly—any more than we would disown our own spouses or children for trying to do our will but doing it imperfectly. In other words, the only loophole or uncertainty in the outcome of the gospel contract is on our side. It is there to allow us a way out of the kingdom if we decide we want out. Those of us who are already in the covenant, but who are still worrying about what God is going to do with us in the future, just don't get it. At this point in the relationship it's not up to God anymore—he is bound (D&C 82:10). The only uncertainty involved is not what God will do (that is certain); rather, it is what we will do. We have the option at any time to cancel the contract, to file for divorce by our actions, but God does not—he has committed himself. We can break the agreement, but if we choose not to break it, the outcome is absolutely sure and certain. Thus the ball is in our court, and our destiny is in our own hands.

Our place in the kingdom is ours—ours to keep or ours to lose—but ours either way. As Church members, if we want to stay in the kingdom, we can stay. If we want to go, we can go.

It is important to remember that the gate of the kingdom of God is entering the covenant of faith, repentance, baptism, and receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost. If this has already happened to you, then the gates are behind you, and you stand, while faithful, in the kingdom of God. That part of the judgment is already past. Nothing that happens subsequently can be understood as helping you get into the kingdom, or earning your way into the kingdom, or contributing to your getting to the kingdom—because you are already there. It logically follows that for those who have been born again, the critical question is not one of getting into the kingdom but of staying in the kingdom—of enduring to the end. For we must choose on an ongoing basis to remain, and that choice must be reflected in what we love and in what we seek. That is why enduring to the end is the fifth principle of the gospel. Daily, our question shouldn't be "Have I made it to the kingdom yet?" but rather, "Do I still want to stay?"

I believe that a great key to successfully following Christ throughout our lives is realizing that we do it as his "born again" sons and daughters (Mosiah 5:7). I personally find great power and comfort in knowing that as I labor for Christ, I labor as a son, encircled in the arms of his love, from a position of safety in his kingdom. I believe that the gratitude and love I feel in response to that knowledge is a stronger motivation for good than fear and anxiety over some future judgment or possible punishment ever could be.

A large part of the good news of the gospel is the promise that the kingdom is ours now: "Behold, the kingdom is yours, and the enemy shall not overcome" (D&C 38:9, emphasis added; see also D&C 29:5, 35:27, 38:9, 42:69, 45:1, 50:35). Can God lie? Of course not. Then we must accept the fact of our membership in his kingdom now—oh, joy and rejoicing!—just as we also accept the duties and chores of sons and daughters in that kingdom. So stop worrying! The hook is set, and if you don't cut the line, there is only one possible outcome to your faithful commitment to Christ.

The lifelong choice to stay in the kingdom, to remain in Christ and continue with him in the gospel covenant, is what the scriptures call "enduring faithful to the end." When taken together, entering the covenant through faith, repentance, baptism, and receiving the Holy Ghost (believing Christ) and subsequently staying in the covenant by enduring faithfully to the end of our lives (following Christ) add up to inheriting celestial glory at the resurrection. Therefore the question is not "Have I made it yet, or not?" The question is "Having been conditionally admitted tot he kingdom of God by baptism through the grace of Christ, do I still want to stay? Do I choose to endure?" And as we answer that question honestly, so it shall be.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Looking unto Christ (3 Nephi 15:9). See JST Luke 14:38, where the Savior counsels the disciples, "Settle this in your hearts, that ye will do the things which I shall teach and command you" (emphasis added).
[^2] Continuing to take upon us the name of Christ (3 Nephi 27:6). See also the examples of those who heard Jesus' "Bread of Life" sermon and were content to believe in him when he fed them but who were offended and "walked no more with him" when he taught them hard doctrines (John 6).
[^3] Feasting upon the words of Christ in steadfastness, hope, and love (2 Nephi 31:20; Moroni 8:26). See also D&C 50:8 and 85:11.
[^4] Offering our whole souls to Christ in fasting and prayer (Omni 1:26). We also need to learn the difference, as Elder Dallin Oaks has pointed out, between "mistakes" and "sins" (see Dallin Oaks, "Sins and Mistakes," BYU Campus Education Week, August 1994).
[^5] Following the example of Christ (2 Nephi 31:16). See D&C 82:3. If much is required where much is given, then where less is given (two talents rather than five), less must be required. Also, see Luke 21:1-4 where the widow's mite was judged to be more in God's eyes than the rich endowments of the wealthy.
[^6] Worshipping the Father in the name of Christ (D&C 20:29).
