Stephen E. Robinson, Following Christ: The Parable of the Divers and More Good News ( 1995)

Chapter Two

Enduring to the End

In the preceding chapter, we saw that whatever "enduring to the end" might be, it's something we are expected to do from a position of strength and safety within the kingdom of God, and that we do it to maintain a place there that is already ours by virtue of our covenant in Christ. We are not merely gambling that if we are good enough, we might coax the doors of the kingdom to open for us sometime in the indeterminate future. No, as we endure, we endure as sons and daughters of God who are already "encircled in the arms of safety" (Alma 34:16), and knowing that we endure as sons and daughters and as designated heirs ought to make enduring easier. So then, what exactly does it mean to endure to the end? Endure what, and how? And when is the end?

Few promises made in scripture have the credentials and the guarantees of the promise made to those who endure to the end. Take, for example, 3 Nephi 15:9: "Look unto me, and endure to the end, and ye shall live; for unto him that endureth to the end will I give eternal life." Besides the many prophets who have repeated that promise in the name of God, scripture records both the Father (2 Nephi 31:15, 20) and the Son (3 Nephi 27:16) making the promise directly in the first person. There can simply be no doubt that those who endure to the end will be saved.

For most people, the term endure calls up images of tar and feathers or torture on the rack. But few of the Saints are actually faced with such persecutions today. Are we therefore less tested than the Saints of former times? Is it easier for us, with fewer physical trials (collectively speaking), to endure to the end? I think not. In fact, enduring affliction is only the smallest part of what enduring to the end really means.

Most frequently the scriptures use the term endure to mean "last," "continue," or "remain" rather than "suffer." That is important; it indicates that enduring has more to do with reliability than with stamina. For example, Alma expresses hope that his son Shiblon "will continue in keeping [God's] commandments; for blessed is he that endureth to the end" (Alma 38:2; emphasis added). Here enduring to the end is explicitly equated with continuing steadfast while in mortality. Nephi had already made that clear in 2 Nephi 33:9: "Be reconciled unto Christ, and enter into the narrow gate, and walk in the strait path which leads to life, and continue in the path until the end of the day of probation" (emphasis added). Notice that those who have come to Christ have already entered into the narrow gate. Now they must continue. Thus to endure means that once we have found the strait and narrow path, we continue in that path (which we adopted at baptism) by keeping our commitments to Christ. First we come to Christ—then we stay put. Staying put in the Church and covenant is "enduring." The "end" is the end of our mortal probation (see 2 Nephi 33:9). To endure to the end means we don't let go of Christ; we don't quit the Church and kingdom or lose our testimony because of life's difficulties or temptations—we stay put. Conversely, failing to endure means backing away from what we've started—first promising loyalty to God and his church and then withholding what we've promised, thus proving unreliable and unfaithful. "No man, having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God" (Luke 9:62; emphasis added). Endurance in the scriptural sense has little to do with physical stamina, for many of the physically most challenged Saints endure like champions as they plow the row God has assigned to them. Rather, endurance is a matter of integrity, of keeping our promises to God once we've been admitted to his covenant and his kingdom.

In the Old Testament, the words for faith, faithful, and faithfulness all come from the Hebrew 'aman (to be firm or reliable) and imply primarily qualities of loyalty and determination rather than qualities of belief. The words for security, certainty, and guarantee all come from the same Hebrew root. Thus being faithful does not have as much to do with our belief or even our activity in the Church as it does with whether we can be trusted to do our duty in the earthly kingdom of God. The covenants of baptism and of the temple are solemn promises we make to God about how we will conduct our lives. Enduring to the end is keeping those promises throughout our lives-no matter what. (However, keeping one's covenants does not mean "never sinning again," since the covenant provides within itself a means of ongoing repentance by partaking of the sacrament.) Unfortunately, due to denominational influence in modern English, the word faith has come to be associated primarily with what we believe and largely ignores its original association with faithfulness. Thus the modern word faith renders only part of the sense of the Hebrew original. If we restore that original nuance (that faith is active commitment to an idea-faithfulness-rather than just passive mental acceptance of it), we largely resolve the false either/or of faith versus works. To have saving faith in Christ is to believe in Christ and to be faithful to Christ. It is to make an investment of ourselves in Christ. It is not enough merely to have a mental conviction that he is the Son of God without letting that conviction have any relevance

Just as a spouse who can be trusted to keep the marriage covenant is called faithful, so those who can be trusted to keep their gospel covenants are called faithful. And since the gospel covenant is so often symbolized in scripture as a marriage, it is entirely correct to refer to those who loyally keep that covenant as faithful partners. to how we live our lives. If we merely believe in his identity without committing our lives to him, then we are no better than the devils, who also know who he is but are not benefited by that knowledge (James 2:19).

Usually the scriptures link enduring to the end specifically with remaining faithful to our Christian covenants and to the covenant community, which is the Church. For example, D&C 20:29 states: "We know that all men must repent and believe on the name of Jesus Christ, and worship the Father in his name, and endure in faith on his name to the end, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God" (see also 2 Nephi 9:24).

The Savior reinforces this covenant dimension of endurance in his teaching to the Nephites, specifically emphasizing the covenant obligations of repentance and baptism: "It shall come to pass, that whoso repenteth and is baptized in my name shall be filled; and if he endureth to the end, behold, him will I hold guiltless before my Father at that day when I shall stand to judge the world" (3 Nephi 27:16).

So enduring to the end means entering into the gospel covenant through faith in Christ, repentance, baptism, and receiving the Holy Ghost and then remaining faithful to that covenant. D&C 20:37 even makes "determination to serve [Christ] to the end" a condition of baptism into the Church.

Consequently, enduring to the end is more than just "being active" in the Church. Enduring to the end requires a personal awareness of covenant obligations and a personal determination to keep them faithfully. While the term active describes visible behavior, enduring faithful to the end describes an inner commitment to the gospel and church of Jesus Christ. Of course it's better to be active than inactive, but just being active doesn't guarantee much about our spiritual commitment—even yeast can be "active." We can be active for the wrong reasons, or for trivial reasons. True sons and daughters ought to manage better than yeastcakes. Having a conscious awareness of our covenant obligations and a determination to keep them to the end is being active for the right reasons.

I once knew a man who had to decide whether or not to pay his tithing every time his paycheck came, whether or not to go to his meetings every time they were held, whether or not to take a drink every time he was offered one. Finally I asked him, "Why can't you just decide once and for all which side you're on? Why do you have to double-check your loyalty every time a decision is called for? You are spiritually reinventing the wheel over and over again, and you will never make any progress until you can build on what you already know." A few weeks later he called and asked for a ride to our stake meetings. I was pleased he was going, and when I told him so, he responded, "You know, I wouldn't like it if my wife told me she had to decide every morning whether she still loved me or not, or if she told me she only stayed with me because she hadn't found a good enough reason to leave—yet. I guess the Lord is entitled to more of a commitment than that from me. I'm ready to stop reinventing the wheel and move on with my life. I've decided that I'm ready once and for all to be a Latter-day Saint."

Some people are basically saying "Well, today I think the Church is true, but ask me again tomorrow." But there must come some point at which our commitment to the gospel and our conviction of its truth settles such questions in advance and predetermines our response to whatever challenge we may encounter to our faith, to whatever commandments we may receive, or to whatever sacrifice we are called upon to make.1 That isn't blind faith; rather, it's a vague suspicion that has finally managed to become true faith! Faith, after all, is spiritual knowledge—not a guess, not a hunch, not a hope, but knowledge. Most often it is knowledge unsupported by physical evidence or even challenged by the available evidence. Until our faith has a life and a strength of its own apart from intellectual argument or even physical evidence, it is not yet faith. In such cases what we thought was faith was merely the strongest human argument we had considered at the time. A testimony isn't like a hypothesis in science, which may be supported by the evidence one day and destroyed by it the next. It is a conviction beyond the available intellectual proof that some things are eternally true. The "provisionally converted" are those who have not received such a conviction (or who will not accept it) but who haven't found a good enough reason to leave—yet. Just as such a low level of commitment is unsatisfactory in a marriage, so in the long run it is unsatisfactory in the spiritual marriage of the gospel. Such people need to become converted and let the question of the truth of the gospel be decided, once and for all, by the witness of the Spirit. Just as a celestial marriage says, "We are sealed, no matter what," so a truly converted member says, "I am a member of this church, and my lot is cast with the apostles and prophets—no matter what. Above all other issues, loyalties, agendas, and commitments, this is where I stand; this is what I believe; this is whom I serve." Then and only then can we experience the power and the blessings promised to the faithful.

Without such a prior commitment, some new commandment or sacrifice or some imagined (or real) offense on the part of Church leaders might challenge our endurance. It is possible to be an "active" member of the Church without such a conviction, but it may not be possible to endure to the end. The Lord spoke of those who could not make such a commitment in the Parable of the Sower—they have no root in themselves but endure only for a while; then, when difficulties arise because of the word, eventually they are offended (Matthew 13:21). We must not fear to send our roots deep—deep into the gospel and deep into the Church, for it is just as self-destructive spiritually for us to hold back part of our promised loyalty as it was for Ananias and Sapphira to hold back part of their promised offerings (Acts 5:1-11). [^1]

According to the scriptures, besides remaining faithful to our baptismal covenants, other component parts of enduring faithful to the end include:

Notice that the common focus of all of these scriptural exhortations to endurance is not primarily suffering but loyalty to Christ.

Often those who cannot keep their commitments seek to justify themselves by separating loyalty to Christ from loyalty to his church, but that is impossible. Our covenants in the restored gospel of Christ are covenants that specifically include our relationship with his church and that are administered through his church—The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. We cannot endure to the end in those covenants without enduring to the end in that church. That is made clear by the Savior himself: "Whosoever is of my church, and endureth of my church to the end, him will I establish upon my rock, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against them" (D&C 10:69; emphasis added). [^2]

There are no side bets or private arrangements. Enduring in our covenants means enduring in the Church. God will not excuse those who leave the Church thinking that they have good reasons or that they can keep covenants made in and through the Church while rejecting the Church or fighting with the Church. No matter what their intentions, they are deceived. By definition, if they have not lasted, they have failed to endure to the end. And there is no acceptable substitute for the covenant relationship outside the church and kingdom of God upon the earth.

What Does It Mean to Be "Faithful"?

A common error made by some members of the Church is to equate the faithfulness that is part of enduring to the end with being sinless. Every time we commit a sin, they would argue, we are unfaithful to Christ and violate our covenants. But that will not wash at all, for all the faithful Saints continue to commit sins from time to time. That is why the repentance and renewal associated with the ordinance of the sacrament is part of the gospel covenant. God has anticipated that his sons and daughters within the Church and within the covenant will mess up more or less regularly, and he has provided us with a remedy when we do.

Just as faithful spouses may not be perfect and may do things that injure their partners and wound the relationship without necessarily ending the marriage, so faithful Church members are also imperfect and may do things that stress their covenant relationship with God—without necessarily ending that relationship. I'm not arguing here that such mistakes are trivial or that they don't matter. I'm only arguing that they don't necessarily terminate the covenant. What does it mean when my wife, Janet, rolls her eyes and says, "Oh well, at least he's faithful"? She certainly doesn't mean that I'm perfect! Rather she means that despite my many flaws, I am loyal to her—there is no one else. Similarly, in the gospel covenant, being faithful doesn't mean being perfect. It just means we're loyal to Christ, and there is nobody else (no interest, cause, or loyalty ahead of him). In our own covenants with each other, we can distinguish between being perfect on the one hand and being faithful on the other. True, some evil acts violate the marriage covenant and leave it in ruins, but forgetting a wedding anniversary isn't one of them. Similarly, some evil acts violate the gospel covenant and put us outside the kingdom, but swearing in traffic isn't one of them. That is why the Lord has instructed us to meet often to partake of the sacrament—to repent of the sins he knows we commit and thus to renew our covenants. We "renew" them because they get soiled and tattered in our day-to-day lives—because we make mistakes and need to get back to base. Still, as long as Christ comes first in our lives, as long as we haven't made him second to some other "love," then we are still faithful partners, though we may need to apologize to him from time to time and start over in some areas of our relationship. As long as we are in mortality, we will have the need to repent and renew our covenants regularly. But that does not mean we are unfaithful—not unless some other loyalty, some other love, has taken Christ's place as our highest concern.

By way of illustration, perhaps you can imagine a second-string soccer goalie who has average ability but who isn't as good as the fellow who plays in front of him. So most of the time he just sits on the bench. Is he off the team because he doesn't start? No, he's on the team; he just isn't the most talented member at that position right now. Now suppose that because of injuries to the one who plays in front of him, this second-string goalie gets into the big game, where he does an okay job, and his team wins—even though he allowed three goals. Is he on the other team now because he allowed the opposition to score three times and a better goalie wouldn't have? When the game is over, should his teammates treat him as a traitor for his errors? Because his limited talent worked in their favor, does the other team owe him something? Of course not. Our second-string goalie may lack talent, but there is no question about his loyalty or about which team he's on. Playing our best game and making mistakes does not put us off the team. We may sit on the bench for our mistakes—but we aren't the enemy.

Similarly, in the church and kingdom of God some players have more talent at some positions than others; some have more strength or experience than others. Not everyone can be relied upon to perform well at every position or in every circumstance. That does not make them unfaithful, and it doesn't mean they are off the team. They are merely the second string right now. Their desire to serve Christ, to repent regularly and improve steadily, guarantees they are still in the kingdom. They are on the right side—even if they're not the most talented players at their position right now. And we in the Church must learn to separate the issue of strength and talent from the issue of loyalty and faithfulness, both in our own self-evaluations and in the way we judge others. [^3]

On the other hand, suppose that before the game the first team goalie had met with the opposing team and been paid to let them score. Whom does he serve? To whom does he belong? Even though his skills may be superior, he serves a different master than his teammates serve, and his disloyalty does make him the enemy. But just being a klutz won't do it.

Some of us are too quick to assume that we are the second- and third-string players or that we are spiritual klutzes. We forget that God, in his perfect judgment, adjusts credit and blame to allow for the circumstances of the individual in question. The gospel is not a "one-size-fits-all" arrangement in that regard. God puts us all in different circumstances in this life and judges us accordingly. In the Parable of the Talents, it didn't matter that one servant had been given five talents and the other only two. What mattered most was what both servants did with what God gave them. The Master said to each of them, "Well done, thou good and faithful servant" (Matthew 25:21). It is better to be a faithful second-string player with limited talents (pun intended) than to be an unfaithful superstar.

The Parable of the Divers

Many years ago, when I was somewhere between nine and eleven, I participated in a community summer recreation program in the town where I grew up. I remember in particular a diving competition for the different age groups held at the community swimming pool. Some of the wealthier kids in our area had their own pools with diving boards, and they were pretty good amateur divers. But there was one kid my age from the less affluent part of town who didn't have his own pool. What he had was raw courage. While the rest of us did our crisp little swan dives, back dives, and jackknives, being ever so careful to arch our backs and point our toes, this young man attempted back flips, one-and-a-halfs, doubles, and so on. But, oh, he was sloppy. He seldom kept his feet together, he never pointed his toes, and he usually missed his vertical entry. The rest of us observed with smug satisfaction as the judges held up their scorecards that he consistently got lower marks than we did with our safe and simple dives, and we congratulated ourselves that we were actually the better divers. "He is all heart and no finesse," we told ourselves. "After all, we keep our feet together and point our toes."

The announcement of the winners was a great shock to us, for the brave young lad with the flips had apparently beaten us all. However, I had kept rough track of the scores in my head, and I knew with the arrogance of limited information that the math didn't add up. I had consistently outscored the boy with the flips. And so, certain that an injustice was being perpetrated, I stormed the scorer's table and demanded an explanation. "Degree of difficulty," the scorer replied matter-of-factly as he looked me in the eye. "Sure, you had better form, but he did harder dives. When you factor in the degree of difficulty, he beat you hands down, kid." Until that moment I hadn't known that some dives were awarded "extra credit" because of their greater difficulty.

I have a friend to whom life has been unkind. Though she married in the temple, her husband proved unfaithful and eventually abandoned her and their small children. Since he has never paid a penny in child support, my friend works full time to support herself and her kids. For several years she also went to school at night to improve her financial situation. Therefore, of necessity, she could not be with her children as much as she would have liked and could not always give them the guidance and discipline they needed. It just wasn't possible in her difficult circumstances. One result of her less-than-perfect family situation was troubled teenagers. Now in middle age she is faced with raising some of her grandchildren—again, all alone. Without a faithful companion, without the priesthood in her home, without the blessings that are realized where the ideal family setting is possible, it is almost inevitable that my friend should feel that her "scores" as a wife and mother, and perhaps even as a person, aren't very high. When she goes to church and sees other "ideal" LDS families, when she hears them bear their testimonies and give thanks for all their spiritual and temporal blessings, she sees in her mind the judges holding up scorecards that say 9.9 or 10.0. When she looks at her own life, her own failed marriage, her own troubled children, she knows that the scores are much lower, and she worries about her place in the kingdom.

Well, she needn't worry, for she is as faithful to her covenants in her troubles as the rest of us are in our blessings. True, there are some things she cannot do, but these are the result of her circumstances, not choices pursued by her own free will, and where there is no choice, there can be no condemnation. I have no doubt that when the "degree of difficulty" is factored in for the life she leads, her crown will shine brighter than many others, for God always factors into his judgments the "degree of difficulty." [^4]

Whenever I am tempted to feel superior to other Saints, the parable of the divers comes to my mind, and I repent. At least at a swim meet, we can usually tell which dives are the most difficult. But here in mortality, we cannot always tell who is carrying what burdens: limited intelligence, chemical depression, compulsive behaviors, learning disabilities, dysfunctional or abusive family background, poor health, physical or psychological handicaps—no one chooses these things. So I must not judge my brothers and sisters. I am thankful for my blessings but not smug about them, for I never want to hear the Scorer say to me, "Sure, you had better form, but she had a harder life. When you factor in degree of difficulty, she beat you hands down."

So, enduring to the end doesn't have much to do with suffering in silence, overcoming all life's obstacles, or even achieving the LDS ideal ("pointing our toes" and "keeping our feet together"). It just means not giving up. It means keeping—to the best of our abilities—the commitments we made to Christ when we entered into the marriage of the gospel. It means not divorcing the Savior or cheating on him by letting some other love become more important in our lives. It means not rejecting the blessings of the atonement that he showered upon us when we entered his church and kingdom.

Faithfulness and Repentance

The process of recognizing the carnal self as carnal and its desires as often contrary to God's will, then denying the carnal self and complying with God's will, is called repentance. The Hebrew word for repent is shuv, and it means literally "to turn," that is, to turn from following the carnal self and begin following Christ instead.

One problem some Saints seem prone to in their understanding of repentance is that they want to see repentance as an event rather than a lifestyle. Though repentance is required before baptism can take place, it is not once-and-for-all repentance that must take place at that time. That would be impossible, for repentance is intended to be a continuing lifestyle, a way of conducting ourselves as we follow Christ. Just as we do not have faith and then stop having it once we are baptized, so we do not repent just once and then stop repenting after we are baptized—faith and repentance must both continue even after baptism. Ongoing repentance is a necessary part of following Christ and being faithful to our covenants.

First, the Lord has directed that we partake of the sacrament regularly to renew our covenants. The steps of faith and repentance that precede baptism also precede this ordinance, and partaking of the sacrament in this manner can have the same spiritual effect as being baptized again. If we could repent once and for all before baptism and put all sin behind us forever, there would be no need for the frequent renewal of our covenants and commitment by partaking of the sacrament.

Second, since our goal is the perfect righteousness of the Father and the Son, and since we cannot achieve this entirely in mortality, as long as we live we're going to have something to repent of, some error to correct, something to work on or eliminate from our lives in order to be more like God. Those who say they do not need continuing repentance are either unaware of their sins or covering for them. Since individual perfection (unlike perfection in Christ) is impossible in mortality (Romans 3:23), there will always be something to repent of. Thus repentance is a process that must begin in earnest at conversion but continue to improve us and bring us closer to God all our lives. We can never be done repenting until we have become what he is. In that sense, repentance is an attitude, an attitude of recognizing our sins, then rejecting them in principle, then working to get rid of them in fact. As we succeed in recognizing and removing big sins like violence, immorality, or a bad temper, we can progress to medium sins like selfishness, ingratitude, and laziness. Hopefully, we can eventually get to the smaller sins like being late to church or not singing when we get there.

Since repenting is "turning" ourselves around, I think a useful analogy can be drawn from the navy. When a captain decides to turn a battleship or an aircraft carrier, it takes some time for the ship to come around. Though the decision has been made, the order has been given, and the change is being carried out, it still takes some time to bring a ship about. So in our lives the decisions for Christ can be truly and genuinely made, the order truly given and carried out, yet it can still take some time and space to overcome the natural resistance of the carnal self and make the complete turn. There will be rejoicing when the turn is completed and we have perfected part or all of our lives, but should we die before it's done, the Lord will still credit us for making the right decision, for issuing the appropriate orders and attempting to carry them out in our lives—the rest would have been just a matter of time. If we should die, as all of us do, with some sins not completely eliminated, it will not harm us. God will give us credit for what we would have accomplished given more time (D&C 137:7-8). Were we truly repentant? Did we truly desire to root sin out of our lives? Then we are justified through the atonement of Christ and will eventually achieve what we sought in life.

The "Mighty Change"

Surely someone, perhaps one of the spiritual masochists among us (or spiritual sadists—we have both in the Church), is going to object, "But what about 'the mighty change?' Did not the Spirit work a mighty change within the people of Benjamin so that they had 'no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually'?" (Mosiah 5:2). That is true, but what is being described there is a change in disposition, a change of desire, a change in our compass headings. From the moment of their conversion (or reconversion), the people of Benjamin changed their orientation and wanted righteousness rather than wickedness. It became their one goal. But that does not mean they achieved their goal instantaneously! It does not mean they never had another carnal thought or that they never subsequently lost any struggle against their carnal natures. At that moment, filled with the Spirit and clearly seeing the two paths before them, the people of Benjamin lost all desire to follow the path of evil. I feel the same way when I feel the Spirit, but I do not always feel the Spirit. And as with Moses, when the epiphany (divine appearance) is over, Satan sometimes takes his best shot (Moses 1:9-12). Therefore we must recharge our spiritual batteries regularly.

Great spiritual damage can be done by teaching the Saints that "the mighty change" means once truly converted we are never again tempted to sin. For if the Saints believe that the truly converted are never subsequently tempted, then when they are tempted—and they will be—they will conclude they are not really converted. However, being truly converted does not end the tests of mortality, for we will continue to be tested and tempted as long as we are in the flesh. Even as covenant members of the church of Jesus Christ, we will continue to be subject to the carnal impulses and other weaknesses that are a consequence of the Fall.

Since my own conversion, if at any time an angel had somehow presented me with two options and said, "Push button A and you will never sin again; push button B and you will," I'd have pushed button A—without hesitation and hard enough to break my thumb! Imperfect as I am, since my conversion I in fact "have no more disposition to do evil but to do good continually," and most of us feel that way. It's just that we have difficulty overcoming our carnal natures and the effects of the Fall at all times in order to act according to our predisposition. That our disposition is good is proven by the fact that when we occasionally act otherwise, we feel bad about it, repent, and return to our previous heading toward righteousness. Like a compass needle that may swing this way or that but always comes again to point north, so are the believers who may make this or that temporary misstep but always correct their course and return to their original heading. That is a clear disposition to do good. "The mighty change" is a change of heart, a change of desires, and a change of disposition concerning our goals. It is not a complete victory over the Fall or over our carnal natures all at once.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] As President Ezra Taft Benson said, "No one adequately and properly knows why he needs Christ until he understands and accepts the doctrine of the Fall and its effect upon all mankind" (A Witness and A Warning [Deseret Book: Salt Lake City, 1988], p. 33).
[^2] That is, "no-win" without the atonement of Christ. As I discuss the bad news here, I am excluding that obvious solution because we need to know the problem in order to appreciate the answer.
[^3] Technically, Adam and Eve were amortal rather than immortal. Amortal means one is not presently subject to death, although under certain circumstances one could be. Immortal means one is immune to death under any circumstances.
[^4] Except, of course, by faith.
