Stephen E. Robinson, Following Christ: The Parable of the Divers and More Good News ( 1995)

Chapter Three

The Fall of Adam and Eve

It would be difficult to understand the good news of the gospel and particularly of the atonement of Christ without first understanding the bad news about the fall of Adam and Eve, for it is the Fall and its consequences that make the Atonement necessary. [^1] As the Fall separates us from God, so the Atonement reunites us with God. Therefore, without the Fall, the gospel would be unnecessary—like a hospital in a world where no one got sick or injured. The Fall is the problem to which the Atonement is the solution.

Indeed, those occasions when we most eagerly turn to God are often the times when we are confronted most directly by the effects of the Fall. For example, when we or our loved ones are sick or dying, we turn to God to plead for help. We may not realize that we are asking him to remove certain effects of the Fall in our behalf, but that is what we are doing. Similarly, when we pray for forgiveness of sins, or for help when we can't overcome life's obstacles, or for guidance when we don't know the right thing to do—we are praying for deliverance from specific aspects of the Fall or from its natural consequences. Too many of us think of our problems as individual symptoms without understanding the underlying cause of our condition. We talk about "health problems," "I.Q. problems," "lack of willpower," or "trouble controlling my thoughts" without realizing that these are just isolated symptoms of a bigger problem—the fall of the human race.

We must also understand the Fall in order to know our limitations here in mortality. Without fully appreciating the limitations placed upon us by the Fall, many of the Saints have despaired because they can't overcome all things on their own or all at once. But given our true circumstances here in mortality, such expectations are wildly unrealistic. As we strive to endure to the end, we will do better if we know what our handicaps are. We need to know what we can reasonably expect to accomplish on our own and what we must rely on the Savior to overcome for us through his love and mercy. For example, it would be silly of me to expect that if I am righteous enough I can overcome old age or death, for victory over these enemies (though guaranteed) comes only later on and through Christ. And there are other enemies we similarly cannot hope to overcome right now or on our own. These impediments are all associated with the fall of Adam and Eve.

While the great victory of Jesus Christ over all our enemies has already been won, the natural effects of the Fall are nevertheless allowed to continue with us, and will continue until the Savior comes again to assert his ultimate lordship. Thus, while ultimate victory over our enemies is certain through Jesus Christ and in fact has already been won, we still have to wrestle with those enemies during our mortal lives. God intends that we struggle under these handicaps and limitations, for that is part of the test of mortality.

The truth is that we humans in our natural state are all in trouble—deep, deep trouble. Because of the Fall, we are caught in the "no-win" situation called mortality. [^2] In this condition we are vulnerable to many enemies (Satan, sin, death, hell, disease, error, and so on) and require the help of God to get out of their power and ultimately out of the trap altogether. The foolish among us make the connection between God's redeeming power and our individual mortal problems only when some aspect of the Fall actually has us in its teeth, like sickness or death. But that is what the gospel is all about—becoming aware of our true situation and our truly desperate circumstances (the results of the Fall) and then learning how this situation and these circumstances can be overcome forever (through the atonement of Christ).

Mortality Is Not Our Proper Element

It stands to reason that if we are fallen, then we must be fallen from someplace. We did not begin in a world like the one we now live in, nor is this natural world our proper setting. As spirit children of God, we first lived with heavenly parents in a glory to which we now hope to return. In a sense, we are fallen from those celestial courts on high and are now looking for the ladder back up. Also, when our first parents were created physically on this earth, they were created in a more glorified state than that we now experience, a condition roughly equivalent to a terrestrial glory, in which no one suffered or died. God created Adam and Eve nonmortal and immune to suffering, but these pleasant physical conditions changed for the worse with the Fall. [^3] Thus humanity has digressed by degrees from the celestial, premortal world of our heavenly parents to the terrestrial Eden, and from thence has fallen hard to this telestial condition. In his redemptive work, Christ will reverse the process, first restoring the earth to its terrestrial or paradisiacal glory (the glory associated with Eden) and then after the Millennium raising earth to its ultimate celestial glory (Article of Faith 10; Revelation 21:1-2; D&C 77:1-2).

Nevertheless, the Fall was neither a tragedy nor a mistake but a necessary step in the eternal progress of God's spirit children, for we had reached the point in our premortal growth where it was time to meet the opposition in a mortal setting, to encounter the evil and negative elements of existence, and to be sorted out according to our response to that opposition. Mortality is the sorting shed. Here some of us will pursue light most of the time no matter what the cost; some will pursue light some of the time if it doesn't cost too much; and others will prefer darkness. Unfortunately, our real preferences can be fairly tested only on a level playing floor, that is, in a place where light and darkness, good and evil, are both readily available to us equally, "for it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things" (2 Nephi 2:11). Mortality is designed to offer those conditions. Mortal life is like an all-you-can-eat buffet dinner with all the moral options spread out before us, from the pure, the virtuous, the righteous, and the holy at one end of the table to the abominable, the wicked, the corrupt, and the vile at the other end. Pick what you like; eat all you want; but your choices will unmistakably reveal what you prefer and therefore what you are. When we can have all we want of whatever we want, our choices unerringly reveal our true character. In this analogy, you are what you eat. In real life, you are what you choose.

However, the environment necessary for this test, this buffet dinner with good and evil presented on the same table, with the opposition present in all things, could not be created in the presence of God, for "no unclean thing can . . . dwell in his presence" (Moses 6:57). (Mom can't know I'm trustworthy until I've been left alone with the cookie jar. As long as she's watching, it's not a fair test.) Therefore, in order to be enticed equally by the evil as well as by the good, it was necessary for us to leave home, to descend from that exalted place of our spirit birth and come into a world like this one—neutral ground for a fair test. Here we can't even tell we have parents, let alone whether they're watching us or not. [^4]

Since the Fall (the separation from God that allows us to be enticed equally by both good and evil) was necessary to human progress rather than being a tragic misstep, in fact since God fully intended that the Fall take place, it would be grossly unfair for God to punish Adam and Eve for it. After all, the Garden of Eden was pretty much a setup for the Fall to occur. For that reason, after Adam and Eve were cast out, God forgave them their transgression in the Garden of Eden and absolved them of any blame for it (Moses 6:53). They were assured they would not be blamed for what occurred before the Fall nor for the Fall itself. Rather, since the Fall was part of God's plan, all its negative aspects would unconditionally and unilaterally be canceled out for them and their posterity through the grace of God and the atonement of Jesus Christ, who alone would bear the burden of the Fall. I hope the reader perceives the wonderful fairness here: since the Fall was part of God's plan, God and God alone will assume all its permanent costs and burdens.

For that reason several Church leaders have insisted on a difference in kind between the "transgression" of Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden and sins committed after the Fall. [^5] After all, the "transgression" was committed under duress in the "setup" in the Garden with its extremely limited options, was committed without Adam and Eve having full moral understanding or accountability, [^6] was necessary for the further progress of God's plan, and was fully intended by God to be the outcome of the Eden experience. It was therefore forgiven them unilaterally through the atonement of Christ. That is only fair.

However, those sins committed by Adam and Eve and their posterity after the Fall, by their own free choice and with full knowledge and accountability, can be forgiven only through the atonement of Christ by entering into the gospel covenant—also by our own free choice. Please note the parallel: The negative effects of the Fall that came about without our participation (sickness, death, and so on) are also canceled without our participation. The negative effects brought about with our participation (our own sins) are canceled only with our participation in the gospel covenant.

Familiar Aspects of the Fall

So how does the fall of Adam and Eve still affect us? As their physical offspring, we inherit the physical consequences of their actions just as we inherit their changed physical condition. The offspring of Adam and Eve are fallen physically. That may not be apparent to people in their twenties who are enjoying good health, but when we are sick or injured and as we age, the evidence becomes more clear—to be born is also to suffer and die. There is no more inexorable connection, no more firmly established scientific certainty in the natural world than that. The bad news here is particularly bad: at some point in your life, whatever is wrong with you will get worse, and then you'll die.

However, that particular aspect of the Fall doesn't usually take us all at once. First, the teeth get cavities, the waistline thickens, the knees go bad, the hair falls out. First we need glasses, then stronger prescriptions, then bifocals, then trifocals. We don't often think of the dentist, the optometrist, or the toupÃ©-maker as helping us cope with the effects of the Fall, but that is what they do. Moreover, physicians, nurses, pharmacists, psychiatrists, psychologists, physical therapists, lab technicians, dietitians, and manufacturers of vitamins, health foods, exercise bikes, and stair-steppers—all these and many more occupations exist only to help us briefly hold at bay the effects of the Fall. But no one can stop the process, for funeral directors, morticians, and gravediggers are also in the "Fall" business and are its ultimate and inevitable conclusion in this world. While death is the most dramatic evidence of our physically fallen state, we should not forget that injury, sickness, pain—all the physical problems with which humans suffer—are also results of our being fallen. In Eden it was not so, nor will it be when Christ restores again to this earth its paradisiacal glory.

Besides being physically fallen, we are also spiritually fallen. That can be correctly described as geographical separation from God, being physically excluded from his presence because of our fallen and sinful condition (Moses 5:4). But the spiritual aspects of the Fall are more directly experienced as feelings of loneliness, inadequacy, alienation, anxiety, depression, and guilt. Where once we lived and talked with heavenly parents for thousands, perhaps millions, of years, suddenly we have been separated from that divine influence. What comfort, what security must our parents have given us as we grew up under their loving care. How much a part of our lives they must have become in those premortal aeons. Now, like homesick freshmen, we suffer from a tremendous separation anxiety, a sense of loss brought about by the Fall, but because the veil has been drawn over our minds, we cannot remember what it is that we so desperately miss. The resulting condition might be called severe spiritual trauma, like being hit on the head, kidnapped, and waking up as a slave with amnesia in Timbuktu. In our spiritually more sensitive moments, we may feel that something isn't quite right about all this, but until we find and accept the gospel of Jesus Christ we can't really know what is wrong with this life or how to fix it. Somewhere deep within us, we grieve for the loss of a home and a life we cannot remember. We only feel the loss in our bones.

Other Aspects of the Fall

While the physical and spiritual aspects of the Fall, death, and separation from God get a lot of attention, I would like to point out some other aspects that are often overlooked but that also have a profound impact on us here in mortality. For example, we often forget that as fallen beings we are mentally fallen.

We humans trust reason and logic; some of us trust reason more than we trust God. We have a tendency to think that if we start with what we know to be true and proceed with correct logic, we will always arrive at correct conclusions, but that is wrong, for human reason is flawed—it is fallen. First of all, we can't ever start from what we already know, because we start here on earth knowing nothing. We bring no data with us from behind the veil. We may have intuitive flashes, and some things we encounter may have a familiar feel, but we have no empirical data, no rational memories from our pre-earth life. We start out with a blank tape. Only the gospel gives us guaranteed data to start from and a guaranteed perspective from which to interpret it.

Second, even if fallen reason did have reliable data to start with, we couldn't follow it through to correct conclusions, for intellect itself is a defective instrument. If a yardstick that is too long or too short is always used to measure itself when it is checked, the error will never be detected. Since intellect is our fallen yardstick, intellect can never detect its own distortions. Most of us are aware that our universe keeps surprising us, that it resists our attempts to impose our understanding upon it. We live daily with the bloody noses that result from the way things really are being different from the way we suppose them to be. These are practical lessons in the inability of human intellect to deal infallibly with mortal reality. If we don't maintain a certain humility, and therefore a certain caution, about our ability to reason correctly and thereby to control our own fate, life will wound us dearly. And we are most at risk when we are most sure of ourselves.

Experience and common sense perceive the effects of the Fall all around us, even though that perception may not always be connected with religious thinking. For example, one popular recognition of our fallen situation is voiced in Murphy's Law: "If things can go wrong they will, and probably already have." That bit of folk wisdom correctly recognizes the "friction" or opposition that the Fall adds to our existence. The same idea is contained in the popular maxim "Stuff happens." Though not overtly religious, both of these popular formulas describe the actual, perceptible effects of the Fall in human affairs. The Scottish poet Robert Burns similarly noted these limitations of mortality when he wrote, "The best-laid schemes o' mice an' men gang aft agley." [^7] Though staunch humanists—even in the Church—will naively argue to the contrary, we humans are not able to control our destinies by our reason alone, for our reason is fallen and defective and will lead us into errors: "The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. . . . For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God" (1 Corinthians 2:14; 3:19). If we are ever to detect and rise above the distortions of our fallen intellect, we need another yardstick—a correct one—to measure our reason by, and that yardstick is the revealed gospel of Jesus Christ.

Much of the time, even most of the time, relying on our best reasoning is a sound operating procedure—most of the time it's the best we've got—but it must always be tempered with the humility that comes from understanding the effects of the Fall on our reason. Fallen intellect can't get things right, not completely. Fallen intellect can never arrive at the whole truth on its own. Thus those who rely on intellect and human reasoning alone as their surest guides in this life are doomed to be "ever learning but never able to come to a knowledge of the truth." They have a self-verifying—but nevertheless defective—yardstick. Only the gospel gives us a reliable indication of when we are working beyond our rational limitations. Only a revealed yardstick can be used to check the calibrations of human wisdom, for the false yardstick of human wisdom will always validate itself when used to measure itself. Absent the influence of the Holy Ghost on some level (whether as revelation, inspiration, intuition, or whatever), our reason will eventually lead us into error.

Another way in which we are fallen is emotionally. Our emotions, like our flesh, are part of our carnal natures. They are flawed and often out of control. We cannot choose our temperament. We don't usually choose what will "bug" us. Sometimes our emotional state can be influenced by physical or chemical factors in the brain, and in these cases may not be governed by agency or subject to accountability. However, in most cases our fallen emotions, like our fallen bodies, can and must be subjected to the rule of our spirits. Moreover, we can't very well choose whom or what to love or determine how intensely we will love them. If we have too much of the wrong kind of contact, our emotions can create new attachments or dissolve old ones when we didn't intend for that to happen. Our emotions are a poor substitute for the Spirit as a guide in our lives, and to follow our unbridled emotions is as foolish as to follow our unbridled flesh. I express it as my opinion that in the resurrection, our emotions, if we have subjected them to our spirits, will no longer be out of control, will no longer be fallen, but will be subject to our will. They will then be as God's emotions are—always under control and always redemptive in their expression.

Also we are fallen morally. That means our sense of right and wrong is defective. While it may be true that we can usually let our conscience be our guide, many times different individuals get contradictory indications from their consciences, and often conscience does not state any opinion whatsoever. The desire to do the right thing doesn't help much if we don't know what the right thing is. The light of Christ gives all people enough information to be held accountable for some sins, and perhaps to avoid certain sins, but it cannot be a substitute for the Holy Ghost. The light of Christ does not have sufficient intensity to serve as a guide for all people in all circumstances—especially if a fallen reason and a carnal nature are urging us in a different direction. Yet mortality requires us to make complex moral judgments about what is right and wrong. In the absence of the gift of the Holy Spirit, we will simply come to the wrong conclusions, and we may even do it while thinking we are right.

The total effect of being fallen in all these ways (physically, spiritually, mentally, emotionally, and morally) is to make the test of mortality much more difficult. At the same time, we receive a physical body, which naturally seeks pleasure rather than righteousness because it has no ability to distinguish between right and wrong—flesh has no conscience. I mean that literally. Just as a thermometer cannot detect radiation and a Geiger counter cannot detect heat, so our flesh cannot detect light and truth—it wasn't designed to do it. Flesh can distinguish only between pleasure and pain, between "feels good" and "doesn't feel good," and therefore it urges us to act upon that distinction alone. The unredeemed carnal self, our flesh and its desires, readily serves the devil because it has no moral sense, no spiritual discernment, and no conscience. It was not designed that way—the ability to make those distinctions was given to our spirit. Unredeemed and without the guidance of spirit, our flesh is morally blind and is therefore an enemy to God, for Satan can successfully argue to the flesh that sin is pleasurable even when he can't successfully argue to the spirit that sin is right. Consequently, being both incredibly powerful and morally blind, until and unless the carnal self yields to the enticing of the Holy Spirit and accepts the leadership of our own spirit with its moral vision, it remains a loose cannon and an enemy to God (Mosiah 3:19).

But please note that we do not seek to destroy or escape the flesh or the carnal self but rather to subject it to the Spirit and to sanctify it. The capacity for pleasure is not, after all, evil. It is necessary and desirable—not when it is our highest priority but rather when it accepts the leadership of the Spirit and serves the interests of the Spirit.

Since we are not perfected all at once when we are converted, we ought not to expect that the carnal self will be subjected to the spirit all at once either. Just as those who have been redeemed from death through the Atonement and Resurrection still have to die anyway, so those who have overcome the carnal self through the Atonement still have to wrestle with it anyway.

In the worst cases, the carnal self can be horribly, leeringly wicked. In the best cases, the carnal self can also be human beings just doing the best they know how—without God—and getting it all wrong as a result. As even the truly converted attempt to follow Christ, they should not suppose they will be freed immediately from every influence of the carnal self. Struggling with that self is part of the test, and our test is not yet over. Indeed, the process of refinement will last more than our lifetime. Victory is assured to the faithful through the atonement of Christ (1 John 5:4-5; D&C 38:7-9), but our individual struggle continues as long as we are in the flesh.

The final bit of bad news is that since the Fall subjects us to a carnal nature, it also puts us at increased risk of personal sin. The Fall is not in itself the immediate cause of our personal sins, but it does put us in a bad neighborhood where we may encounter and be enticed by sin. That enticement, combined with the enthusiastic urging of our carnal self, often overcomes the righteous desires of our spirit, and we pollute ourselves. [^8] To summarize then, the bad news is that without the atonement of Christ we are, by our own premortal choice, trapped in an existence that includes pain, suffering, and anguish. Led by the understandable preference of our carnal natures for pleasure rather than pain, we have fallen into bondage to Satan through personal sin. Our ability to reason is, by celestial standards, impaired, and in its fallen condition serves not our spirits but our flesh. Our emotions are often out of control, and we often think that wrong is right. We are eventually and unavoidably going to die, and when we die, we can't go home. That—without the gospel—is the bad news of the Fall. But don't get depressed; the good news is that the Fall and all its effects have been overcome by Jesus Christ, and they will be removed from us when this mortal test is over.

Why Would We Choose to Face This?

If the Fall brought about the conditions listed above, then why would beings like you and me agree to experience it? I believe that our premortal willingness to risk the hazards of the Fall was in most cases an act of faith in Christ. We entered the trap of mortality on the strength of God's promise, God's Word, that he would bring us out again if we would repent when we sinned and turn to him, and all but a very few of us spirit children who come into mortality fully intended back then to repent and to turn to him in this life. Thus to become mortal was to put ourselves completely in the Savior's hands, to jump into a pit of alligators and trust him to pull us out. We trusted him that much then, and we covenanted with him that we would experience the Fall and repent and turn to him, if he would overcome all our enemies and provide atonement and resurrection for us. Should he fail, we were doomed, but it speaks highly of our premortal opinion of Christ that we were willing to take that risk. As it turned out, he did not fail to keep that covenant, but many of us have. The Savior didn't fail his grand commission, and all we have to do is trust him here and now as much as we did when we voted for him back then—and once again put ourselves completely in his hands.

The Good News: the Atonement of Christ

Since I have written at length on the Good News in my earlier book, I am not going to rehearse all of that here except to say that Christ has overcome all things and defeated every enemy.

However, if we choose to indulge and obey the carnal self, if we seek to please the flesh, if we cherish and nurture the carnal thought rather than cast it out of our minds, if we obey our inappropriate emotional impulses, or if we continue to insist that wrong is right after the Spirit or inspired leaders instruct us otherwise—then we are accountable for those personal choices. In those cases, our fallen nature has merely tapped on the door, but we have yanked it open and eagerly embraced what was on the other side instead of keeping the door shut. In those cases we are not merely struggling with a fallen nature that keeps whining its preferences at us; rather we have crossed the line and committed willful, personal sin. And for that we will be held accountable unless we repent.

Part of the Good News of the gospel is that the physical, spiritual, mental, emotional, and moral aspects of the Fall have all been overcome by the Savior, and we will eventually be freed from all of them through his grace. Nevertheless, as part of our mortal "test" or probation, we are still required to work under those handicaps until a later time. Disease and death will eventually claim us, no matter how much faith we have. Carnal thoughts will sometimes come into our minds (even, perhaps, in holy places) no matter how righteous we may be. We will make mental errors no matter how converted we are to Christ. Our emotions will inappropriately urge us, and wrong will sometimes seem right no matter how committed we are to the Church and kingdom. We have the promise that the limitations will be removed from us entirely in the resurrection, and that we will not be punished for having suffered them in mortality (unless we chose to embrace and obey them), but until that great day we must suffer the frustrations and limitations of wrestling the leering beast. It is part of our test. Our task is to admit our handicap, something some of us find very difficult to do, and yet still to serve as humbly and faithfully as we can until it is removed. Moreover, as we learn to obey God's commandments and progress in becoming more and more like him, we will find that the influence of the carnal self in our lives diminishes over time.

I know people in the Church who beat themselves up for having fallen natures, who take it as a sign that they are not worthy of the kingdom. For these spiritual masochists it isn't enough to control their carnal nature or to begin diminishing its influence by developing habitual obedience to God-they don't even want to have a carnal nature. They foolishly expect their conversion to the gospel and their desire to lead celestial lives to overcome all the effects of the Fall right now-but it won't happen. The "mighty change" is a change of orientation, desire, and goals that allows us to receive the blessings of the Atonement. But most of us will not achieve all our spiritual goals in this life. It is a process that will continue into eternity. In mortality, resisting the urges of our carnal thoughts and putting them out of our minds is a reasonable goal and expectation. But not ever having a carnal thought is an unreasonable goal and expectation. President Brigham Young put it this way: "Do not suppose that we shall ever in the flesh be free from temptations to sin. Some suppose that they can in the flesh be sanctified body and spirit and become so pure that they will never again feel the effects of the power of the adversary of truth. Were it possible for a person to attain to this degree of perfection in the flesh, he could not die neither remain in a world where sin predominates. . . . I think we should more or less feel the effects of sin so long as we live, and finally have to pass the ordeals of death." [^9]

Now, the preceding paragraphs tell the truth, but there is great danger in saying those things. The danger is that someone, somewhere, is going to think that resisting their carnal nature is impossible. That is not correct; resistance is not only possible, it is required. In this life progress is possible—perfection is not. [^10] What is impossible is being totally separated from our carnal self. We are stuck, like missionaries with companions who won't get out of bed. We can't just leave them. So we do the best we can to keep the rules ourselves while trying to make the companionship as productive as possible under the circumstances. And we look forward to a transfer. So in the flesh we do the best we can to resist the influence of our carnal companion and to keep the rules while trying to make our lives as productive as possible under the circumstances. And we look forward to the resurrection.

The effects of the Fall (physical, spiritual, mental, emotional, moral) constitute external handicaps that we must all work under in mortality, but we are promised that they will be removed from us in eternity through the victory of Christ. The compulsive and the perfectionists among us need to realize that a large part of why things go wrong in this life is the Fall—not their own incompetence. Once we understand and accept the natural limitations placed upon us by the Fall and its consequences, then we must come to grips with the more dangerous internal hazards that face us in our attempts to follow Christ—our own sins.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] As members of the Church in good faith who have entered the gospel covenant, we are already in the kingdom of God (though only conditionally at present) for as long as we choose to remain. Alma 7:24: "See that ye have faith, hope, and charity, and then ye will always abound in good works" (emphasis added). Clearly, Alma understands these abounding good works to be a result of our faith, our hope, and our charity. The good works of Alma himself came only after his remarkable conversion to Christ. Alma was positively wicked until he accepted Christ and was redeemed; then he "labored without ceasing." [^4] Of course, some sins are serious enough to threaten the covenant relationship itself. These must be discussed with the Lord's representative, the bishop or branch president.
[^2] Enduring faithfully to the end does not just mean "coping" successfully with our problems or suffering affliction with stamina, although some have been called upon to do these things in order to endure. Certainly it has little to do with overcoming personal obstacles or achieving personal goals. Rather it means staying put in the kingdom by holding on to Christ and to his church without altering our commitment—no matter what. Neither "enduring" nor "being faithful" means being perfect or living from our baptism until our death without sinning, for God has anticipated our weaknesses and has prepared the sacrament as a means of ongoing repentance and improvement within the covenant. [^1] Ether 12:4: "Whoso believeth in God might with surety hope for a better world, yea, even a place at the right hand of God, which hope cometh of faith, maketh an anchor to the souls of men, which would make them sure and steadfast, always abounding in good works, being led to glorify God." Again, note that people abound in good works after receiving their anchor of faith and hope. It is conversion to Christ that convinces us of our need to improve and creates the desire to repent and do good works. Good works are generally the fruit of accepting the gospel covenant rather than vice versa. It is possible to be saved in a kingdom of glory, even in the celestial kingdom, without fully becoming what God is (D&C 131:1-4; 132:17).
[^3] Some of the imperfections that so bedevil us in mortality are not of our own choosing, and we will not be held accountable for them. Imperfections of this type are built-in handicaps and limitations that simply come, because of the Fall, with mortality, and when we put off mortality we shall put off these handicaps as well. Moroni 7:28: "He hath answered the ends of the law, and he claimeth all those who have faith in him; and they who have faith in him will cleave unto every good thing." It is our faith in Christ and his claim upon us that compels us as Saints to seek after good. True Saints will cleave unto every good thing—not so they may claim him, but because he has claimed them. Protestants, however, would use the term salvation only for the beginning of the process—not believing there is an end. If we adjust definitions appropriately, we are actually talking about the same thing.
[^4] See Alma 36:12-24 (especially 24).
[^5] Though, as I make clear in Believing Christ, "keeping the commandments" is not the same as "always keeping every commandment." There is room in the covenant relationship for our errors and weaknesses (though not for rebellion) as long as we are improving.
[^6] The Joseph Smith Translation clarifies that John is not referring to the occasional infraction but to willful and repeated sinning by reading "continueth in sin" here (emphasis added).
[^7] The phrase by grace alone does not occur in the Bible. The phrase by faith only is found at James 2:24 but in a passage that explicitly denies justification is possible in this way.
[^8] I was guilty of this myself as a missionary, though it wasn't a part of the authorized missionary discussions. I learned it from my senior companions and taught it to my junior companions. For all I know, green missionaries are still getting the infection (the idea that James was right and Paul was wrong) in this manner and passing it on to others.
[^9] See, for example, Genesis 6:18 (Noah), Genesis 15:18 and 17:2 (Abraham), Exodus 34:27-28 Moses, 2 Samuel 23:5 (David), 2 Kings 11:17 (Jehoiada), 2 Kings 23:3 (Josiah), and many others in the Old Testament. The relationship brought about by Jesus is a new covenant according to the New Testament. See Hebrews 8:7-13; 9:15-20 (where "testament" means "covenant," as the JST notes). In fact, the Greek word translated "testament" is also the word for covenant. The New Testament is the new covenant.
[^10] Most scholars deny that Paul wrote the Pastoral Epistles (1 and 2 Timothy and Titus), insisting that these letters were written by Paul's close associates in his name. I think they are wrong, but it doesn't matter here. Paul's "students" can also offer excellent testimony on how Paul and his associates understood and used this term.
