Stephen E. Robinson, Following Christ: The Parable of the Divers and More Good News ( 1995)

Chapter Four

Faith and Works

Among other things, I hope the first three chapters of this book have established at least the following:

Then Why Work?

Now if all the above are true, then why should I work anymore? After all, if we are already in the kingdom, then the purpose of doing good works cannot be to get into the kingdom! The works must fit in differently somehow, for we can't be working to earn something we already possess. But if the monumental task before me as a mortal member of the Church is not to work my way into the kingdom, then what is it? If I'm already in the kingdom, why am I working so hard? In fact, why should I work at all?

Some Christians have no good answers to those questions, since they do not possess the fullness of the gospel plan. They see salvation as a single event, in fact the only really significant event there is, and for them once you reach the kingdom the ball game is over and won. But for Latter-day Saints the answer is not that simple. We see the saving work of God in its entirety, not as a single event but as a process with a beginning and an end. The beginning of the process is coming to Christ through faith, repentance, baptism, and receiving the Holy Ghost. In doing so, and at any point in the process thereafter, we are justified, sanctified, and "saved" on the condition of endurance (Matthew 10:22), that the process continue. Thus far, LDS theology is similar to that of other Christians. But Latter-day Saints know that the end of the process is far, far grander than even this. The ultimate goal, the purpose for all God's work, is not merely to save us from death and hell, as wonderful as that is in itself. The purpose behind it all is to make us what Christ is. (Is that monumental enough for you?) To be saved is to become sons and daughters of God through the atonement of Christ—but the ultimate goal for sons and daughters is to grow up and be what their parents are. That is the dimension only Latter-day Saints understand! I'm not working now, after my conversion, to get into the kingdom; I'm not working to be "saved"; I'm working to become what he is, and to do what he does, and to have what he has.

One could say that coming to Christ is like getting on a train headed for a specific destination. If you want to go to that place, it is critically important to get on the train. And having gotten on the train, if we stay on it, we will inevitably arrive at the destination. But even so, merely getting on the train is not the point of the journey. Arriving at our destination is the point of the journey. Coming to Christ, being saved, begins our transformation. It gets us on the train, so to speak. But our ultimate object, our goal, is to become what Christ is. And that is why we work, not to save ourselves from hell—Christ has already done that for us. In his great condescension, God the Son became everything we are and suffered everything we suffer in order to remove every obstacle and open every door (Revelation 3:8); now he invites us to become everything he is by treading the path he has cleared. So we work to close the distance, to become more like our Father (Mosiah 5:7), to actualize the individual perfection Christ has made possible. Those who do not desire to become entirely as Christ now is will find themselves increasingly uncomfortable with the process and will eventually get off the train, some nearer and some farther from their proper destination. [^2] But nobody gets thrown off. If we stay on board—if we endure to the end—we have God's promise that we shall reach our destination and become all that he is and receive all that he has (Romans 8:14-19, especially 17; John 16:15; Luke 12:44; D&C 84:38).

Unfortunately that is the answer other denominations cannot use, for in their theology we and Christ are usually different species of beings—he is divine and we are human. In their view, it is blasphemous to suggest we can become what he is. They would insist there is no process, no long-term goal, and no point to religion beyond the single event of being saved from death and hell. Once saved, they are left theologically with nowhere to go, nothing to do, and no reason to do it. Their train is stationary—no engine, no tracks, no journey. For them getting on the train is the complete destination. No wonder the one-time event of "being saved" becomes for them the focal point for all eternity and the LDS insistence on working toward a further goal irritates them so—they deny the existence of any further goal beyond merely being saved from death and hell. They mistakenly suppose the Latter-day Saints are working to be saved, and, unfortunately, so do some of our own people. But Christ has already done that work; now we work to become as much like him as we desire to.

Only the Latter-day Saints understand that the purpose of God's grace is to take us all the way to himself and make us—quite literally—what he is. Now that is grace indeed! For Latter-day Saints the focal point of this life must be coming to Christ and beginning the process, but we also look forward to that greater moment in eternity when we shall finally be like him (1 John 3:2; 2 Corinthians 3:18). And toward that glorious day as faithful sons and daughters we consecrate ourselves in the everyday unfolding of our lives, that by our labors we might close the gap between us. When we use the term coming to Christ in describing conversion, it is a figure of speech that describes our intent and our desires. But the ultimate realization of coming to Christ is in actually closing the distance between us by becoming what he is through doing what he does.

If we focus too much attention on the beginning of life in Christ, on our initial conversion and justification by faith in Christ (that is, on being saved), it is possible to obscure the object, goal, and purpose of our new life, which is gradually, both now and in the eternity before us, to become in actual fact like Christ. Too much emphasis on beginning obscures the importance of finishing. As absolutely essential as it is to be converted, if we do not then begin to imitate Christ and move gradually toward him, we do not really honor him or truly worship him, for true worship is imitation.

Similarly, if we focus too much attention on the final accomplishment of our eternal goal, on becoming someday what our Father is, it is possible to undervalue or even overlook Christ's saving work, to glorify our own efforts instead and feel we are "saving ourselves" by working toward our goal. For that reason many miss the full power and blessing of having Christ in their lives right now. Thus, I suggest it is better to think of salvation as a process with a beginning in this life and an end in eternity. [^3] The beginning is mostly up to Christ; the end is mostly up to us. That is what Nephi tells us in 2 Nephi 31:19-20: We got into the strait and narrow path by unshaken faith in the word of Christ, relying wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save. Now we must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ and a perfect brightness of hope. If we "endure to the end" in this fashion, the Father promises, "Ye shall have eternal life." But we must always remember that while we are genuinely engaged in this process, while we labor between its beginning and its end, we are safe in his kingdom and in his loving arms—saved in the classical sense (Alma 5:33, 34:16; Mormon 5:11, 6:17).

Other Reasons to Work

There are also other reasons to do the work of the kingdom. First, our work for the kingdom is a form of worship; in fact, it is the highest form of worship. God, in all his glorious attributes, in all his perfect righteousness, is our God. We love and respect and seek what he is. How can we worship him and not worship what he is? We can't, for that would be a logical contradiction. A thing is what it is; we cannot worship a thing and not worship what it is. Therefore we honor, respect, and value righteousness—for he is righteous. We value love—for he is love. We value compassion and forgiveness—for he is compassionate and forgiving. And what we value we seek to possess. Thus we worship God by seeking to possess his divine attributes in our own lives. The false gods of wealth, fame, sex, and so on are worshiped by pursuing them and seeking to possess them. The person who worships money seeks to possess money; the person who worships fame seeks to be famous; and so forth. The true God is love, truth, and light. So if we truly worship him, we pursue and seek to possess for ourselves love, truth, and light. We cannot seek good, pursue good, worship good—without becoming good (or at least without becoming better over time). The real question we must ask ourselves about eternity is not "What do I want to get?" or even "Where do I want to go?" but rather "Who do I want to be?"

We also work to testify. The scriptures give us several examples of this: "Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven" (Matthew 5:16). "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another" (John 13:35). If Christ and I are truly one in the gospel covenant, then I must truly reflect his nature in my life. My behavior, in changing for the better, testifies of the Christ who has taken me to himself. The final result may not appear for some time, but the process of positive change in me will be unmistakable. If his countenance does not become, over time, more and more visible in me, if I do not begin to bear the fruits of my conversion, it becomes doubtful that I have really entered into the covenant in good faith or that I have not secretly changed my mind somewhere along the line.

Moreover, according to Ephesians 2:19-22, we members of the Church are like the individual stones or bricks in the structure of the Church. Now, what exactly do stones do? What great works do they perform? Well, they are just there; they don't really do anything! Maybe that is so . . . but they are always there! That, in fact, is what they do. They are there. They are reliable; they are steadfast; they can be counted on—they endure in the place where they've been put. That is how they serve the Master Builder. They don't come and go; they don't move or wander; they don't try to check out for a rest or shift their part of the burden to their neighbors—they don't leave a gap in the wall.

Also, we do good works to build the kingdom itself. In my experience, it is those who are most converted to the gospel who work the hardest for the gospel's sake. The truth is that the greatest works follow conversion—they do not precede it. Joseph Smith laid down his life, the pioneers crossed the plains, early Christians went to the lions, not so they could become converted to the gospel but because of their conversion to the gospel.

Consider the following scriptures:

Also, I believe there is an indisoluble link between labor and happiness, a law that says something like "You can have only as much joy as you are willing to sweat for." Our eternal nature as children of God may be such that our capacity for joy is increased by work (opposition in all things). After all, couch-potatoes miss a lot of happiness in this life; perhaps in the eternities spiritual couch-potatoes likewise miss something that might otherwise have been theirs with more effort.

If we want to be like God, we must remember that God works; he works very hard. And if God's work and glory are to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of his children, then to avoid his work is also to miss his glory.

Finally, sons and daughters of the house do the chores of the house. Just as Christ did "the works which the Father hath given" him (John 5:36), so we, in imitating him, also do the chores he has given us: "He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also" (John 14:12). My own son, Michael, doesn't obey me at home and do his chores in order to become my son. I don't say, "Gee, Mike, if you do your chores really well you just might be my boy someday." He is already my son, and he knows it; that happened years ago. Conversely, were I to instruct the Karlsven kids across the street to mow my lawn, they probably wouldn't do it, because I'm not their dad, and it's not their lawn. They don't owe me any chores. Michael obeys me because he's my son, for the sake of a relationship that already exists, and which he values. He obeys to affirm that he willingly accepts the terms of sonship and his rightful place in our family. Michael cannot with any amount of work, service, or obedience become my son because he already is my son (though he could by calculated disobedience reject the relationship and damage it to the point that it was a mere biological fact and nothing more). Because both of us treasure the relationship and because we love each other, I try to be an understanding parent and he tries to be an obedient son. In the same spirit and for the same reasons, we sons and daughters of the kingdom do the works our Heavenly Father has given us to do. If we want to continue, to endure, in that glorious relationship, then to the best of our abilities we do our chores.

The Scriptural Necessity of Works

The scriptures make crystal clear that proper behavior (works) must be part of our life in Christ. The Savior himself taught, "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven. . . . Depart from me, ye that work iniquity" (Matthew 7:21, 23; emphasis added). In other words, merely acknowledging Jesus' lordship, merely saying the words or making the confession, while refusing to make him our lord by serving him and conforming our behavior to his will—this will not get us into the kingdom. The confession or the acknowledgment must be accompanied by doing the will of the Father in heaven and by not doing iniquity. Jesus explicitly established the undeniable link between salvation and good works: "If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments" (Matthew 19:17). In John's Gospel (3:20-21) he is quoted as saying: "Every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But he that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God" (emphasis added). You can't do evil and be in the light—our deeds and our spiritual condition and destiny are interconnected. Moreover, Jesus also makes keeping his commandments—that is, behavior—a part of abiding in his love: "If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have kept my Father's commandments, and abide in his love" (John 15:10; see also 14:15, 21). The necessary link between proper behavior and being "in Christ" is further taught by John: "He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. But whoso keepeth his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected: hereby know we that we are in him" (1 John 2:4). Who is truly "in Christ"? Those who keep the commandments! [^5] There are those who profess him but will not work for him, those who claim to be sons and daughters but refuse to do their chores. But these, according to the scripture, are "liars."

The necessity of good behavior for abiding in Christ is again emphasized by John at 1 John 3:6-8: "Whosoever abideth in him sinneth not: whosoever sinneth [^6] hath not seen him, neither known him. Little children, let no man deceive you: he that doeth righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous. He that committeth sin is of the devil; for the devil sinneth from the beginning" (emphasis added).

Finally, the Apostle Paul, who cannot be accused of being anti-grace, teaches the necessary connection between salvation and good works in several places, among them 1 Corinthians 6:9-10: "Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God." Period. No exceptions—not even for Christian adulterers, Christian thieves, or Christian extortioners. In the jargon of my students, God will not accept our talking the talk without our walking the walk.

Faith and Works

Now, the doctrine of justification by faith is thoroughly scriptural (see, for example, Galatians 2:16; 2 Nephi 2:5; D&C 20:30), but the doctrine of justification by faith alone, without any effort, obedience, commitment, or response on the part of the believer, is not. [^7]

Some Christians (but not as many as you might think) argue that God requires nothing of us after our conversion, but that he will lovingly accept any lifestyle the saved may subsequently choose to wallow in—thus subsidizing their sins like a rich, indulgent, or gullible parent who keeps paying the bills for spoiled, ungrateful, and rebellious children. To Latter-day Saints, such a view insults the dignity, justice, and righteousness of God.

On the other hand, for many years "popular" Mormonism (that counterfeit religion invented by members stuck for an answer) has wrongly promoted the other side of the false dilemma of grace versus works. Because the "enemy" (that is, the Baptists, Pentecostals, or whomever they are arguing with) dismiss the need for works and exalt grace alone, it has been felt for some inexplicable reason that we must take the opposite position, dismissing grace and exalting works alone. The resulting "popular" theology is just as defective as the adversarial attitude toward other Christians that goes along with it.

Since the scriptures—not just the Bible but all the scriptures—discuss the importance of both grace and works, we are not at liberty to choose sides or to throw out one in favor of the other. Any theological view that slights the vital role of either grace or works is defective. Luther was wrong to ignore James. Latter-day Saints are wrong to shy away from Paul. Both James and Paul wrote the word of God. Both the Epistle of James and the Epistle to the Romans are scripture. Unfortunately, some LDS missionaries, when confronted with Paul's "By grace are ye saved" (Ephesians 2:8) or "A man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law" (Romans 3:28) have counterattacked with James' "Faith without works is dead" (James 2:26) as though Paul was wrong or as though James somehow cancels out Paul. [^8] But Paul was an apostle of the Lord, and his letters are just as much the word of God as the letter from James (see the eighth Article of Faith). We cannot choose sides between grace and works—both must be right!

The Covenant

The larger theological perspective needed to accommodate both grace and works is provided by the scriptures themselves in the concept of "covenant," an agreement entered into voluntarily by two parties, with obligations laid upon both. This concept is taught in both the Old and New Testaments as characterizing the proper relationship between God and his people. [^9]

The availability of the covenant, the Savior who mediates it, his agony that empowered it—these are all free gifts of grace: God didn't have to offer; Jesus didn't have to suffer. They are gifts bestowed upon us out of love. But the decision to remain in the covenant, to stay put and "endure to the end"—that choice is ours, and it is indicated by whom we serve and by the works we do. As long as we choose to remain loyal to him, Christ continues to justify us by his grace and to atone for our mistakes. Our present good works (such as we can manage) are a token of the perfect righteousness we genuinely seek to offer but at this point can achieve only through Christ, a token that we still serve him and not the Enemy. This token—our sincere effort—is accepted by Christ, who alone redeems and justifies us through the covenant.

Ultimately, salvation is the task of him who bears the title—Savior. It is his title because it is his function and not ours. Occasionally, he allows us to work for him as tools in saving others, but never for ourselves. We can't baptize ourselves, bless ourselves, ordain ourselves, or endow ourselves. Still, we can and must do something to enter into and remain in the covenant. We cannot logically insist he is our master while at the same time refusing to serve him. We can't have it both ways. Servants, by definition, serve. If entering into the covenant is a choice for Christ rather than Satan, then staying in the covenant is serving Christ—that is, to continue choosing Christ, to endure or persist in choosing Christ—and that choice is expressed in our behavior. We can't come to Christ and then just wander off to do our own thing.

Though some find it offensive, it is still true that the relationship alluded to by the biblical terms "servant" and "master" is the institution of slavery. In fact, the term "redeem" means literally "to buy back." Satan owned us; we were his slaves, and Christ bought us back. But Jesus didn't buy us with his own blood so that we could belong to ourselves—we now belong to him. That's why he is the Master and we are his servants. And we therefore owe him our service; and we owe him—not sin, not the devil, not ourselves—just him. We are his servants, bought and paid for with his precious blood (1 Corinthians 6:20).

To say "Christ is Lord" unhypocritically is to say Christ is my Lord. And to say "Christ is my Lord" unhypocritically is to serve him and to reject Satan. Scripture assures us that we cannot merely assert his lordship without serving him and then hope to enter his kingdom (Matthew 7:21). You cannot be his servant without serving him. This is talking the talk without walking the walk.

On the other hand, works without the grace of Christ cannot save us, for on our best day, due to the limitations of the Fall, it takes more to keep us going than we can produce (see Mosiah 2:21; Luke 17:7-10). We can by our works, by our best efforts, only confirm our loyalty to our Savior and our desire to continue being justified by his grace. And our obedience to his commandments, that imperfect token of our perfect intentions, affirms our decision to remain in the covenant.

James versus Paul

Perhaps the greatest scriptural puzzle concerning the roles of faith and works is presented in the apparently contrasting views of James and Paul in the New Testament. We shouldn't minimize the apparent contradiction. On the one hand Paul says in Romans 3:28, "A man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law" (emphasis added). On the other hand, James, the Lord's own half-brother, says in James 2:14 and 24, "What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have not works? can faith save him? [Remember, Paul said yes!] . . . Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only" (emphasis added). This apparent contradiction has spawned centuries of heated arguments over whether we are justified by our faith or justified by our works and has caused many students of the scriptures to reject one side in favor of the other. I believe the key to the puzzle may lie in the fact that Paul and James define the word faith differently in their writings. James defines faith as most modern readers would—as mere belief. Thus he points out that the devils also believe, and tremble. That is, they believe, but they're still going to be damned—mere belief won't do them any good.

On the other hand, Paul clearly understands faith to be more than just believing. For him faith still retains its Old Testament meaning of "faithfulness" (see above, pp. 23-25) or commitment to the gospel. In 1 Timothy 4:1 and 5:8, for example, "the faith" is clearly that to which we are faithful, that is, the gospel covenant, which he further describes as being "kept" or "denied" by good or bad behavior. [^10] Twice in his letter to the Romans, at 1:5 (where it is mistranslated in the King James Version) and at 16:26, Paul uses the phrase "the obedience of faith," further indicating that obedience or behavior is a part of faith as he defines the term.

Now, if we use Paul's definition of faith as faithfulness to the gospel covenant, then we find that Paul's formula in Romans 3:28 is correct: Faith alone (commitment to the gospel) will justify us to God, even without living the law of Moses. On the other hand, if we define faith as James does—as mere belief—then James' formula is also correct: Mere belief or affirmation without good behavior is insufficient by itself to justify us before God. If we use James' narrow definition of faith, then James' formula is correct. If we use Paul's broader definition of faith, then Paul's formula is also correct. Both apostles teach the truth. Where we get into trouble is in combining James' definitions with Paul's formula or vice versa. Plugging Paul's definition of faith into James' formula would make us say that faithfulness to the gospel is insufficient for salvation. Plugging James' definition into Paul's formula would make us say that merely believing in Jesus will save us even without proper behavior. Both of these hybrids are wrong. So if you are still working to get yourself into the kingdom, won't you finally come in out of the cold? And if you have come into the kingdom in good faith, won't you do your chores?

Work Out Your Own Salvation

Another frequent objection to the doctrine of grace is made by misapplying Paul's teachings in Philippians 2:12: "My beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling." Those who resist the good news of the gospel and would appoint themselves as Savior in Christ's place say, in effect, "Ah, see? Jesus doesn't save us; he doesn't do the work. We save ourselves; we work out our own salvation; therefore we don't need any grace or any mercy; we do it all ourselves—and Philippians 2:12 proves it."

Actually, the phrase "work out your (own) salvation" occurs three times in scripture, and in all three instances the sense is exactly the opposite to the distortion cited in the last paragraph. First of all, in Philippians 2:12, the injunction is to obedience with humility rather than with the pride of the "self-saved," knowing that Jesus, and not us, is Lord (verse 11) and knowing that the ability to achieve what we work for comes only from God and not from ourselves (verse 13). In the Book of Mormon, Moroni enjoins, "Ask the Father in the name of Jesus for what things soever ye shall stand in need" and "Come unto the Lord with all your heart, and work out your own salvation with fear and trembling before him" (Mormon 9:27). But how do we ask God in faith for what we need, and come to Christ, while at the same time denying we have any needs, denying implicitly that we even need Christ, as we attempt to work out our own salvation? We can't. What Moroni means is to keep the covenant, to do our part with fear and trembling, [^11] and to rely on God for what we lack. To work out our own salvation does not mean to do so independently of Christ and his atonement. Rather it means to keep our part of the gospel covenant in humility while relying upon the Lord for everything we need and asking him for it in faith. Alma is even more explicit in this regard (Alma 34:37-38): "I desire . . . that ye should work out your salvation with fear before God, and that ye should no more deny the coming of Christ; that ye contend no more against the Holy Ghost, but that ye receive it, and take upon you the name of Christ; that ye humble yourselves even to the dust, and worship God, in whatsoever place ye may be in, in spirit and in truth; and that ye live in thanksgiving daily, for the many mercies and blessings which he doth bestow upon you" (emphasis added). We cannot "work out our salvation" apart from Christ; we cannot "humble ourselves even to the dust" if in our arrogance we think we can save ourselves without Christ; we cannot "live in and come to Christ, while at the same time denying we have any needs, denying implicitly that we even need Christ, as we attempt to work out our own salvation? We can't. What Moroni means is to keep the covenant, to do our part with fear and trembling, [^12] and to rely on God for what we lack. To work out our own salvation does not mean to do so independently of Christ and his atonement. Rather it means to keep our part of the gospel covenant in humility while relying upon the Lord for everything we need and asking him for it in faith. Alma is even more explicit in this regard (Alma 34:37-38): "I desire . . . that ye should work out your salvation with fear before God, and that ye should no more deny the coming of Christ; that ye contend no more against the Holy Ghost, but that ye receive it, and take upon you the name of Christ; that ye humble yourselves even to the dust, and worship God, in whatsoever place ye may be in, in spirit and in truth; and that ye live in thanksgiving daily, for the many mercies and blessings which he doth bestow upon you" (emphasis added). We cannot "work out our salvation" apart from Christ; we cannot "humble ourselves even to the dust" if in our arrogance we think we can save ourselves without Christ; we cannot "live in thanksgiving daily for the many mercies of God" if we deny we've been shown many mercies. In fact, having faith in the Savior, repenting, entering the covenant, and staying put therein are "all we can do" (2 Nephi 25:23).

Frustration with God's Mercies

Some in the modern Church just seem to have a difficult time acknowledging God's great mercy to his Saints. This has been a failing in other dispensations as well. For example, Alma quotes the ancient Prophet Zenock to his own people (and to us) as follows: "Thou art angry, O Lord, with this people, because they will not under-stand thy mercies which thou hast bestowed upon them because of thy Son" (Alma 3:16). I believe it is a sin of ingratitude to resist the mercies that have been bestowed upon us because of the Son.

Why is it so difficult for some of us to accept and acknowledge the mercy and grace of God? Much of it boils down to the fear that someone, somewhere, will "get away" with something. First of all, we fear that the guilty can "get away" with their sins without suffering. Since it is merciful, the good news of justification by faith in Christ naturally violates our sense of justice. Also, if people are too confident of their place in God's kingdom, they might try to "get away" with doing less work than we think they should do.

Well, as far as not working hard goes, I suggest that love and gratitude are in the long run better motivators of good works than are fear and anxiety. They are certainly superior to depression and despair. If we feel the Savior's love and know that we are his, our desire to serve him will be greater than if we don't know his love and worry that he might send us to hell. Parents whose children obey only out of fear eventually lose their children, but parents whose children obey out of love gain them forever.

As far as the guilty "getting away" with their sins, my colleague Larry Dahl has offered an illustration worthy of repetition here. A young, unmarried couple he knew had become sexually involved. After some time, an unexpected pregnancy, and no small scandal, they repented, were married civilly, and a year later were sealed in the temple. But some of the local sisters were indignant at how "easily" this pair had gotten off. One sister was overheard to say, "Well, if it's that easy to get away with it, why don't we all just have our fun and then repent when we get caught?"

The mistake this sister makes, as Brother Dahl points out, is in thinking that sin is something desirable and that those who sin and repent somehow enjoy an advantage over those who do not sin. Her reaction was not one of moral superiority—it was the envy of a carnal nature positively drooling over the goodies others got to enjoy and anger because she couldn't have them too. In short, she was green with envy. In her case, sexual misconduct was something she wanted to do but didn't "get" to do, and she felt cheated.

Of course, the correct view is that the righteous who have kept the commandments "get" to live faithfully, "get" to have the companionship of the Spirit, and "get" to become more Christlike, while the poor sinners around us are stuck in the mud until they repent. The recently repentant should envy us our uninterrupted service to the Master rather than us envying their recent bondage to the adversary. The proper perspective is that I "got" to enjoy a relationship with Christ for thirty years, while that poor soul has enjoyed life in Christ only for thirty days. I am way ahead of him or her, not behind. I think I'm behind or at a disadvantage only if my hidden value system puts a higher desirability on wickedness than on righteousness! It's a matter of which you really feel is best—the life of sin or life in Christ. If the former, then letting sinners off the hook bothers you, and you want them to suffer (to balance out all that extra fun and pleasure they had and you didn't). If the latter, then you know that their sinful lifestyle was already its own punishment, and you rejoice with the angels over those who have repented and been redeemed.

Walking the tightrope

The two major hazards of pitting faith against works as though they were competitors are (1) antinomianism and (2) do-it-yourself salvation. Antinomianism is the scholars' word for the talk without the walk—the belief that grace removes from us any obligation to do good works or that merely saying "Christ is Lord" will guarantee salvation even for wicked and unfaithful Christians. Do-it-yourself salvation is my term for the belief that we save ourselves, that we "work out our own salvation" without grace and without being justified through faith in Christ. Theologically we walk a tightrope between these two equally disagreeable extremes. The finished product of the covenant relationship, neither all grace nor all works, is a faithful Christian saved in the kingdom of God through the grace of Christ. Without the grace of Christ there is no salvation. But without our faithfulness there is no salvation either. Like two blades of the scissors, to borrow C. S. Lewis's analogy, both grace and works must be part of the process. That is why the relationship is described in the scriptures as a covenant rather than a gift of grace alone or a reward for works alone. The saved are involved in the salvation process and contribute to it because they are involved in the covenant and must "keep" it. Leave out grace or leave out our own efforts and desire, and you are left with only one half of the scissors—not enough to do the job. Latter-day Saints do not reject the proposition that we are saved by grace. We do, however, reject the proposition that grace can save us against our will or without our consent or while we rebel against Christ.

Still, there is no life so wretched or talent so small or strength so tiny that its consecration will not be accepted for now, that the process of salvation might begin. But our lives must be offered, the consecration must be made, and our proud hearts must break. Thus anyone who desires Christ more than he or she desires sin, from whatever background or with whatever history, may enter into Christ's covenant and be saved.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^2] Should the president be incapacitated, the Lord will continue to lead the Church through the united voice of the prophets, seers, and revelators who are his counselors.
[^3] I am indebted to my colleague Joseph F. McConkie for the term "goose-pimple gang." It perfectly describes that nut-ball fringe in the Church who invent, and the gullible Saints who repeat, any story that will produce goose pimples in their listeners. Apparently their standard for "inspirational stories" is not "Is it true?" but rather "Does it give me goose bumps?"
[^5] As at Matthew 24:24 or Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:22, here broadly paraphrased.
[^6] Some of us even, instead of helping to build Zion, absurdly and unfairly blame God for the way Satan governs Babylon. You don't like this world? Help build the next one!
[^7] I am not suggesting that faithful Saints can't ever be appropriately critical of Church institutions. But we must recognize and neutralize the grudge our carnal selves may bear them. Many Saints are double-minded in this way. They believe themselves loyal to the kingdom as a whole while being disloyal to its constituent parts.
[^8] I was guilty of this myself as a missionary, though it wasn't a part of the authorized missionary discussions. I learned it from my senior companions and taught it to my junior companions. For all I know, green missionaries are still getting the infection (the idea that James was right and Paul was wrong) in this manner and passing it on to others.
[^9] See, for example, Genesis 6:18 (Noah), Genesis 15:18 and 17:2 (Abraham), Exodus 34:27-28 Moses, 2 Samuel 23:5 (David), 2 Kings 11:17 (Jehoiada), 2 Kings 23:3 (Josiah), and many others in the Old Testament. The relationship brought about by Jesus is a new covenant according to the New Testament. See Hebrews 8:7-13; 9:15-20 (where "testament" means "covenant," as the JST notes). In fact, the Greek word translated "testament" is also the word for covenant. The New Testament is the new covenant.
[^10] Most scholars deny that Paul wrote the Pastoral Epistles (1 and 2 Timothy and Titus), insisting that these letters were written by Paul's close associates in his name. I think they are wrong, but it doesn't matter here. Paul's "students" can also offer excellent testimony on how Paul and his associates understood and used this term.
[^11] 11. In the scriptures fear and trembling denotes an attitude of reverence and respect but also of joy. The phrase comes originally from the messianic Psalm 2:11: "Serve the Lord with fear [that is, with reverence and respect], and rejoice with trembling" (emphasis added). Those who embrace the Son (verse 12) tremble with joy, not with fear in the modern sense. That is of profound importance, yet it is exactly opposite to the usual interpretation of "with fear and trembling."
