Stephen E. Robinson, Following Christ: The Parable of the Divers and More Good News ( 1995)

Chapter Five

Hazards to Endurance

As we attempt to keep our part of the gospel covenant and endure faithfully to the end, there are specific hazards to our individual endurance beyond the limitations of the Fall and our struggle with a carnal nature. In Matthew 24:9-13 the Savior's wonderful promise to those who will endure includes a warning against three specific things to watch out for. These specific hazards are weakness in affliction, deception, and iniquity. Concerning affliction the Lord has said to his disciples: "They [shall] deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you: and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name's sake. And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one another" (Matthew 24:9-10).

Satan is an abuser, and one of his first tactics in approaching the faithful is therefore to threaten, bully, and abuse. We have in the Church both historical and contemporary examples of those who couldn't take it and who broke their covenants rather than face opposition, criticism, or unpleasantness. They couldn't bear the malice of the world, and the malice of the world is one of those things we are promised if we are faithful to Christ (John 15:18-19). The world's standard is "You gotta go along to get along." But the gospel standard is uncompromising when it comes to our covenant obligations and our relationship to Christ. These must remain nonnegotiable. Still, when Satan has threatened some of the Saints with pain or loss, they've lost sight of who the winner will be in the cosmic struggle. Consequently they've waffled, let go of their covenants, and given up the kingdom.

On the other hand, Church history provides no better examples of people enduring afflictions faithfully than those of the early pioneers. But as we think of the pioneers and their afflictions, we need to reconsider for a minute what it means to "endure" in circumstances like theirs. Although we naturally tend to think of the living, struggling Saints moving victoriously into the Salt Lake Valley as having "endured" the hardships of the trek West, we must remember that for many of the faithful Saints "enduring to the end" simply meant dying on the way. The old, the young, the sick, the unlucky—they did not endure the hardships of the crossing. Their hardships killed them—by the scores and by the hundreds. Some barely made it out of Nauvoo before they died. Nevertheless, in the gospel sense those who died the first day of the trek "endured to the end" just as much as those who lived to enter the valley. They "endured" because they were faithful to their covenants to the end of their lives. As proud as we may be of the pioneers who overcame the wilderness, we must remember that enduring doesn't necessarily mean "winning" or "overcoming." We can't let the marvelous physical endurance of the strong-who-live eclipse the equally marvelous spiritual endurance of the frail-who-die, for the weak and the helpless can endure to the end in the gospel sense as well as the strong.

When I was working on my master's degree at Brigham Young University, I shared several classes with a convert from Finland named Helvi TemisevÃ¤. Helvi had contracted polio at eight years of age, and this was followed soon thereafter by rheumatoid arthritis. So from her childhood Helvi had been totally incapacitated. She could not move her neck or her body. She had only partial use of her hands. She came to class in a strange conveyance that seemed a cross between a wheelchair and a bed. Helvi could type a single character at a time or turn the pages of a book (or scratch her nose) with the aid of a long knitting needle that she held in one hand. Only years later did I learn that it took forty-five painful minutes every morning for Helvi to be slowly raised from a reclining to a semi-sitting position so that she could begin her day, and another forty-five painful minutes to reverse the process in the evening so she could sleep.

And Helvi TemisevÃ¤ never overcame life's obstacles; she never achieved her most cherished goals. She never walked. She never married. She never even defeated her need for twenty-four-hour care. But she endured to the end and was a blessing to all who knew her. When she died at age fifty-two, Saints on two continents mourned her passing. For Helvi radiated the light of Christ; she had as strong a hold on the iron rod as anyone I've known. In her presence, one could not be rude or coarse, could not swear, could not murmur or complain. She never said anything reproachful to me, but her example made me ashamed of all my sins. Helvi uplifted and improved all who met her, but it wasn't her courage that inspired us, it wasn't her victory over life's obstacles, it wasn't even her suffering—it was her commitment to the Savior, how she loved and how she served him even in her weakness, and even when he flatly, utterly denied her most fervent prayers. No, enduring isn't always overcoming. Sometimes it's being crushed and ground to powder—with his name on our lips.

I take considerable moral strength from the example of a pioneer named Orson Spencer, a distant relative, who had been called on a mission to England but interrupted his preparations for it to flee Nauvoo with the Saints in February of 1846. However, a month after leaving Nauvoo, his wife, Catherine, died, so he returned to the city from Iowa to bury her beside the infant they had lost six months earlier. When he finally rejoined his children at Winter Quarters, he was asked by the Brethren there to return East once again to begin the mission to which he had previously been called. In order to accept this call, Brother Spencer had to leave his six children alone and parentless at Winter Quarters. The eldest child, Ellen, was fourteen.

Conditions at Winter Quarters became worse than anyone could have anticipated, and the Spencer children, though tended at times by kindly neighbors, very nearly starved. Later that year, Wilford Woodruff wrote an apology to Brother Spencer, explaining that with so many dying it had been impossible to do more for the Spencer children. After three long years, Orson Spencer was finally reunited with his children in Salt Lake City but had been with them scarcely a year when he was called away from them again—on yet another mission. In his letters to his children, Brother Spencer often wrote, "Trust in the Lord, though he slay you."

I cannot help but think that by modern standards the Spencers would qualify as a "dysfunctional family." But this they put behind them for the gospel's sake. Among the children of Orson and Catherine Spencer were Aurelia Spencer Rogers, the founder of the Primary organization of the Church, and Howard Orson Spencer, later the bishop of Orderville. I find it ironic that in the contemporary Church we find those who would claim the same covenant privileges, the same devotion to the gospel as the Spencers and other pioneers, but who won't even accept a calling in the Primary or an assignment at the stake farm! In the resurrection, how will we face those who gave their lives, who lost their homes and fortunes, who buried their loved ones in shallow graves—all for the gospel's sake—if we wither in the face of trivialities and let go of the rod? How shall we who are unwilling to make the smallest sacrifice for Christ expect to share in his infinite sacrifice at the last day? To follow Christ is to follow him and not someone or something else. If we love someone or something else more than we love him, we are unfaithful spouses, and our relationship is no longer a marriage.

Some of the greatest trials and afflictions we will face in the Church are the offenses that are a natural part of human interaction. Many people leave the Church or otherwise fail to endure to the end because they have become offended. They feel wronged by someone or something in the Church, and so they get even by breaking their covenants and divorcing Christ. I have always been amazed that the offended among us somehow think it matters whether their complaints are justified or not. They seem to feel that if they truly have been wronged, then they are somehow justified in letting go of the rod. But the validity of the complaints has never been the issue. "OK," I want to say to them, "let's just assume that you are absolutely, 100 percent right. Let's grant that Bishop X was inept and foolish, or that Sister Y was rude and catty, or that President Z betrayed your trust, or that I was insensitive, or that my wife snubbed you. So what? Investigation will reveal that most of these kinds of hurts are inflicted unintentionally, but let's suppose that in your case it was vicious and premeditated. So . . . so what? What does the Savior command (not suggest or advise but command) in cases of intentional, personal affront? To 'turn the other cheek' (Matthew 5:39; 3 Nephi 12:39). If his command to us is to turn the other cheek when the offense is intentional, how much more ought we to 'turn the other cheek' when the affront is unintentional! But assuming that your complaint is absolutely valid and correct, assuming that you have been deeply wronged, where do you go from there? Why, you get over it and get on with it. After all, does the Christ who suffered infinite agony for our sakes have the right to ask us to put up with a bonehead or two in the Church for his sake? I will wager so. Christ died for the boneheads too, you know. And breaking your covenants with Christ because you dislike someone in the Church is like divorcing a faithful spouse because you can't stand his or her family."

Deception

Although significant individual cases of religious persecution still occur and many Saints bear heavy physical burdens, it does not appear that the mainstream of the LDS Church now has to suffer physical affliction and persecution as it once did for the gospel's sake. In the contemporary Church our biggest collective tests seem now to lie in other areas.

The Savior warned of a second hazard to endurance, perhaps even more relevant to today's Saints than the hazard of weakness in affliction. That is the hazard of deception: "Many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many." "For in those days there shall also arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch, that, if possible, they shall deceive the very elect, who are the elect according to the covenant" (Matthew 24:11; Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:22).

If Satan can't intimidate or bully us with physical trials, he'll often try to fool us with substitute issues and programs. He would like us to invest our time, talents, and energy in causes that are not the cause of Zion, in the hope they may ultimately replace our commitment to the gospel. Often these other concerns are valid and worthwhile. That is irrelevant. The deception comes in giving these concerns a higher priority in our lives than our gospel covenants and thus to prove unfaithful to our first love, who is Christ. Those who are fooled in this way usually feel the Church is not doing enough in the area of their pet concerns. They may become disenchanted with the program of the Church and begin to follow "alternate voices." These members do not lack zeal; indeed, they are often strong enough to endure tremendous trials. But Satan has diverted their zeal to the defense of other causes instead of Zion, and they don't perceive that their shifting loyalty is really unfaithfulness. Those so deceived do not generally reject Christ; they just decide to interpret his will differently or to serve him in different ways or according to new standards and values, and their original commitments take a backseat to their new agenda. In essence, they change their spiritual compass headings. But the truth is that they couldn't be trusted to hold their original course and keep their original commitments. They didn't endure.

Again and again the Lord has warned the Church about following other voices, as, for example, at D&C 43:5: "This shall be a law unto you, that ye receive not the teachings of any that shall come before you as revelations or commandments; and this I give unto you that you may not be deceived, that you may know they are not of me" (emphasis added).

This verse of scripture deserves much more attention than it gets. This is a law, a commandment from God every bit as binding on the members as "Thou shalt not kill" and "Thou shalt not steal," maybe even more so since it was given specifically to the Church in these latter days. If we are to avoid deception, we are commanded by God not to listen to anyone who purports to reveal his doctrine or his will other than the properly called, sustained, and ordained priesthood leadership. Period. No ifs, ands, or buts—no exceptions. This includes religion teachers, [^1] authors, neighbors, rumors, newspapers, television, so-called "intellectuals," prevailing scientific opinion, returned missionaries, brothers-in-law, business partners, housewives, boyfriends, girlfriends, political candidates, a "friend of a friend," a "guy in my ward," mystics, gurus, and "real spiritual people." (Have I left anyone out?) Do we get the message here? Nobody talks for God but God and those properly called by God and properly sustained by the Church to represent him and conduct his business here on earth. I find the blind, ignorant compulsion of so many of the Saints to break this commandment and follow this guru or that self-appointed teacher as scandalous and inexplicable as the compulsion of ancient Israel to worship idols in the groves and high places of the Canaanites. Certainly the stupidity required and the results obtained are the same in both cases.

I don't understand why so many contemporary Saints have difficulty with this principle. God reveals his will to those whose stewardship it is to receive it—individuals for themselves (and only themselves), parents for children, bishops for wards, stake presidents for stakes, and so on. However, God reveals new doctrine or otherwise speaks to the whole Church in only one way—through revelation to the president of the Church. [^2] Why do so many with itching ears (frequently those who most pride themselves on their spiritual maturity) lust so greatly for other channels of spiritual information? I do not know, but I have in the past advised more than one of my students to write "D&C 43:5" on their foreheads with a felt-tip marker—and to keep it there until they learn to keep the commandment found therein.

But doesn't God reveal things to people who are not priesthood leaders? Isn't it possible for exceptional individuals to learn by direct revelation mysteries that are unknown to others? Yes, this is possible, but always with one hugely important condition that is stated in Alma 12:9: "It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God; nevertheless they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him" (emphasis added). In other words, many of the faithful may receive revelations from God—even revelation regarding the mysteries. But they are commanded at the same time to keep their mouths shut! They can share with others what God has already revealed to the Church in the scriptures and through his prophets, but the rest is private, and keeping it private is a sacred obligation. In effect the Lord tells those who are blessed with additional insights, "If I wanted everyone to know, I would instruct the prophet to teach it to the Church. But this is for you alone, so keep it to yourself." Therefore, anyone in the Church (or out of it, for that matter) who shares a private revelation out of stewardship does so in violation of God's "strict command." So, for example, if somebody had a vision or an out-of-body experience and then set about instructing the Saints on the nature of the spirit world or the events of the Second Coming, that would be, in my opinion, in direct contradiction to the principle of Alma 12:9 and a betrayal of the Lord's "strict command." This happened once in Joseph Smith's day when an otherwise faithful Hiram Page began "revealing" things to the other members. The Lord instructed the Church at that time that "no one shall be appointed to receive commandments and revelations in this church excepting my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., . . . For I have given him the keys of the mysteries, and the revelations which are sealed, until I shall appoint unto them another in his stead" (D&C 28:2, 7). Hiram Page was well-intentioned, but he was deceived and in time would have deceived others with his false revelations.

Of course, if the Lord does want certain information revealed to the Church, he will, as D&C 28:2 and 43:5 indicate, reveal it through his prophet. There is no room in the doctrinal framework of the Church for freelance revelations or freelance revelators. There are no "independent" religious authorities in the Church and never have been. That is not the way the Lord works. Even if the reported experiences are valid, and they sometimes are, sharing them publicly would be a betrayal of God's confidence. And I frankly have trouble believing that someone mature enough to receive a "special" revelation would then be wicked or foolish enough to turn right around and spill the beans. Maybe if more of us could be trusted to keep our mouths shut, in accordance with Alma 12:9, we'd get more personal revelation for our own edification! So the bottom line is: when someone inflicts their revelations on others out of stewardship, either they are lying or they are unfaithful—one or the other. Given Alma 12:9 and D&C 43:5, there are no other possibilities, and wise Saints will avoid such revelations and such revelators as the spiritual snares they are.

I encounter another form of this snare almost every year at BYU. I am regularly approached by some student (male or female, though the majority are female) with the following story: "Brother Robinson, my boyfriend (or girlfriend, as the case may be) is a returned missionary, and he has had a revelation that I am supposed to marry him. I'm not really in love with this person, but should I marry him anyway? I don't want to disobey the Lord."

"Well," I reply, "what is the order of the priesthood? Who is entitled to receive revelation for you? The apostles and prophets in the faithful performance of their stewardships. Your stake president, your bishop, your parents, and your husband (also in the faithful performance of their rightful stewardships). Finally, and most importantly, you. You are entitled to receive revelation for yourself, and you are required to confirm for yourself all revelation received for you by those in the priesthood line of authority. Is this person, this returned missionary with the revelation, in your priesthood line of authority? No, of course not, though he desperately wants to be. Has the Lord confirmed this revelation to you personally? No, he hasn't. Then get as far away from this person as you can, and do it as fast as you can. This is someone who is trying to use your religion to manipulate and control you. Get away now before you are caught in the snare!"

Now, there may be cases from time to time where the Lord reveals to someone whom they are going to marry. My grandmother, Willmia Brown, for example, once heard an audible voice identify Joseph E. Robinson as her future husband, and it turned out to be so. But in such cases the revelation will be kept confidential until the other party has come to the same conclusion. Such a sacred insight will not be used like a crowbar to try to pry someone else into compliance. If it is genuine, it will come to pass on its own.

The Saints need to become more sophisticated in detecting spiritual snake-oil dealers. Whether they're peddling marriage or plural marriage or revelations or books or politics or special doctrines or special diets or herbs and vitamins or the "original" Greek (or Hebrew) or financial advice or "LDS" investments or whatever—if they are using religion to help sell their product or point of view, then they represent the cunning snares of Satan.

Revelation by Rumor?

For me, one of Elder Delbert L. Stapley's most memorable observations, and one of my favorite quotations from general authorities, was "The Saints are suckers." Many of the Saints are indeed suckers, and one way in which this is certainly true involves the Saints' stupid acceptance of rumors. God doesn't govern his church by rumor, and yet some Saints whip themselves into a frenzy over rumors heard outside the proper channels of revelation. I once had a student come to me and ask if I thought he and his wife should drop out of school and sell their car in order to get their year's supply of food by the next April conference. "Probably not," I responded. "Getting your year's supply is an important goal, but right now I would judge it more important for you to make whatever financial sacrifice is necessary for you to finish school. Why would you consider dropping out?" I asked. "Well, because of the prophecy," he replied. "You know, the one where President Benson told his family to be sure and get their food storage by April because 'important things are going to happen then.' Several people in my ward have spoken on this prophecy in sacrament meeting just in the past couple of weeks, and my wife and I are frightened because the only way we can afford to get ready by April is to sell our car and drop out of school."

"Ah, my young friend," I said, finally realizing what had happened, "you have been a victim of the goose-pimple gang. [^3] These are the creators and purveyors of 'tabloid religion' in the Church, and they judge the truth of an idea by how exciting, thrilling, or sensational it is— you know, the 'Space Aliens Kidnap President Hunter' sort of thing. The actual gospel is much too tame for the goose-pimple gang, so they are constantly inventing and spreading an 'enhanced' version—the 'tabloid gospel.' You need to inoculate yourself against them by learning a fundamental principle: The Lord does not govern his church by rumor. There is no such prophecy as the one reported to you, or maybe more correctly put, there are dozens of such prophecies—all bogus. Learn the order of the priesthood, my friend, and learn that rumor has no place in it. Then you will be safe from the further deceptions of the goose-pimple gang and their tabloid gospel."

In the past several years, I have kept track of dozens of "faith-promoting rumors" frequently repeated by the goose-pimple gang. Some that I hear quite often are "The Prophet in the Elevator," "Nephites on the Mesa," and "The Benson Family Special." "The Prophet in the Elevator" comes in many different forms, but basically someone is supposed to have bumbled into an elevator with the president of the Church and been specifically warned to get a year's supply, do genealogy, get a temple recommend, or whatever, because the Second Coming, the call to Missouri, a Soviet nuclear attack, or whatever, is going to take place in April or October—by the next general conference. This story first surfaced in the 1950s and has been told in one form or another about presidents McKay, Smith, Lee, Kimball, Benson, and Hunter. I have no doubt that a revised version involving President Hinckley will be in circulation by the time this book is out.

The "Nephites on the Mesa" has also been around for at least thirty years. Supposedly some good members driving to conference are stopped in the desert between Las Vegas and St. George by a man dressed in black. The stranger warns the members to accomplish some spiritual goal (food storage, genealogy, and so on) by a certain date because something apocalyptic is about to happen. The man in black then asks to be let out, and as the car drives away, he vanishes from sight. Obviously, he was one of the Three Nephites. Less obvious is why these instructions for the Church didn't come through the proper channels.

I am privileged to count as a friend and colleague Brother Reed Benson, eldest son of the late President Ezra Taft Benson. After checking out a dozen or so rumors attributed to Reed or to his family over several weeks, it occurred to me to ask him how many such inquiries he actually received. "Oh, it seems like about sixty a week," he replied. "Sometimes I wish they'd let me talk at conference just so I could tell the Saints all at once that the Benson family hasn't had any special revelations, special prophecies, special visitations, special family councils, special ordinations, or special information. The gospel is the same for us as it is for everybody else." Once again—the Lord does not govern his people by rumor.

Other fertile sources for rumors are "a friend of a friend's patriarchal blessing" or supposed missionary stories. Patriarchal blessings fall into the category of individual revelation, so if there is special information in a blessing, the commandment of Alma 12:9 to keep it sacred and private would apply. Thus, if it is not my patriarchal blessing, any information in it should be deemed unreliable, since if this person were on the up and up, the blessing wouldn't be made public. On the other hand, if it's my patriarchal blessing, then the information in it is for me and not for anybody else. Many of the stories one hears about other people's patriarchal blessings, and most missionary stories, have become "urban legends" in the Church and are untrue besides. Stock-in-trade of the goose-pimple gang, they have little power to edify, and they should be ignored by those Saints who are not suckers.

My Sheep Hear My Voice

In the premortal life, all of us rejected Satan and his alternate plans. Now we must do it again. If we are to endure, we must avoid religious "special interest" groups as well as irreligious influences. Not everything labeled "LDS" or that is "religious" is good—there are wolves in sheep's clothing out there. Unfortunately, the wolves have learned that some of the Saints will buy or believe anything, as long as a large "LDS" label is prominently displayed on it. The wolves try to imitate the voice of the shepherd, but his sheep listen only to his voice and follow only him (John 10:27).

Right now there are many other voices, "alternate voices," vying for the attention of the Saints. There are social voices, intellectual voices, political voices, and yet other voices. For example, I have a friend who is now going through a difficult time. He is politically very intense. He is worried particularly about a "new world order" and also about the end of the world. He sees satanic conspiracies all around him, in world events, in the schools, in government, in society, and he can't understand why the Church isn't as intense and as concerned as he is about these threats. He spends a great deal of time trying to "warn" other members of the Church whom he believes to be asleep, and he privately wonders if the Church leadership aren't also asleep. Basically, his thinking runs like this: "My church and my politics are telling me two different things, and I know that my politics are true, so there must be something wrong with the Church." He won't consider the other logical possibility—that the Church might be true and his politics in need of adjustment. Nor does he recognize his incipient apostasy, the reversal of priorities and loyalty evident in this thinking. He is in danger of making Christ second to his political views—of divorcing his first love. There is often truth in what he says, but that is not the point. The point is that he is listening to other voices and has transferred his highest loyalty to programs other than the Lord's. Tragically, his politics have become the idol to which all else in his life must bow—even his commitment to the Church and his covenant with God. [^4] This shouldn't be a difficult concept for most of us: the Church is true. It's as simple as that. All may not be well in Zion, but the Church is still true. It's not anemic; it doesn't need supplements. It's not true if, and it's not true but, and it's not true except. It's just true! Moreover, the Church is not off course; it's not going too slow, and it's not going too fast. Its leaders are not asleep, and they don't need any uninvited help from the passengers to steer the boat. The Church is true! Knowing this is what it means to have a testimony of the truth of the restored gospel, and those who maintain otherwise are the deceivers or the deceived who have lost their faith and changed their loyalty and their compass headings, who have divorced Christ for love of an idol, and who have not endured to the end.

More or Less

Some protection from the hazard of deception may be found in the principle of "more or less": "Truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come; and whatsoever is more or less than this is the spirit of that wicked one who was a liar from the beginning" (D&C 93:24-25; see also 3 Nephi 11:40, 18:13; D&C 10:68, 98:7).

In the context of the gospel, truth is what God has actually said, what he actually directs, what he actually requires—no more and no less. On a straight and narrow path, it doesn't matter whether we fall off to the right or to the left—we are in trouble either way. It doesn't matter whether we are liberals or conservatives, whether we believe too little or too much. If Satan can't get us to abandon the principles of the gospel, he is content that we should live them obsessively or as fanatics. One is less than the will of the Lord; the other is more. Either puts us in the territory of the wicked one.

I know people who won't eat white bread, refined sugar, or chocolate because they believe those things violate the Word of Wisdom. They are obsessed with vitamins, herbs, and supplements. There would be nothing wrong with some of this (they may, in fact, be right in some of their claims), except that they teach it as the will of the Lord and as part of the Word of Wisdom. Their error is in "supplementing" what the Lord has actually revealed with what they wish he had revealed—adding to the Word of Wisdom themselves and then calling it the word of God. Satan loves a fanatic as much as a rebel, for they are both off the path and therefore in his power. And there are LDS fanatics! One cannot simply assume, because someone is LDS and has a great deal of zeal and a temple recommend, that he or she is therefore correct or even credible. What the Lord has actually said to the apostles and prophets for the Church, or what he has actually said privately to a single individual for that individual (and no one else)—that is the trustworthy standard.

We have in the Church today those who are embarrassed that God has said as much as he has, who find some of his word not to their liking, and who go about trying to discredit the Brethren and neutralize the revelations and commandments. We have others who are embarrassed that God has not said more about their pet concerns, and who go about preaching programs and principles the Lord has never revealed. One takes words out of God's mouth; the other puts them in. Each preaches a "new, improved" gospel inspired by that wicked one who was a liar from the beginning, the very first alternate voice.

It requires discipline to embrace as gospel and to teach as gospel exactly what the Lord has revealed, no more and no less, and to avoid revising the gospel to suit ourselves. But those who can do it will know things as they really are (Jacob 4:13) and will avoid deception.

A Liar from the Beginning

Satan lies; it is his essence. As God is truth, and truth is knowledge of things as they really are, so Satan is a liar who teaches us things as they aren't exactly, but as they appear to be and often as we want them to be. Satan is the plausible god, the god of appearances, the god of "looks like" and "seems to be." He is the god of things as we wish them to be, and under his influence he lets us create any universe we want—for Satan rules as the god of every false universe so created. In Satan's world any philosophy can be true, any sin can be a virtue, any opinion can be right. The universe can be whatever we want it to be. Because Satan offers us a way of getting what we want, we mortals are vulnerable to his imitation worlds and plausible realities. Of course, the cost is truth, for truth is knowledge of things as they really are, not of things as we want them to be. Satan will create a universe to fit any desire, but only God can show us how to fit our desires to the universe—the real universe, the one that won't change to accommodate us. Satan offers a false "truth" to legitimize, or so it seems, our every desire; God would change our desires to fit a single, legitimate truth.

Satan lies. It's such a simple principle, but so few remember it. Instead we blindly assume the truth of rumors, media reports, personal anecdotes, and so forth that reflect badly upon the Church or its leaders. In some future judgment many of the deceived Saints are going to say when they finally learn the truth, "Oh, really? Gee, I wish I'd known that. You see, the information I had was that . . . ," and they will then try to blame their letting go of the iron rod on bad information instead of on themselves for listening to alternate voices. But unfortunately, we will be held accountable for allowing ourselves to be deceived. After all, we have been explicitly forewarned: "Satan will lie so cleverly, even the elect will be at risk." [^5] We also have the teachings of the apostles and prophets. We have the counsel of other priesthood leaders. We have the scriptures. We have the gift of the Holy Ghost. We have personal prayer and personal revelation. We have been given all we need to avoid doctrinal deception, so if we are deceived in doctrine it is unfortunate, but it is usually our own fault. On the other hand, those who take advantage of all these resources, and whose fingers can't be pried off the iron rod, won't be deceived: "Whoso treasureth up my word, shall not be deceived" (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:37; emphasis added).

The difficulty is not so much in believing that Satan lies—that is easy enough. The difficulty for many Saints seems to be in believing that Satan could lie skillfully enough to fool even them if they let go of the rod. ("Moi, deceived? Oh come now, be serious! The merely elect perhaps, but me? Never! You see, I'm . . . well, I'm special.") Believing themselves to be "special"—especially intelligent or especially talented or especially intuitive—they insist upon their ability to detect the truth on their own, and then, of course, they are lost. For Satan does lie, and he's very, very good at it. Some Saints are particularly vulnerable to lies told by scholars, others are most vulnerable to lies told by reporters, and still others seem most vulnerable to lies told by friends or social peers. Tragically, with each new lie some of the Saints are fooled and let go of the rod. They don't endure to the end.

Satan is particularly good at lying about people. He slanders the Saints, and the slanders are believable and are believed. One of his scriptural titles, besides "liar from the beginning" (D&C 93:25), is "the accuser of our brethren" (Revelation 12:10). Satan is the archetypical prosecutor or attorney for the plaintiff. He's an accuser, a prosecutor—he never defends. Satan is an inquisitor; he finds fault, and where he finds no actual fault, he cleverly creates the appearance of fault. That is what Satan is; it's what he does; it is his essence to lie and to accuse, and his lying accusations will often seem correct to most honest, objective observers. He accused Jesus of blasphemy and treason and got most of the people to believe it. He accused the Lord's Anointed falsely and got away with it. We should not be surprised to see the Brethren in our day, the Lord's anointed in the modern Church, attacked with false accusations in the media of the world. That is what Satan does, what he has done from the beginning.

The promise of the Savior to those that serve him is: "If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you" (John 15:18-19).

Sometimes we Latter-day Saints get confused on this point. We think that because we are "good," because we are "religious," or because we are pursuing the truth, that the world ought to admire us, and we expect that it will. And we are often surprised to find ourselves despised by the world to the very degree that we really do believe God and try to keep his commandments. We forget whose world this is (at least until the rightful owner comes again to reclaim it). We forget who is presently, for the most part, calling the shots and controlling the perceptions here (2 Corinthians 4:4). [^6]

When charges and accusations fly against the Church, when the Brethren are accused, when the world is unanimous in its condemnation, then the faithful need to smell the sulfur and be wary. Of course, there may be real scandals in the Church from time to time—Judas' behavior was certainly a scandal—but usually there are just lies. Given the nature and function of Satan and the past record for honesty of this world that serves him, when charges and accusations are leveled at the Church and its leaders, sons and daughters of the kingdom owe their covenant relationship with Christ at least the benefit of a doubt—and probably the benefit of many doubts. After all, why should the affirmations of a scholar, a reporter, or a disaffected former member be more reliable to me than the solemn affirmations of the Holy Ghost in answer to fervent prayer?

Resisting the "Carnal Grudge"

Besides the external opposition of the world to the Saints, there is an internal opposition that often goes unrecognized for what it is. The carnal man within us despises our walk by faith. It is an affront and an abomination to him. The carnal self rebels and rages at the suggestion that he is morally blind and needs a guide, or that he is not to rule but must be in subjection. The scriptures tell us that the natural man is an enemy to God (Mosiah 3:19), and some of us don't realize that that enemy was not totally vanquished at our baptism. The natural self, the carnal man or woman, still resides within us, is still a part of our mortal test—and given its own way is still an enemy to God. Unfortunately, many of us don't recognize this domestic enemy, this sneering would-be traitor within ourselves who responds with immediate and irrational irritation, condescension, or hostility whenever the subject of Zion comes up.

I see these little treasons, for example, in some BYU students who habitually talk about their university or about Utah in a sneering and condescending way. No matter that they may come from cities where you can't safely walk the streets at night, from high schools with the moral standards of a TV series, or from rural areas that are cultural and intellectual wastelands—some still have this sneering disrespect for "Happy Valley" and BYU. Why? Because at some level of their consciousness, they associate these things with the Church and kingdom of God, and the not-yet-completely-vanquished carnal self within them is an enemy to God. Time and again I have seen even faithful members grow hot and hostile or sneering and contemptuous at the suggestion they might subscribe to the Church magazines or support the Church Educational System or read a "Church book." People pretend to themselves that this native resentment of Church culture is rational, but it never is. It is natural, and we seldom recognize our resentment for what it is—the natural man or woman sniping from ambush within us at the cause of Zion.

Many otherwise faithful Saints who are trying to follow Christ in most ways nevertheless allow themselves the resentment and irritation of this carnal grudge against some aspect of Christ's kingdom. In every ward there are those with a chip on their shoulder, who are not sinful and wicked or even "inactive," but whose carnal self just resents being subjected to the Spirit, so irritation and resentment become their habitual and normal responses to Church leaders and programs. Their carnal self isn't strong enough to keep them in Egypt, but it does sabotage the wagons all the way to Canaan. If we are obligated to serve God with all our heart, might, mind, and strength and to build his kingdom, can we in good faith resist, resent, or attack any part of that kingdom?

Always the goal of Church programs is to perfect the Saints. Always (so far) they fail to do that completely. That means both the institutional Church and its individual members are trying to do something (achieve perfection) that they fail to do. The carnal self and other critics like to interpret that failure as hypocrisy. "You hypocrites," they say. "You think you're so hot, trying to be so good, but you turn out to be human just like the rest of us." But hypocrisy is having pretended values we don't really try to live by, and there is no pretense about LDS values and goals—these are our genuine aspirations. Moreover, weakness is not the same as hypocrisy, and those who genuinely seek perfection and fall short are no more "hypocrites" than high jumpers or pole vaulters who fail to clear the bar are hypocrites. That is one of Satan's filthy slanders, one that is widely accepted. I have seen people who never even notice the corruptions of Babylon practically foam at the mouth in anger at the imperfection and "hypocrisy" of Church programs. But why should those who aspire to righteousness and fall short be despised more than those who aspire to evil and succeed? Because the natural man is an enemy to God, and the natural man despises any attempt to live by the Spirit.

Now, what makes you mad at the Church, its programs or its constituent parts? Think about it. Shall we be double-minded, or single-eyed? Shall we finally decide whose team we're on—and let the consequence follow? Even after we have been converted to the gospel, we must be wary of small treasons against the cause of Zion rooted in the resentment of the carnal self to the control of the Spirit. [^7]

Where the natural man has gained even greater control in the life of a person, it no longer snipes from ambush at peripheral programs, but it attacks the central elements of the Church or attacks the Brethren directly. In cases like these, the carnal self is no longer just resentful; it has become the dominant part of us and attacks the Spirit openly. That is the last step before total loss of the Spirit and complete apostasy.

Two Types of Hypocrisy

The Greek word hypocrites, usually translated "hypocrite," actually means "actor" or "role-player." A hypocrite in the classical sense is someone who pretends to beliefs and standards that he or she does not really hold or try to live. One may generally encounter more than one type of true hypocrisy in the Church; some of these are malicious and some are not. At least two types of hypocrisy constitute a real hazard to the endurance of faithful Saints: the oxymormons and the role-players.

Type 1: Oxymormons. Most people know what an oxymoron is. It is a term whose component parts deny or contradict each other, like "jumbo shrimp," "criminal innocence," or "true lies." Oxymormons are Church members whose theology does this same thing. Often their true feelings and their stated feelings are not the same, so they end up maintaining mutually contradictory propositions. For example, should someone come along and suggest that we be faithful in a "new" way by rejecting the fundamental propositions of the gospel, then this "unfaithful faithfulness" would be self-contradictory. The desire to be unfaithful coupled with the desire not to appear unfaithful causes people to talk nonsense. We can't define adultery as a "new" kind of virtue, or abuse as a "new" way of presiding in our homes, or doubting as a "new" way of believing. Neither is darkness a "new" kind of light, or hatred a "new" kind of love. Such claims are moronic as well as oxymoronic. Yet we have in the Church some who would become a "new" kind of Latter-day Saint by denying the definitive tenets of the faith: that Jesus is the Christ, that the Church is true, that Joseph Smith is a prophet, that the Book of Mormon is a true account. These are the oxymormons, and they don't want to leave the Church. They want to change it. They want the rest of us to be faithful Saints in a "new" way—by rejecting the faith of the Saints. After all, if all the possible compass headings are labeled "North," then we can never be accused of being off course, no matter where we want to go! A fitting strategy for him who was a liar from the beginning. But this is not being LDS in a "new" way, nor is it enduring to the end. It is unfaithfulness.

Type 2: Role-players. The other type of hypocrisy we encounter from time to time in the Church is the more passive variety I call "role-playing." Most role-players are not malicious; they just want to stay in the Church even though they don't believe in it. But even these casual hypocrites do more damage than they know. For example, several years ago, I bore strong witness to one of my classes that living the gospel could make anyone's home a little bit of heaven on earth. After class one student waited until all the others had gone and then asked me quietly, "Are you lying to us, or are you telling the truth? Can a family really be that way, or is it all just a fairy tale? I need to know." I asked her why she would ask such a question, and she responded, "My family are all very active in the Church; we are the 'ideal LDS family.' All my life I have watched my parents create and maintain that appearance of faithfulness. Mom is the 'indispensable woman' in our ward, and Dad serves on the high council—but it is all a lie; it's just a role they play until they get home. My brother and I call it 'playing church.' We look like an 'ideal LDS family' on the outside, but on the inside there is nothing. We do not have family prayer or family home evening. My parents neither love nor respect each other, and our home is not heaven. I can't wait to leave and get away from all the contention and hypocrisy. For years I have believed that all LDS families were like mine and that 'living the gospel' meant to everyone else what it means to me—just 'playing church.' I have just assumed that everybody else was playing the same role and creating the same illusion and telling the same lie—and now you are telling me that for some people it's not an illusion and not a lie?" At that point she began to weep. "I would give anything to have a family like the one you describe, but can it really be like that, or are you just feeding us the same old stuff?" I took her hands in mine and looked her straight in the eye: "I testify to you, on my honor, that I speak the truth. The gospel is true, and its blessings are real to those who will live it. It's not just a comforting fairy tale; it is true."

This young woman had been greatly wounded by role-playing parents, and her ability to believe the promises of the gospel had been impaired as a result. Unfortunately, there are many role-players in the Church, and they usually wound those around them in this same way, though they probably have no intention of doing so. They wound others because they inadvertently teach, nonverbally by their attitudes and their example, that the Church isn't really to be taken seriously, that it's something we just do for social or business reasons, or out of a sense of tradition, or because we think religion is good for the kids, or even because we're just too lazy to break the habits of our youth. Often these role-players know all the right answers and go through all the right motions, but inside they are spiritually dead. Many of them genuinely enjoy being active in the Church, but for the same reasons other people enjoy being active in Rotary or the PTA.

I have known missionaries, students, spouses, and children who have been savaged by the hypocrisy of leaders or parents who were just "playing church" without real testimony or conviction. Such victims come to believe that the Church is just an inside joke that everyone eventually wises up to and then plays along with—like Santa Claus or the Easter Bunny. They are taught this by the lying example of role-players who rob them of the opportunity to genuinely encounter and be led by the Spirit.

If you have been injured or disillusioned by exposure to role-players in the Church, know that the vast majority of members are not such. Endurance requires that we maintain our conviction of the truth even if some others think of the Church as an inside joke. Do not let your testimony or your endurance be diminished by those about whom the Lord has said: "Wo unto them that are deceivers and hypocrites, for, thus saith the Lord, I will bring them to judgment. Behold, verily I say unto you, there are hypocrites among you, who have deceived some, which has given the adversary power; but behold such shall be reclaimed; but the hypocrites shall be detected and shall be cut off, either in life or in death" (D&C 50:6-8).

Other Hazards: Spiritual Masochists and Sadists

Spiritual masochists is my term for those who resist the good news of the easy yoke and the light burden (Matthew 11:28-30) and instead imagine such difficult requirements for salvation that they know they cannot possibly make it. Believing that God can't save them puts some people in a state of despair, which, for perverse carnal reasons, they prefer instead of joy. Their concern with their own sins and weaknesses is usually obsessive, and it often gives them a certain carnal satisfaction ("Your problems and sins are trivial, but mine are too complex even for God to resolve!") These individuals need to repent, not (at least not at first) of any single transgression but rather of their wallowing self-indulgence on the one hand and their lack of faith in the infinite power of Christ on the other.

Spiritual sadists are those who want the rest of us, especially those of us who are struggling with problems or afflictions, to know how difficult salvation will be for us. I think they are worried that heaven might be too crowded, or perhaps they're worried about having to share it with lesser beings than themselves, so they're trying to cut down on the numbers by doing a little weeding out before they get there. Both spiritual masochists and spiritual sadists operate under the direction of carnal rather than spiritual motives, and both can be a hazard to the endurance of the young, tender, or inexperienced.

I once asked a close friend why she had left the Church as a teenager to return only after many years, and I discovered that she had been deceived by a spiritual sadist. "I remember sitting in my Laurel class," she said, "and the teacher was telling us how good and how pure we had to be to go to the celestial kingdom. She taught us how hard it would be to repent if we made a mistake, and that even if we did repent we could never have the same blessings as before. Of course, by then I had already made my mistakes. Then she made a special point of telling us that only a special few could find the strait and narrow way, and when I looked around that room and saw my competition, all of those goody-goodies, I knew I didn't have a chance of being one of the few. Never kiss boys? Never listen to rock music? Never fight with my mother? Never have an unclean thought? I knew right then I didn't have a snowball's chance, so I just gave up and quit coming." When I asked her why she had come back to the Church after more than a decade, she answered, "This is where the light is, and I just couldn't stand the dark anymore. At first all I knew was that I had to get out of the dark, but as I moved closer and closer to the light, I finally realized that my teacher hadn't told the truth. There is room for me in the kingdom of God, and I don't have to compete with the goody-goodies to get there. I'm not competing with anyone but myself. I have repented; I've already found the strait and narrow way, and as long as I'm just a little better this month than I was last month, just a little nicer, a little kinder, a little more compassionate [or genuinely seek to be (D&C 46:9)]—in his name and for his sake—then I win it all."

Iniquity

The third hazard in Jesus' warning is the hazard of iniquity: "Because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold" (Matthew 24:12). If Satan can't shake us with affliction or trick us with alternate voices and alternate plans, sometimes he'll just try to buy us. In the latter days many will take the money and run—will take the cash, the flesh, or the fame and run from their covenant obligations. A final test of our endurance is not falling in love with this world's pleasures. The faithful can't be bought with these things. On Sundays they're in church; they willingly pay tithes and offerings. They keep their physical appetites and desires within bounds, and they are honest in their dealings. Their loyalty is not weakened by the possessions and powers God has placed in their care.

Still, failing to endure is not a sin we commit once for all time. While we remain in mortality, we always have the option of repenting of our failures and trying again. Not long ago, a former student came to see me who had lost his membership as a result of repeated, willful iniquity. He said he wanted to straighten his life out. I asked him if he had a testimony, and he said no, he didn't. Surprised, I asked him why he wanted to repent and regain his membership if he didn't have a testimony. I will never forget his answer: "I don't know that the Church is true, but I know that I once knew, and I know that God knows I once knew. The Church didn't change between then and now—I did. And now I want to know again what I knew before, and I am willing to repent to do it." Even where endurance has failed before the end, repentance can always bring about a new beginning.

Trials, deception, and iniquity—these are the enemies of endurance. Those who can bear the pain of trials, who can ignore the ever-increasing number of alternate voices, who aren't deceived by oxymormons, role-players, or spiritual sadists, those whose loyalty can't be bought with sinful pleasures—these will not betray their Master's trust. They will faithfully maintain the charted course. No matter what happens, their compass-needles always swing back north. They will endure.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] This term is not meant as a put-down for anyone, since everyone is spiritually immature in some area of life.
[^2] At BYU one often hears some student who is chafing against the standards say, "Teach us the principles, and then let us govern ourselves," a misquoting of the Prophet that really means, "Put the rules in a pamphlet and stop enforcing them." For such as these, rules are a blessing from God. Without all three prerequisites (correct understanding of the principles, the guidance of the Holy Ghost, and the desire to obey) principle-based living will fail.
[^3] Matthew 5:44-45; 3 Nephi 12:44-45.
[^4] The danger of teaching the law of love is that invariably some spiritually immature persons will pit love against obedience. That will not work. We can keep the commandments through principles, like the law of love, or keep them through individual rules—but we can't keep the command to love God by breaking his commandments (John 14:21).
[^5] 1 Corinthians 13:1-2, 8, 13.
[^6] Moroni 7:44, 46.
[^7] See also 1 John 4:7, 20; 2 John 1:5.
