Stephen E. Robinson, Following Christ: The Parable of the Divers and More Good News ( 1995)

Chapter Six

The Prime Directive

Since this book is about following Christ, some people will be surprised I have not discussed in greater detail specific rules and commandments and how to keep them more exactly. Perhaps that is because I myself quickly feel overwhelmed when I think of the gospel as hundreds of rules, all demanding my immediate attention. I do not deny that the gospel apparently can be lived that way by some, but it's too much for me. I am easily daunted by the thought that being right with God consists of mastering many little things and then doing them all in exactly the right way at exactly the right time in exactly the right order.

But on the other hand, perhaps I've left a detailed description of the rules out because some of us too quickly think of enduring to the end in following Christ as a matter of keeping hundreds of rules rather than as a matter of living a few principles. The commandments of God may be expressed either as rules or as principles, depending on the circumstances of those to whom his word is given. Nevertheless, there is a tremendous difference between rules and principles. Rules are usually based on principles, but rules are "bite sized," specific applications of principles to certain specified situations. Because of their greater specificity, rules are more rigid and inflexible than principles. By design they offer little choice—other than to obey or disobey—and little wiggle-room. After all, "A rule is a rule." Rules are usually constant; they are the same for every person in every circumstance: "A rule is a rule." And because you don't have to understand a rule in order to obey it, rules are a blessing to the young, the inexperienced, or the spiritually immature. [^1] The rules automatically apply higher principles for us to many of life's common situations. This they do in a predetermined and almost mechanical manner that does not require much judgment or discernment on the part of those who keep them: "A rule is a rule." A prime example of righteousness by the rules would be the law of Moses (including the Ten Commandments), which was given to spiritually immature Israel in the wilderness.

Principles, on the other hand, are not rigid and inflexible in how they are observed, and they may often be appropriately adapted and changed to meet special circumstances, though doing this successfully requires more spiritual maturity and judgment than does merely keeping a rule. That is the great advantage of principle-based righteousness over rule-based righteousness: In order to live our lives by the rules, we would need a rule for every possible human situation, zillions of rules, more than we could ever memorize, but we need only a few principles to live by, and those same few principles can always be appropriately applied to any of life's zillion possible situations. Rules, like the law of Moses, are fulfilled (and made obsolete) when we learn and live by the larger principles on which the rules are based. Thus the principles of the gospel fulfill the rules of the law of Moses, which was a law of "carnal commandments," or a law of rules. For example, in the context of the gospel, the rule against homicide is fulfilled and made obsolete by the principle of love, the rule against adultery by the principle of chastity, and so on. The rules of the law of Moses are good and true, but they are rendered obsolete and unnecessary by living the broader principles of the gospel, which they only partly expressed.

Principle-based living requires a knowledge of the true nature of the God we worship by imitation and of the principles he has revealed in his gospel. We can't live by principles we don't know or follow an example we haven't seen. Principle-based living also requires the gift of the Holy Ghost to guide us as we apply gospel principles to our life situations. Otherwise our carnal minds would influence our interpretation of the principles and subvert our decisions. Finally, principle-based living requires, perhaps most of all, the genuine desire to obey God. Liars who merely want to be freed from the restraint of rules but who do not really want to obey God on a higher level cannot be immediately detected, and they therefore often attempt to use "principle-based living" as an excuse for breaking the rules. Without a genuine desire to obey God, principle-based living quickly becomes an excuse for sin. These are three reasons why true principle-based living can be accomplished only by those who have entered the covenant and keep it. When Joseph Smith was asked how he could govern so many Latter-day Saints, he replied, "I teach them correct principles and they govern themselves." That is, he taught them the principles of the gospel; then the Saints, motivated by a desire to obey God and with the help of the Holy Ghost, decided how to apply those principles to their individual lives. But then they did it—they actually followed through and governed themselves by the principles of the gospel. [^2]

There is much to be said for rule-based righteousness. Many people find it, for a while, the easiest way to make progress toward a Christlike life. It does a good job of teaching us the specifics of what God requires, and it can be an effective training program as we move toward keeping all the commandments all the time (Galatians 3:24). Each of the hundreds of separate elements it keeps in our view are true and important in their own right. And all of us ought to evaluate ourselves from the "rule-based" perspective from time to time just to see how we're doing with all the details and to gauge our progress.

However, I do not personally subscribe to the rule-book approach to living the gospel every day, not because it is bad or wrong, but because there is a better way to follow Christ. Not only are broad principles better than the narrow rules they contain; there is also one particular principle that contains within it all the other principles. James calls this principle "the royal law" (James 2:8), and Paul calls it "a more excellent way" (1 Corinthians 12:31). To me it's the difference between trying to keep track of a thousand individual rules, like a thousand little marbles rolling around on a tabletop, and trying to follow one overriding principle, like putting all the marbles into a bag where they can be handled as a single object. In a bag all the marbles are still there, but you only have to keep track of one thing instead of a thousand. In the same way, one principle contains a thousand rules.

The truth is, there is one thing, one single principle, that includes within it all the other rules, like marbles in a pouch, so that if we live just that one principle, we automatically live the rules as well. And since there is a limit to the number of pages I can put in this book, and a limit to the number of rules we can be expected to memorize or worry about at one time, it would seem wise and economical, both practically and spiritually, to focus on the one inclusive principle rather than the thousand individual rules. This single principle is the law of love, and if we can get this one principle right, and live it, then we automatically live all of the rules, too. Or at least God will judge it so (1 Peter 4:8; Romans 4:7-8).

That the law of love includes within it all the other laws is made clear by the Apostle Paul: "He that loveth another hath fulfilled the law. For this, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness, Thou shalt not covet; and if there be any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. Love worketh no ill to his neighbour: therefore love is the fulfilling of the law" (Romans 13:8-10, emphasis added). Now, please don't understand me to be saying anything at all against rule-based righteousness (working from the parts to the whole) or against focusing on a lot of smaller things all at once when you can do it. But if you need a single point to focus on to follow Christ, then this is it.

The Savior himself makes it clear in both the New Testament and the Book of Mormon that there is one thing, one principle, that more than anything else makes us true children of our Father in Heaven: "Love your enemies . . . that ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven." [^3] Do you want to be a true son or daughter of God? Then love your enemies (and your friends, too, I would guess), for God loves and blesses all his children. Do you want to be like God? Then cultivate the one trait above all others that characterizes God—love all your brothers and sisters as he loves all his children.

In the gospel of Jesus Christ, the commandment to love is the Prime Directive, so to speak. It is the first and most important principle in eternity. It is the single most important principle of the gospel and includes all the rules within itself. Loving others and acting accordingly will make us more like God than any other principle. Unfortunately, it also seems to be the element many of us forget first when we start trying to "be religious." Many "religious" people, especially those relying on the rule-based approach, come to think that religion is about what we eat, or how we vote, or how many meetings we attend, or how much money we pay, or how many pages we read. All those things are important, but none of them is most important. [^4] It is possible to be "active" in church and still be spiritually dead, particularly if we fail to love one another. That is what Paul and Moroni are telling us in 1 Corinthians 13 and Moroni 7: Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains [that is, though I may have all the other attributes of piety], and have not charity, I am nothing. . . . Charity never faileth. . . . And now abideth faith, hope and charity, these three; but the greatest of these is charity. [^5]

If a man be meek and lowly in heart, and confesses by the power of the Holy Ghost that Jesus is the Christ, he must needs have charity; for if he have not charity he is nothing; wherefore he must needs have charity. . . . Wherefore, my beloved brethren, if ye have not charity, ye are nothing, for charity never faileth. Wherefore, cleave unto charity, which is the greatest of all. [^6]

The Prime Directive has been delivered to us pointedly by the Savior no fewer than three times in John's Gospel alone: "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another" (John 13:34-35). "This is my commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you. Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends" (John 15:12-13). "These things I command you, that ye love one another" (John 15:17). [^7]

Matthew records the delivery of the Prime Directive on another occasion. When asked what the most important commandment was, Jesus answered, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets" (Matthew 22:37-40).

This is not emotional fluff. This is not pie in the sky, wishful thinking, or idealistic gas. Love is not some subsidiary principle that allows the weepy among us to go off on a crying jag. It's not just something thrown in for the benefit of the sisters or for the super-sensitive "artsy" types. It is not an option that may be ignored by those who would prefer not to clutter their lives with other peoples' problems. There is a grand key here, probably the grandest of them all. It is this: the heart and soul of the gospel is love, and all the rest is commentary. Whatever else we may perceive religion to be, we are wrong—for true religion is love in action—God's love for us and our love for God and for our neighbors.

But surely, one may say, if I'm personally righteous, and I've got a Ph.D., and I'm a stake president or a Relief Society president, and I pay 20-percent tithing, and I have fifteen children, and I went on a mission, and I got married in the temple, and I'm an Eagle Scout, and I have two years' worth of food storage, and my genealogy is done all the way back to Adam—surely for all this God will exalt me even if I'm not a very compassionate person and don't really love my brothers and sisters.

Wrong!

Listen to Joseph Smith: "To be justified before God we must love one another." [^8]

Listen to Nephi: "The Lord God hath given a commandment that all men should have charity, which charity is love. And except they should have charity they were nothing." [^9]

Listen to Alma: "If ye do not remember to be charitable, ye are as dross, which the refiners do cast out, (it being of no worth) and is trodden under foot of men." [^10]

Listen to Moroni: "This love which thou hast had for the children of men is charity; wherefore, except men shall have charity they cannot inherit that place which thou hast prepared in the mansions of thy Father." [^11]

Listen to Paul (again): "Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing." [^12]

Listen to Peter: "Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently." [^13]

Listen to John: "Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love." [^14]

Love is the sine qua non of the kingdom of God, the "without-which-not" of celestial glory. Other things may be required as well, but without love in our hearts for God and for our fellow beings, we will not be raised up to a throne. There are no exceptions. We cannot become like God, we cannot be true sons and daughters of God without love—for God is love.

Starting from the Wrong End

Much religious anxiety is created by people starting doctrinally from the wrong end of things, with odds and ends instead of with first principles or with the Prime Directive. For example, if we start with the doctrine of hell and the suffering promised those who disobey the commandments, it is easy to conclude that God is some kind of cosmic bully with a stick, just itching to smash those who won't do what he says. (I know members of the Church who actually believe this!) But if we start at the right end, with the Prime Directive (God is love, and to become like him we must love), then we more easily see that God is a Father trying to warn precious children where the hidden reefs and hazards are located and guide us home to himself. The sufferings of the disobedient are not the retribution of an offended and vengeful autocrat but the natural consequences of ignored warnings from a loving parent who pleads for us to pay attention. The commandments are not a list of God's arbitrary demands or hoops we have to jump through to please him but a chart through the reefs of life compiled by someone who knows these waters.

Another example of starting from the wrong end can be found in the pain and anxiety of those who agonize over questions of who is sealed to whom. (I'm sealed to A, and I want to be sealed to B; or, Mom and Dad are divorced and sealed to separate partners, so I can't be sealed to the parents I love; and so forth.) Now, I can't answer most of the questions people have on these subjects, but I can help with some of the pain: Start at the right end—start with God's perfect love and his wonderful promises. That great being who is pure love has promised us a fullness of joy if we are true and faithful to our covenants [^15]—not just happiness, not just a better life there than here, but a fullness of joy, in other words, so much joy we could not possibly under any circumstances have more. So instead of starting with me or Mom being sealed to the wrong person and concluding "therefore I can't possibly be happy in the celestial kingdom," start with the infinite love of God and the promise of a fullness of joy and (using a little faith) conclude "therefore this problem is going to be sorted out somehow to my perfect satisfaction and joy." However God works this out—and he's going to do something—it's exactly what we would choose if we only had all the information and all the powers that God has. We are going to be absolutely, fully, and completely satisfied. We have to be, or our joy isn't full as we've been promised. No one in the celestial kingdom will be sealed to someone he or she doesn't want to be with—that wouldn't be a fullness of joy. No one will lose a loved one he or she can't be sealed to—that wouldn't be a fullness of joy either. [^16] I don't know how God will sort these things out, but I know that he loves us; I know he's promised that the faithful will receive "all things"; I know he's promised them a fullness of joy—and I believe him on all counts. [^17] "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him" (1 Corinthians 2:9). In other words, we can't even imagine how great this is going to be! So stop worrying or complaining in advance, and trust him—you're going to love this. [^18]

God's Work

Sometimes, by starting from the wrong end, we forget that God's business isn't damnation but salvation. I don't recall ever seeing God described in scripture as "the Terminator," but I do recall seeing the term "Savior" a couple of times. I don't recall those who attempt to imitate Christ and do his work ever being called "Destroyers on Mt. Zion" or "Punishers on Mt. Zion." No, we are to be, like him, "Saviors"—"Saviors on Mt. Zion." So what is God all about? (We'd better know if we're trying to be like him.) According to John, "God is love." And how exactly is this love expressed? What does God do? He tells us himself in the Pearl of Great Price: "This is my work and my glory, to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). God's work is us! What he does for a living is to make us wretched humans be more, be better, be greater.

It is vital we understand that this scripture doesn't apply only to God's celestial children but to all of them. The many mansions in our Father's house include the terrestrial and telestial kingdoms as well as the celestial. They are all kingdoms of glory. It isn't just his obedient children who are part of God's work and glory and for whom he labors; it is all of them who will be redeemed from the devil and raised to any degree of glory whatever (see, for example, D&C 76:42-43, 85, 88-89). In other words, God improves everybody; he blesses everyone and everything he touches; it is his nature to raise and to bless. He has raised us from whatever we were before we were spirits to make us his spirit children. He has given those of his children who would allow it physical bodies. And in the resurrection he will give us eternal glory to the degree that we have allowed it. God tries to give all his children celestial glory, but if we resist that, he tries to give us terrestrial glory. And if we resist that, he tries to give us telestial glory. It is his work to maximize our eternal condition, to get us the best deal in eternity that he can—it's what he does for a living. Naturally, he wants to give us all everything, but of course most of us resist him—so he gives us what he can. It's his job—his "work"; and it's what makes him great—his "glory." Saving us and improving us is what he's all about.

Now, if we are going to inherit his kingdom, we must imitate God and become like him. That means we also— like him—must love all God's children and improve everyone and everything we touch. If our children or our friends resist our attempts to help them gain celestial glory, we must then fall back and do what we can to help them gain terrestrial glory. And if they resist that, we must work to get them into the penthouse, rather than the basement, of the telestial glory. But if we are to be like God and to become gods, then we, like him, must to the extent that we are able bless and raise and improve all with whom we come in contact—not just our obedient children and not just our neighbors who might join the Church.

Several years ago I delivered a Know-Your-Religion lecture in which the topic of God's love came up. After the lecture, a woman approached me and said, "Brother Robinson, I'd like your opinion on something. My husband and I have told our daughter all her life that if she would get married in the temple we would pay for everything, but if she didn't get married in the temple, she was on her own, and neither she nor her husband would be welcome in our home. Well, do you know what she's done? She's gotten pregnant and can't get married in the temple! So we're going to keep our word. We won't be attending the wedding, and until she straightens out her life, we don't want anything to do with her. Some of our friends think we are being a little too harsh, but she knew what she was doing, and it's on her own head. What do you think?"

What I dearly wanted to say, but didn't, was this: "I think that for the next couple of years when you attend church you and your husband ought to try standing on the pews instead of sitting in them. That way, possibly, the things being taught there won't continue going over your head."

What I did say was this: "Look, those of us who are in the gospel covenant are not in the condemnation business—that's Satan's self-appointed role. We're in the salvation business here. OK, your daughter isn't living the celestial law right now, but how close can you keep her to it? She isn't going to be married in the temple, but will she get married in the Church and let the bishop perform the ceremony instead of going to Las Vegas or something? Will she feel good about the Church and feel loved by her friends and family there? Will her positive experiences with the Church lead her in the future to welcome home teachers and visiting teachers into her home, people who may in time help this young couple be active in the Church and eventually be sealed in the temple? What can be salvaged here, Sister, and how can it be done? Do God's work—improve your daughter and help her rise as far as she can. God's work and glory has as much to do with helping some of his beloved children find telestial and terrestrial glory as it does helping a smaller number find celestial glory. So be like God, bring your daughter as close as you can, lift her and love her as much as you can—as much as she will allow. If I were you, I'd go home right now and call your daughter. Apologize to her and ask her how you and your husband can help her out in her new circumstances. Then go buy a swing and a car seat for the baby and hope your daughter forgives you."

Do you have troubled or unfaithful children? Then picture the following scene. I can't prove it represents true doctrine, but I dearly believe it does. Suppose the Father brings you a little baby spirit and says, "This child is going to have more problems than most in mortality, but I know that if she is raised in your home she will rise higher and go farther than if she were anywhere else. Will you take her and love her and maximize her potential? It will be hard, because she's not going to get straight A's, and she won't win any awards. There will be things she can't overcome, and there will at times be great pain for you. But she is my baby, and she is precious to me, and I know she will go farther and rise higher with you for her parents than with anyone else. Won't you please take her and love her as I do?"

I believe that many righteous parents with troubled children volunteered in a premortal life to take those children to help them reach a higher state of glory than they could otherwise have received. Not even God can exalt all his children. We must remember that our task is not necessarily to exalt all of ours but to imitate God in lifting and blessing all our children (and his) as much as they will allow us to—even the ones who are troubled. And in the resurrection, when they have learned better and have finally turned again to God, they will say, "All that I have gained I owe to my Savior and to my noble parents." And they will rise up and thank and bless us for our love and patience and sacrifices in their behalf. [^19]

Unconditional Love?

There has been a great deal of discussion about God's "unconditional" love lately, and most of the discussion has not been very useful. If God is love, and if the Prime Directive is to love as God loves, then is God's love "unconditional," and should mine also be "unconditional"? That is a loaded question, for unconditional means different things to different people, and the core of the misunderstanding lies in those different definitions. (Note that "unconditional love" is not a scriptural term, and I think it is not a very useful one. It has been my experience that whenever people discuss the scriptures using nonscriptural terms, they usually get into trouble, like the Nicene fathers did with trinity or homoousios.) [^20]

For some people, God's "unconditional" love means that God will accept everyone on equal terms, no matter what they may have done in life. He won't hold our sins against us, and ultimately he will forgive everyone everything and deny no one any of the blessings given to anyone else. "The righteous have no advantage and the wicked no disadvantage," they would argue, "because these are conditions, and God's love and approval are 'unconditional.'" That, of course, is totally false. Many of our Father's children will never even see him again, for they will not be allowed into his presence in their filthy state, except perhaps for judgment.

However, in denying that God's love is "unconditional" in that sense, it is possible to go too far and deny that he loves his children at all, insisting rather that he loves only his "good" children—and even them only after they've repented and entered into the gospel covenant. That is also false. The same divine love that causes the heavens to rejoice over the repentant and righteous causes them to weep over the rebellious and wicked (Moses 7:28, 37). Good or bad, we are his children, and in either case God loves us—he loves all of us.

Those who speak against God's loving all his children usually start with a scripture like John 15:10, "If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love," which clearly states a condition for "abiding in his love." The doctrinal misunderstanding arises from equating "being loved by God" with "abiding in God's love," for those two phrases do not describe the same state. God can love us whether we return his love or not. His loving us does not require our emotional response. But for us to "abide in his love" requires our willingness so to abide. God can love me without my consent, but he can't have a relationship with me—I don't "abide in his love"—unless I agree to it. Love defined as the desire to have a relationship can be unilateral—it requires (alas) only one party. But love as a relationship requires two parties. I can be "in love" with a woman who does not love me back (and I have been). It is painful, one-sided—and unconditional. It's just there. But no matter how much I may love that person, we do not have a relationship. Though I may be in love, we are not—because the relationship isn't there, only my desire for it. She cannot "abide in my love," even though I may want her to, because she refuses to do so.

Similarly God's love (understood as his desire for a relationship with us) is unconditional. In fact, God commands all men and women everywhere to repent and come to him (3 Nephi 11:32). He desires to redeem us, to glorify and exalt us equally and unconditionally. Does God desire to have an eternal relationship with all his children? Yes, and in this sense God's love is unconditional. "All are invited, none is excluded." But it takes two people to have a relationship. A relationship, by definition, requires two points of reference, and only some of God's children love him back and agree to enter into the desired relationship. He does not initially love them any more than the others, but in time the relationship of love that is possible with them is much, much greater than it is with those who reject him. They "abide in his love."

Many of God's children will not love him. They will not accept the proposal of the Bridegroom, though he loves them dearly. They will never experience the joys the gospel marriage brings. However, that is not because God is unwilling or because they failed to meet conditions that would have rendered him willing. It is because they will not accept his proposal; they will not come to the wedding. Though he loved them first, they did not love him back, and by their choice the relationship will not be as great as it might have been—they refuse to "abide in his love."

To summarize, God's love (understood as his desire for us) is unconditional. God's love (understood as his relationship with us) is conditioned upon our positive response to his wooing of us. The only variable is us. Not even God can force another person to love him, and not even God can have the same relationship with those who hate him that he can with those who love him. While God's love might be unconditional, to "abide" in a relationship with him requires our participation and our love in return.

Faith, Hope, and Charity

Most members of the Church understand that faith, hope, and charity (love) are linked together, but perhaps not as many would realize exactly how often they are linked together in scripture or understand why. [^21] As we have true faith in Christ, when we begin to believe his good news as well as to believe in him, it finally dawns on us that if Christ can do what he says he can do, then he really can save us. There is hope for us. Therefore, if I truly believe Christ, then of necessity I must also have hope in my own salvation and exaltation. That is what the book Believing Christ was all about. But beyond that, hope in Christ in turn leads to charity (love), and that is what this book is all about. For the expectation of being with Christ is also the expectation of being like Christ. We cannot come to Christ and worship Christ without becoming what he is—and Christ is love. Therefore of necessity, believing Christ gives us hope of being with Christ, and our anticipation of being with him leads us to imitate him now and to share with others what he has shared with us. True faith in Christ is, in a way, like a disease: it is highly communicable, and it causes us eventually to break out in a rash of hope and love. According to the scriptures, that is how to tell whether someone has faith or not. If people have faith, it will give them hope and move them to love their brothers and sisters (John 13:35).

I have on rare occasions felt the pure love of God pour into my soul. But more often the love of God has come to me mediated through the love of others. I first learned about the love of God through the selflessness of family, friends, and teachers who loved me, made sacrifices for me, and ministered to me in his name. Their names are legion, but I would like to share my experiences with just three. These people who have had such an impact on my life were just ordinary, faithful members of my ward and my family doing their best to live the gospel. I doubt they would have considered themselves the heroes that they are to me.

A Primary teacher

When I was ten or eleven years old—a Blazer, I think—my teacher was a sister named Maudie Barron. I cannot remember anything she ever taught me, anything at all. Nor can I remember anything in particular she did that other teachers didn't. But I knew then and know now, although I don't remember her ever saying it, that Sister Barron loved me. I know because I felt it heart to heart. Actually, I do remember one time when another leader was pressuring me to sing a solo part in a song she had arranged for the Primary Christmas program. I'm sure it was important to her that her program be successful, and for some reason, she thought that required my singing this part. I'm also sure she didn't realize how traumatized I was at being forced to sing in front of the other kids, who were teasing and laughing at me. I would have eaten spiders before singing that solo. But this sister just kept playing my part over and over again on the piano, frustrated that I wouldn't sing it, while I stared at the floor in humiliation refusing to sing, speak, or move. Finally, just seconds short of total meltdown, Sister Barron saw my situation, came to the stand, and escorted me from the room. Outside the chapel as I burst into tears, she hugged me and promised me I wouldn't have to sing if I didn't want to. And I knew that she loved me more than she loved the darn program.

Sister Barron had a bad heart, they tell me, but I have never believed it. To this day, almost forty years later, I cannot speak her name without tears coming to my eyes, so great was her impact on me, not just from this one episode but also from many months of kindness, patience, and caring when I was a difficult child at a difficult age. I know that nothing was wrong with her heart, and she is not merely remembered, she is revered. My point is this: Maudie Barron brought me closer to the kingdom of God by her Christlike influence and by flooding me with her genuine love than many other teachers have done with their lessons and activities. I know those lessons helped me a great deal, and I am grateful to those teachers who sacrificed to prepare them. But in the long run the best lesson and the one with the greatest impact on me overall was a Christlike life and an unfeigned love. Even at that young age, I knew that Sister Barron was a lot like our Heavenly Father, and I knew that in eternity I wanted to live in a place where the people were just like her.

Perhaps it's also worth noting, though it grieves me to say it, that Maudie never knew how I felt. By the time I was old enough to tell her, her very excellent heart had stopped working, and she was gone. We don't have to save the world to obey the Prime Directive and be our Heavenly Father's children; we just have to do our part and love each other. And we may never know in this life whom we have touched, blessed, or even saved.

A Scoutmaster

Cy Watson was my Scoutmaster for several years and one of the greatest influences for good in my life. Cy was my kind of guy—a grumpy old man. But somehow through the grumpy, we Scouts knew he loved us. Cy sacrificed hours, evenings, and weekends in our behalf. He never missed troop meetings, activities, or courts of honor. He never said he loved us (Cy wouldn't have), but we knew it anyway. And because he loved us, we were willing to be taught by him. Cy taught me how to fold a flag and how to love my country. He taught me that hard work pays off. He taught me to measure twice and cut once. He taught me to close gates and to hate litter. He once made me stand for half an hour "holding up a tree" because I disobeyed the rules. I don't remember what I'd done, but he taught me the law of justice, and that no one was above the law. I learned from Cy, by example, the old-fashioned virtues. I learned that honor was better than wealth and that duty was more pressing than desire or even than need. I didn't learn these things because Cy told me, I learned them because Cy taught me—because he believed them himself. He believed in the Scout Oath and the Scout Law, and he infused in me his noble values. May God bless him!

Looking back now, I really don't know much about Cy. I know that he contributed in a major way to my present character. I know I respected him. I know I loved him. Cy had a testimony, but he was not ostentatious in things religious. Still, he obeyed the Prime Directive, and the fruit it bore in our ward was a whole generation of boys who became men—not just grownups, but men. I eagerly look forward to seeing him again in the kingdom of God.

Grandma Loved the Backs

I did not know my grandmother as well as I could have wished. She lived with relatives in Arizona, and I only saw her once or twice a year. She died while I was still a teenager, but I do remember that Grandma loved the backs. Whenever we had chicken, she would say, "Oh, may I please have the back? I love the backs." That never quite made sense to me. How could anyone actually love the backs? I mean, a back was just fried skin on bone with a tiny dab of meat. As a growing boy, I certainly had no such foolish preferences, and I was grateful that my siblings and I got the breasts, the legs, the thighs—got them in part because Grandma preferred the backs. My father tells me that she was always like that. When he was a boy and times were hard on the dry farm, chickens were scarce, and there was seldom more than just enough for such a large family, but even then Grandma loved the backs.

I never figured it out until years later, never even had a clue until I was an adult with my own children, children I loved, children whose happiness was more important to me than my own. One day as my heart swelled with love for my own dear ones, I realized that all her life Grandma had taken the least part for herself and given the best away. It wasn't the backs that Grandma had loved at all; it was her children and grandchildren, her neighbors, her fellowman—and her Savior. Oh, Grandma, thank you for the lesson. I'll try harder to love the backs.

Pass It On

The ultimate expression of following Christ is to receive his love, whether from himself or from those who serve him, to be lifted and blessed by it and then to be for others what he has been for us—lifting and blessing them with our love in turn. Someone out there will experience the love of God first and foremost through you. The love of God radiates outward like ripples from a stone thrown in a pond, like an infection that spreads from person to person. The royal law is "As I have loved you, love one another." Then pass it on! We cannot always pay back the same individuals who have loved and served us most. Grandma and Maudie Barron and Cy Watson are all gone. By the time I realized how much I owed them, I could no longer pay them back. Then what must I do to clear the debt? I must pass it on; I must be for someone else what these Saints have been for me.

I repay my parents and grandparents for their love by loving my children and grandchildren—who will in turn love and bless their children and grandchildren. I repay my teachers for their love by teaching others and loving those I teach. And they in turn will love and teach still others so that my influence, which is Cy's influence, Maudie's influence, Grandma's influence—and ultimately the Savior's influence—will never end. As Christ loved and served those who could never repay him, so I must love and serve those who will never repay me, and they in turn will love and serve still others who can never repay them. In that way, love truly never ends (1 Corinthians 13:8); it ripples outward forever and ever. In becoming part of that chain, we become part of an eternity of love in which the Father and the Son are also links. And in this we truly follow Christ.

We can love Christ, too, but we can't really do much for him personally. I mean, he pretty much has everything he needs by now. (It's that age-old problem: "What can you get for the man who has everything?") Well, we sure can't save him. We can't bind up his wounds, carry his burdens, or lessen his pain. We can't feed him when he's hungry or clothe him or take care of him when he's sick—for he is far beyond all that now. So how, then, shall we appropriately express our love for him? He has told us how in Matthew 25:34-40:

Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world: For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me.

Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?

And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.

Christ invites us to repay our debt to him by blessing others in turn. Our neighbors in their need become symbolic of Christ, and in filling their needs as he has filled ours, we partially pay our debt to him. Also, as we minister to those who need our help, we adopt his role as the one who blesses. Thus, as we minister to them, we follow him; as we minister to them, we become him. Those we serve take on our former role as recipients of his love and grace, and by serving them we "move up" and take on his role as the one who loves, blesses, and saves. We become saviors on Mt. Zion for those we serve; we are exalted—raised up to his level and to his function—by our love and service to others. [^22]

Now go out and find him. Find him and minister to him. Find him in the faces of your family, friends, neighbors, students, colleagues, and strangers on the street. Search him out. Dress his wounds. Feed him. Clothe him. Serve him. Teach him. Love him. For this is the Prime Directive, the "royal law," the "more excellent way." In this way more than in any other, we truly follow him.

Notes

in process

---
Notas:
[^1] This term is not meant as a put-down for anyone, since everyone is spiritually immature in some area of life.
[^2] At BYU one often hears some student who is chafing against the standards say, "Teach us the principles, and then let us govern ourselves," a misquoting of the Prophet that really means, "Put the rules in a pamphlet and stop enforcing them." For such as these, rules are a blessing from God. Without all three prerequisites (correct understanding of the principles, the guidance of the Holy Ghost, and the desire to obey) principle-based living will fail.
[^3] Matthew 5:44-45; 3 Nephi 12:44-45.
[^4] The danger of teaching the law of love is that invariably some spiritually immature persons will pit love against obedience. That will not work. We can keep the commandments through principles, like the law of love, or keep them through individual rules—but we can't keep the command to love God by breaking his commandments (John 14:21).
[^5] 1 Corinthians 13:1-2, 8, 13.
[^6] Moroni 7:44, 46.
[^7] See also 1 John 4:7, 20; 2 John 1:5.
[^8] History of the Church 2:229.
[^9] 2 Nephi 26:30.
[^10] Alma 34:29, where charity equals love and "charitable" equals "motivated by love."
[^11] Ether 12:34 (emphasis added). See also Moroni 10:21, where we are also informed we cannot be saved in the kingdom of God without charity (love).
[^12] 12. 1 Corinthians 13:1-2.
[^13] 13. 1 Peter 1:22.
[^14] 14. 1 John 4:7-8.
[^15] 15. See John 15:11; 16:24; 2 Nephi 9:18; D&C 101:36; 138:17 among others. The words of Christ to the Three Nephites are pertinent to all who will receive of his fullness (see 3 Nephi 28:10).
[^16] 16. See Elder Boyd K. Packer's conference address in April of 1992 and his wonderful assurance that faithful parents will not "lose" their less-faithful children. If God has promised me all things, how can that not somehow include my babies?
[^17] 17. Think about it. God says he will give the faithful "all things." What isn't included in "all things?" What will I not have if God gives me "all things"? The magnitude of that promise boggles my mind and solves all my problems. All I have to do is endure faithfully.
[^18] 18. Understand, of course, that those who complain the loudest about the shortcomings of the gospel plan are usually not those who try to live it. In their case the complaints are moot, for the fullness comes only to the faithful.
[^19] 19. Again, this is only my opinion—and my hope—but I do believe it to be so.
[^20] 20. Homoousios is an unscriptural Greek word meaning "of the same essence." It was used in the Nicene Creed to describe the relationship of the Father and Son.
[^21] 21. Romans 5:2-5; 1 Corinthians 13:13; 1 Thessalonians 1:3, 5:8; 1 Peter 1:21-22; 2 Nephi 31:20 (where faith equates with steadfastness); Alma 7:24, 13:29; Ether 12:4, 28; Moroni 7:1, 40-45, 8:14, 10:20; D&C 4:5, 6:19, 12:8, 18:19.
[^22] 22. I understand that being "saviors on Mt. Zion" is associated primarily with work for the dead. I merely suggest that it could refer to saving work for the living as well—our everyday work at our everyday callings in our everyday families, wards, and branches.
