(Scripture Reading Exercise.)

THE RELATIONSHIP OF INTELLIGENCES.

ANALYSIS.

I. Relationship of Jesus to Other Intelligences.

II. The Relationship of God and Other Intelligences.

REFERENCES.

St. John's Gospel i:1-14; in connection with Doc. and Cov. Sec. xciii: 6-22. King Follet's Sermon, Mill. Star, Vol. XXIII: p. 245-280. Also notes, 2, 3, 4.

Pearl of Great Price, Book of Abraham, ch. iii:19-23 and note 5.

NOTES.

1. Men and Jesus of the Same Order of Beings: The Scriptures teach that Jesus Christ and men are of the same order of beings; that men are of the same race with Jesus, of the same nature and essence; that he is indeed our elder brother. "For it became him, for whom are all things and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect through suffering. For both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren." (Heb. ii:10, 11.) Hence while very far removed from us in that the Christ is more perfect in righteousness, and more highly developed in intellectual and spiritual powers than we, yet these differences are of degree, not of kind; so that what is revealed concerning Jesus, the Christ, may be of infinite helpfulness in throwing light upon the nature of man and the several estates he has occupied and will occupy hereafter. The co-eternity of Jesus Christ with God, the Father, is quite universally held to be set forth in the preface of John's gospel, which is so familiar that it need not be quoted here. Moreover, to us who accept the new' dispensation of the gospel, through the revelations of God to the Prophet Joseph Smith, the doctrine of John's preface comes with increased emphasis by reason of the proclaimed extension of the principle of the co-eternity of God, the Father, and Jesus Christ, to other beings, namely, to men; and by asserting also the fact that the intelligent entity in man, the mind, intelligence, was "not created or made, neither indeed can be." The following is from the revelation:

    "John saw and bore record of the fulness of my glory * * * and he
    bore record saying, I saw his glory that he was in the beginning
    before the world was; therefore in the beginning the Word was, for
    he was the Word, even the messenger of salvation, the Light and the
    Redeemer of the world, the Spirit of Truth, who came into the world
    because the world was made by him, and in him was the life of men
    and the light of men."

Such is the account which Jesus gives of John's testimony; and now Jesus himself:

    "And now, verily, I say unto you, I was in the beginning with the
    Father, and am the first born. * * * * * Ye [referring to the
    brethren who were present when the revelation was given] were also
    in the beginning with the Father, that which is spirit, even the
    spirit of truth. * * * * * Man [meaning the race] was also in the
    beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not
    created or made, neither indeed can be. All truth is independent
    in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as
    all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence. Behold here
    is the agency of man, and here is the condemnation of man, because
    that which was from the beginning is plainly manifest unto them and
    they receive not the light. And every man whose spirit receiveth
    not the light is under condemnation, for man is spirit."

Here we have the co-eternity of Jesus and of all men most emphatically stated: "I was in the beginning with the Father. * * * * * Ye were also in the beginning with the Father, that which is spirit;" that is, that part of man that is spirit. "Man," that is all men, the term is generic--"man was in the beginning with God." And then mark what follows: "Intelligence"--the part that was with God in the beginning, the entity of man which cognizes truth, that perceives that which is, mind, say,--"intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be."

2. Jesus as the First Born: Sure it is that God, the Father, is the Father of the spirits of men. "We," says Paul, "have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits and live?"

According to this, then, there is a "Father of Spirits." It follows, of course, that "spirits" have a father--they are begotten. It should be remarked that the term, "spirits" in the above passage cannot refer to self-existent, unbegotten intelligences of the revelations, considered in the foregoing note; and certainly this relationship of fatherhood to spirits is not one brought about in connection with generation of human life in this world. Paul makes a very sharp distinction between "Fathers of our flesh" and the "Father of spirits," in the above. Fatherhood to spirits is manifestly a relationship established independent of man's earth-existence; and, of course, in an existence which preceded earthlife, where the uncreated intelligences are begotten spirits. Hence, the phrase "shall we not be subject to the Father of spirits and live?"

Christ is referred to by the writer of the epistle to the Colossians, as the "first born of every creature;" and the Revelator speaks of him as "the beginning of the creation of God;" and in the revelation already quoted so often (Doc. & Cov. sec. xciii.) Jesus represents himself as being in the "beginning with the Father;" and as "the first born."

The reference to Jesus as the "first born of every creature" cannot refer to his birth into earth-life, for he was not the first-born into this world; therefore, his birth hare referred to must have reference to the birth of his spirit before his earth life.

The reference to Jesus as the "beginning of the creation of God," cannot refer to his creation or generation in earth-life; for manifestly he was not the beginning of the creations of God in this world; therefore, he must have been the "beginning" of God's creation elsewhere, viz. in the spirit world, where he was begotten a spiritual personage; a son of God.

The reference to Jesus as the "first born"--and hence the justification for our calling him "our Elder Brother"--cannot refer to any relationship that he established in his earth-life, since as to the flesh he is not our "elder brother," any more than he is the "first born" in the flesh; there were many born as to the flesh before he was, and older brothers to us, in the flesh, than he was. The relationship of "elder brother" cannot have reference to that estate where all were self-existent, uncreated and unbegotten, eternal intelligencies; for that estate admits of no such relation as "elder," or "younger;" for as to succession in time, the fact on which "younger" or "elder" depend, the intelligences are equal, that is,--equal as to their eternity. Therefore, since the relationship of "elder brother" was not established by any circumstance in the earth-life of Jesus, and could not be established by any possible fact in that estate where all were self-existing intelligences, it must have been established in the spirit life, where Jesus, with reference to the hosts of intelligences designed to our earth, was the "first born spirit," and by that fact became our "Elder Brother," the "first born of every creature," "the beginning of the creations of God," as pertaining to our order of existence. (See note 10, lesson v.)

3. Why God is God: "These two facts do exist, that there are two spirits, one being more intelligent than the other; there shall be another more intelligent than they: I am the Lord thy God, I am more intelligent than them all. * * * * * I dwell in the midst of them all; * * * I rule in the heavens above, and the earth beneath, in all wisdom and prudence, over all the intelligencies thine eyes have seen from the beginning." (Word of the Lord to Abraham, Book of Abraham, ch. iii: 19-21.) "I am more intelligent than them all." By this expression I do not understand the scripture to mean that God is more intelligent than any one of the other intelligencies, but more intelligent than all of them combined. His intelligence is greater than that of the mass. It is this fact doubtless which makes this One, "more intelligent than them all," God. He is the All-Wise One! The All-Powerful One! What he tells other intelligencies to do must be precisely the wisest, fittest thing that they could anywhere or anyhow learn--the thing which it will in all ways behoove them with right loyal thankfulness, and nothing doubting, to do.[A] There goes with this, too, the thought that this All Wise One, will be the Unselfish One, the-All-Loving One, the One who desires that which is highest, and best; not for Himself alone, but for all; and that will be best for Him too. His glory, His power, His joy will be enhanced by the uplifting of all, by enlarging them; by increasing their joy, power, and glory. And because this All Intelligent One is all this, and does all this, the other intelligences worship Him, submit their judgments and their will to His judgment and His will. He knows, and can do that which is best; and this submission of the mind to the most Intelligent, Wisest--wiser than all--is worship. This the whole meaning of the doctrine and the life of the Christ expressed in--"Father, not my will but Thy will, be done."

5. The Desire of God for the Advancement of Other Intelligences: "The first principles of man are self-existent with God. God himself, finding he was in the midst of spirits and glory, because he was more intelligent, saw proper to institute laws whereby the rest could have a privilege to advance like himself. The relationship we have with God places us in a situation to advance in knowledge. He has power to institute laws, to instruct the weaker intelligences, that they may be exalted with himself, so that they might have one glory upon another, and all that knowledge, power, glory, and intelligence which is requisite in order to save them in the world of spirits. This is good doctrine. It tastes good. I can taste the principles of eternal life, and so can you. They are given to me by the revelations of Jesus Christ; and I know that when I tell you these words of eternal life as they are given to me, you taste them, and I know that you believe them. You say honey is sweet, and so do I. I can also taste the spirit of eternal life. I know it is good; and when I tell you of these things which were given me by inspiration of the Holy Spirit, you are bound to receive them as sweet, and rejoice more and more."--Joseph Smith. (Mill. Star, Vol. XXIII, p. 262.)

6. Value of the Doctrine of Eternal Existence: But what is the value of this doctrine of the eternal existence of uncreated intelligences? In what way does it contribute to the better apprehension of that which is, the truth? These considerations, of course, should not be and are not our first concern. Our first consideration should be and has been the truth of the thing. But since that is now settled by what God has revealed about it, we may well, if possible, ascertain what helpfulness there is in the doctrine, for the right apprehension of the general scheme of things. This apprehension, I believe, it affects in a very vital way. As matters now stand, the usually accepted Christian doctrine on the matter of man's origin is that God of his free-will created of nothing the spirits and bodies of men. That they are as he would have them, since in his act of creation he could have had them different if he had so minded. Then why should he--being infinitely wise and powerful and good, for so the creeds represent him--why should he create by mere act of volition beings such as men are, not only capable of, but prone to, moral evil? Which, in the last analysis of things, in spite of all special pleadings to the contrary, leaves responsibility for moral evil with God? God's creative acts culminating thus, the next pertinent questions are: Then what of the decreed purpose of God to punish moral evil? and what of the much vaunted justice of God in that punishment? Wherein lies the just responsibility of man if he was so created as to love evil and to follow it? It is revolting to reason, as it is shocking to piety to think, that God of his own free will created some men, not only inclined to wickedness, but desperately so inclined; while others, he of his own volition created with dispositions naturally inclined toward goodness. In like manner stands it with man in relation to his inclination to faith, and to disbelief: and yet, under the orthodox belief all are included under one law for judgment! Under the conception of the existence of independent, uncreated, self-existent intelligences, who by the inherent nature of them are of various degrees of intelligence, doubtless differing from each other in many ways, yet alike in their eternity and their freedom; with God standing in the midst of them, "more intelligent than them all," and proposing the betterment of their condition--progress to higher levels of being, and power through change--under this conception of things how stand matters? There is the begetting of these intelligences, spirits; the spirits, men; the men, resurrected personages of infinite possibilities; at each change increased powers for development are added to intelligences, yet ever present through all the processes of betterment is the self-existent entity, the "intelligencies," with the tremendous fact of his consciousness and his moral freedom, and his indestructibility;--he has his choice of moving upward or downward in every estate he occupies; often defeating, for a time, at least, the benevolent purposes of God respecting him, through his own perverseness; he passes through dire experiences, suffers terribly, yet learns by what he suffers, so that his very suffering becomes a means to his improvement; he learns swiftly, or slowly, according to the inherent nature of him, obedience to law; he learns that "that which is governed by law, is also preserved by law, and perfected and sanctified by the same; and that which breaketh law abideth not by law, but seeketh to become a law unto itself and willeth to abide in sin, cannot be sanctified by law, neither by mercy, justice nor judgment. Therefore they must remain filthy still." (Doc. & Cov. sec. 88:34, 35.) This conception of things relieves God of the responsibility for the nature and status of intelligences in all stages of their development; their inherent nature and their volition make them primarily what they are, and this nature they may change, slowly, perhaps, yet change it they may. God has put them in the way of changing it by enlarging their intelligence through change of environment, through experiences; the only way God effects these self-existent beings is favorably; he creates not their inherent nature; he is not responsible for the use they make of their freedom; nor is he the author of their sufferings when they fall into sin: that arises out of the violations of law to which the "intelligence" subscribed, and must be endured until its lessons are learned.

[Note: To the class teachers. When giving this lesson make your appointment for lesson six, which is a discourse. This will give plenty of time for preparation. The class ought to expect much from him or those who receive the assignment. Make it an occasion.]
