(Scripture Reading Exercise.)

THE ADAMIC DISPENSATION--VI.

ANALYSIS.

I. The Rejoicing of Adam and Eve on Receiving a Dispensation
of the Gospel.

II. The Place of Adam in the Divine Economy of the Gospel Dispensation.

REFERENCES.

Book of Moses, ch. v:10-12. Note 1.

Millennial Star, Vol. XVII, pp. 310-311. Also Vol. XVIII, pp. 164-5. Mormon Doctrine of Deity, pp. 243-251. Doc. and Cov. Sec. cvii:53-56.

Notes 2, 3, 4.

NOTES.

1. Joy in the Gospel: The rejoicing of Adam and Eve on receiving a dispensation of the Gospel, which rejoicing went to the extent of condoning the fact of their fall, (See Book of Moses, V:10, 12) could arise from no other circumstance than that their former knowledge of what was to be accomplished by the earth-life of man had been restored to them. Which knowledge possessed by the pre-existent spirits of man before the foundations of the earth were laid, caused "The Morning Stars to sing together, and all the sons of God to shout for joy." (Job 38:7). Doubtless the contemplation of that "eternal life which God, that cannot lie, promised before the world began" (Titus I:2) was sufficient cause for their joy; and it brings home to us the truth, that notwithstanding the presence of evil and sorrow in this world, there has been no blundering in the creation of the earth and the placing of men upon it under circumstances in the midst of which they are called upon to work out their salvation. The purposes of God have not been surprised, nor have they ran awry. On the contrary they are moving forward in majestic procession to the attainment of their end. God is in his world, reconciling it unto himself. Man is here in this world in one of the departments of God's great university to learn of good and evil; of joy and sorrow; to take upon his spirit a clothing of flesh and bone,--elements through which, and only through which, (See Doc. & Cov. Sec. xciii; 33, 34) he may have a larger, nobler and higher life than was possible for him when existing only in spirit form. And the coming in contact with evil and engaging in the struggle with it, brief or more or less prolonged, is but an incident, a means of education, and over evil he will ultimately triumph, and conform his life to the law of God--the law of righteousness. And so, too, will the race, those who succumb permanently to evil will be so few in comparison with those who will triumph, that the calamity of their misfortunes should not weigh against the larger good that shall come to the race, or check the rejoicings of the first pair upon gaining the full vision of God's meaning when he ordained man's earth-existence.

2. The Priesthood of Adam: The Priesthood was first given to Adam; he obtained the First Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generation. He obtained it in the Creation, before the world was formed, (Genesis i, 20, 26, 28). He had dominion given him over every living creature. He is Michael, the Arch-Angel, spoken of in the Scriptures. Then to Noah, who is Gabriel; he stands next in authority to Adam in the Priesthood; he was called of God to this office, and was the Father of all living in his day, and to him was given the dominion. These men held keys first on Earth, and then in Heaven. The Priesthood is an everlasting principle, and existed with God from eternity, and will to eternity, without beginning of days or end of years. The keys have to be brought from Heaven whenever the Gospel is sent. When they are revealed from Heaven, it is by Adam's authority. Daniel vii, speaks of the Ancient of Days; he means the oldest man, our Father Adam, Michael; he will call his children together and hold a council with them to prepare them for the coming of the Son of Man. He (Adam) is the Father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men, and all that have had the keys must stand before him in this grand council. This may take place before some of us leave this stage of action. The Son of Man stands before him, and there is given him glory and dominion. Adam delivers up his stewardship to Christ, that which was delivered to him as holding the keys of the Universe, but retains his standing as head of the human family. * * * * * The Father called all spirits before him at the creation of man, and organized them. He (Adam) is the head, and was told to multiply. The Keys were first given to him, and by him to others. He will have to give an account of his stewardship, and they to him. * * * * * how have we come at the Priesthood in the last days? It came down, down in regular succession. Peter, James, and John had it given to them, and they gave it to others. Christ is the Great High Priest; Adam next. Paul speaks of the Church coming to an innumerable company of angels--to God the Judge of all--the spirits of just men made perfect; to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, etc. (Heb. xii. 23.) I saw Adam in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman. He called together his children and blessed them with a patriarchal blessing. The Lord appeared in their midst, and he (Adam) blessed them all, and foretold what should befall them to the latest generation."--Joseph Smith, Millennial Star, Vol. XVII, p. 310-311.

3. Adam in the Land of Adam-ondi-Ahman: The vision alluded to in the closing sentences of the preceding note was doubtless the foundation of the following passage in the Book of Doctrine & Covenants, "Three years previous to the death of Adam, he called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, who were all High Priests, with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing. And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the Prince, the Archangel. And the Lord administered comfort unto Adam, and said unto him, I have set thee to be at the head--a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou art a Prince over them for ever. And Adam stood up in the midst of the congregation, and notwithstanding he was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy Ghost, predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation. These things were all written in the book of Enoch, and are to be testified of in due time." (Doc. & Cov. Sec. 107, vers. 53-57.)
