(Scripture Reading Exercise.)

THE TESTIMONY OF PROPHECY.

ANALYSIS.

I. Predictions of the New Testament Prophets.

II. Paul's Great Prophecy to the Thessalonians.

III. The Prophecy of Isaiah on Breaking the "Everlasting Covenant."

IV. Concluding Reflections on the Whole Subject of the Dispensations.

REFERENCES.

Besides the authorities cited in the notes see "Outlines Ecclesiastical History," Section vii. New Witness for God, chapter vi.

NOTES

What is Prophecy but History Reversed: "What is prophecy but history reversed?" Nothing. Prophecy is a record of things before they take place. History is a record of them after they have occurred; and of the two prophecy is more to be trusted for its accuracy than history; for the reason that it has its source the unerring inspiration of God; while history--except in the case of inspired historians--is colored by the favor or prejudice of the writer, depends for its exactness upon the point of view from which he looks upon the events; and is likely to be marred in a thousand ways by the influences surrounding him--party considerations, national interest or prejudice; supposed influence upon present conditions and future prospects--all these things may interfere with history; but prophecy is free from such influences. Historians are self-constituted, or appointed by men; but prophets are chosen of God. Selected by divine wisdom, and illuminated by that spirit which shows things that are to come, prophets have revealed to them so much of the future as God would have men to know, and the inspired writers record it for the enlightenment or warning of mankind, with out the coloring or distortion so liable to mar the work of the historian. Thus Moses recorded what the history of Israel would be on condition of their obedience to God; and what it would be if they were disobedient. Israel was disobedient, and historians have exhausted their art in attempts to tell of their disobedience and suffering; but neither in vividness nor accuracy to the histories compare with the prophecy. So with the prophecy of Daniel in regard to the rise and succession of the great political powers that should dominate the earth, and the final triumph of thhe Kingdom of God. So with well nigh all of the prophecies. With these observations upon the trustworthiness of prophecy it is my purpose to show that prophecy no less than the facts of history, sustains the conclusion arrived at on the apostasy from the Christian religion, and the destruction of the Christian Church." (New Witness for God, pp. 113-4).

Testimony of Prophecy to the Universal Apostasy: Clear as the fact is made in this historical review that there was a complete and universal apostasy from the religion established in the Dispensation of the Meridian of Time; and clear as is the proof from the same review that the Church of Christ then established was destroyed, there is yet another line of evidence pointing to the same solemn fact that I cannot altogether omit, though often used in our literature, viz., the testimony of prophecy to the apostasy from the Christian religion, and the destruction of the Church of Christ.

The Apostles themselves through the inspiration of the Holy Ghost were fully aware that such an apostasy would take place, as the following several predictions bear witness: Paul passing through Ephesus admonished the Elders of that Church to take heed to thhe flock "over which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers; * * * * * for I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them."[A]

Paul's Predictions: TO Timothy Paul said: "The Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils; speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their conscience seared with a hot iron; forbidding to marry and commanding to abstain from meats."[A] And again: "I charge the to preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine. For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts they shall heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears, and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables."[B]

And still again he said to Timothy: "This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away."[A]

Peter's prophecy concerning the rise of false teachers among the saints, who privately would bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord who bought them, and by reason of whom the way of truth would be evil spoken of, we have already quoted.[A]

Paul's Prophecy to the Thessalonians: Paul, in his second epistle to the Thessalonians, gives utterance to a prophecy which covers the whole ground of the absolute and universal apostasy of Christendom. A prophecy which, if the apostasy of so-called Christendom has not been complete and universal, proves beyond all question that the great Apostle of the Gentiles is a false prophet; or if fulfilled, then it proves that the Church of Christ, so far as it existed in the earth, was to be destroyed; that another and different religion was to be substituted for the Christian religion; that another church, one founded by men, was to take the place of the Church of Christ, a worldly church dominated by the very spirit of Lucifer, who, under its rule, would oppose and exalt himself above all that is called God; and sit in the temple of God, showing himself, so far as this world is concerned, that he is God. Moreover, Paul declared in this very prophecy I am about to quote that the forces which would ultimately bring to pass this universal apostasy from the Christian religion--"the mystery of iniquity"--was already at work even in his day. With this introduction, which is also to be considered as my comment upon and interpretation of the passage, I quote Paul's great prediction on the universal Apostasy.

Now we beseech you brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto Him, that ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand. Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the Son of Perdition; who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God. Remember yet not, that, when I was yet with you, I told you these things? And now ye know what withholdeth that he might be revealed in his time. For the mystery of iniquity doth already work: only he who now letteth (hindereth) will let (hinder), until he be taken out of the way. And then shall that wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of His mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of His coming: even him whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders, and with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness in them that perish; because they receive not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie: that they all might be damned who believe not the truth, but had pleasure in uprighteousness.[A]

Isaiah's Great Prophecy: A more ancient prophet than Paul also predicted a like condition of the world in the last days. "Behold," says Isaiah, "the Lord maketh the earth empty, and maketh it waste, and turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad the inhabitants thereof. And it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest. * * * * * The land shall be utterly emptied and utterly spoiled: for the Lord hath spoken this word. The earth mourneth and fadeth away, the world languisheth and fadeth away, the haughty people of the earth do languish. The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant. Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left."[A]

Clearly all this prophecy of Isaiah's has not yet been fulfilled; for the earth, however much it may have been defiled under the inhabitants thereof, has not yet been burned, and but few men left. That is a judgment that still hangs over the world; and will come upon it as sure as the Lord has spoken the word; and that, too, because men have transgressed the laws; because they have changed the ordinances; because they have broken--not the covenant made with Moses, or with Abraham--but because they have broken the everlasting covenant; of which covenant the blood of Christ is the sign and seal.[A] in other words, they have broken the Gospel covenant--departed from the Gospel faith--hence the predicted judgment.

Yet a few shall escape. As the prophet in another place in this remarkable chapter says--referring to the general desolation of the earth and its inhabitants--"When thus it shall be in the midst of the land among the people, there shall be as the shaking of an olive tree, and as the gleaning of grapes when the vintage is done. They shall lift up their voices, they shall sing for the majesty of the Lord, they shall cry aloud from the sea. From which it is to be understood that there will be a few even in those disastrous times, whose righteousness will call down the favor of God. And though the earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard, and the transgressions thereof shall be heavy upon it; though the Lord shall punish the host of the high ones that are on high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth; though as prisoners they shall be gathered into the pit, and will not be visited for many days; though the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed, yet shall the Lord of Hosts reign in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem, and before his ancients gloriously." (Isaiah xxiv:20-23.)

If I did not think these two great prophecies foretold completely the universal apostasy of Christendom, I should be tempted to enter into the consideration of the great prophecies to be found in the book of Daniel and the book of Revelation, and show how to both of these prophets, as well as unto Paul and other New Testament writers, the Lord revealed the rise of an earth-power that would not only open his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme His name and them who dwell in heaven;[A] who would speak great words against the Most High, and so magnify itself as to stand up against the Prince of princes--[B] but who would also make war with the saints and "prevail against them;"[C] who would "wear out the saints of the Most High;"[D] "destroy the mighty and the holy people;"[E] "make war with the saints and overcome them."[F] But believing that the two passages quoted at length entirely cover the subject prophetically, I shall not here enter into further prophetic proofs either of the corruptions of the Christian religion or the destruction of the Christian Church, deeming that what has already been set forth sufficient on that head.

Notwithstanding the above remark I think it will be to the advantage of the student to have placed before him in parallel form the predictions of St. John and Daniel, to which allusion is made.

John.

And I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up out of the sea, having seen seven heads and ten horns, and upon his heads the name of blasphemy.--(Rev. xiii:1.)

And the Dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great authority.--(Rev. xii:2.)

And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemy; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two months.--(Rev. xiii:5.)

And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God to blasphemy His name and they who dwell in heaven.--(Rev. xiii:6.)

And it was given unto him to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them.--(Rev. xiii:7.)

Daniel.

Then I would know the truth of the fourth beast.--And of the ten horns that were in his head, and of the other which came up, * * that had eyes and a mouth that spake very great things.--(Dan. vii:19-20.)

And his power shall be mighty, but not by his own power--(viii:2.)

And he shall speak great words against the most high; and think to change times and laws, and they shall be given unto his hand until a time times and the dividing of time.--(vii:25.)

And he shall magnify himself in his own heart. He shall also stand up against the Prince of Princes,--(viii:25.)

I beheld and the same horn made war with the Saints and prevailed against them.--(vii:21.) He shall wear out the Saints of the most High.--(viii:25.) And he shall destroy the Mighty and the Holy people.--(viii:24.)

Concluding Reflections on the Whole Period Covered by the Dispensations as Far as Developed: The sum of the whole matter, thus far, is:--The purpose of man's creation and the plan of his redemption, were known to God and the immense host of the spirits of men before the creation of the earth. Adam came to the new creation, the earth, under the divine commandment to people it with his offspring. From Adam to Messiah numerous dispensations of the Gospel were given to men; but these dispensations were limited in their effectiveness, owing to the proneness of men to reject the truth, and to walk in darkness rather than light because their deeds were evil. Yet God left not Himself without witnesses in the earth; for there were a few in all dispensations that honored Him and his righteous laws. Finally, when the appointed time was come, Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of God, came and made the appointed Atonement for the sins of the world and brought men under the dominion of His mercy, as well those who lived before his coming, as those who lived after that event. He taught the Gospel; He brought life and immortality to light; He brought into existence His Church, and then ascended on high to His Father. For a time the Gospel in its purity was preached in the world by the chosen Apostles, though even in their days men began to mar it with their vain philosophies, their doctrines of science, falsely so called; and when the Apostles were all fallen asleep, then corruptions ran riot in the Church, doctrines of men were taught for the commandments of God; a church made by men was substituted for the Church of Christ; a church full of pride and worldliness; a church which, while it clung to forms of godliness, ran riot in excesses and abominations--until spiritual darkness, fell like a pall over the nations; and thus they lay for ages. In vain men sought to establish reforms, and through them bring back the religion of Jesus Christ, and the Church of Christ. To do that, however, was beyond the power of these men, however good their intentions. The Gospel taken from the earth, divine authority lost, the Church of Christ destroyed, there was but one way in which all these could be restored, viz.: By reopening the heavens and dispensing again a knowledge of the Gospel; by once more conferring divine authority upon men, together with a commission to teach all the world, and re-establish the Church of Christ on earth. In a word, it would require the incoming of the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times to restore all things, and gather together in one all things in Christ, both in heaven and in earth. Such a Dispensation is promised of God, as we have seen; and it now only remains to add that such dispensation was committed to the Prophet Joseph Smith; and this brings us to the outline development of that dispensation in Part VI.
