(Scripture Reading Exercise.)

DOCTRINAL AND ORGANIC DEVELOPMENT (Note 1).

ANALYSIS.

I. The Name of the Church:

1. The Church of Christ.

2. The Church of the Latter Day Saints.

3. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints.

II. The first officers of the Church:

1. Elders.

2. Priests.

3. Teachers.

4. Deacons.

III. Subsequent additions of officers and Councils.

1. The Presidency of the Church.

2. High Priests.

3. Bishops.

4. Standing High Councils.

5. Councils of the Seventy.

REFERENCES.

History of the Church, Vol. II p. 79, 62--See title of minutes as also minutes and footnote; also Ibid pp. 79, 249. Doc. & Cov. Sec. cxv. and History of the Church Vol. III, pp. 23-4 and note 2, note 1. Doc. & Cov. Sec. xx. New Witness for God, ch. xxiv.

Doc. & Cov. Sec. xx; 65-67. Also Ibid Secs, lxxxiv, cvii; cxxiv, (Presidency.)

Doc. & Cov. Sec. xx; 2, 3. History of the Church Vol. I pp. 76-78. Ibid 243 and foot note. Ibid p. 267. Ibid p. 334 (Doc. & Cov. Sec. xc; 6. And Vol. II p. 176. Doc. & Cov. Sec. cvii-22.)

History of the Church Vol. I pp. 175-6 and foot notes.

Doc. and Cov. Sec. xli; 9 and foot note lxxii; 1-15.

Doc. & Cov. Sec. cii. History of the Church, Vol. II ch. ii.

Doc. & Cov. Sec. xviii, also Sec. cvii. History of the Church, Vol. II, ch. xiii. And the foot notes. Also Seventy's Year Book No. 1, Lesson i, ii, iii.

NOTES.

1. Development of the Church and its Doctrine: Only the merest outline can be indicated on the Doctrinal and Organic development of the Church in this and the succeeding (which is the concluding) LESSON of this Year Book. It should be understood, however, that we have been merely led up to the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times, not into it. These sketches are merely traced to give something like completeness to our outline History of the Dispensations, but it should be remembered of course that they are outlines throughout, and that these of the last dispensation, the most incomplete.

2. The Evolution of the Name of the Church: "For thus shall my Church be called in the last days, even the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." It will be observed that the Lord gives to the Church its official name, "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." Previous to this the Church had been called "The Church of Christ," "The Church of Jesus Christ," "The Church of God," and by a conference of Elders held at Kirtland in May, 1834, (see Church History, vol. 2 pp. 62-3), it was given the name "The Church of the Latter-day Saints." All these names, however, were by this revelation brushed aside, and since then the official name given in this revelation has been recognized as the true title of the Church, though often spoken of as "The Mormon Church," the "Church of Christ," etc. The appropriateness of this title is self evident, and in it there is a beautiful recognition of the relationship both of the Lord Jesus Christ and of the Saints to the organization. It is "The Church of Jesus Christ." It is the Lord's. He owns it. He organized it. It is the Sacred Depository of His truth. It is His instrumentality for promulgating all those spiritual truths with which He would have mankind acquainted. It is also His instrumentality for the perfecting of the Saints, as well as for the work of the ministry. It is His in all these respects. But it is an institution which also belongs to the Saints. It is their refuge in principle, doctrine; and they have joint ownership in it with Jesus Christ, which ownership is beautifully recognized in the latter part of the title. "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," is equivalent to "The Church of Jesus Christ;" and "The Church of the Latter-day Saints." (History of the Church, vol. III, p. 24.)

3. The Presidency: The idea of Presidency of the Church like all things else seems to have passed through a course of development. At the first organization effected on the 6th of April, 1830, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were sustained as the First and Second Elders of the Church (Doc. & Cov. Sec. xx and Sec. xxi, History of the Church, vol. I, pp. 76-78.) Subsequently on the 25th of January, 1832, Joseph Smith was ordained President of the High Priesthood at a conference at Amherst, Ohio; in which position he was sustained by a general conference of the Church held in Zion (Independence, Mo.), on the 26th of April, 1832. On March 8th, 1833, a revelation was given announcing Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams to be equal with the Prophet in holding the keys of the kingdom (Doc. & Cov. Sec. xc:6); on the 18th of the same month, these brethren expressed the desire to be ordained to their office. "Accordingly," remarked the Prophet, "I laid my hands on Brother Sidney and Frederick, and ordained them to take part with me in holding the keys of this last kingdom and to assist in the Presidency of the High Priesthood, as my counselors." (History of the Church, vol. I, p. 334.)

On the 5th of December, 1834, Oliver Cowdery was brought into the Presidency of the High Priesthood--which is also the Presidency of the Church--taking his place as "Second Elder" of the Church (see History of the Church vol. II, p. 176 and foot note). In pursuance of this arrangement it will be found on the title page of the "Doctrine and Covenants" Issued at Kirtland in August, 1835, that these four brethren are set forth is the Presiding Elders of the Church, as follows:

Compiled by

Joseph Smith, Junior,

Oliver Cowdery,

Sidney Rigdon,

Frederick G. Williams,

(Presiding Elders of Said Church).

On March the 28th, 1835, however, a revelation was received in which it is said: "Of the Melchisedek Priesthood, three presiding High Priests, chosen by the body, appointed and ordained to that office, and upheld by the conference, faith, and prayer of the church, form a quorum of the Presidency of the church." (Doc. & Cov., Sec. 107, ver. 22.) And to this law the matter of Presidency of the High Priesthood and of the Church, the latter always goes with the former, has been conformed.

4. The Evolution of Church Government: Next to the evidence of divine authority furnished by the spirit of church government is the manner in which that government was brought into existence. "Governments," remarks Herbert Spencer, "are not made, they grow." A remark which is as true of ecclesiastical as of civil government: and although the growth of the church government founded by Joseph Smith was rapid, it was, nevertheless, a growth, a development; it was not made. What I mean is there was no plan more or less elaborate formed by the prophet, a mental creation of officers with duties assigned, powers defined and authority limited, and then an organization effected in accordance with such a plan. On the contrary the organization at the beginning was extremely simple. Before the church was organized both the Melchisedek and Aaronic Priesthood had been conferred on Joseph Smith, but the only officer known to the church at its organization, April 6th, 1830, were elders, priests, teachers and deacons. It was not until the 4th of February, 1831, that a bishop was appointed, and then of course by revelation. Then in November following it was made known that other bishops were to be appointed. The first high council in the church was not organized until February 17th, 1834. The quorum of the Twelve Apostles and quorums of Seventy were not organized until the winter of 1835. Thus throughout, an officer was appointed today and his duties defined; another officer was appointed tomorrow or next year and an explanation given of his duties and perhaps a limit fixed to his authority, Thus line was given upon line, precept upon precept: the prophet and those co-operating with him being apparently unconscious that they were gradually developing a system of government, each part of which was beautifully adjusted to every other part and to the whole. This gives evidence that if there was no general plan for this organization in the mind of Joseph Smith, there was a plan in the mind of God who through the instrumentality of this man was founding his church. Joseph Smith, under God's direction, was building better than he knew. He as well as others associated with him were called upon to lay the foundation of a great work--how great they knew not. One may stand so close to a mountain that he perceives neither the vastness of the pile nor the grandeur of its outlines. Not until one recedes from it some distance does the magnificence of its snow-capped peaks, the solemnity of its rugged cliffs, and deep ravines stir the sensibilities of the soul. So with this work established through the labors of Joseph Smith and his associates. They stood too close to it to comprehend its greatness; too absorbed in its parts to contemplate much less fully understand the meaning and harmony of the whole. It was not until the work was well advanced towards its completion, and men had receded some distance from it in time that they began to be aware that out of the parts given to them developed so sublime a system of ecclesiastical government, the like of which was not to be found in all the world." (A New Witness for God, pp. 255-7.)
