Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1967)

CHAPTER 2

THE NATURE OF GOD

The Pearl of Great Price contains the revelations of God to several great prophets, including Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Joseph Smith. God revealed Himself and gave commandments to each of them, and in these revelations He also manifested certain aspects of His nature and character. It is therefore important that man study these revelations in order to learn of God. Specifically, the reader of the Pearl of Great Price should understand that God is a personal being, in whose image and after whose stature man is organized. But God is also a divine, or glorified being. An understanding of the divine nature is necessary if man is to know how to worship and what he worships. In studying the material contained in this chapter, the reader should be aware of the divine nature of God and how it provides an understanding of such doctrines as (1) the omnipresence of God, (2) the omniscience of God, and (3) the omnipotence of God.

Manifestations Of God To Prophets In The Pearl of Great Price

The Revelations of God to Adam

God's revelation of Himself to Adam began in the Garden of Eden before the fall. During this period, the Lord (with other divine beings) visited Adam and gave him instructions, speaking with him face to face without a veil between them. [^1] After Adam and Eve had been driven from the Garden of Eden and shut out from God's presence, God again manifested Himself unto them. The record states:

. . . Adam and Eve, his wife, called upon the name of the Lord, and they heard the voice of the Lord from the way toward the Garden of Eden, speaking unto them, and they saw him not; for they were shut out from his presence.

And he gave unto them commandments, that they should worship the Lord their God, and should offer the firstlings of their flocks, for an offering unto the Lord. And Adam was obedient unto the commandments of the Lord. [^2]

Thus the knowledge of God was established in the earth, so that man might worship God and, by faith and righteousness, come unto Him.

The Revelations of God to Enoch

Enoch was among the greatest of the ancient prophets. While he was still "but a lad," [^3] God revealed Himself unto Enoch and called him to be a prophet to the people. As the Book of Moses relates, the Lord made known the essentials of this commission:

. . . it came to pass that Enoch journeyed in the land, among the people; and as he journeyed, the Spirit of God descended out of heaven, and abode upon him.

And he heard a voice from heaven, saying: Enoch, my son, prophesy unto this people, and say unto them—Repent, for thus saith the Lord: I am angry with this people, and my fierce anger is kindled against them; for their hearts have waxed hard, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes cannot see afar off;

And for these many generations, ever since the day that I created them, have they gone astray, and have denied me, and have sought their own counsels in the dark; and in their own abominations have they devised murder, and have not kept the commandments, which I gave unto their father, Adam.

Wherefore, they have foresworn themselves, and, by their oaths, they have brought upon themselves death; and a hell I have prepared for them, if they repent not;

And this is a decree, which I have sent forth in the beginning of the world, from my own mouth, from the foundation thereof, and by the mouths of my servants, thy fathers, have I decreed it, even as it shall be sent forth in the world, unto the ends thereof.

And when Enoch had heard these words, he bowed himself to the earth, before the Lord, and spake before the Lord, saying: Why is it that I have found favor in thy sight, and am but a lad, and all the people hate me; for I am slow of speech; wherefore am I thy servant?

And the Lord said unto Enoch: Go forth and do as I have commanded thee, and no man shall pierce thee. Open thy mouth, and it shall be filled, and I will give thee utterance, for all flesh is in my hands, and I will do as seemeth me good.

Say unto this people: Choose ye this day, to serve the Lord God who made you. [^4]

Having been called and ordained to the Holy Priesthood, [^5] Enoch ministered among the people. A revelation explained that "he saw the Lord, and he walked with him, and was before his face continually." [^6] So great was the power God gave to Enoch that "when they [i.e., the people] heard him, no man laid hands on him; for fear came on all them that heard him; for he walked with God." [^7] Of another great manifestation Enoch received from God, he said in part:

As I was journeying, and stood upon the place Mahujah, and cried unto the Lord, there came a voice out of heaven, saying—Turn ye, and get ye upon the Mount Simeon.

And it came to pass that I turned and went up on the mount; and as I stood upon the mount, I beheld the heavens open, and I was clothed upon with glory;

And I saw the Lord; and he stood before my face, and he talked with me, even as a man talketh one with another, face to face. . . .

And . . . Enoch was high and lifted up, even in the bosom of the Father, and of the Son of Man. . . .

And Enoch beheld angels descending out of heaven, bearing testimony of the Father and Son; and the Holy Ghost fell on many. . . .

And it came to pass that the God of heaven looked upon the residue of the people, and he wept; and Enoch bore record of it, saying: How is it that the heavens weep, and shed forth their tears as the rain upon the mountains?

And Enoch said unto the Lord: How is it that thou canst weep, seeing thou art holy, and from all eternity to all eternity? . . .

And naught but peace, justice, and truth is the habitation of thy throne; and mercy shall go before thy face and have no end; how is it thou canst weep?

The Lord said unto Enoch: Behold, . . .I am God; Man of Holiness is my name; Man of Counsel is my name; and Endless and Eternal is my name, also.

Wherefore, I can stretch forth mine hands and hold all the creations which I have made; and mine eye can pierce them also. . . .

But behold, these which thine eyes are upon shall perish in the floods; and behold, I will shut them up; a prison have I prepared for them.

And that which I have chosen hath plead before my face. Wherefore, he suffereth for their sins; inasmuch as they will repent in the day that my Chosen shall return unto me, and until that day they shall be in torment;

Wherefore, for this shall the heavens weep, yea, and all the workmanship of mine hands. . . . [^8]

The Revelations of God to Noah

Noah lived at a time when corruption had gained such a hold upon the hearts of men and was so strengthened in its influence by perverse institutions and practices that God could no longer exercise mercy and forbearance toward men; and He was forced by their wickedness to decree their destruction. As the prophet who stands next to Adam in holding the keys of the Holy Priesthood over this earth, [^9] Noah was given the difficult task of declaring the final testimony of truth to a perverse world, of perpetuating the several forms of life upon the earth through the flood, and of establishing the human family again upon the institutions of God in a world cleansed from sin. God's revelations to Noah, as contained in the Pearl of Great Price, are concerned essentially with the Lord's decrees concerning the corrupt order then prevailing upon the earth. To Noah, the Lord said:

My Spirit shall not always strive with man, for he shall know that all flesh shall die; yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years; and if men do not repent, I will send in the floods upon them. . . .

And God saw that the wickedness of men had become great in the earth; and every man was lifted up in the imagination of the thoughts of his heart, being only evil continually. . . .

And the Lord said: I will destroy man whom I have created, from the face of the earth, both man and beast, and the creeping things, and the fowls of the air; for it repenteth Noah that I have created them, and that I have made them; and he hath called upon me; for they have sought his life. . . .

And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth.

And God said unto Noah: The end of all flesh is come before me, for the earth is filled with violence, and behold I will destroy all flesh from off the earth. [^10]

The Revelations of God to Abraham

After the flood, men again began to depart from the ways of the Lord. That His law might be perpetuated among men, God selected Abraham and covenanted to establish His holy order with the father of the faithful and his elect posterity in the flesh. The manifestations of God to Abraham, as recorded in the Pearl of Great Price, begin on a dramatic note. Because Abraham would not bow down and worship idols, he was bound and placed upon an altar to be offered up as a human sacrifice. The great patriarch later wrote:

. . . as they lifted up their hands upon me, that they might offer me up and take away my life, behold, I lifted up my voice unto the Lord my God, and the Lord hearkened and heard, and he filled me with the vision of the Almighty, and the angel of his presence stood by me, and immediately unloosed my bands;

And his voice was unto me: Abraham, Abraham, behold, my name is Jehovah, and I have heard thee, and have come down to deliver thee, and to take thee away from thy father's house, and from all thy kins-folk into a strange land which thou knowest not of.

And this because they have turned their hearts away from me, to worship the God of Elkenah, and the god of Libnah, and the god of Mahmackrah, and the god of Korash, and the god of Pharaoh, king of Egypt; therefore I have come down to visit them, and to destroy him who hath lifted up his hand against thee, Abraham, my son, to take away thy life. [^11]

As Abraham prepared to leave Ur of the Chaldees, the Lord again manifested Himself unto him. Abraham wrote:

Now the Lord had said unto me: Abraham, get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will show thee. . .

But I, Abraham, and Lot, my brother's son, prayed unto the Lord, and the Lord appeared unto me, and said unto me: Arise, and take Lot with thee; for I have purposed to take thee away out of Haran, and to make of thee a minister to bear my name in a strange land which I will give unto thy seed after thee for an everlasting possession, when they hearken to my voice.

For I am the Lord thy God; I dwell in heaven; the earth is my footstool; I stretch my hand over the sea, and it obeys my voice; I cause the wind and the fire to be my chariot; I say to the mountains—Depart hence—and behold, they are taken away by a whirlwind, in an instant, suddenly.

My name is Jehovah, and I know the end from the beginning; therefore my hand shall be over thee.

And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations. . . .

Now, after the Lord had withdrawn from speaking to me and withdrawn his face from me, I said in my heart: Thy servant has sought thee earnestly; now I have found thee. . . . [^12]

These were not the only times God manifested Himself unto Abraham, for He appeared to the great patriarch on the plains of Moreh and said: "Unto thy seed will I give this land." [^13] Later, as Abraham entered the land of Egypt, God instructed him to take certain precautionary measures concerning his wife, Sarai, that the Egyptians might not seek his life. [^14] But one of the greatest revelations the Lord gave to Abraham concerned the nature and order of the universe, the pre-earth existence of man as an organized entity, and the creation and placement of life upon the earth, which will be considered in later chapters. In his report of God's appearances unto him during these great manifestations, Abraham wrote:

. . . I, Abraham, talked with the Lord, face to face, as one man talketh with another; and he told me of the works which his hands had made;

And he said unto me: My son, my son (and his hand was stretched out), behold I will show you all these. And he put his hand upon mine eyes, and I saw those things which his hands had made, which were many; and they multiplied before mine eyes, and I could not see the end thereof. [^15]

The Revelations of God to Moses

Chapter 1 of the Book of Moses contains a report of a great revelation that was given to Moses between the time of the burning bush episode [^16] and the time when he went back to Egypt to deliver the Israelites from bondage. [^17] The record states that the ancient lawgiver was caught up into an exceedingly high mountain:

And he saw God face to face, and he talked with him, and the glory of God was upon Moses; therefore Moses could endure his presence.

And God spake unto Moses saying: Behold, I am the Lord God Almighty, and Endless is my name; for I am without beginning of days or end of years; and is not this endless?

And, behold, thou art my son; wherefore look, and I will show thee the workmanship of mine hands; but not all, for my works are without end, and also my words, for they never cease.

Wherefore, no man can behold all my works, except he behold all my glory; and no man can behold all my glory, and afterwards remain in the flesh on the earth.

And I have a work for thee, Moses, my son; and thou art in the similitude of mine Only Begotten; and mine Only Begotten is and shall be the Savior, for he is full of grace and truth; but there is no God beside me, and all things are present with me, for I know them all.

And now, behold, this one thing I show unto thee, Moses, my son; for thou art in the world, and now I show it unto thee.

And it came to pass that Moses looked, and beheld the world upon which he was created; and Moses beheld the world and the ends thereof, and all the children of men which are, and which were created: of the same he greatly marveled and wondered.

And the presence of God withdrew from Moses, that his glory was not upon Moses; and Moses was left unto himself. And as he was left unto himself, he fell unto the earth.

And it came to pass that it was for the space of many hours before Moses did again receive his natural strength like unto man; and he said unto himself: Now, for this cause I know that man is nothing, which thing I never had supposed.

But now mine own eyes have beheld God; but not my natural, but my spiritual eyes, for my natural eyes could not have beheld; for I should have withered and died in his presence, but his glory was upon me; and I beheld his face, for I was transfigured before him. [^18]

At the conclusion of this experience, Satan appeared unto Moses and tempted the man of God to worship him. But Moses refused, saying: "I will not cease to call upon God, I have other things to inquire of him; for his glory has been upon me, wherefore I can judge between him and thee." [^19] Moses then commanded Satan to depart. At first the adversary refused, declaring: "I am the Only Begotten, worship me." [^20] But calling upon God, Moses received strength, and he said firmly: "Depart from me, Satan, for this one God only will I worship, which is the God of glory." [^21]

After the departure of Satan, another great vision was opened to Moses. The record states:

And calling upon the name of God, he beheld his glory again, for it was upon him; and he heard a voice, saying: Blessed art thou, Moses, for I, the Almighty, have chosen thee, and thou shalt be made stronger than many waters; for they shall obey thy command as if thou wert God.

And lo, I am with thee, even unto the end of thy days; for thou shalt deliver my people from bondage, even Israel my chosen.

And it came to pass, as the voice was still speaking, Moses cast his eyes and beheld the earth, yea, even all of it; and there was not a particle of it which he did not behold, discerning it by the spirit of God.

And he beheld also the inhabitants thereof, and there was not a soul which he beheld not; and he discerned them by the Spirit of God; and their numbers were great, even numberless as the sand upon the sea shore.

And he beheld many lands; and each land was called earth, and there were inhabitants on the face thereof.

And it came to pass that Moses called upon God, saying: Tell me, I pray thee, why these things are so, and by what thou madest them?

And behold, the glory of the Lord was upon Moses, so that Moses stood in the presence of God, and talked with him face to face. [^22]

Other Manifestations of God's Divine Nature to Moses and Israel

Not only was the glory of the Lord shown to Moses before he went into Egypt to redeem Israel, as the Book of Moses indicates, but it was also manifested to Israel during the exodus and at subsequent times in her history. It is necessary to stress this fact in order for the reader to appreciate the significance of the manifestations that were given to Moses before the exodus of Israel from Egypt and to see the purpose that God had in revealing Himself to Moses. Of Israel in the exodus, the Bible reports: "And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; to go by day and night: He took not away the pillar of the cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, from before the people." [^23] When the Egyptians pursued the Israelites to bring them back to Egypt, "the angel of God, which went before the camp of Israel, removed and went behind them; and the pillar of the cloud went from before their face, and stood behind them: and it came between the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of Israel; and it was a cloud and darkness to them, but it gave light by night to these: so that the one came not near the other all the night." [^24] As the enemies of Israel pursued them, "the Lord looked unto the host of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire and of the cloud, and troubled the host of the Egyptians." [^25] This continued until the Egyptians were destroyed in the Red Sea.

Later, the Lord sought to sanctify Israel that she might behold His glory and be made a partaker of that divine intelligence. In a modern revelation, God explained, "Moses plainly taught . . . the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God." [^26] God therefore instructed Moses:

Go unto the people, and sanctify them to-day and to-morrow, and let them wash their clothes.

And be ready against the third day; for the third day the Lord will come down in the sight of all the people upon mount Sinai.

And thou shalt set bounds unto the people round about, saying, Take heed to yourselves, that ye go not up into the mount, or touch the border of it: whosoever toucheth the mount shall be surely put to death:

There shall not a hand touch it, but he shall surely be stoned, or shot through; whether it be beast or man, it shall not live: when the trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to the mount.

And Moses went down from the mount unto the people, and sanctified the people; and they washed their clothes.

And he said unto the people, Be ready against the third day: come not at your wives.

And it came to pass on the third day in the morning, that there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud; so that all the people that was in the camp trembled.

And Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with God; and they stood at the nether part of the mount.

And mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly.

And when the voice of the trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder and louder, Moses spake, and God answered him by a voice.

And the Lord came down upon Mount Sinai, on the top of the mount: and the Lord called Moses up to the top of the mount; and Moses went up.

And the Lord said unto Moses, Go down, charge the people, lest they break through unto the Lord to gaze, and many of them perish.

And let the priests also, which come near to the Lord, sanctify themselves, lest the Lord break forth upon them.

And Moses said unto the Lord, The people cannot come up to mount Sinai: for thou chargedst us, saying, Set bounds about the mount, and sanctify it.

And the Lord said unto him, Away, get thee down, and thou shalt come up, thou, and Aaron with thee: but let not the priests and the people break through to come up unto the Lord, lest he break forth upon them.

So Moses went down unto the people, and spake unto them. [^27]

Some time after this experience, Moses, Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel were given a more direct manifestation of God in His glory. The record of their experience states:

And they saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness.

And upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: also they saw God, and did eat and drink.

And the Lord said unto Moses, Come up to me into the mount, and be there: and I will give thee tables of stone, and a law, and commandments which I have written; that thou mayest teach them.

And Moses rose up, and his minister Joshua: and Moses went up into the mount of God.

And he said unto the elders, Tarry ye here for us, until we come again unto you: and, behold, Aaron and Hur are with you: if any man have any matter to do, let him come unto them.

And Moses went up into the mount, and a cloud covered the mount.

And the glory of the Lord abode upon mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days: and the seventh day he called unto Moses out of the midst of the cloud.

And the sight of the glory of the Lord was like devouring fire on the top of the mount in the eyes of the children of Israel.

And Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and gat him up into the mount: and Moses was in the mount forty days and forty nights. [^28]

As was previously indicated, the Lord encouraged the children of Israel to learn of His divine nature, so that they might come unto Him and be made partakers of His glory and power. For this reason He manifested Himself unto them in glory, as the following experience also indicates:

And it came to pass, as Moses entered into the tabernacle, the cloudy pillar descended, and stood at the door of the tabernacle, and the Lord talked with Moses.

And all the people saw the cloudy pillar stand at the tabernacle door; and all the people rose up and worshipped, every man in his tent door.

And the Lord spake unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend. And he turned again into the camp; but his servant Joshua, the son of Nun, a young man, departed not out of the tabernacle.

And Moses said unto the Lord, . . . If I have found grace in thy sight, show me now thy way, that I may know thee, that I may find grace in thy sight; and consider that this nation is thy people.

And he said, My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest.

And he said unto him, If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence.

For wherein shall it be known here that I and thy people have found grace in thy sight? Is it not in that thou goest with us? So shall we be separated, I and thy people, from all the people that are upon the face of the earth.

And the Lord said unto Moses, I will do this thing also that thou hast spoken; for thou hast found grace in my sight, and I know thee by name.

And he said, I beseech thee, show me thy glory.

And he said, I will make all my goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim the name of the Lord before thee: and will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will show mercy.

And he said unto Moses, Thou canst not see my face at this time, lest mine anger be kindled against thee also, and I destroy thee, and thy people; for there shall no man among them see me at this time, and live, for they are exceeding sinful. And no sinful man hath at any time, neither shall there be any sinful man at any time, that shall see my face and live.

And the Lord said, Behold, thou shalt stand upon a rock, and I will prepare a place by me for thee.

And it shall come to pass, while my glory passeth by, that I will put thee in a cleft of a rock, and cover thee with my hand while I pass by.

And I will take away mine hand, and thou shalt see my back parts, but my face shall not be seen, as at other times; for I am angry with my people Israel. [^29]

When Israel rejected the higher law of the Holy Priesthood by which she could have become sanctified and entered into the presence of God as a partaker of His glory, [^30] God revealed unto her a lesser spiritual law. Of the experience of Moses as he obtained the lesser law, the Bible states:

And he was there with the Lord forty days and forty nights; he did neither eat bread, nor drink water. . . .

And it came to pass, when Moses came down from mount Sinai with the two tables of testimony in Moses' hand, when he came down from the mount, that Moses wist not that the skin of his face shone while he talked with him.

And when Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of his face shone; and they were afraid to come nigh him.

And Moses called unto them; and Aaron and all the rulers of the congregation returned unto him: and Moses talked with them.

And afterward all the children of Israel came nigh: and he gave them in commandment all that the Lord had spoken with him in mount Sinai.

And till Moses had done speaking with them, he put a vail on his face.

But when Moses went in before the Lord to speak with him, he took the vail off, until he came out. And he came out, and spake unto the children of Israel that which he was commanded.

And the children of Israel saw the face of Moses, that the skin of Moses' face shone: and Moses put the vail upon his face again, until he went in to speak with him. [^31]

Until Israel proved herself unworthy of the divine presence, God continued to manifest His glory and power to her as a people. Elijah made the calling down of fire from heaven a sign by which the true and living God could be identified. [^32] At the dedication of the temple of Solomon, the glory of God was also manifested. Of this instance the record states:

It came even to pass, as the trumpeters and singers were as one, to make one sound to be heard in praising and thanking the Lord; and when they lifted up their voice with the trumpets and cymbals and instruments of music, and praised the Lord, saying, For he is good; for his mercy endureth for ever: that then the house was filled with a cloud, even the house of the Lord;

So that the priests could not stand to minister by reason of the cloud: for the glory of the Lord had filled the house of God. [^33]

Again:

Now when Solomon had made an end of praying, the fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices; and the glory of the Lord filled the house.

And the priests could not enter into the house of the Lord, because the glory of the Lord had filled the Lord's house.

And when all the children of Israel saw how the fire came down, and the glory of the Lord upon the house, they bowed themselves with their faces to the ground upon the pavement, and worshipped, and praised the Lord, saying, For he is good; for his mercy endureth forever. [^34]

The word Shechinah was used by the later Jews (and borrowed from them by the Christians) to denote the cloud of brightness, or the divine presence, that was manifested on such occasions as those given above. The presence of the Shechinah was reckoned as one of the special blessings to which Israel was a lawful heir in the flesh. The Apostle Paul wrote, for example, that to Israel "pertaineth the adoption [i.e., the articles of adoption by which they could enter the kingdom of God as sons and daughters in the divine family of Christ], [^35] and the glory, and the covenants [upon which the divine patriarchal order is built], and the giving of the law, and the service of God, and the promises." [^36] Whenever God's covenant people become the sons and daughters of Christ and are founded in righteousness upon His law, they have a right to receive His glory. This is according to His covenant and promise in all ages of time. When Israel is indeed Israel, the glory of God will be manifest unto the people, and they will be made partakers of that divine intelligence.

The Revelations of God to Joseph Smith

The Dispensation of the Fulness of Times was ushered in by the only known visitation of the Father and the Son in simultaneous appearance unto mortal man. For this reason, Joseph Smith's first vision may be classified as one of the greatest manifestations of God to man on this earth. This experience came to him as a youth in his fifteenth year, at a time when the neighborhood in which he lived was greatly agitated by a religious revival. Many were contending for their particular views and tenets, while endeavoring to prove false the claims of others who held contrary views. Joseph Smith later wrote: "While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by the contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day reading the Epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse, which reads: If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him." [^37] This statement by the Apostle James had a great influence upon Joseph's mind. He said: "At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in darkness and confusion, or else I must do as James directs, that is, ask of God." [^38] Having arrived at this conclusion, Joseph decided to ask of God; and on a beautiful spring morning in 1820, he retired to a secluded spot in a grove near his father's home and commenced to pray. He later wrote:

. . . while fervently engaged in supplication, my mind was taken away from the objects with which I was surrounded, and I was enwrapped in a heavenly vision, and saw two glorious personages, who exactly resembled each other in features and likeness, surrounded with a brilliant light which eclipsed the sun at noon day. They told me that all religious denominations were believing in incorrect doctrines, and that none of them was acknowledged of God as His Church and kingdom: and I was expressly commanded "to go not after them," at the same time receiving a promise that the fullness of the Gospel should at some future time be made known unto me. [^39]

This statement by the Prophet is important in disclosing that the Father and the Son, who then appeared to him, "exactly resembled each other in features and likeness," and that they were "surrounded with a brilliant light which eclipsed the sun at noon day." [^40] In the account now contained in the Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith said of this experience:

. . . I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me. . . .

When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him! [^41]

Clarifications On The Doctrine Of Deity

The Father and the Son Separate Corporeal Beings

God the Father, the Man of Holiness (who is designated at times by the exalted name-title Elohim), and Jesus Christ, the Son of Man, are separate and distinct corporeal beings. Each now possesses a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's physical body, except that their bodies are perfect in all their physical attributes and powers, and they are free from the corrupt elements associated with man's mortal tabernacle. "There is no other God in heaven but that God who has flesh and bones," Joseph Smith declared. [^42] Of the general form and stature of God's corporeal body, he said, "If the veil were rent today, and the great God who holds this world in its orbit, and who upholds all worlds and all things by his power, was to make himself visible, . . . you would see him like a man in form—like yourselves in all the person, image, and very form of a man." [^43]

The Godhead

"There are two personages who constitute the great, matchless, governing, and supreme power over all things, by whom all things were created and made, that are created and made, whether visible or invisible, whether in heaven, on earth, or in the earth, under the earth, or throughout the immensity of space," Joseph Smith taught. "They are the Father and the Son." [^44] These two supreme beings appeared to the Prophet in his first vision, [^45] and clarified to man in modern times the fundamental doctrine that they are two separate and distinct personages. Identified in a subordinate role to the Father and the Son, yet one with them in managing the affairs of the earth, is another divine personage known as the Holy Ghost, variously designated as the Holy Spirit, the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, etc. Of these three separate and distinct beings, the Prophet wrote: "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit. Were it not so, the Holy Ghost could not dwell in us." [^46] Again Joseph Smith declared:

I will preach on the plurality of Gods. I have selected this text for that express purpose. I wish to declare I have always and in all congregations when I have preached on the subject of the Deity, it has been the plurality of Gods. It has been preached by the Elders for fifteen years.

I have always declared God to be a distinct personage, Jesus Christ a separate and distinct personage from God the Father, and that the Holy Ghost was a distinct personage and a Spirit: and these three constitute three distinct personages and three Gods. If this in accordance with the New Testament, lo and behold! we have three Gods anyhow, and they are plural; and who can contradict it? [^47]

It was with this view of the Godhead that Joseph Smith wrote in the Articles of Faith: "We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost." [^48]

The Prophet's statement that the Holy Ghost, as the third member of the Godhead, is a personage of Spirit means that He is a separate and distinct individual endowed with the attributes and powers of Deity and composed in His bodily organization of that pure and fine substance called spirit. Though the Holy Ghost is defined as a personal being and not merely a divine force or essence, there is a divine and highly endowed substance designated scripturally as the Holly Spirit, the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Truth, etc., [^49] and one must differentiate by determining the usage and the context of the statement whether reference is being made to the person or to the power of the Holy Ghost.

The Divine Nature of God

In addition to the fact that the Father and the Son are perfect corporeal beings, they are beings of exquisite glory. Their glory constitutes their divine nature. Consequently, the Father and the Son are divine (or glorified) beings, as well as corporeal beings. The Holy Ghost as a personage of Spirit is also a glorified being.

The testimony of prophets whose experiences are recorded in the Pearl of Great Price teaches that God has manifested His divine nature to man on several occasions. In fact, God's revelations to man have been characterized by the manifestation of His divine nature. The Book of Moses declares of the experience of Moses: "He saw God face to face, and he talked with him, and the glory of God was upon Moses; therefore Moses could endure his presence." [^50] As has been shown previously, the glory of God enveloped Moses and transfigured him to where he could behold God as a divine being. Moses testified: "Now mine own eyes have beheld God, but not my natural, but my spiritual eyes, for my natural eyes could not have beheld; for I should have withered and died in his presence; but his glory was upon me; and I beheld his face, for I was transfigured before him." [^51] Enoch's visions of God were given under similar circumstances. Telling of the great revelation in which he was shown the history of the earth down to the Second Coming of Christ, Enoch said: "It came to pass that I turned and went up on the mount; and as I stood upon the mount, I beheld the heavens open, and was clothed upon with glory; and I saw the Lord; and he stood before my face, and he talked with me, even as a man talketh one with another, face to face." [^52]

The glory of God was manifested to Joseph Smith in the first vision. Like Enoch and Moses, he was enveloped in glory at the time of this divine manifestation. He later wrote:

. . . I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me. . . .

When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. [^53]

With reference to the divine nature of these two glorified beings, Joseph Smith wrote on another occasion: "I . . . saw two glorified personages, who exactly resembled each other in features and likeness, surrounded with a brilliant light which eclipsed the sun at noon day." [^54] When the angel Moroni appeared to the Prophet as a resurrected, celestial being, he also manifested his glory. Of his initial appearance, Joseph Smith wrote:

While I was . . . in the act of calling upon God, I discovered a light appearing in my room, which continued to increase until the room was lighter than at noonday, when immediately a personage appeared at my bedside, standing in the air, for his feet did not touch the floor.

He had a loose robe of most exquisite whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever seen; nor do I believe that any earthly thing could be made to appear so exceedingly white and brilliant.

Not only was his robe exceedingly white, but his whole person was glorious beyond description, and his countenance truly like lightning. The room was exceedingly light, but not so very bright as immediately around his person. [^55]

The next day, as Joseph went to the Hill Cumorah to view the sacred record the angel had come to reveal, he was again met by the same heavenly messenger, while "the heavens were opened and the glory of the Lord shone round about and rested upon him." [^56]

During the period in which the Book of Mormon was being translated, John the Baptist appeared in glory to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and restored the Aaronic Priesthood. Elder Cowdery later wrote of this experience:

On a sudden, as from the midst of eternity, the voice of the Redeemer spake peace to us, while the veil was parted and the angel of God came down clothed with glory, and delivered the anxiously looked for message, and the keys of the gospel of repentance! . . . As in the "blaze of day;" yes, more—above the glitter of the May sun beam, which then shed its brilliancy over the face of nature! Then his voice, though mild, pierced to the center, and his words, "I am thy fellow servant," dispelled every fear. We listened—we gazed—we admired! 'Twas the voice of the angel from glory—'twas a message? from the Most High! and as we heard we rejoiced, while his love enkindled upon our souls, and we were wrapt in the vision of the Almighty! . . .

I shall not attempt to paint to you the feelings of this heart, nor the majestic beauty and glory which surrounded us on this occasion; but you will believe me when I say, that earth, nor men, with the eloquence of time, cannot begin to clothe language in as interesting and sublime a manner as this holy personage. No; nor has this earth power to give the joy, to bestow the peace, or comprehend the wisdom which was contained in each sentence as they were delivered by the power of the Holy Spirit! . . . The assurance that we were in the presence of an angel; the certainty that we heard the voice of Jesus, and the truth unsullied as it flowed from a pure personage, dictated by the will of God, is to me, past description, and I shall ever look upon this expression of the Savior's goodness with wonder and thanksgiving while I am permitted to tarry, and in those mansions where perfection dwells and sin never comes, I hope to adore in that DAY which shall never cease! [^57]

As the work of translating the Book of Mormon came to a conclusion, the three witnesses were permitted to see the ancient record and the items associated with it. Of the appearance of the angel Moroni to reveal them, Joseph Smith wrote: "We knelt down . . . and had not been many minutes engaged in prayer, when presently we beheld a light above us in the air, of exceeding brightness; and behold, an angel stood before us." [^58] Of the manifestation, David Whitmer said:

. . . it was just as thought Joseph, Oliver and I were sitting here on a log, when we were overshadowed by a light. It was not like the light of the sun nor like that of a fire, but more glorious and beautiful. It extended away round us, I cannot tell how far, but in the midst of this light about as far off as he sits (pointing to John C. Whitmer, sitting a few feet from him), there appeared as it were, a table with many records or plates upon it, besides the plates of the Book of Mormon, also the Sword of Laban, the Directors—i.e., the ball which Lehi had—and the Interpreters. I saw them just as plain as I see this bed (striking the bed beside him with his hand), and I heard the voice of the Lord, as distinctly as I ever heard anything in my life, declaring that the records of the plates of the Book of Mormon were translated by the gift and power of God. [^59]

The Glory of God Is Intelligence

A revelation to Joseph Smith promises man that by obedience to the will of God he may acquire the glory of God; and in extending this hope, the revelation clarifies certain basic facts concerning the nature of God's glory. It states: "He that keepeth his [i.e., God's] commandments receiveth truth and light, until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things." [^60] If the obedient are to receive light and truth until they are glorified in truth, it follows that glory consists of truth and light. Having established these points, the revelation declares: "The glory of God is intelligence; or, in other words, light and truth." [^61] The divine nature of God thus consists essentially of intelligence with its several divine attributes and powers concentrated in the person of God (or in a personage of Deity) to a point of brilliance that exceeds the brightness of the sun at noon day.

For many the only meaning of the above statement is that God finds glory, or true pleasure, in being an intelligent personage. But though He may do so, the real meaning of this scripture seems to be that the divine substance which is centered in God and called His glory is His Holy Spirit, [^62] in which truth and light (or intelligence) are developed to a point of brilliance above the brightness of the sun. Let the reader imagine a being in whose corporeal image man is created and who has centered within Himself a concentration of pure intelligence and its related attributes and powers to the extent that the very brilliance of the Spirit emanating from Him would outshine the sun. If man could comprehend such a glorified being, to see as He sees, understand as He understands, and feel as He feels, he could then know God. This is what it means to possess eternal life—to know the only true God and Jesus Christ whom He has sent. [^63] That goal cannot be achieved fully by man in his mortal state. Nor can mortal man behold all God's glory and afterward remain in mortality, for God explained to Moses: "No man can behold all my glory, and afterwards remain in the flesh on the earth." [^64] The divine nature of God is above finite comprehension. To Joseph Smith, it defied "all description." [^65] After Moses beheld but a portion of God's glory, he concluded: "Now, for this cause I know that man is nothing, which thing I never had supposed." [^66]

There are several synonyms for God's divine nature, among which are the terms light, heat, fire, etc. Both Moses and the Apostle Paul wrote that God is "a consuming fire." [^67] And Joseph Smith explained:

God Almighty Himself dwells in eternal fire; flesh and blood cannot go there, for all corruption is devoured by the fire. . . . When our flesh is quickened by the Spirit, there will be no blood in this tabernacle. Some dwell in higher glory than others. . . . Immortality dwells in everlasting burnings. . . . All men who are immortal dwell in everlasting burnings. [^68]

In the 24th Psalm, David answered the questions, "Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall stand in his holy place?" But Isaiah wrote more explicitly:

Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?

He that walketh righteously, and speaketh uprightly; he that despiseth the gain of oppressions, that shaketh his hands from holding of bribes, that stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood, and shutteth his eyes from seeing evil;

He shall dwell on high. . . . [^69]

Though appropriate descriptive symbols and synonyms are used scripturally to denote the divine nature of God, it should be stressed again that the Lord has revealed in modern times that the glory of God is intelligence, and intelligence consists, in turn, of truth and light. [^70] All other terms by which the divine nature is designated are either synonyms or symbols of some aspects of God's glory.

The Glory of God Manifested as the Holy Spirit

Modern scriptures indicate that the glory of God is synonymous with His Holy Spirit. For example, when the glory of the Lord was upon Moses [^71] he beheld in vision the inhabitants of the earth, discerning "them by the Spirit of God." [^72] The divine medium by which Moses beheld this great vision is designated as both the glory of God and the Spirit of God. Again, Moses bore record that his natural eyes could not have beheld God, for without being transfigured he would "have withered and died in his presence." "But," he declared of God, "his glory was upon me; and I beheld his face, for I was transfigured before him." [^73] The transfiguring agent was identified as the glory of God. And to Joseph Smith a revelation explained, "No man has seen God at any time in the flesh, except quickened by the Spirit of God." [^74] Since the transfiguring agent is said to be the Spirit of God, it follows that the glory of God is manifest as His Holy Spirit. Finally, when the glory of God withdrew from Moses during the experience related above, [^75] he declared to Satan who then appeared unto him desiring the man of God to worship him: "Blessed be the name of my God, for his Spirit hath not altogether withdrawn from me, or else where is thy glory, for it is darkness unto me?" [^76] Thus, Moses again referred to the glory of God as being synonymous with the Holy Spirit of God.

In summary, the writer suggests that as a personage of glory, God has centered within Him as a part of His organized being that divine essence that is called the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of God, the Light of Truth, etc. This pure and holy substance has a great capacity to receive intelligence; and, as the divine nature of God (who is a personal, tangible, glorified being) the Holy Spirit partakes of the intelligence and power of God and manifests them in and through all things throughout universal space.

Functions of God's Divine Nature

God's divine nature is as much a part of Him as is His physical nature. Each constitutes a different aspect of His total organized being. By the manifestation of His divine nature in and through all things within His vast domain, [^77] God is everywhere present (omnipresent). Thereby He is also in visible contact with all things, and thus, He knows all things. (He is omniscient.) To Enoch, God said: "Wherefore, I can stretch forth mine hands and hold all the creations which I have made; and mine eye can pierce them also." [^78] And to Abraham, the Lord said: "I know the end from the beginning." [^79] Because the intelligence and power of God as manifested in the Holy Spirit quicken and sustain all things. [^80] He is allpowerful (omnipotent), for He upholds all things by the word of His power. To Abraham, God said: "I dwell in heaven; the earth is my footstool; I stretch my hand over the sea, and it obeys my voice; I cause the wind and the fire to be my chariot; I say to the mountains—Depart hence—and behold, they are taken away by a whirlwind, in an instant, suddenly." [^81] Since power is obtained as a result of organization, and since God organizes and subordinates all things ultimately to His will in truth, He possesses all the power that exists; and He is free to exercise His power consistently through the agency of His Holy Spirit, subject only to "wisdom, mercy, truth, justice, and judgment." [^82]

Ancient Israel understood that God manifests Himself throughout universal space in all the functions of Deity by means of His divine nature. King David declared:

O Lord, thou hast searched me, and known me. Thou knowest my downsitting and my uprising, thou understandest my thought afar off.

Thou compassest my path and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways.

For there is not a word in my tongue, but, lo, O Lord, thou knowest it altogether.

Thou has beset me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me.

Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is high, I cannot attain unto it.

Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presenc?

If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there.

If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea;

Even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me.

If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me; even the night shall be light about me.

Yea, the darkness hideth not from thee; but the night shineth as the day: the darkness and the light are both alike to thee. [^83]

In modern times, the Lord has revealed important insights into the functions of His divine nature manifested as the Holy Spirit or Light of Christ. To Joseph Smith a revelation explained:

He [i.e., Christ] . . . ascended up on high, as also he descended below all things, in that he comprehended all things, that he might be in all and through all things, the light of truth;

Which truth shineth. This is the light of Christ. As also he is in the sun, and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made.

As also he is in the moon, and is the light of the moon, and power thereof by which it was made;

As also the light of the stars, and the power thereof by which they were made;

And the earth also, and the power thereof, even the earth upon which you stand.

And the light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings;

Which light proceedeth forth from the-presence of God to fill the immensity of space—

The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things. . . .

He comprehendeth all things, and all things are before him, and all things are round about him; and he is above all things, and in all things, and is through all things, and is round about all things; and all things are by him, and of him, even God, forever and ever.

And again, verily I say unto you, he hath given a law unto all things, by which they move in their times and their seasons;

And their courses are fixed, even the courses of the heavens and earth, which comprehend the earth and all the planets. . . .

Unto what shall I liken these kingdoms, that ye may understand?

Behold, all these are kingdoms, and any man who hath seen any or the least of these hath seen God moving in his majesty and power.

I say unto you, he hath seen him; nevertheless, he who came unto his own was not comprehended.

The light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth it not; nevertheless, the day shall come when you shall comprehend even God, being quickened in him and by him.

Then shall ye know that ye have seen me, that I am, and that I am the true light that is in you, and that you are in me; otherwise ye could not abound. [^84]

One of the finest statements in Latter-day Saint literature correlating the beliefs of the Church as to the corporeal and the divine natures of God, and explaining the functions of the latter, was made by Charles W. Penrose, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and subsequently a counselor in the First Presidency. Because of the important ideas contained within this statement, extensive excerpts are given below:

While our Father . . . is a person, an indivdual, it may be asked: "How can He be here, there and everywhere at the same time?" Well, He is not, in His personality; but He can be omnipresent in a certain sense. There is a Spirit, an influence, that proceeds from God, that fills the immensity of space, the Holy Spirit, the Light of Truth. As the sun itself, a planet or heavenly body, is not present in any other place except that which it actually occupies, so the individual Father occupies a certain locality; and as the light that proceeds from the sun spreads abroad upon all the face of the earth and lights up other planets as well as this earth, penetrating to the circumference of an extended circle in the midst of God's great universe, so the light of God, the Spirit of God. proceeding forth from the presence of God, fills the immensity of space. It is the light and life of all things. It is the light and the life of man. It is the life of the animal creation. It is the life of the vegetable creation. It is in the earth on which we stand; it is in the stars that shine in the firmament; it is in the moon that reflects the light of the sun: it is in the sun, and is the light of the sun, and the power by which it was made; and these grosser particles of light that illuminate the heavens and enable us to behold the works of nature, are from that same Spirit which enlightens our minds and unfolds the things of God. As that light comes forth from the sun, so the light of God comes to us. That natural light is the grosser substance or particles of the same Spirit.

Spirit is a substance, it is not immaterial; it may have some properties that are different from that which we see and handle, which we call matter, but it is a reality, a substantial reality. . . .

Our Father and our. God is an individual. . . . He has a body, though that body is different from our bodies, it being a spiritual body. It is quickened by spirit. Our bodies are quickened by that corruptible substance which we call blood; but our Heavenly Father's body is quickened by spirit. It is not governed by the same laws as those by which earthly bodies are governed. It is a body something similar to that which Jesus had after His resurrection. Jesus Christ, when He rose from the dead, had the same body that He had upon the earth, but a change had been wrought upon it. He had shed His blood for the remission of sins. This body was quickened by spirit. "He was put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit;" so we are told in the Scriptures, and He was raised up from the dead by that Spirit. Paul says, in his Epistle to the Romans, viii ch. 11 v.:

"But if the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, He that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by His Spirit that dwelleth in you."

Jesus Christ's body was put in the sepulchre a natural body; it was raised a spiritual body. . . . It was no longer bound by the laws of earthly gravitation as it was before. He stood upon the mount of Olives, in the presence of His disciples, and ascended up to heaven from their midst and disappeared from their view. He could manifest Himself to them, and then take Himself away from their gaze. He could enter the room when the doors were shut, as He did in the case when His disciples gathered in secret for fear of the Jews, and manifest Himself to them. And yet at the same time His body was tangible, and the unbelieving Thomas could reach forth his hand and thrust it into His side, and put his fingers into the prints of the nails. But this body was a glorious body, "the glorious body of the Son of God," and it was in the fashion and likeness of the glorious body of His Eternal Father. It was a celestial body quickened by the celestial glory. . . .

As I have previously explained, God is not everywhere present personally, but He is omnipresent in the power of that spirit—the Holy Spirit—which animates all created things; that which is the light of the sun, and of the soul as well as the light of the eye, that which enables the inhabitants of the earth to understand and perceive the things of God. As the light of the sun reveals natural objects to our eyes, so that Spirit that comes from God, with a fitting place to occupy and conditions to operate in, reveals the things of God. We see natural things by the light of the sun. We see spiritual things by spiritual light, and he that is spiritual discerneth all things and judgeth all things, and he that is not spiritual cannot comprehend spiritual things. They are foolishness to him. And while the Saints of God, quickened by the Spirit which they have obtained through obedience to the Gospel, can comprehend these things of which I am speaking and discern their meaning and signification, those that are wicked and corrupt and obey not the ordinances of God, cannot see these things nor comprehend them as they are, but they are foolishness to them.

But, if God is an individual spirit and dwells in a body, the question will arise, "Is He the Eternal Father?" Yes, He is the Eternal Father. "Is it a fact that He never had a beginning?" In the elementary particles of His organism, He did not. But if He is an organized Being, there must have been a time when that being was organized. This, some one will say, would infer that God had a beginning. This Spirit which pervades all things which is the light and life of all things, by which our Heavenly Father operates, by which He is omnipotent, never had a beginning and never will have an end. It is the light of truth; it is the spirit of intelligence. . . . And we are told . . . that this Spirit, when it is manifest, is God moving in His glory. When we look up to the heavens and behold the starry worlds, which are kingdoms, we behold God moving in His majesty and His power. Now, this Spirit always existed; it always operated, but it is not, understood, and cannot be comprehended except through organisms. If you see a living blade of grass you see a manifestation of that Spirit which is called God. If you see an animal of any kind on the face of the earth having life, there is a manifestation of that Spirit. If you see a man you behold its most perfect earthly manifestation. And if you see a glorified man, a man who has passed through the various grades of being, who has overcome all things who has been raised from the dead, who has been quickened by this Spirit in its fulness, there you see manifested, in its perfection, this eternal, beginningless, endless spirit of intelligence.

Such a Being is our Father and our God, and we are following in His footsteps. He has attained to perfection. He has arisen to kingdoms of power. He comprehends all things, because in Him dwelleth the fulness of the Godhead, bodily. He is a perfect manifestation, expression and revelation of this eternal essence, this spirit of eternal, everlasting intelligence or light of truth. It is embodied in His spiritual personality or spiritual organism. This Spirit cannot be fully comprehended in our finite state. It quickens all things. As we are told in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, it is:

"The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God, who sitteth upon His throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things.—Sec. lxxxviii, v. 13."

That spirit exists wherever there is a particle of material substance; that spirit is round about it, and in it, and through it; but that we may comprehend it, it must be manifested through organisms. The perfection of its manifestation is in the personality of a being called God. That is a person who has passed through all the gradations of being, and who contains within Himself the fullness, manifested and expressed, of this divine Spirit which is called God. . . .

As the Father had taken His upward course in worlds before this, so Jesus Christ followed in His footsteps in every respect; therefore He is entitled to sit down at the right hand of God in the heavens, to sit on His throne and be one with the Father in all things; and all the power and glory, and dominion that the Father hath He conferred also upon Jesus. And the promise to the sons of God on the earth is, that if they will follow in the footsteps of Jesus, they shall be also exalted and shall partake of that glory which He partakes of. and they shall become Gods, even the sons of God, and "all things" shall be theirs. And we are told in the revelations of God to us in the latter days, that if we are faithful in all things, "all that the Father hath" shall be given unto us. We shall become like Him, and we shall receive power and dominion and glory similar to that which He enjoys, only He will always be above us, God as our Father, and Jesus Christ our elder brother. [^85]

Importance of Understanding the Divine Nature of God

The Apostle Paul declared that the purpose of the Gospel, as Christ gave it to His disciples, was to manifest the glory of God to those who accepted it and develop the divine intelligence within man. To illustrate this point, he made use of the experience of Moses. Having referred to the glory that was manifested when that great prophet received the Law of Carnal Commandments, which is a lesser law to that of the Gospel, he declared:

. . . if the ministration of death, written and engraven in stones [i.e., the lesser law that was finally given to Israel], was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory of his countenance; which glory was to be done away:

How shall not the ministration of the Spirit be rather glorious?

For if the ministration of condemnation be glory, much more doth the ministration of righteousness exceed in glory.

For even that which was made glorious had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that excelleth.

For if that which is done away was glorious, much more that which remaineth is glorious.

Seeing then that we have such hope, we use great plainness of speech:

And not as Moses, which put a vail over his face, that the children of Israel could not steadfastly look to the end of that which is abolished:

But their minds were blinded: for until this day remaineth the same vail untaken away in the reading of the old testament; which vail is done away in Christ.

But even unto this day, when Moses is read, the vail is upon their heart.

Nevertheless when it shall turn to the Lord, the vail shall be taken away.

Now the Lord is that Spirit: and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.

But we all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same [divine] image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. [^86]

From this statement it is apparent that Paul understood that man must receive one endowment upon another of the attributes and powers of the divine nature of God, until he is changed into the same divine image as Christ, from glory to glory, by the Spirit of the Lord. According to the Apostle's understanding, this is the purpose and design of the Gospel. For this reason he declared that the saints in his day stood and rejoiced "in hope of the glory of God." [^87] Having been led by the Holy Spirit, they became the children of God. Said he:

And if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together.

For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us.

For the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God. [^88]

The manifestation of the sons of God to which Paul refers seems to be the anticipated manifestation of God's glory in the faithful by which they are glorified in Christ, as He is glorified in His Father. Having partaken of the blessings of the Holy Spirit in some measure through the Gospel, the saints waited in patience for the full manifestation of that divine intelligence within them. Here was the essence of their hope.

It can be seen that an understanding of the divine nature of God provides a vital key to intelligent and meaningful worship. Moses refused to worship Satan and stated: "For this one God only will I worship, which is the God of glory." [^89] It was while Enoch was "clothed upon with glory" [^90] that he worshipped God in open visual communion. The same was true of Joseph Smith. [^91] Indeed, King Benjamin declared to his people that the divine plan of salvation is designed to enable man to "grow in the knowledge of the glory of him that created you, or in the knowledge of that which is just and true." [^92] A revelation in which God spoke concerning His divine nature states:

I give unto you these sayings that you may understand and know how to worship, and know what you worship, that you may come unto the Father in my name, and in due time receive of his fulness.

For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father; therefore, I say unto you, ye shall receive grace for grace. [^93]

If man is to understand how to worship and what he worships, he must comprehend that God is a divine (or glorified) being as well as a corporeal being. Only by such knowledge can man understand the ultimate purpose of true worship, which is to come unto the Father in the name of Jesus Christ and in due time receive of the Father's fulness, or glory. All those who keep the commandments of God are promised that they will receive of the Father's fulness and be glorified in Christ, as Christ is glorified in the Father. With this view of his eternal destiny, man must approach God in faith and thereby acquire divine truth and light, grace for grace, even as Christ received of the glory of the Father by receiving grace for grace.

Since man now possesses a physical body to which his spirit will be restored in the resurrection, the remaining purposes of the plan of life and salvation are, first, to cleanse man from all sin and, second, to develop within him the divine truth light, and power of God's glory. Only in this way can man become like God. This means that in true worship man must partake of the truth, light, and power of God, so that his relationship with Deity is founded in truth and power. True worship is not merely a matter of man accepting certain required theological or philosophical principles and practices, or of adhering to a prescribed set of ethical and moral standards requiring personal righteousness and service. Though all these things are vitally important, true worship requires in addition that the intelligent believer acquire a spiritual union with God by which divine truth and power are transferred from God to man. Thereby man partakes of the glory of God. In this spiritual union he must mature until eventually he is glorified in Christ, as Christ is glorified in the Father.

The divine formula by which man may come unto the Father through Christ will be discussed in a later chapter. It is sufficient at this time to see that the object of true worship is for man to partake of God's divine nature and in this way become like Him. In acquiring the divine nature, man partakes of the powers and attributes of eternal life. Here is an essential difference between the plan of life and salvation and a written associated with the manifestation of divine truth and power. If man has the plan of life and salvation, he is a recipient of divine truth and power, which give him life and which, in their celestial fulness, constitute eternal life. The Apostle John therefore said of the Gospel of Christ, in comparing it with the written law that God gave to ancient Israel through Moses:

. . . as many as believe on his [i.e., Christ's] name shall receive of his fulness. And of his fulness have all we received, even immortality and eternal life, through his grace. For the law was given through Moses, but life and truth came through Jesus Christ.

For the law was after a carnal commandment, to the administration of death; but the gospel was after the power of an endless life, through Jesus Christ, the Only Begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father. [^94]

Here is a vital key to the meaning of man worshiping God in Spirit and in truth. To the woman of Samaria, as recorded in the Inspired Revision of John's Gospel, Jesus said:

. . . the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in truth; for the Father seeketh such to worship him.

For unto such hath God promise his Spirit. And they who worship him, must worship in Spirit and in truth. [^95]

By attaining a true understanding of worship, man, like Christ, may attain ultimately a fulness of that divine intelligence and power that is called glory, providing he continues to worship God in Spirit and in truth. Christ is the great prototype. "I am the way, the truth, and the life," He declared; "no man cometh unto the Father, but by me." [^96] Of Jesus and the path He followed to a fulness of glory and power, John testified:

. . . I, John, saw that he received not of the fulness at first, but received grace for grace;

And he received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness. . . .

And I, John, bear record that he received a fulness of the glory of the Father;

And he received all power both in heaven and on earth, and the glory of the Father was with him, for he dwelt in him. [^97]

In acquiring the fulness of the Father's glory, Christ "received grace for grace." [^98] By definition the word "grace" means unearned divine assistance. It is an unearned (not necessarily an unmerited) gift. As used in the above scripture, it is an endowment of truth and power given by the Father in return for the grace that Christ gave to others while doing the will of the Father. Jesus received grace for grace; that is, He received grace from the Father as He in turn gave grace to others. Service in doing the will of the Father was therefore the key to Christ's spiritual development. By giving service in the divine plan, Jesus "continued from grace to grace [i.e., from one endowment of truth and light through the Holy Spirit to a greater endowment], until he received a fulness." In this way, Christ received a fulness of the glory of the Father, which gave Him "all power, both in heaven and on earth." [^99]

For Christ and man the plan of life is essentially the same, with these exceptions. First, man is subordinate to Christ in that he receives through Him the intelligent endowments of the Holy Spirit. Christ, on the other hand, received these divine endwoments directly from the Father and is subordinate to the Man of Holiness. Second, in acquiring a body of flesh and bones in mortality, man must be given a remission of sins through the power of Christ's atonement before he can partake significantly of the divine endowments of the Holy Spirit. Christ was without sin and partook of the divine endowments from the Father directly without the need of a savior. Finally, Christ had the divine attributes and powers of life planted within Him in embryo in the flesh as the Son of God, which action gave Him "life in himself." [^100] But others being born strictly of mortal parents must be adopted into the divine family of Christ and thereby acquire the divine attributes and powers that lead to eternal life, as sons and daughters of Jesus Christ. Having begun to come unto to Father through Christ, man must continue by obedience divine endowment to another until ultimately he receives a fulness of the glory of the Father. Man, like Christ, must "receive grace for grace." [^101] By service in doing the will of God, man must acquire one endowment of the divine nature after another until he is glorified in Christ, as Christ is glorified in His Father. Here is the essence and the object of true worship.

Conclusion

God is a tangible being of infinite glory and power, and thereby He manifests Himself in and through all things in all the functions of an infinite being. This is true also of Christ as the Son of God. Because God's divine nature is the means by which He expresses His intelligence and power throughout universal space, an understanding of the glory of God is most important if man is to comprehend how and what he worships. Only by possessing such knowledge is it possible for man to understand that God is really and truly everywhere present (omnipresent). Here also is the key to an understanding of how God is all-knowing (omniscient) and all-powerful (omnipotent). Finally, here is a vital key to the relationship that man has with God. To some degree, God is in man, and man is in God; and the divine purpose is to perfect and intensify this indwelling relationship until, through Christ, man receives a fulness of the glory of the Father and is glorified in Christ, as He is glorified in the Father. The Pearl of Great Price makes a vital contribution to man's understanding of these principles and to the relationship man has with God. The doctrines set forth in this Standard Work are consistent with those that are found in each of the other scriptural books that make up the canon of the Church.

Footnotes

On the evening of the 21st of September, A.D., 1823, while I was praying unto God, and endeavoring to exercise faith in the precious promises of Scripture, on a sudden a light like that of day, only of a far purer and more glorious appearance and brightness, burst into the room, indeed the first sight was as though the house was filled with consuming fire; the appearance produced a shock that affected the whole body; in a moment a personage stood before me surrounded with a glory yet greater than that with which I was already surrounded. This messenger proclaimed himself to be an angel of God. . . .—DHC, IV, pp. 536-537.

Joseph and Oliver and I were sitting on a log when we were overshadowed by a light more glorious than that of the sun. In the midst of this light, but a few feet from us, appeared a table upon which were many golden plates, also the sword of Laban and the directors. I saw them as plain as I see you now and distinctly heard the voice of the Lord declaring that the records of the plates of the Book of Mormon were translated by the gift and the power of God. MS, XLIII, pp. 421-423, 437-439, citing the Kansas City Journal, June 5, 1881.

---
Notas:
[^1] "Father" as Literal Parent—Scriptures embodying the ordinary signification—literally that of Parent—are too numerous and specific to require citation. The purport of these scriptures is to the effect that God the Eternal Father, whom we designate by the exalted name-title "Elohim," is the literal Parent of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and of the spirits of the human race. Elohim is the Father in every sense in which Jesus Christ is so designated, and distinctively He is the Father of spirits. Thus we read in the Epistle to the Hebrews: "Furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live?" (Hebrews 12:9). In view of this fact that we are taught by Jesus Christ to pray: "Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name." Moses 1:31-33.
[^2] "Father" as Creator—A second scriptural meaning of "Father" is that of Creator, e.g. in passages referring to any one of the Godhead as "The Father of the heavens and of the earth and all things that in them are" (Ether 4:7; see also Alma 11:38-39 and Mosiah 15:4). Ibid., 7:30.
[^3] Jesus Christ the "Father" of Those Who Abide in His Gospel—A third sense in which Jesus Christ is regarded as the "Father" has reference to the relationship between Him and those who accept His Gospel and thereby become heirs of eternal life. Following are a few of the scriptures illustrating this meaning. Hebrews 1:2.
[^4] Jesus Christ the "Father" by Divine Investiture of Authority—A fourth reason for applying the title "Father" to Jesus Christ is found in the fact that in all His dealings with the human family Jesus the Son has represented and yet represents Elohim His Father in power and authority. This is true of Christ in His preexistent, antemortal, or unembodied state, in the which He was known as Jehovah; also during His embodiment in the flesh; and during His labors as a disembodied spirit in the realm of the dead; and since that period in His resurrected state. To the Jews He said: "I and my Father are one" (John 10:30; see also 17:11, 22); yet He declared "My Father is greater than I" (John 14:28); and further, "I am come in my Father's name" (John 5:43; see also 10:25). Thus the Father placed His name upon the Son; and Jesus Christ spoke and ministered in and through the Father's name; and so far as power, authority and Godship are concerned His words and acts were and are those of the Father. John 1:3.
[^5] D&C 76:23-24.
[^6] Ibid., 76:41-42.
[^7] DHC, III, p. 387.
[^8] Alma 5:50.
[^9] Moses 1:32-33; 6:57. See also Moses 7:35.
[^10] Abraham 3:24.
[^11] See D&C 110:1-4; 3 Nephi 15:4-5.
[^12] 1 Nephi 19:10.
[^13] Moses 7:35.
[^14] Ibid., 7:60.
[^15] Ibid., 1:6.
[^16] Ibid., 1:32.
[^17] 1 Nephi 19:10.
[^18] Moses 1:17, 26.
[^19] 3 Nephi 15:5. See Also I.V., Matthew 9:19.
[^20] Moses 1:16. See also verse 6.
[^21] Ibid., 1:17.
[^22] Exodus, 3:6.
[^23] Ibid., 3:14-15.
[^24] John 8:58.
[^25] D&C 39:1. See also Ibid., 38:1.
[^26] Moses 7:35-36.
[^27] Ibid., 7:45-47, 59-60.
[^28] Ibid.
[^29] D&C 93:16-17.
[^30] Lectures on Faith, No. 5.
[^31] See D&C 88:41.
[^32] See D&C 93:30.
[^33] Ibid., 29:43.
[^34] Ibid., 88:4.
[^35] Moses 6:59.
[^36] See D&C 93:21; Colossians 1:15; Hebrews 1:6; Revelation 3:14.
[^37] D&C 93:13-14.
[^38] Moses 1:6.
[^39] Ether 4:12.
[^40] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, I, pp. 27-28.
[^41] Alma 11:38-40.
[^42] John 1:19; Acts 17:28; D&C 88:49-50.
[^43] Ether 3:14. Christ's divine Fatherhood in this relationship will be discussed more fully in a subsequent chapter.
[^44] The First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, June 30, 1916.
[^45] John 16:14-15.
[^46] D&C 36:2.
[^47] 3 Nephi 20:27. For other references where the power of the Holy Ghost is specifically designated as the Spirit of Christ, see 3 Nephi 18:11 and Moroni 10:17.
[^48] Moses 5:9.
[^49] Ibid.
[^50] Deuteronomy 4:35.
[^51] 1 Samuel 2:2.
[^52] Isaiah 45:5.
[^53] Ibid., 45:22. See also verse 18.
[^54] Mark 12:29-34. See also Deuteronomy 6:4.
[^55] James 2:19.
[^56] 1 Corinthians 8:4.
[^57] 1 Corinthians 8:6.
[^58] 1 Timothy 2:5.
[^59] John 21:28.
[^60] Ibid., 1:1.
[^61] Ibid., 1:14.
[^62] Philippians 2:6.
[^63] Isaiah 9:6.
[^64] Ibid., 7:14.
[^65] Matthew 1:22-23.
[^66] John 1:1, 14.
[^67] 3 Nephi 1:14.
[^68] John 14:8-11.
[^69] Ibid., 14:9.
[^70] I.V., Luke 10:23.
[^71] Alma 11:32-33. See also Ibid., 13:1-2, 7; 14:5; 24:10; 33:23.
[^72] Ibid., 12:33.
[^73] 3 Nephi 11:7.
[^74] Ibid., 11:11, 32-36; 12:45; 15:15-18.
[^75] Ibid., 19:19-23, 28-35.
[^76] Ibid., 13:9; 18:19.
[^77] Ether 12:11.
[^78] Moroni 7:48.
[^79] Title page of the Book of Mormon.
[^80] 2 Nephi 30:2.
[^81] 2 Nephi 9:19-21.
[^82] Ether 3:12.
[^83] Ibid., 3:14.
[^84] Mormon 9:12.
[^85] Mosiah 7:26-27.
[^86] Alma 11:39-40.
[^87] 1 Nephi 19:10. See also 2 Nephi 10:3; 11:7; 26:12; Mosiah 15:1; Helaman 8:22-23; 3 Nephi 11:14; Ether 2:12.
[^88] Mosiah 15:1-2.
[^89] Ibid., 15:2-3.
[^90] See, again, John 14:8-11, where Jesus explained to Philip that the divine nature of the Father, Elohim, dwelt within Him, so that He (Christ) was in the Father and the Father was in Him.
[^91] See Ibid., 5:26.
[^92] Mosiah 15:3-4.
[^93] D&C 6:2, 21.
[^94] Ibid., 35:1-2.
[^95] Ibid., 36:1, 8.
[^96] See Ibid., 8:1; 11:2, 28; 12:2, 9; 14:2, 9; 17:9; 19:1, 4; 27:1; 33:1; 34:1; 38:1; 41:1.
[^97] D&C 29:1.
[^98] Ibid., 29:42.
[^99] Ibid., 29:46.
[^100] Ibid., 49:5.
[^101] Ibid., 49:28.
