Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1967)

CHAPTER 3

JESUS CHRIST

The Pearl of Great Price reveals important insights into the pre-earth life of Jesus Christ and His relationship with the Father, Elohim, and thus makes a significant contribution to man's knowledge of God. Specifically, students of the Pearl of Great Price should come to understand the pre-earth mission and status of Christ, and the relationship Jesus then had with His Father. This relationship provides an important principle by which man can understand how Christ Himself may be designated appropriately as the Father, and how He may function as the Father.

Christ's Pre-earth Life As Revealed In The Pearl Of Great price

Creative Functions of Christ

Christ existed with God as a conscious entity before He came to earth to acquire a physical body and to fulfill His atoning mission; and in that pre-earth state of existence, He was the great creator of numberless worlds. To Moses, God said of Christ's many creations:

For mine own purpose have I made these things. Here is wisdom and it remaineth in me

And by the word of my power have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth.

And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten. [^1]

A statement by Enoch is helpful in gaining an understanding of the vastness of God's creations. The ancient patriarch once exclaimed to the Lord: "Were it possible that man could number the particles of the earth, yea, millions of earths like this, it would not be a beginning to the number of thy creations; and thy curtains are stretched out still." [^2]

The testimony given in the Book of Moses corroborates and throws light upon the biblical declaration which states that, by the instrumentality of Christ, God "made the worlds." [^3] John also wrote of Jesus, "All things were made by him; and without him was not anything made that was made." [^4] Finally, all of the above testimonies concerning the creative activities of Christ are supported by the declaration of a voice out of heaven to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon, who later said: "And we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—that by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created." [^5]

As a result of these and other revelations concerning Christ, Latter-day Saints do not regard Him merely as the Babe of Bethlehem, or as the world's greatest teacher, or as but a man among men. Christ was and is a divine being who came to this earth according to a pre-ordained plan to manifest God to man on this earth, to sanctify the world from all sin, and to save all those whom the Father had put into His power and made by Him. [^6] To Latter-day Saints, Christ holds "the keys of the universe"; [^7] He is "the King of all the earth" and "the King of heaven." [^8]

The Divine Status of Christ

In the Book of Moses, Jesus is designated as the Only Begotten Son of the Man of Holiness; and for this reason, He is called the Son of Man (meaning the Son of the Man of Holiness), even Jesus Christ, a righteous Judge. [^9] Christ's title as the Son of Man, therefore, is derived from the fact that He is the Only Begotten of the Father, Elohim.

Abraham designated Christ in the pre-earth life as being one who was "like unto God." [^10] In intelligence and power, He stood next to the Father; and in occupying that position, the pre-earth Jesus had great authority in the presence of God. It may be that with the introduction of morality into the world Christ's position and authority were increased, for He then began to act as the Lord and God of man in morality; and by this appointment, latter-day revelation clarifies that Christ is Jehovah, [^11] the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob. [^12] He was the God with whom the ancient patriarchs and prophets were concerned, and the God whose declarations are recorded in the Pearl of Great Price.

As the God of this earth, Christ speaks and acts as both the Father and the Son. For example, God declared to Enoch: "Behold, I am God; Man of Holiness is my name; Man of Counsel is my name; and Endless and Eternal is my name, also." [^13] Yet this divine being later stated to Enoch that He would come to dwell on the earth "in the last days." [^14] Though Enoch was obviously speaking to Christ, it is evident (as will be discussed later) that Christ was manifested to the great patriarch as both the Father and the Son.

A study of the manifestations of God to Moses leads to a similar conclusion. As the God of the earth, Christ appeared to the ancient lawgiver as the Father. In speaking to Moses, the Lord said: "Mine Only Begotten is and shall be the Savior, . . . but there is no God besides me." [^15] Again God said, as He spoke to Moses of His many creations: "By the word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth." [^16] It is highly probable that the personage then speaking to Moses was Christ, since Jehovah led the Israelites out of Egyptian bondage; [^17] and God's appearance to Moses on this occasion was concerning his mission to Egypt. [^18] As Christ visited the Nephites after His resurrection, He said unto them: "Behold, I am he that gave the law [to Moses], and I am he who covenanted with my people Israel." [^19]

From a detailed study of Moses I, it becomes apparent that it was actually Christ who manifested Himself unto Moses, as recorded in the Pearl of Great Price. Moses quotes God as having said unto him: "Thou art after the similitude of mine Only Begotten." [^20] And in speaking of the manifestation of God at the time of the burning bush, Moses said: "He also gave me commandment when he called unto me out of the burning bush, saying: Call upon God in the name of mine Only Begotten, and worship me." [^21] Though Moses indicates that the Father spoke to him, it is evident that it was Christ as the Father who manifested Himself to Moses at the burning bush, for He declared on that occasion: "I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob." [^22] When Moses asked the Lord who he should say had sent him to lead the Israelites out of Egypt, the Lord explained: "I AM THAT I AM." Continuing, God stated:

Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you. . .

Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, the Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations. [^23]

To the Jews, Jesus declared that He was "I AM." [^24] And in modern times, Christ has stated: "Hearken and listen to the voice of him who is from all eternity to all eternity, the Great I AM, even Jesus Christ." [^25] It is therefore evident that the being who manifested Himself to Moses at the burning bush as God and as the Father was actually Jesus Christ. He is the same who spoke unto Moses as recorded in the Pearl of Great Price.

The appearance of the pre-earth Christ to Enoch as the Father and the Son is of special interest to students of the Pearl of Great Price. As Enoch was enveloped in glory, he spoke face to face with God, who declared:

Behold, I am God; Man of Holiness is my name; Man of Counsel is my name; and Endless and Eternal is my name, also.

Wherefore, I can stretch forth mine hands and hold all the creations which I have made; and mine eye can pierce them also. . . . [^26]

Continuing the account of this manifestation the record states:

And it came to pass that Enoch looked; and from Noah, he beheld all the families of the earth; and he cried unto the Lord, saying: When shall the day of the Lord come? When shall the blood of the Righteous be shed, that all they that mourn may be sanctified and have eternal life?

And the Lord said: It shall be in the meridian of time, in the days of wickedness and vengeance.

And behold, Enoch saw the day of the coming of the Son of Man, even in the flesh; and his soul rejoiced, saying: The Righteous is lifted up, and the Lamb is slain from the foundation of the world; and through faith I am in the bosom of the Father, and behold, Zion is with me. . . .

And Enoch beheld the Son of Man ascend up unto the Father; and he called unto the Lord, saying: Wilt thou not come again upon the earth? Forasmuch as thou art God, and I know thee, and thou hast sworn unto me, and commanded me that I should ask in the name of thine Only Begotten; thou hast made me, and given unto me a right to thy throne, and not of myself, but through thine own grace; wherefore, I ask thee if thou wilt not come again on the earth.

And the Lord said unto Enoch: As I live, even so will I come in the last days, in the days of wickedness and vengeance, to fulfil the oath which I have made unto you concerning the children of Noah. . . . [^27]

From the record of this manifestation, it would seem that God the Father, Elohim, was speaking to Enoch, for He declared that His name was Man of Holiness. Enoch also indicated that he was "in the bosom of the Father." Yet when the ancient patriarch saw in vision the Son of Man ascend up unto the Father after His crucifixion, he exclaimed to the personage who stood before him and who had declared Himself to be the Man of Holiness: "Wilt thou not come again upon the earth?" Enoch therefore understood that it was Christ to whom he was speaking. To the pre-earth Christ, Enoch then said: "Thou art God, and I know thee, and thou hast sworn unto me, and commanded me that I should ask in the name of thine Only Begotten." Obviously, Enoch was speaking to Christ as the Father, as he then requested of the personage before him: "I ask thee [i.e., the Father] if thou [i.e., Christ] wilt not come again on the earth." The divine being to whom Enoch spoke then replied, "As I live, even so will I come in the last days." [^28] Thus did Christ manifest Himself to Enoch as the Father and the Son.

Clarifications Concerning Christ As The Father And The Son

The Relationship in Glory of the Father and the Son

Though the Father and the Son are corporeal beings, and though they and the Holy Ghost are three separate and distinct personages, they possess a divine nature that enables them to enjoy a different relationship with each other than they would otherwise be able to attain. For example, as a corporeal being, the Father extends His divine intelligence in its fulness to dwell in Christ. By means of His divine nature, the Father is therefore in Christ, and in a similar way Christ is in the Father; and by means of this divine essence, the Father and the Son are one. In disclosing important truths concerning this subject, a revelation to Joseph Smith explained that by obedience to the Father's will, Christ developed until He received eventually the full glory and power of that supreme being. John bore testimony of Jesus, saying: "And I, John, bear record that he received a fulness of the glory of the Father; and he received all power, both in heaven and on earth, and the glory of the Father was with him, for he dwelt in him." [^29] In the Lectures on Faith, Joseph Smith wrote of the indwelling relationship of glory and power of the Father and the Son:

. . . the Father and the Son possessing the same wisdom, glory, power, and fulness—filling all in all; the Son being filled with the fulness of the mind, glory, and power, or, in other words, the Spirit, glory, and power, of the Father, possessing all knowledge and glory, and the same kingdom, sitting at the right hand of power, in the express image and likeness of the Father, mediator for man, being filled with the fulness of the mind of the Father; or, in other words, the Spirit of the Father. . . . [^30]

The terms "mind" and "Spirit" are made synonymous in the above statement and have reference to the Father's glory (or Spirit) that is extended to dwell in Christ in its fulness, giving Jesus the same divine intelligence (or mind) and power as the Father, thereby making these two separate and distinct corporeal beings one in their possession of the divine nature. Inherently, intelligence cleaves to intelligence, truth embraces truth, and light has a natural affinity with light. [^31] By possessing a fulness of the glory of the Father (i.e., a fulness of Elohim's divine intelligence, or, in other words, a fulness of His divine truth and light), Jesus is made one with the Father. In this way, the Father is in Christ and is manifested through Christ, and Christ becomes the Father. On the other hand, truth and intelligence are by nature independent in their respective spheres, [^32] so that by possessing a fulness of the glory of the Father, Christ became fully mature and independent in the divine sphere of eternal life.

Christ's union with the Father is ideal in individualism. It is founded in truth, not in domination. In this divine indwelling union, Christ acquired the full attributes and powers of the Father, Elohim, by which He (Christ) became a fully independent being with all power in heaven and on earth. In turn, the Father, Elohim, obtained in Christ a mature and divine associate who was capable of utilizing His (the Father's) infinite intelligence, or glory, while acting in truth in His (the Father's) name and expressing His (the Father's) will in eternity. But it should be stressed that in this eternal union, Christ became more than a personification of the Father; He became an extension of the Father—a living manifestation of the Father to others. The divine relationship of the Father and the Son cannot be comprehended unless one first understands something about the glory of God. As has been indicated in chapter two of this work, here is the key of understanding what man should worship and how he should worship.

Christ as the Son of God

To see the relationship that Christ has with the Father and the way by which Jesus becomes the Father, it is necessary to understand the three stages of life in the over-all program of life and salvation that begins in the pre-earth past and extends in the future to that point where the faithful are crowned in the resurrection with celestial glory and power. These three stages of life offer the central primal intelligence of man different channels of expression. They are: (1) spirit life, the life one has an organized spirit personage; (2) physical life, the life one has when his organized spirit is tabernacled in a body of flesh and bones; and (3) eternal life, the life one possesses as a resurrected being endowed with celestial glory and power. However only the righteous will attain eternal life.

Eternal life does not mean merely to live forever; the term that connotes a continued existence without end is "immorality." The Lord has indicated that in the resurrection man may "be raised in immorality unto eternal life." [^33] Eternal life is something in addition to immortality. It is the kind of life a resurrected being has who possesses the divine attributes and powers of celestial glory within himself as a part of his organization in the resurrection. He may then see as God sees, comprehend as God comprehends, and exercise power throughout universal space on the same principle that God has power in all things and over all things. Thus the scriptures define eternal life as being "the glory of the celestial kingdom." [^34] For this reason, the Lord, in speaking to Adam declared eternal life to be "immortal glory" as it is given in the resurrection to those who are born into the kingdom of heaven, [^35] and continue faithful to the end of this probationary period.

In each of the three stages of life—spirit, physical, and eternal—Christ is the Son of God; and, as such He is designated scripturally. The Firstborn of the Father in His pre-earth spirit life, [^36] Jesus was also the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh. In addition, John bore record that Christ is the Son of God in the glorified relationship of eternal life. Of Jesus he said: "And he received not of the fulness [of His Father's glory] at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness; and thus he was called the Son of God, because he received not of the fulness at the first." [^37] Thus Christ is said to be the Son because He received not the fulness of the Father's glory at first, or, in other words, because He was subordinate to the Father in acquiring the endowments of eternal life by which He possessed the divine nature.

Christ the God and Father of Man

In the ultimate sense, all divine power centers in the Man of Holiness, the Father, Elohim. To Moses the Lord declared: "My Only Begotten is and shall be the Savior, for he is full of grace and truth; but there is no God beside me." [^38] Christ as the Son is neither God nor Father. But Christ as the manifestation of the divine intelligence and power of the Man of Holiness, Elohim, is in some respects both God and Father. As the Only Begotten Son of the Father, Christ receives from Him the divine endowments of truth and life and becomes their source for man. By this relationship, He is the God and Father of man.

As the Firstborn of the Father's spirit children in the preearth life, Christ became the birthright son in the Father's spirit family. As the lawful heir of the Father, He inherited all that the Father possessed, including the glory and power of that divine being, to the degree that He was capable (by the nature of His organized person and by the extent of His ability) of acquiring them. Others were permitted, by faithfulness to the will of God, to become joint heirs with Christ and thereby inherit through Him all that the Father possessed. This relationship in the divine patriarchal order made Christ the center of life, light, truth, and power for the rest of the Father's spirit children. Being the center of the attributes and powers of eternal life, Christ was appointed to be the God and Father of all others in the same general sense that Elohim is His (Christ's) Father in giving Him eternal life. "I am the Father," Jesus therefore declared to Moroni; "I am the light, and the life, and the truth of the world." [^39]

The following chart may help to illustrate the three stages in the over-all plan of life and the principle of fatherhood that is related to each of these stages of life:

Father of Father of Father of

Spirit Life Physical Life Eternal Life

CHRIST: Elohim Elohim Elohim

MAN: Elohim man Christ

All people upon the earth were brothers and sisters in the pre-earth spirit life. But in acquiring physical bodies they are first children and then parents. Consequently, brothers and sisters in spirit life become, first, sons and/or daughters and then fathers and/or mothers in physical life. In somewhat the same way, Jesus, as man's elder brother in spirit life, was appointed to be man's God and his Father in giving him the divine endowments that lead ultimately to eternal life, or glory.

The problem of understanding how Christ is the Father is founded in some respect in semantics—in determining the meaning and usage of words. A given word may have several variations in meaning, and the reader must determine from the context of the word the meaning intended by the writer. The word "father," for example, may be applied to a male human parent. In the Hebrew culture, it was applied to any male ancestor. The word "father" also denotes a patriarch, an aged or reverend man, or an honored official in society such as a member of the ancient Roman Senate. Essentially, it means to beget or originate, and hence to found or to produce creatively. Thus it may be applied to one who founds an institution or creates a literary or musical work.

As a method of clarifying the variations of meaning given to the word "Father" in this chapter, it may be proper to borrow the form used to define terms in Joseph Smith's "Egyptian Alphabet and Grammar." There each term is given several degrees of meaning, and each degree is defined and illustrated for the reader. In like manner, the following degrees of meaning may be suggested for the term "Father":

Father, 1st degree—The Man of Holiness, Elohim, He who is the initial Head of life, in all its aspects and relationships, for those beings who belong to the specie of man; He who is the initial cause of all organized life within His vast domain; and He who is the primary source of truth and power for all things within the universe.

Father, 2nd degree—Jesus Christ, who, as the heir of the Man of Holiness, inherits all things within His kingdom and is appointed by the Father, Elohim, to be the light and the life of the world, and is therefore the Father of heaven and earth and all things therein. As the Father, Christ manifests the divine intelligence, mind, or life of God to others in all its legitimate expressions. Consequently, His role as the Father is expressed in more than one way and in more than one function.

Father, 3rd degree—A being through whom another receives endowments and attributes of life, whether it be the endowments and attributes of spirit life, physical life, or eternal life. Thus Adam is the father of all men in the physical endowments and attributes of life; and men, as sons of Adam, are in turn fathers of their posterity in the flesh. The same principle applies to all who give spirit life and/or eternal life to others.

Expressions of the Fatherhood of Christ

Christ's Fatherhood is expressed in three distinct ways. First, He is the Father by divine investiture of authority, in that the divine indwelling intelligence and power within Him permits Christ to speak and to act as the Father. President Joseph Fielding Smith has said:

All revelation since the fall has come through Jesus Christ, who is the Jehovah of the Old Testament. In all of the scriptures, where God is mentioned and where he has appeared, it was Jehovah who talked with Abraham, with Noah, Enoch, Moses and all the Prophets. He is the God of Israel, the Holy One of Israel; the one who led that nation out of Egyptian bondage and who gave and fulfilled the Law of Moses. The Father has never dealt with man directly and personally since the fall, and he has never appeared except to introduce and bear record of the Son. Thus the Inspired Revision records that no man hath seen God at any time, except he hath borne record of the Son (John 1:19).

In giving revelations, our Savior speaks at times for himself; at other times for the Father, and in the Father's name, as though he were the Father, and yet it is Jesus Christ, our Redeemer who gives the message. So, we see, in Doctrine and Covenants 29:1, that he introduces himself as "Jesus Christ, your Redeemer," but in the closing part of the revelation he speaks for the Father, and in the Father's name as though he were the Father, and yet it is still Jesus who is speaking, for the Father has put his name on him for that purpose. [^40]

Second, Christ is the Father of creative and quickening life within all things; and in this sense He is "the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth, and all things which in them are." [^41] Man, for example, has three factors of life within him: the life of the organized spirit, the life of the physical body, and the indwelling, quickening life he receives from Christ by which he lives and moves and has a being. [^42] For each of these there is a father; and for the last, Christ is the Father.

Third, Christ is the Father of the regenerating and sanctifying life that leads ultimately, by means of the Gospel, to eternal life or glory. "Behold, I am Jesus Christ. I am the Father and the Son," the Lord declared to the brother of Jared. "In me shall all mankind have light, and that eternally, even they who shall believe on my name; and they shall become my sons and my daughters." [^43]

Doctrine of the Father and the Son Explained by the First Presidency

In an official statement, the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints explained the doctrine of the Father and the Son, and how Christ is designated appropriately as the Father. Because of the importance of this statement, it is given below in full:

The scriptures plainly and repeatedly affirm that God is the Creator of the earth and the heavens and all things that in them are. In the sense so expressed, the Creator is an Organizer. God created the earth as an organized sphere; but He certainly did not create, in the sense of bringing into primal existence, the ultimate elements of the materials of which the earth consists, for "the elements are eternal" (D&C 93:33).

So also life is eternal, and not created; but life, or the vital force, may be infused into organized matter, though the details of the process have not been revealed unto man. For illustrative instances see Genesis 2:7; Moses 3:7; and Abraham 5:7. Each of these scriptures states that God breathed into the body of man the breath of life. See further Moses 3:19, for the statement that God breathed the breath of life into the bodies of the beasts and birds. God showed unto Abraham "the intelligences that were organized before the world was"; and by "intelligences" we are to understand personal "spirits" (Abraham 3:22, 23); nevertheless, we are expressly told that "Intelligence" that is, "the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be" (D&C 93:29).

The term "Father" as applied to Deity occurs in sacred writ with plainly different meanings. Each of the four significations specified in the following treatment should be carefully segregated.

Jesus Christ applies to Himself both titles, "Son" and "Father." Indeed, He specifically said to the brother of Jared: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ. I am the Father and the Son" (Ether 3:14). Jesus Christ is the Son of Elohim both as spiritual and bodily offspring; that is to say, Elohim is literally the Father of the spirit of Jesus Christ and also of the body in which Jesus Christ performed His mission in the flesh, and which body died on the cross and was afterward taken up by the process of resurrection, and is now the immortalized tabernacle of the eternal spirit of our Lord and Savior. No extended explanation of the title "Son of God" as applied to Jesus Christ appears necessary.

God is not the Father of the earth as one of the worlds in space, nor of the heavenly bodies in whole or in part, nor of the inanimate objects and the plants and the animals upon the earth, in the literal sense in which He is the Father of the spirits of mankind. Therefore, scriptures that refer to God in any way as the Father of the heavens and earth are to be understood as signifying that God is the Maker, the Organizer, the Creator of the heavens and the earth.

With this meaning, as the context shows in every case, Jehovah, who is Jesus Christ the Son of Elohim, is called "the Father," and even "the very eternal Father of heaven and of earth" (see passages before cited, and also Mosiah 16:15). With analogous meaning Jesus Christ is called "The Everlasting Father" (Isaiah 9:6; compare 2 Nephi 19:6). The descriptive titles "Everlasting" and "Eternal" in the foregoing texts are synonymous.

That Jesus Christ, whom we also know as Jehovah, was the executive of the Father, Elohim, in the work of creation is set forth in the book Jesus the Christ, chapter 4. Jesus Christ, being the Creator, is consistently called the Father of heaven and earth in the sense explained above; and since His creations are of eternal quality He is very properly called the Eternal Father of heaven and earth.

In the fervent prayer offered just prior to His entrance into Gethsemane, Jesus Christ supplicated His Father in behalf of those whom the Father had given unto Him, specifically the apostles, and, more generally, all who would accept and abide in the Gospel through the ministry of the apostles. Read in our Lord's own words the solemn affirmation that those for whom He particularly prayed were His own, and that His Father had given them unto Him: "I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of the world: thine they were, and thou gavest them me; and they have kept thy word. Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou hast given me are of thee. For I have given unto them the words which thou gavest me; and they have received them, and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed that thou didst send me. I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast given me; for they are thine. And all mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified in them. And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one as we are. While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those that thou gavest me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition; that the scripture might be fulfilled" (John 17:6-12).

And further: "Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word; That they all may be one as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me. And the glory which thou gavest me I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are one: I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one; and that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them, as thou hast loved me. Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world" (John 17:20-24).

To His faithful servants in the present dispensation of the Lord has said: "Fear not, little children, for you are mine, and I have overcome the world, and you are of them that my Father hath given me" (D&C 50:41).

Salvation is attainable only through compliance with the laws and ordinances of the Gospel; and all who are thus saved become sons and daughters unto God in a distinctive sense. In a revelation given through Joseph the Prophet to Emma Smith the Lord Jesus addressed the woman as "My daughter," and said: "for verily I say unto you, all those who receive my gospel are sons and daughters in my kingdom" (D&C 25:1). In many instances the Lord has addressed men as His sons (e.g. D&C 9:1; 34:3; 121:7).

That by obedience to the Gospel men may become sons of God, both as sons of Jesus Christ, and, through Him, as sons of His Father, is set forth in many revelations given in the current dispensation. Thus we read in an utterance of the Lord Jesus Christ to Hyrum Smith in 1829: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God. I am the life and the light of the world. I am the same who came unto mine own and mine own received me not; But verily, verily, I say unto you, that as many as receive me, to them will I give power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on my name. Amen" (D&C 11:28-30). To Orson Pratt the Lord spoke through Joseph the Seer, in 1830: "My son Orson, hearken and hear and behold what I, the Lord God, shall say unto you, even Jesus Christ your Redeemer; The light and the life of the world; a light which shineth in darkness and the darkness comprehendeth it not; Who so loved the world that he gave his own life; that as many as would believe might become the sons of God. Wherefore you are my son" (D&C 34:1-3). In 1830 the Lord thus addressed Joseph Smith and Sidney Ridgon: "Listen to the voice of the Lord your God, even Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, whose course is one eternal round, the same today as yesterday, and forever. I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who was crucified for the sins of the world, even as many as will believe on my name, that they may become the sons of God, even one in me as I am in the Father, as the Father is one in me, that we may be one" (D&C 35:1-2). Consider also the following given in 1831: "Hearken and listen to the voice of him who is from all eternity to all eternity, the Great I Am, even Jesus Christ, The light and the life of the world; a light which shineth in darkness and the darkness comprehendeth it not: The same which came in the meridian of time unto mine own, and mine own received me not; But to as many as received me, gave I power to become my sons, and even so will I give unto as many as will receive me, power to become my sons" (D&C 39:1-4). In a revelation given through Joseph Smith in March, 1831 we read: "For verily I say unto you that I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the light and the life of the world—a light that shineth in darkness and the darkness comprehendeth it not. I came unto mine own, and mine own received me not; but unto as many as received me, gave I power to do many miracles, and to become the sons of God, and even unto them that believed on my name gave I power to obtain eternal life" (D&C 45:7-8).

A forceful exposition of this relationship between Jesus Christ as the Father and those who comply with the requirements of the Gospel as His children was given by Abinadi, centuries before our Lord's birth in the flesh: "And now I say unto you, who shall declare his generation? Behold, I say unto you, that when his soul has been made an offering for sin, he shall see his seed. And now what say ye? And who shall be his seed? Behold I say unto you, that whosoever has heard the words of the prophets, yea, all the holy prophets who have prophesied concerning the coming of the Lord; I say unto you, that all those who have hearkened unto their words, and believed that the Lord would redeem his people, and have looked forward to that day for a remission of their sins; I say unto you, that these are his seed, or they are the heirs of the kingdom of God: For these are they whose sins he has borne; these are they for whom he has died, to redeem them from their transgressions. And now, are they not his seed? Yea, and are not the prophets, every one that has opened his mouth to prophesy, that has not fallen into transgression; I mean all the holy prophets ever since the world began? I say unto you that they are his seed" (Mosiah 15:10-13).

In tragic contrast with the blessed state of those who become children of God through obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ is that of the unregenerate, who are specifically called the children of the devil. Note the words of Christ, while in the flesh, to certain wicked Jews who boasted of their Abrahamic lineage: "If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham. * * * Ye do the deeds of your father. * * * If God were your Father, ye would love me. * * * Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do" (John 8:39, 41, 42, 44). Thus Satan is designated as the father of the wicked, though we cannot assume any personal relationship of parent and children as existing between him and them. A combined illustration showing that the righteous are the children of God and the wicked the children of the devil appears in the parable of the Tares: "The good seed are the children of the kingdom; but the tares are the children of the wicked one" (Matt. 13:38).

Men may become children of Jesus Christ by being born anew—born of God, as the inspired word states: "He that committeth sin is of the devil; for the devil sinneth from the beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil. Whosoever is born of God doth not continue in sin; for the Spirit of God remaineth in him: and he cannot continue in sin, because he is born of God. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil: whosoever doeth not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loveth not his brother" [I.V., 1 John 3:8-10, used by the present writer.]

Those who have been born unto God through obedience to the Gospel may by valiant devotion to righteousness obtain exaltation and even reach the status of godhood. Of such we read: "Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God" (D&C 76:58; compare 132:20, and contrast paragraph 17 in same section; see also paragraph 37). Yet, though they be gods they are still subject to Jesus Christ as their Father in this exalted relationship; and so we read in the paragraph following the above quotation: "and they are Christ's, and Christ is God's" (76:59).

By the new birth—that of water and the Spirit—mankind may become children of Jesus Christ, being through the means by Him provided "begotten sons and daughters unto God" (D&C 76:24). This solemn truth is further emphasized in the words of the Lord Jesus Christ given through Joseph Smith in 1833: "And now, verily I say unto you, I was in the beginning with the Father, and am the Firstborn; And all those who are begotten through me are partakers of the glory of the same, and are the church of the Firstborn" (D&C 93:21, 22). For such figurative use of the term "begotten" in application to those who are born unto God see Paul's explanation: "for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the gospel" (1 Cor. 4:15). An analogous instance of sonship attained by righteous service is found in the revelation relating to the order and functions of priesthood given in 1832: "For whoso is faithful unto the obtaining these two priesthoods of which I have spoken, and the magnifying their calling, are sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies: They become the sons of Moses and of Aaron and the seed of Abraham, and the church and kingdom, and the elect of God" (D&C 84:33, 34).

If it be proper to speak of those who accept and abide in the Gospel as Christ's sons and daughters—and upon this matter the scriptures are explicit and cannot be gainsaid nor denied—it is consistently proper to speak of Jesus Christ as the Father of the righteous, they having become His children and He having been made their Father through the second birth—the baptismal regeneration.

We read, by way of analogy, that God placed His name upon or in the Angel who was assigned to special ministry unto the people of Israel during the exodus. Of that Angel the Lord said: "Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not; for he will not pardon your transgressions: for my name is in him" (Exodus 23:21).

The ancient apostle, John, was visited by an angel who ministered and spoke in the name of Jesus Christ. As we read: "The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to shew unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass; and he sent and signified it by his angel unto his servant John" (Revelation 1:1). John was about to worship the angelic being who spoke in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, but was forbidden: "And I John saw these things, and heard them. And when I had heard and seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel which showed me these things. Then saith he unto me, See thou do it not: for I am thy fellowservant, and of thy brethren the prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this book: worship God" (Rev. 22:8, 9). And then the angel continued to speak as though he were the Lord Himself: "And, behold, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work shall be. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last" (verses 12, 13). The resurrected Lord, Jesus Christ, who had been exalted to the right hand of God His Father, had placed His name upon the angel sent to John, and the angel spoke in the first person, saying "I come quickly," "I am Alpha and Omega," though he meant that Jesus Christ would come, and that Jesus Christ was Alpha and Omega.

None of these considerations, however, can change in the least degree the solemn fact of the literal relationship of Father and Son between Elohim and Jesus Christ. Among the spirit children of Elohim the firstborn was and is Jehovah or Jesus Christ to whom all others are juniors. Following are affirmative scriptures bearing upon this great truth. Paul, writing to the Colossians, says of Jesus Christ: "Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature: For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers; all things were created by him, and for him: And he is before all things, and by him all things consist. And he is the head of the body, the Church: who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things he might have the preeminence. For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell" (Colossians 1:15-19). From this scripture we learn that Jesus Christ was "the firstborn of every creature" and it is evident that the seniority here expressed must be with respect to antemortal existence, for Christ was not the senior of all mortals in the flesh. He is further designated as "the firstborn from the dead," this having reference to Him as the first to be resurrected from the dead, or as elsewhere written "the firstfruits of them that slept" (1 Corinthians 15:20, see also verse 23); and "the first begotten of the dead" (Revelation 1:5; compare Acts 26:23). The writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews affirms the status of Jesus Christ as the firstborn of the spirit children of His Father, and extols the preeminence of the Christ when tabernacled in flesh: "And again, when he bringeth in the firstbegotten into the world, he saith, And let all the angels of God worship him" (Hebrews 1:6; read the preceding verses). That the spirits who were juniors to Christ were predestined to be born in the image of their Elder Brother is thus attested by Paul: "And we know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose. For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren" (Romans 8:28, 29). John the Revelator was commanded to write to the head of the Laodicean church, as the words of the Lord Jesus Christ: "These things saith the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation of God" (Revelation 3:14). In the course of a revelation given through Joseph Smith in May, 1833, the Lord Jesus Christ said as before cited: "And now, verily I say unto you, I was in the beginning with the Father, and am the Firstborn" (D&C 93:21). A later verse makes plain the fact that human beings generally were similarly existent in spirit state prior to their embodiment in the flesh: "Ye were also in the beginning with the Father; that which is Spirit, even the Spirit of truth" (verse 23).

There is no impropriety, therefore, in speaking of Jesus Christ as the Elder Brother of the rest of human kind. That He is by spiritual birth Brother to the rest of us is indicated in Hebrews: "Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people" (Hebrews 2:17). Let it not be forgotten, however, that He is essentially greater than any and all others, by reason (1) of His seniority as the oldest or firstborn; (2) of His unique status in the flesh as the offspring of a mortal mother and of an immortal, or resurrected and glorified Father; (3) of His selection and foreordination as the one and only Redeemer and Savior of the race; and (4) of His transcendent sinlessness.

Jesus Christ is not the Father of the spirits who have taken or yet shall take bodies upon this earth, for He is one of them. He is The Son, as they are sons or daughters of Elohim. So far as the stages of eternal progression and attainment have been made known through divine revelation, we are to understand that only resurrected and glorified beings can become parents of spirit offspring. Only such exalted souls have reached maturity in the appointed course of eternal life; and the spirits born to them in the eternal worlds will pass in due sequence through the several stages or estates by which the glorified parents have attained exaltation. [^44]

Christ and the Holy Ghost

Since Christ is the light of the world, all things pertaining to life center in Him and proceed from Him to others of the Father's children. This includes the power manifested to man through the Holy Ghost. To this fact Jesus bore record, declaring of the third personage in the Godhead: "He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you. All things that the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall shew it unto you." [^45] The Spirit and power manifest through the Holy Ghost therefore is an expression of the glory and power of Jesus Christ. In support of this view, the Lord said in a revelation to Edward Partridge: "I will lay my hand upon you by the hand of my servant Sidney Rigdon, and you shall receive my Spirit, the Holy Ghost, even the Comforter." [^46] Again, Jesus informed the Nephites that the Father would pour out "the Holy Ghost through me upon the Gentiles." [^47]

As the minister of Christ, the Holy Ghost bears record of Him as the Father and the Son. When an angel revealed the knowledge of Christ to Adam,

. . . the Holy Ghost fell upon Adam, which beareth record of the Father and the Son, saying: I am the Only Begotten of the Father from the beginning, henceforth and forever, that as thou hast fallen thou mayest be redeemed, and all mankind, even as many as will. [^48]

In bearing record of the Father and the Son, the Holy Ghost declared, "I am the Only Begotten." [^49] Thus the Only Begotten is the Father and the Son, or vice versa.

Supporting Testimonies Of Christ As God And Father

The Biblical Concept of One God

The Bible declares repeatedly that there is but one God. To Israel, Moses proclaimed: "Unto thee it was shewed, that thou mightest know that the Lord he is God; there is none else besides him." [^50] Hannah, the mother of Samuel, prayed: "There is none holy as the Lord: for there is none beside thee: neither is there any rock like our God." [^51] Isaiah wrote: "I am the Lord, and there is none else, there is no God besides me." [^52] Again, he recorded: "I am God, and there is none else." [^53] Jesus quoted the declaration of Moses: "Hear, O Israel; The Lord our God is one Lord"; and having cited this scripture, Christ commended one of the scribes for speaking discreetly when the latter commented, "Well, Master, thou hast said the truth: for there is one God and there is none other but he." [^54] The Apostle James wrote to the saints of his day: "Thou believest there is one God; thou doest well." [^55] Finally, Paul declared: "There is none other God but one." [^56]

According to the apostle Paul, the one God to whom biblical prophets referred is the Father—the divine being whom Latter-day Saints designate as Elohim. Paul wrote: "To us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him." [^57] Again, he declared: "There is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus." [^58]

Though the Bible declares that there is but one God, even the Father, Elohim, the apostle Thomas recognized the risen Christ and addressed Him with the declaration, "My Lord and my God." [^59] John declared that Christ, as the Word, was in the beginning with God, and that "the Word was God." [^60] That the Word was Christ is evidenced by John's statement that "the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us." [^61] The apostle Paul also wrote that Christ, "being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God." [^62] Thus Christ was also designated as God, and as equal in some respects with the Father.

Isaiah expressed a similar view when he spoke prophetically of the birth of Christ and said: "For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, . . . and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, The Mighty God, The Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace." [^63] Among the appellations by which Christ was to be known were those of "The Mighty God" and "The Everlasting Father." Isaiah also declared of the birth of Christ, "Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel." [^64] According to Matthew, Immanuel means "God with us." [^65] At the birth of Jesus, God was with men, since He was the Word made flesh, who, as God, dwelt on earth. [^66] He came to earth as the Father and the Son.

When Jesus came as the Father and the Son to perform His earthly ministry, His disciples evidently were not fully aware of His dual nature and of His dual mission "to do the will, both of the Father and of the Son." [^67] Philip therefore inquired, "Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us." Jesus then said unto him,

Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father; and how sayest thou then, Shew us the Father?

Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? the words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself: but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works.

Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me. . . . [^68]

Notice that Jesus did not say to Philip, "He that hath seen me hath seen a prototype of the Father." Instead, He stated, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father." [^69] In other words, Jesus was manifested as the Father, or as a manifestation of the Father; He was not revealed to man only as the Son. In making this point clear to Philip, Jesus explained that He was the Father because the divine glory, or intelligence, of the Father, Elohim, dwelt in Him and was manifested through Him. Because of the indwelling relationship He had with the Man of Holiness, Jesus was the Father, for it was the divine intelligence and power of the Father dwelling in Him that did the works which were manifest in the world through Christ. It was with this view that Jesus said, as recorded in Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of the Bible: "All things are delivered to me of my Father; and no man knoweth that the Son is the Father, and the Father is the Son, but him to whom the Son will reveal it." [^70]

Book of Mormon Testimony of Christ as God and Father

Other latter-day scriptures support and add clarity to the above doctrines found in the Pearl of Great Price. The ancient prophets on the Western hemisphere repeatedly testified of Christ as "the Son of God." [^71] Alma taught that God called upon men "in the name of his Son," saying: "If you will repent, and harden not your hearts, then will I have mercy upon you, through mine Only Begotten Son." [^72] When the resurrected Christ appeared to the Nephites, the voice of the Father was heard bearing record of Him, saying: "Behold my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name." [^73] Having descended in their midst, Jesus spoke of His Father [^74] and prayed to His Father, [^75] while admonishing the Nephites to do the same. [^76] Moroni observed that though the law of Moses was given by faith, "in the gift of his Son hath God prepared a more excellent way." [^77] For this reason, he admonished: "Wherefore my beloved brethren, pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love [which is called charity], which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ." [^78] It is evident that the prophets upon the Western hemisphere had a true and meaningful concept of Christ as the Son of God.

But the concept of Christ as the Son of God is not the only one concerning Him expressed in the Book of Mormon. That volume was written for the declared purpose of proving to both "Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God." [^79] The central concept of Deity expressed in the Nephite scripture is that of Jesus as God. For example, Nephi states that the Son was "the Holy One of Israel." [^80] His brother, Jacob, said of Christ who was to come into the world: "O the greatness of the mercy of our God, the Holy One of Israel." [^81] There is no inconsistency in these two declarations, for Christ is the Father and the Son, and the God of the earth.

In the Book of Mormon, Christ is declared repeatedly to be both God and Father. The brother of Jared recognized the pre-earth Christ to be God; [^82] and to that ancient prophet, Jesus declared: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ. I am the Father and the Son." [^83] As the God of this earth, Christ came down among men as the Father and the Son. Moroni therefore declared: "By Adam came the fall of man. And because of the fall of man came Jesus Christ, even the Father and the Son." [^84] In citing the teachings of Abinadi, Limhi said: "He said unto them that Christ was the God, the Father of all things, and he said that he should take upon him the image of man." [^85] Amulek also declared of Jesus: "He is the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth, and all things which in them are; he is the beginning and the end, the first and the last; and he shall come into the world to redeem his people." [^86] Of Christ as the God of Israel, Nephi wrote:

And the God of our Fathers, who were led out of Egypt, out of bondage, and also were preserved in the wilderness by him, yea, the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, yieldeth himself, according to the words of the angel, as a man, into the hands of wicked men, to be lifted up, according to the words of Zenock, and to be crucified, according to the words of Neum, and to be buried in a sepulchre, according to the words of Zenos. . . . [^87]

Christ is explicitly said to be the God of Israel—the God who appeared to Moses and directed the release of the Israelites from Egyptian bondage, and the God who appeared and spoke unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. In this inspired declaration, is found added confirmation of the views set forth in this chapter.

Not only does the Book of Mormon contain teachings about Christ that are consistent with those found in the Pearl of Great Price, but it also explains how Christ is both God and Father to men on earth. In speaking of Christ, Abinadi declared: "I would that ye should understand that God himself shall come down among the children of men, and shall redeem his people." He then explained: "And because he dwelleth in flesh he shall be called the Son of God." [^88] Here is the most popular reason why Christ is designated as the Son of God. But having stated why He would be called the Son of God, Abinadi observed that Jesus would be both "the Father and the Son." He would be "the Father, because he was conceived by the power of God." [^89] That is, in His conception in the flesh, there would be implanted within Christ the divine nature of His Father, that while He was on earth He might be in the Father and the Father in Him, in the divine indwelling relationship of eternal life, [^90] and that He might have life within Himself on the same principle as the Father, Elohim, has life within Himself. [^91] Thus Abinadi observed that Christ would become on earth "the Father and Son." Continuing, the Nephite prophet declared: "And they [i.e., the Spirit or power of the Father in Christ as the Son] are one God, yea, the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth." [^92] Again it may be seen that an understanding of the divine nature of God is the key by which man may begin to comprehend God.

Latter-day Testimony of Christ as God and Father

In modern times, Christ has revealed Himself to be both the Son of God and the God of this earth. "Behold, I am God; give heed unto my word," He admonished. In the same revelation, He declared: "I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God." [^93] In another revelation, He declared: "Listen to the voice of the Lord your God, even Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. . . . I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who was crucified for the sins of the world." [^94] Still again the Redeemer stated: "Thus saith the Lord God, the Mighty One of Israel, . . . I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God." [^95] From these and many other revelations given to Joseph Smith [^96] it is evident that, though Jesus is the Son of God, He is our Lord and our God, and He speaks and acts as such in His dealings with man.

Modern revelation also indicates that Christ is the Father and the Son, and that He speaks in both capacities unto man. A revelation to Joseph Smith contains the following declaration: "Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ, your Redeemer, the Great I AM, whose arm of mercy hath atoned for your sins." [^97] There is no question that it is Christ who is speaking by means of the Holy Ghost to the Prophet and his associates. Further on, this revelation states: "I, the Lord God, gave unto Adam and unto his seed, that they should not die as to the temporal death, until I, the Lord God, should send forth angels to declare unto them repentance and redemption, through faith on the name of mine Only Begotten Son." [^98] Again, the revelation declares: "Little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world through mine Only Begotten. [^99] Christ is speaking as the Father in the Father's name.

In a later revelation, Christ again speaks as the Father and in the Father's name. Toward the beginning of this revelation He as the Father declares: "I am God, and have sent mine Only Begotten Son into the world for the redemption of the world, and have decreed that he that receiveth him shall be saved, and he that receiveth him not shall be damned." [^100] But at the conclusion of the revelation the Lord declares: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ, and I come quickly." [^101]

A revelation in January, 1841, gives another example of Christ's ministry both as the Father and the Son. In the beginning, He speaks in a personal way of His Second Coming "to appoint the portion of the oppressor among hypocrites," declaring: "For the day of my visitation cometh speedily, in an hour when ye think not of; and where shall be the safety of my people, and refuge for those who shall be left of them?" [^102] But in this revelation Christ proclaims Himself to be "the Lord God." [^103] And toward the end of it He makes reference to "the Priesthood which is after the order of Melchizedek, which is after the order of mine Only Begotten Son." [^104] Thus again, Christ, who is the Son of God, manifests Himself as Son, God, and Father unto man.

Latter-day revelation gives a classic scriptural explanation of why Christ is the Father. In a great revelation on the divine nature of God, Jesus promises that every soul who forsakes his sins and comes unto Him and keeps His commandments

. . . shall see my face and know that I am; and that I am the true light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world;

And that I am in the Father, and the Father in me, and the Father and I are one [in the sense that Christ is the Father]—

[I am] the Father because he [Elohim] gave me of his fulness, and the Son because I was in the world and made flesh my tabernacle, and dwelt among the sons of men.

I was in the world and received [glory, which is divine intelligence and power] of my Father, and the works of him were plainly manifest. [^105]

The central idea suggested in the above revelation is that Christ is the Father because the Man of Holiness gave Jesus of His fulness. Thus, as Christ entered the world, He received divine powers of intelligence and life from His Father. Thereby the Father dwelt in Christ, making Him the Father; and as the Father, Jesus manifested the works of the Man of Holiness on earth. This explanation is in full accord with Christ's declaration to Philip: "Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? the words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself: but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works." [^106]

Conclusion

The Pearl of Great Price reveals Christ to man as the great creator, who holds the keys of power over the universe. He is the Only Begotten Son of the Man of Holiness, by whom the Father has created worlds without number. Christ's true relationship with the Father, Elohim, can be seen and appreciated only by understanding the divine nature of God, by which the Father is in Christ and Christ is in the Father.

All revelations of truth and saving power that have been given to man since the fall of Adam have come from the Father, Elohim, through Jesus Christ. Whenever God has spoken personally and directly to man and revealed the truths and powers of eternity, it has been Jesus Christ who has made the disclosures, speaking either as the Father or the Son or both as the Father and the Son. Whenever the Man of Holiness has appeared in His own right as the Father, He has done so to bear record of Christ. Even when both beings appeared simultaneously to Joseph Smith in the spring of 1820, that divine order was followed. Christ is the God of this earth. Into His hands all things have been committed. Only by understanding these great principles can man begin to learn of God and understand the revelations He has given. In giving man added insights into the nature of God and His relationship to man, the Pearl of Great Price is consistent with the other Standard Works of the Church. They each reveal the same concept of Deity.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Abraham 3:1.
[^2] Ibid., 3:22-23.
[^3] Ibid.
[^4] Ibid., 3:18.
[^5] Ibid., 3:15-19.
[^6] Ibid., 3:16. As Joseph Smith explained this subject while using the revelation of God to Abraham as a basis of his statement, he stated: "Intelligences exist one above another, so that there is no end to them."—DHC, VI, p. 476. This subject will be discussed in detail in the last chapter of this volume.
[^7] Abraham 3:16.
[^8] Alma 5:50.
[^9] Moses 1:32-33; 6:57. See also Moses 7:35.
[^10] Abraham 3:24.
[^11] See D&C 110:1-4; 3 Nephi 15:4-5.
[^12] Ibid., 3:24.
[^13] Ibid. It should be remembered, however, that by possessing the divine nature of His Father, Elohim, Christ is God.
[^14] Ibid.
[^15] Ibid., 4:1.
[^16] DHC, VI, pp. 477, 478.
[^17] Moses 1:32-34. When this statement is read in context and viewed in relation to its antecedent statements, it has reference to the many worlds that God has created in eternity. The first man on each of these worlds is called Adam. It is not until the next verse in the text that the Lord declares that He will limit His explanation of His creative activities to this earth; and not until verse 40 in the text does the Lord actually begin to limit His statements to this earth.
[^18] Ibid., 1:35.
[^19] Ibid., 1:38-39.
[^20] Ibid., 3:5-7.
[^21] This name does not appear in the Pearl of Great Price. See D&C 76:26.
[^22] Moses 4:1-4.
[^23] Ibid., 4:4.
[^24] Ibid., 4:1.
[^25] Ibid.
[^26] D&C 29:30.
[^27] See John 17:17.
[^28] Moses 1:32; D&C 29:30.
[^29] Moses 2:3, 5.
[^30] Ibid., 4:2.
[^31] See DHC, VI, p. 306, for Joseph Smith's explanation of this law as it pertains to Christ and His relationship with the Father, Elohim.
[^32] Moses 4:4.
[^33] Ibid., 6:35-36.
[^34] See D&C 93:23, 29.
[^35] See D&C 93:29.
[^36] Ether 3:15-16.
[^37] D&C 77:2.
[^38] Ibid., 131:7-8; DHC, IV, p. 575.
[^39] Abraham 3:22-23.
[^40] D&C 93:33.
[^41] Ibid., 93:23.
[^42] Ibid., 93:29.
[^43] See, for example, Ibid., 84:45.
[^44] See "An Interesting Letter," of Benjamin F. Johnson to George S. Gibbs, p. 8.
[^45] JD, I, p. 258.
[^46] Ibid., VIII, pp. 284-285.
[^47] D&C 131:7-8; DHC, IV, p. 575.
[^48] See again D&C 93:23, 29, 33.
[^49] Abraham 3:22; JD, VII, pp. 284-285.
[^50] See D&C 88:6-7. where it states that truth shines.
[^51] DHC, VI, p. 311.
[^52] D&C 93:29.
[^53] Ibid., 93:28, 36.
[^54] Ibid., 93:29-30.
[^55] Ibid., 93:36.
[^56] JD, I, pp. 7-8.
[^57] See D&C 93:29-30.
[^58] See Abraham 3:18-19.
[^59] The fact that Abraham later states that the intelligences he saw were organized as spirits assumes that their organization had a beginning, but in the statement referred to above the Lord does not consider this point.
[^60] Abraham 3:18.
[^61] The Mormon, August 29, 1857.
[^62] See John 17:5.
[^63] 1 Nephi 1:9.
[^64] D&C 76:25.
[^65] Moses 1:14.
[^66] Key to Theology, 9th ed., p. 115.
[^67] DHC, VI, pp. 307-308.
[^68] See Abraham 3:22-28.
[^69] DHC, VI, p. 308.
[^70] Ibid., III, p. 387.
[^71] TPJS, p. 181.
[^72] Journal History, February 23, 1847.
[^73] Abraham 3:22.
[^74] D&C 121:41-46.
[^75] DHC, I, p. 283.
[^76] Ibid., VI, p. 364.
[^77] Alma 13:3-6.
[^78] See D&C 131:5.
[^79] DHC, IV, 359-360.
[^80] Ecclesiastes 12:7.
[^81] Acts 17:29.
[^82] Hebrews 12:9.
[^83] Numbers 6:22.
[^84] Ibid., 27:16.
[^85] Job 38:1-7.
[^86] John 1:1-2.
[^87] Ibid., 6:38.
[^88] Ibid., 6:62.
[^89] Ibid., 16:27-29.
[^90] Luke 23:46.
[^91] John 17:4-5.
[^92] Luke 24:39.
[^93] Revelation 3:14.
[^94] Colossians 1:15.
[^95] Hebrews 1:6.
[^96] Revelation 12:7-10, 12.
[^97] 2 Peter 2:4.
[^98] Jude 6.
[^99] Isaiah 14:12-17.
[^100] Acts 17:26.
[^101] Ephesians 1:3-4.
[^102] Deuteronomy 32:7-9.
[^103] 1 Peter 1:18-20.
[^104] Jeremiah 1:5.
[^105] John 9:1-3.
[^106] 1 Nephi 19:10; 2 Nephi 11:7; Mosiah 15:1-13; Alma 11:26-40.
