Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1967)

CHAPTER 4

THE PRE-EARTH STATE OF MAN

The Pearl of Great Price makes a significant contribution to our knowledge of man's pre-earth state of existence. It affirms that man existed as a conscious entity before coming to this earth; and in that state of life, many organized spirits acquired great intelligence and power. Although the Pearl of Great Price contributes much to our present knowledge of man's pre-earth life, the disclosures made in other modern scriptures, and statements made by Joseph Smith and his associates, should be considered in order to understand this doctrine better.

Man's Pre-earth Life As Revealed In The Pearl Of Great Price

The Vision of Abraham

Abraham, like other great patriarchs in the ancient world, had possession of the Urim and Thummim. He wrote: "I, Abraham, had the Urim and Thummim, which the Lord my God had given unto me, in Ur of the Chaldees." [^1] By means of this divine instrument, he saw the great cosmic system that exists under the government of Kolob, the mighty orb that controls all the spheres—the stars, the sun, and its planetary system—belonging to the same order in the universe as our earth. As a part of this great vision, Abraham was also shown the organized intelligences or spirits, of men in their pre-earth state; and it was made plain to him that man, in his various states of existence, is a creature of the universe whose life is not confined to this mortal sphere. Abraham wrote: "Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones; and God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them." [^2]

Abraham made clear that the "intelligences that were organized before the world" existed were spirits. In speaking of God being in the midst of these intelligences, he said: "He stood among those that were spirits." [^3] Though there was a time when spirits had been organized, Abraham was informed that the essential life within them was eternal. On this point, God said: "If there be two spirits, and one shall be more intelligent than the other, yet these two spirits, notwithstanding one is more intelligent than the other, have no beginning; they existed before, they shall have no end, they shall exist after, for they are gnolaum, or eternal." [^4]

Abraham was also shown the gradation of intelligence of the spirits that existed in the pre-earth state of life. In illustrating this point, the Lord made use of the organized cosmos in His explanation to Abraham, indicating that as the many spheres in the cosmos differed in size, time schedule, and governing power, so also did the spirits of men differ in intelligence in the pre-earth life. Having been shown this correlation, Abraham wrote:

. . . the Lord said unto me: Abraham, I show these things unto thee before ye go into Egypt, that ye may declare all these words.

If two things exist, and there be one above the other, there shall be greater things above them; therefore Kolob is the greatest of all the Kokaubeam [i.e., stars] that thou hast seen, because it is nearest unto me.

Now, if there be two things, one above the other, and the moon be above the earth, then it may be that a planet or a star may exist above it; and there is nothing that the Lord thy God shall take in his heart to do but what he will do it.

Howbeit that he made the greater star; as, also, if there be two spirits, . . . one being more intelligent than the other; there shall be another more intelligent than they; I am the Lord thy God, I am more intelligent than they all. [^5]

In the above quotation, three points are of special significance: First, Abraham was told that organized life exists, one system above another, without end. To him, God said: "If two things exist, and there be one above the other, there shall be greater things above them." [^6] Second, God then applied this principle of gradation to the systems of life existing under the government of Kolob. He said to Abraham concerning the organized spheres in this great system: "Therefore Kolob is the greatest of all the Kokaubeam [i.e., stars] that thou hast seen, because it is nearest to me." [^7] Third, there was a gradation of organized intelligences, or spirits, in the pre-earth state. Jehovah, who was speaking to Abraham, declared Himself to be more intelligent than all other spirits in the pre-earth state. B. H. Roberts has said:

I believe that this means more than that God is more intelligent than any other one of the intelligences. It means that he is more intelligent than all of the other intelligences combined. His intelligence is greater than that of the mass, and has led me to say in the second Year Book of the Seventies:—"It is this fact doubtless which makes this One, 'more intelligent than them all,' God." He is the All-Wise One! The All-Powered One! What he tells other Intelligences to do must be precisely the wisest, fittest thing that they could anywhere or anyhow learn—the thing which it will always behoove them, with right loyal thankfulness, and nothing doubting, to do. There goes with this, too, the thought that this All-Wise One will be the Unselfish One, the All-loving One, the One who desires that which is highest, and best; to come to earth under the circumstances that surrounded his mortal life, in order that he might play a vital role in the great and eternal plan leading to the immortality and eternal life of mankind.

Second, Abraham designated Jehovah, or the pre-earth Christ, as one like unto God. Christ is the great Executive of the Father, Elohim, through whom the earth was created. Having initial access to the glory and power of the Man of Holiness, Christ said to other subordinate beings who were with Him, "We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these [i.e., the residue of the organized spirits] may dwell." [^8] The directing personage was not God, but one "like unto God." [^9] This point, along with the fact that it was He who directed the activities of the creation, seems to identify the one like unto God as the pre-earth Christ.

Third, those assisting Christ in the creation were the noble and great spirits among whom was Abraham in the pre-earth state. Abraham wrote: "And there stood one among them [i.e., the noble and great spirits] that was like unto God, and he said unto those [noble and great spirits among whom He stood] who were with him: We will go down . . . and we will make an earth." [^10] Later in Abraham's account of the creation, those who created the earth are designated as Gods. For example, when the activities of the creation commenced, Abraham wrote: "And then the Lord said [to the noble and great spirits]: Let us go down. And they went down at the beginning, and they, that is the Gods, organized and formed the heavens and the earth." [^11]

In calling the noble and great ones Gods, Abraham revealed the degree to which some spirits had developed in the pre-earth state. A previous chapter states that there are three stages of life in the over-all plan of life and salvation—spirit life, physical life, and eternal life—and that in each there is a father-son relationship. In the third stage of life, an organized being becomes a son or daughter of God by partaking of the divine endowments of intelligence and power that lead ultimately to eternal life. But when one, having developed significantly in these divine endowments, is given the authority to extend the blessings and powers of the Holy Spirit to others, he then becomes to them a God and a Father. On the basis of this principle, Jesus became the God and Father to men on earth, even before He came to earth to acquire the physical endowments of life and fulfil His atoning mission. Others, under Christ, also received the title of "God" in the pre-earth state. Joseph Smith explained:

They found fault with Jesus Christ because He said He was the Son of God, and made Himself equal with God . . . . What did Jesus say? "Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are Gods? If He called them Gods unto whom the word of God came, and the scriptures cannot be broken, say ye of Him whom the Father had sanctified and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest, because I said I am the Son of God?" It was through Him that they drank of the spiritual rock [and for this reason He was their God]. Of course He would take the honor to Himself. Jesus, if they were called Gods unto whom the word of God came, why should it be thought blasphemy that I should say I am the son of God? . . .

The scriptures are a mixture of very strange doctrines to the Christian world, who are blindly led by the blind. I will refer to another scripture. "Now," says God, when He visited Moses in the bush, . . . "Thou shalt be a God unto the children of Israel." God said, "Thou shalt be a God unto Aaron, and he shall be thy spokeman." I believe those Gods that God reveals as Gods to be sons of God, and all can cry, "Abba, Father." Sons of God who exalt themselves to be Gods, even from before the foundation of the world. . . . [^12]

The great prophets such as Moses, who was made a god over ancient Israel, were in reality sons of God in the divine endowments of eternal life. They had exalted themselves to be gods even from before the foundation of the world, and were the noble and great spirits whom Abraham designated as "Gods."

Fourth, a major purpose in creating the earth was to prove all those who would be placed upon it, to see whether they would do as the Lord commanded them. Learning obedience is a primary objective of mortal life. Man must learn to subordinate the new endowments of physical life to the will of God, if he is to be exalted to further glory and power in eternity. Before the earth was created, the organized intelligences, or spirits, were to be given a final test to see if they would keep their first estate. The term "first estate" has reference to their existence as organized spirits in the pre-earth life. Those who kept their first estate were to be "added upon." In other words, they were to be given the additional endowments and attributes of life that come with receiving a physical body. Those who would not keep their first estate would not have glory in the same kingdom as would those who kept their first estate. Not only would the disobedient spirits in the pre-earth life be denied the opportunity of acquiring a physical body and its related attributes, but they would not have glory (intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth) in the same kingdom in eternity. As disobedient beings, they would be deprived of access to the glory and power of God. Those who kept their second, or mortal, estate would have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever. In mortality, the individual was to be tested again, and those who failed to keep their second estate would lose access to the glory of God in eternity or, at best, be given the divine nature in a limited degree. But those who kept their second estate would have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever. There would be no end to their acquisition of divine intelligence (i.e., light and truth) in eternity. Like God, they would possess the principles of eternal progression.

Fifth, Abraham saw and made brief reference to the central issue which determined whether the organized spirits would keep their first estate. One of the Father's spirit sons was to be chosen to create the earth and redeem its inhabitants. When the Father, Elohim, inquired, "Whom shall I send?" there were two who volunteered to go. Because the Father selected the first, the second became angry and did not keep his first estate and in his rebellion there were many who followed after him. These facts, only, Abraham records, and statements from other scriptures are necessary to fill in the details. The great patriarch does not say who led the rebellion. Nor does he state specifically that it was an act of rebellion against a just and merciful God of truth.

The Explanation of God to Moses

Moses also indicates that man is a creature of the universe and exists in various states of existence on many different spheres throughout the orderly cosmos. Having indicated to Moses that He had created worlds without number through the instrumentality of His Only Begotten Son, God said: "And the first man of all men have I called Adam, which is many." [^13] Continuing, the Lord explained: "There are many worlds that have passed away by the word of my power. And there are many that now stand, and innumerable are they unto man." [^14]

He also declared:

. . . as one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof even so shall another come; and there is no end to my works, neither to my words.

For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. [^15]

It is God's work, by which He acquires glory, to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man on the many worlds He has created and is continually creating.

Moses, like Abraham, indicates that as a creature of the universe, man had a pre-earth existence as a conscious, organized entity. In the midst of his account of the creation of the physical earth, and before relating the actual placement of physical life upon the newly formed sphere, Moses clarifies that all forms of life that were to be placed on earth had a pre-earth organization in spirit form. The Lord explained to Moses:

. . . every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew. For I, the Lord God, created all things, of which I have spoken, spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth. For I, the Lord God, had not caused it to rain upon the face of the earth. And I, the Lord God, had created all the children of man; and not yet man to till the ground; for in heaven created I them; and there was not yet flesh upon the earth, neither in the water, neither in the air;

But . . . all things were before created; but spiritually were they created and made according to my word. [^16]

Having informed Moses of the pre-earth organization of all life and having recounted the acts of the creation of the physical earth and life, God then spoke to Moses concerning the underlying issues of the pre-earth rebellion which is known popularly as the War in Heaven. Of Lucifer, [^17] who instituted the rebellion and thereby became Satan, God said:

. . . he came before me, saying—Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor.

But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me—Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever.

Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down;

And he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice. [^18]

In the above statement are several important points: First, the Lord identifies the leader of the pre-earth rebellion as that being now known as Satan. It seems evident from God's statement to Moses that this name was given to Lucifer as a consequence of his rebellion, because the scripture states that thereby "he became Satan." [^19]

Second, there was no disagreement as to the need of man coming to earth under the power of the fall and the necessity of a redeemer to restore him to the presence of God. While agreeing on this issue, Satan said: "I will be thy Son [in the flesh and in the divine endowments that lead to eternal life], and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost." [^20] Unless man fell from God's presence there would be no need for a plan of redemption. In proposing to redeem all mankind, Lucifer was tacitly agreeing to the need of a fall.

Third, Lucifer set forth a proposal contrary to the will of the Father as to how man was to be redeemed. The Only Begotten Son proposed to uphold and sustain the Father's will. There was, therefore, a division of opinion on this issue. In rejecting Lucifer's counter-proposal, God was not merely giving preference to His own expressed will for jealous reasons or because of His personal attachment to it. Nor was He endeavoring to suppress the free expression of opinion on the part of others. On the contrary, as a God of truth His expressed will is based upon truth. Though Lucifer had the freedom to propose a plan of his own, the Father had an obligation to choose that which was consistent with eternal verities. This was His obligation to truth. He also had an obligation to those who relied upon His wisdom and judgment in pointing the way to life and happiness.

Fourth, as a necessary part of his proposal to redeem all mankind that not one soul would be lost, Lucifer advocated the suspension of man's free agency on earth. To fulfill such a commitment, he would need control in order that some individuals would not deviate from his plan and be lost. But Lucifer's cure for the malady of disunion was worse than the disease. In his proposal to suspend man's free agency, he was advocating the destruction of organized life. All life must be independent in its sphere of action if it is to exist permanently and if it is to attain further endowments of truth to enhance its joy and power. Because Lucifer rebelled against the God of truth and sought to destroy the agency of man, he was cast down from the presence of God.

Fifth, within Lucifer's counter-proposal was an evident lust for power. To the Father he said: "Give me thine honor." [^21] In a revelation to Joseph Smith, the Lord explained that Lucifer rebelled against Him, saying: "Give me thine honor, which is my power." [^22] One source of God's power arises out of the honor that other intelligences and forms of life give to Him. He is a God of truth, and His word is truth. [^23] When other intelligences and forms of life sustain truth, they give merited honor to God, which increases His power. For this reason God indicates that His creative activities are carried out by "the word of my power." [^24] His word is the expression of His will, founded in truth, unto others, including the elements which possess life sufficient to be acted upon by His glory. For example, on the first day of creation, God said: "And I, God, said, Let there be light; and there was light. . . . And I, God called the light Day; and the darkness I called Night, and this I did by the word of my power, and it was done as I spoke." [^25] God's expression of truth (or His word) has its center in the power He possesses as a result of His honor. Lucifer lustfully sought for this honor.

Sixth, Lucifer's counter-proposal would have subverted the Law of Consecration and Stewardship, which is a basic law of celestial society. He selfishly sought for the honor which would be derived from the creation and redemption of the world, but Jesus expressed His willingness to uphold the heavenly law by declaring, "Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever." [^26] In fulfilling the requirements of this divine law, Christ will deliver the earth to the Father when it has been sanctified and glorified. In this way, the Father obtains kingdom upon kingdom and continually adds glory unto Himself. As the heir of the Father Christ inherits all that the Father possesses; and Christ is established under the Father, Elohim, as the God and Father of all things that He creates and redeems. [^27]

Seventh, through having been cast down from the presence of God, Satan is allowed to perform a mission of destruction in the earth. Good and evil, joy and pain, health and sickness, life and death must come before man to test him in his second estate. In order to provide an alternative to life, truth, and happiness, Satan is allowed to tempt man. If man loves the truth and light that comes from God sufficient to resist and overcome the powers of spiritual death that Satan is allowed to exercise he will not let himself be bound down by the powers of spiritual darkness and destruction. Those who choose to follow Satan merit that which they receive. The Lord therefore observed that Satan's mission is "to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken to my voice." [^28]

The Vision of Enoch

Enoch recorded a brief but meaningful testimony concerning the pre-earth existence of human life. At the time the Lord called him to preach the Gospel and declare repentance to the people, He gave Enoch a vision in which the spirit world was manifested unto him. The report of this vision states:

. . . the Lord spake unto Enoch, and said unto him: Anoint thine eyes with clay, and wash them, and thou shalt see. And he did so.

And he beheld the spirits that God had created; and he beheld also things which were not visible to the natural eye; and from henceforth came the saying abroad in the land: A seer hath the Lord raised up unto his people. [^29]

This brief testimony supports the testimony of other great prophets whose experiences are recorded in the Pearl of Great Price, and sustains the essential facts concerning the dual nature of man to which they bear record.

Clarifications On The Pre-earth State Of Man

The Issue of Proper Terms

The scriptures declare that man existed as a conscious entity before his birth into mortality, and that the basic life within him goes back to a time without beginning. Consequently, some Latter-day Saints refer to the period before earth life as man's "pre-existence." But in the proper sense of meaning there is no such term in Latter-day Saint thought as "pre-existence." The primal life within man is eternal; it was not created, neither indeed can be. [^30] Consequently, it is contradictory to speak of man's "pre-existence," for anything that is eternal cannot pre-exist. We should therefore refer to the time before physical birth as man's pre-earth existence.

Man's pre-earth existence may also be designated as his "pre-mortal existence," since he comes directly to mortality from the spirit world through the process of physical birth. But Adam and Eve existed on earth as physical beings before mortality came upon them through their transgression. Consequently, the term "pre-earth existence" may be used for all men, including Adam and Eve, but the term "pre-mortal existence" must be applied only to Adam's posterity. The following chart indicates the various stages of man's existence from his pre-earth life through his resurrection:

The Two Stages of Man's Pre-earth Existence

In a broad and general sense, man's pre-earth existence may be divided into two periods of time. The primal life within man is designated as "intelligence, or the light of truth." [^31] A time came when the primal intelligence of man was organized and became a spirit personage. To the brother of Jared, the pre-earth Christ said of His spirit body:

Seest thou that ye are created after mine own image? Yea, even all men were created in the beginning after mine own image.

Behold, this body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I created after the body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit will I appear unto my people in the flesh. [^32]

By revelation, Joseph Smith further made clear that for all forms of life, the spiritual is in "the likeness of that which is temporal; and that which is temporal [is] in the likeness of that which is spiritual; the spirit of man in the likeness of his person, as also the spirit of the beast, and every other creature which God has created." [^33] As organized entities, the several spirit creatures were formed from a fine, pure, elastic substance called spirit. [^34]

The human spirit was organized through a process of conception and birth in which the organized spirit became the literal offspring of eternal parents—the Man of Holiness and His glorified and exalted companion.

The Pearl of Great Price says nothing directly about the primal intelligence of man. Abraham speaks of "the intelligences that were organized." But, as has been indicated, he makes it clear that these "were spirits." [^35] It is thus evident that Abraham was not referring directly to the primal intelligence of man, but to organized spirits. However, the fact that the spirits he saw were organized intelligences implies in an indirect way that there must have been an act of organization by which they became spirits. And this fact in turn implies that there was some form of unorganized intelligence before spirits were born into the second stage of man's pre-earth existence. This does not mean that there was no law governing the primal life or intelligence of man before it was organized as a spirit, but that it was not then organized as a spirit personage.

Scriptural Evidence of Man's Primal Intelligence

There are three scriptural statements that refer directly to the primal life within man:

For man is spirit. [^36]

Ye were also in the beginning with the Father; that which is Spirit, even the Spirit of truth. [^37]

Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be. [^38]

From these statements it is evident that the primal life within man is centered in spirit. The first statement does not say that man is a spirit, but that man is spirit. And in referring to the primal life within man, the second statement speaks of it as being "that which is Spirit, even the Spirit of truth." Finally, the primal life within man is designated as "intelligence, or the light of truth." The fact that the primal life within man is said to be "the Spirit of truth" in one statement and "the light of truth" in another is not a contradiction, as the terms "Spirit" and "Light" are often used synonymously in the scriptures. [^39] Joseph Smith is also reported to have taught that "life and light and spirit are one." [^40]

Clarifications by Prominent Brethren

To see more clearly the nature of the primal life within man, the reader may be helped by the following statements from associates of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Parley P. Pratt said:

It [i.e., the primal intelligence of man] never was created, being an inherent attribute of the eternal element called spirit, which element composes each individual spirit, and which element exists in an infinitude of degrees in the scale of intellect, in all the varieties manifested in the eternal God, and thence to the lowest agent, which acts by its own will. [^41]

From Brigham Young:

There is an eternity of life, from which we were composed by the wisdom and skill of superior Beings. . . .

The life that is within us is a part of an eternity of life, and is organized spirit, which is clothed upon by tabernacles, therefore constituting our present being, which is designed for the attainment of further intelligence. [^42]

From these statements it seems that the primal life within man is an inherent factor within that pure, fine, and elastic element [^43] called spirit. If life is inherent within spirit, it must be there innately; it is as old as the substance with which it is associated. Spirit, with its inherent life, also exists in an infinitude of degrees in the scale of intellect.

Apparently Joseph Smith also taught that within each organized spirit there was a central primal intelligence or ego that possessed the basic rudimentary characteristics of an independent, uncreated, self-existing being. It may be that this central primal intelligence was an inherent factor of life within a given particle, or element, of that pure substance called spirit, and that the central primal intelligence of man was later organized in union with other elements of spirit (with their inherent and acquired intelligence) to make the organized human spirit.

Nowhere in scripture or in any authoritative source is the central primal life of man said to be "an intelligence" that existed as a living entity in the form and stature of man. The primal life of man is designated scripturally as "intelligence, or the light of truth," and it is said to be directly associated with that substance called spirit, if it is not synonymous with spirit. [^44] Abraham beheld that the spirits of men had been "organized"; and Brigham Young stated that "the life within us . . . is organized spirit." [^45] It therefore seems appropriate to conclude that in man's primeval birth, his central primal intelligence was organized in union with other elements of spirit to produce the organized human spirit.

The Nature of Primal Intelligence and Its Organization as a Spirit

As indicated, life is inherent in all matter, particularly in that pure and fine form of matter called spirit. In a general way, it may be said that life, light, and spirit are one. But in a more specific sense, life seems to be inherent within spirit, and light is evidently the radiance of the truth associated with that life. [^46] The life that is inherent within spirit may be said to be an expression of intelligence, or intelligence in action. Such life or intelligence, as stated above, is as eternal as the substance in which it is inherent. Joseph Smith inquired: "Is it logical to say that the intelligence of spirits is immortal and yet that it [i.e., the primal intelligence] had a beginning? The intelligence of spirits had no beginning, neither will it have an end." [^47]

The scriptures speak of two kinds of intelligence, in relation to man. First, the primal life within man is designated as "intelligence, or the light of truth." [^48] Second, there is a kind of intelligence with which the primal intelligence of man may thereafter be endowed, until ultimately man as a resurrected being is crowned with a fulness of glory. This kind of intelligence is said to consist of "light and truth." [^49] It is not said how these two kinds of intelligence differ. But the fact that they do differ in a fundamental way seems to be apparent by the terms that are applied to them and by the role they each play in the great scheme of life.

It seems possible that the primal life within man, being independent within the sphere in which God had placed it, [^50] was able to develop to some degree in acquiring endowments of "light and truth" [^51] before being organized as a human spirit. In man's primeval birth, the central primal intelligence of man—a single conscious entity, or element of spirit—was then organized in union with other elements of spirit, with their inherent and acquired intelligence, and given the form and organization of a spirit personage. Parley P. Pratt said of the organized spirits of men:

. . . what are they, if they are not flesh and bones? . . . Of what are they composed? . . . Why, they are organized intelligences. What are they made of? They are made of the element which we call spirit, which is as much an element of material existence as earth, air, electricity, or any other tangible substance recognized by man; but so subtle, so refined is its nature, that it is not tangible to our gross organs. . . . [Spirit is] a substance so holy, so pure, so endowed with intellectual attributes and sympathetic affections, that it may be said to be on a par, or level, in its attributes, with man.

Let a given quantity of this element, thus endowed, or capacitated, be organized in the size and form of man, let every organ be developed, formed, and endowed, precisely after the pattern or model of man's outward or fleshly tabernacle—what would we call this individual, organized portion of the spiritual element?

We would call it a spiritual [i.e., a spirit] body, an individual intelligence, an agent endowed with life, with a degree of independence, or inherent will, with the powers of motion, of thought, and with the attributes of moral, intellectual, and sympathetic affections and emotions.

We would conceive of it as possessing eyes to see, ears to hear, hands to handle; as in possession of the organ of taste, of smelling, and of speech.

Such beings are we, when we have laid off this outward tabernacle of flesh. [^52]

Gradation in the Primal Intelligence of Men

There is no evidence to support the assumption that the spirits of men were equal in the endowments and attributes of life they possessed at the time of their primeval birth, although each organized spirit, being a child of God, had the potential of becoming like God. If the central, primal intelligence of man was independent in its sphere before the time it was organized in union with other elements of spirits to become a spirit personage, [^53] this state of independence strongly argues that the central, primal intelligence of one person, being an independent entity, may have varied in its development from another before they were organized as spirits. To be independent in a given sphere is to have agency; and where agency exists variety develops, resulting in differences and gradations of being.

When Abraham beheld in vision the pre-earth spirits of men, he was informed that they differed in the intelligence they possessed. [^54] In the Lord's statement to Abraham, the inference is also made that this gradation of intelligence existed before as well as after spirit birth. For example, in the Lord's statement to Abraham no consideration is given to the fact that the spirits of men had a beginning in their organization as spirits. [^55] Instead, the Lord merely stated that "notwithstanding one [spirit] is more intelligent than the other, [they] have no beginning." [^56] Since this declaration is made as a general statement on the gradation of the intelligence of spirits, without regard for the organization of the human spirit, it undoubtedly applies to the period before as well as after the organization of the spirit of man in its primeval birth. Thus the basic point of Abraham's statement is that there was a gradation of intelligence among spirits, the life element of which had no beginning. And the assumption is that a gradation of intelligence existed before as well as after spirit birth.

The Nature of Spirits

The pre-earth spirit of man was a person of radiant brilliance. To a lady who made inquiry about her pre-mortal existence, John Taylor wrote: "Knowest thou not that thou art a spark of Deity, struck from the fire of His eternal blaze, and brought forth in the midst of everlasting burnings?" [^57] An organized spirit may be a personage of brilliant splendor for two reasons: First, it is composed of elements of spirit that are by nature radiant. Second, an organized spirit can acquire, in some measure, the light and truth of God's glory. Jesus, for example, had glory with the Father before the world was; [^58] and, when Lehi beheld Christ come to earth to take upon Himself a body of flesh and bones, "he beheld that his luster was above that of the sun at noon-day." [^59]

To illustrate the difference in the two points expressed above, it may be noted that by rebellion Lucifer lost the latter principle of light, and because of his loss of glory he "was thrust down from the presence of God and the Son." [^60] When Satan appeared to Moses, the man of God could thus comment: "I could not look upon God [i.e., the pre-earth Christ in the office and power of the Father], except his glory should come upon me, and I were strengthened before him. But I can look upon thee in the natural man. Is it not so, surely?" [^61] Parley P. Pratt has written:

The good spirits . . . can appear unto men, when permitted, but not having a fleshly tabernacle, they can not hide their glory. Hence, an unembodied spirit, if it be a holy personage, will be surrounded with a halo of resplendent glory, or brightness above the brightness of the sun.

Whereas, spirits not worthy to be glorified will appear without this brilliant halo, and although they often attempt to pass as angels of light, there is more or less of darkness about them. So it is with Satan and his hosts who have not been embodied. [^62]

Preparations for Mortality

When the time came for the spirit children of God to receive physical bodies, a series of councils was held to prepare for this next stage of existence. First, as Joseph Smith explained:

The head God called together the Gods and sat in grand council to bring forth the world. The grand councilors sat at the head in yonder heavens and contemplated the creation of the worlds which were created at the time. . . .

In the beginning, the head of the Gods called a council of the Gods; and they came together and concocted a plan to create the world and people it. [^63]

A careful reading of Abraham's vision of the pre-earth state and the preparations that were then made for man to come to this earth gives the impression that he beheld the activities of this initial council. [^64] Those present were the noble and great spirits, who were Gods. They met under the direction of the Father, Elohim. Thus Joseph Smith declared that the head God was "the Father of the Gods." [^65] In this great council, the Gods formulated the plan by which the earth was to be created, peopled, and redeemed. In recording his account of the creation, Abraham continually refers back to the initial plan (or blueprint) of the creation as it was formulated by the Gods before the actual work of organization began.

Following the Grand Council of the Gods, of necessity a meeting was held to report the proposals of the council to all the spirit children who were expected to come to this earth. Lucifer, whose plan was rejected by the Grand Council of the Gods, may also have made his proposal known at this great convocation of spirit beings. And the War in Heaven followed. This struggle was a conflict of errors and half truths against eternal truths and verities. It was an ideological conflict in which Satan and his followers so embraced and advocated error and perversion that they lost the glory they had acquired and were therefore cast out of the presence of God.

After the War in Heaven was over and Satan and his hosts were cast out, the Father called the remaining spirits together into a Grand Organizational Council, to make the final arrangements that were required for their earthly sojourn. Of this council, Joseph Smith said: "The Father called all spirits before Him at the creation of man [that is, after the preliminary councils were over and man was to be placed on earth], and organized them. He (Adam) is the head, and was told to multiply." [^66] Again the Prophet explained: "At the first organization in heaven we were all present, and saw the Savior chosen and appointed and the plan of salvation made, and we sanctioned it." [^67]

As the Prophet uses it, the term "first organization" seems to refer to the first time the spirit children of God were organized into proposed families, groups, etc., as they were to be developed in the flesh on the earth. If man would keep the commandments of God and seek the promptings of the Holy Spirit in forming the associations of life in the flesh, the "first organization" would find actual expression on earth. By sealing those associations in righteousness under the power of the Holy Priesthood, man could then perpetuate the relationships formed on earth into eternity. Hence, the tentative arrangements that were effected in the pre-earth state were referred to as having been carried out in the "first organization." In a manifestation to Brigham Young after the Prophet's death, Joseph Smith was reported to have instructed his successor as follows:

"Tell the people to be humble and faithful, and be sure to keep the Spirit of the Lord and it will lead them right. Be careful and not turn away the small still voice; it will teach them what to do and where to go; it will yield the fruits of the kingdom. Tell the brethren to keep their hearts open to conviction, so that when the Holy Ghost comes to them, their hearts will be ready to receive it. They can tell the Spirit of the Lord from all other spirits; it will whisper peace and joy to their souls; it will take malice, hatred, strife and all evil from their hearts; and their whole desire will be to do good, bring forth righteousness and build up the kingdom of God. Tell the brethren if they will follow the spirit of the Lord, they will go right. Be sure to tell the people to keep the spirit of the Lord; and if they will, they will find themselves just as they were organized by our Father in Heaven before they came into the world. Our father in Heaven organized the human family, but they are all disorganized and in great confusion."

Joseph then showed me the pattern, how they were in the beginning. This I cannot describe, but I saw it, and saw where the Priesthood had been taken from the earth and how it must be joined together, so that there would be a perfect chain from Father Adam to his latest posterity. Joseph again said, "Tell the people to be sure to keep the spirit of the Lord and follow it, and it will lead them just right." [^68]

The Doctrine of Election and Foreordination

In the pre-earth state, God had looked upon the noble and great spirits and said, "These I will make my rulers." [^69] Rulers in the Kingdom of God were to exercise authority by the power of example and by the attraction of the truth which they taught. God's rulers were to be His prophets—those to whom He would commit the priesthood and its keys. By the proper exercise of the priesthood, their sceptre would become an unchanging sceptre of righteousness and truth, and their dominion an everlasting dominion that, without compulsory means, would flow unto them forever and ever. [^70]

In the pre-earth organizational council, various individuals were ordained to fulfil certain missions on earth. "Adam was made to open the way of the world, and for dressing the garden," Joseph Smith explained. "Noah was born to save seed of everything, when the earth was washed of its wickedness by the flood; and the Son of God came into the world to redeem it from the fall." [^71] Others also were chosen and ordained. According to the Prophet, "Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand [Organizational] Council of heaven before this world was." [^72]

Concerning this view of man's calling to fulfil offices of trust and responsibility on earth, Joseph Smith wrote in the fifth Article of Faith: "We believe that a man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands, by those who are in authority to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof." To be called of God by prophecy is to be called of God by a prophetic declaration made before man was placed on earth. Alma explained the true procedure as follows:

. . . this is the manner after which they were ordained—being called and prepared from the foundation of the world according to the foreknowledge of God, on account of their exceeding faith and good works; in the first place being left to choose good or evil; therefore they having chosen good, and exercising exceeding great faith, are called with a holy calling, yea, with that holy calling which was prepared with, and according to, a preparatory redemption for such.

And thus they have been called to this holy calling on account of their faith, while others would reject the Spirit of God on account of the hardness of their hearts and blindness of their minds, while, if it had not been for this they might have had as great privilege as their brethren.

Or in fine, in the first place they were on the same standing with their brethren; thus this holy calling being prepared from the foundation of the world for such as would not harden their hearts, being in and through the atonement of the Only Begotten Son, who was prepared—

And thus being called by this holy calling, and ordained unto the high priesthood of the holy order of God, to teach his commandments unto the children of men, that they also might enter into his rest. [^73]

It is evident that though the foreknowledge of God was manifested in the pre-earth organizational council, God's foreknowledge was not expressed in a way that would destroy man's free agency. Instead, man was to be tried and tested in mortality, and only after he had been proved worthy was he to realize the blessings he had been foreordained to receive. Man is required to live by faith on earth, and to follow the dictates of the Holy Spirit. Only in this way can he be led to obtain that which he has been foreordained to receive. Consequently, the prophetic statement that was made in the Grand Organizational Council was not the more sure word of prophecy, for the more sure prophetic declaration is given only to men who have proved themselves on earth and are sealed by the powers of the Holy Priesthood. [^74] Thereby they may know that their calling, or election, to promised blessings in the resurrection is made sure. The prophetic declaration that was made before man was placed on earth was conditional, for it required man first to be tested and proven in this probationary state, so that the callings and appointments of God could be given by faith and by merit. Thus, while a prophetic statement was made in the pre-earth council, there was no guarantee—no sealing powers exercised—that the individual would receive that which he was ordained to receive. Nor was there at that time a guarantee given of the individual's reward in the resurrection. Explained Joseph Smith: "Unconditional election of individuals to eternal life was not taught by the Apostles." [^75] This being true, it follows that the final destiny of the individual to any kingdom in the resurrection was not then established, except in the way of potential destiny.

Supporting Testimonies Of The Pre-Earth State Of Man

Biblical Evidence of Man's Pre-earth State

The Bible teaches that man is a dual being possessing a spirit tabernacled in a body of flesh and bones. In Ecclesiastes we read concerning temporal death: "Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall return to God who gave it." [^76] If the spirit returns to God at death, the implication is that it existed with God before it entered the body. The relationship of the spirit to God in the pre-earth state was such that the Apostle Paul declared that man is "the offspring of God." [^77] He wrote: "We have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live?" [^78] The Israelites recognized the Father as "the God of the spirits of all flesh." [^79] Moses therefore requested the Almighty: "Let the Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the congregation." [^80] That the spirit of man existed as a conscious entity before earth life is implied in the declaration of God to Job:

. . . the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwind, and said,

Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?

Gird up now thy loins like a man; for I will demand of thee, and answer thou me.

Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare, if thou hast understanding.

Who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? or who hath stretched the line upon it?

Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the corner stone thereof;

When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy? [^81]

According to this declaration, there were those who were sons of God in the pre-earth life; and while the "morning stars" sang together, they shouted for joy when the foundations of the earth were laid in the creation.

Jesus, like man, was a dual being and had an existence with the Father before coming to earth. John wrote: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God." [^82] Jesus Himself declared: "I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me." [^83] Again: "What and if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend up where he was before?" [^84] To His disciples, Christ said: "The Father himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God. I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father." [^85] As He succumbed on the cross He exclaimed: "Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit." [^86]

In the pre-earth state, Jesus had glory with His Father. For this reason He prayed: "I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do. And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was." [^87] Christ came to earth from a state of glory; and after His departure from the world, He returned to acquire that same glory in its fulness.

To His disciples, the resurrected Christ confirmed the general form and stature that a spirit possesses. As He appeared to them after His resurrection and calmed their fears, He said: "Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have." [^88] Though His spirit was an organized being with the same form and stature as His physical body, it was not composed of gross elements like the resurrected body of Christ.

In the pre-earth state, Christ was the Firstborn of the spirit children of the Father, Elohim. The Apostle John was informed that Jesus was "the beginning of the creation of God." [^89] The Apostle Paul declared Him to be "the firstborn of every creature." [^90] And in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Paul wrote: "And again, when he [God the Father, Elohim] bringeth in the firstbegotten into the world, he saith, And let all the angels of God worship him." [^91] Since Christ was known as the "firstbegotten" before He came into the world, there must have been a pre-earth conception and birth of spirits in which Christ was the Firstborn.

The Bible speaks of the great conflict that took place in the pre-earth life. John wrote while on the Isle of Patmos:

. . . there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels,

And prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven.

And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him.

And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night. . . .

Woe to the inhabiters of the earth and of the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time. [^92]

In calling attention to the justice of God in the pre-earth life, the Apostle Peter alluded to the War in Heaven and observed: "God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment." [^93] Jude also declared: "And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he [i.e., God] hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day." [^94] Of the ambitions of Satan in the pre-earth war and the later effects of his power on earth, Isaiah wrote:

How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations!

For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north:

I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High.

Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit.

They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider thee, saying, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake kingdoms;

That made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities thereof; that opened not the house of his prisoners? [^95]

The Bible speaks of the organization that was made to prepare those who kept their first estate for earth life. In the court of Areopagus, the Apostle Paul declared to the men of Athens that God "hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation." [^96] To determine the times before appointed is to designate when men would come to earth; and to determine the bounds of their habitation is to prescribe their birthplaces. To the Ephesian saints, Paul wrote: "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ: according as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world." [^97] Paul was referring to those who were chosen before the foundation of the world to be born on earth when they could hear the Gospel and, by adoption, become sons and daughters of God, through Jesus Christ.

Moses declared these same truths to ancient Israel when he said:

Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations: ask thy father, and he will shew thee; thy elders, and they will tell thee.

When the Most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel.

For the Lord's portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance. [^98]

It was common knowledge among the fathers and elders of Israel that God had organized men and nations to have place upon the earth at given times. When God divided among the nations their inheritance, he separated the sons of Adam and set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel. Israel was the central body that the Lord used in this action, for through that people He designed to bring about the redemption of all mankind. Consequently, God considered them first and organized His program accordingly.

Since the Bible indicates that certain individuals were selected to come to earth at given times, it follows that individual consideration was given to all men to determine when and under what circumstances they would come to earth. Chief among those who were foreordained was Christ. Of Him, Peter wrote:

Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers;

But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot:

Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you." [^99]

To be foreordained is not merely to be foreknown, but to be appointed and commissioned beforehand to fulfil a given mission. Jesus was foreordained before the foundation of the world to come to earth and make redemption possible.

Jeremiah was another who was foreordained before his birth. Of him the Lord said: "Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations." [^100] A different kind of mission, but nevertheless one appointed of God, was given to a blind man who had the kind and quality of faith to be healed by the Master. The man had been born blind; and as the disciples saw him, they inquired of Jesus: "Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind?" In order for the man to sin and deserve the condemnation of being born blind, he would have had to exist as a conscious and responsible agent before birth. Though sanctioning such a possibility, Jesus answered, "Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the works of God should be made manifest in him." [^101] The man had been born blind that he might participate with Christ in manifesting the power of God on earth.

Book of Mormon Evidence of Man's Pre-earth State

As the Book of Mormon says little concerning man's existence as an organized spirit in the pre-earth state, references to it are few and indirect. There are references to the effect that Christ was the God of Israel before He came to fulfil His earthly mission. [^102] The brother of Jared was privileged to see the pre-earth Christ several hundred years before Jesus was born in the flesh; and, as was indicated earlier in this chapter, Christ then explained that as an organized spirit He was in the same general form and stature as His mature physical body would be on earth. [^103] The Nephite prophets taught that man is also a dual being and that his spirit, like that of the pre-earth Christ, is an organized personage with power to perceive its own existence and act as an independent agent. [^104] Moroni mentions "ministering spirits." [^105] And Alma declared that at the time of mortal death "the spirits of all men . . . are taken home to God who gave them life." [^106] His statement assumes that the spirits of men came from the presence of God to earth, for their home is there and not here.

Prophets in the Book of Mormon gave the Father, Elohim, a direct parental relationship to man. King Benjamin declared to his people: "I say unto you, that there are not any among you, except it be your little children, that have not been taught . . . that ye are eternally indebted to your heavenly Father, to render to him [thanks for] all that you have and are." [^107] The Nephite scripture contains numerous references to "the Father," meaning Elohim. In His ministry on the Western hemisphere following His resurrection, Jesus many times spoke of "the Father." At other times He made mention of "your Father who is in heaven" and of "thy Father." [^108]

Some Book of Mormon prophets gave evidence that the Nephites were aware of the War in Heaven. Lehi observed:

. . . I, Lehi, according to the things which I have read [in their scriptural works], must needs suppose that an angel of God, according to that which is written, had fallen from heaven; wherefore, he became a devil, having sought that which was evil before God.

And because he had fallen from heaven, and had become miserable forever, he sought also the misery of all mankind. [^109]

Jacob also mentioned "that angel who fell from before the presence of the Eternal God, and became the devil." [^110] And Nephi, Mormon, and others mention "devils and . . . unclean spirits." [^111]

Lehi's vision of the coming of Christ and His apostles to earth is probably the most direct and conclusive evidence of man's pre-earth existence in the Book of Mormon. In reporting this vision, Nephi said:

And it came to pass that he saw one [i.e., Christ] descending out of the midst of heaven, and he beheld that his luster was above that of the sun at noon-day.

And he also saw twelve others following him, and their brightness did exceed that of the stars in the firmament.

And they came down and went forth upon the face of the earth. . . . [^112]

Lehi's vision implies that a pre-earth appointment was made of certain men to perform specific functions in the Kingdom of God on earth. This conclusion has other supporting evidence in the Book of Mormon. Nephi beheld that the apostle John had been "ordained" to write the Apocalypse before coming to earth. [^113] Lehi quoted the ancient patriarch Joseph as prophesying that both Moses and the latter-day Seer, Joseph Smith, would be sent to perform their respective missions on earth. [^114] Alma mentions that those who were ordained among the Nephites to the Holy Priesthood "were called and prepared from the foundation of the world according to the foreknowledge of God." [^115] But as has been indicated earlier in this chapter, ordination to the Holy Priesthood required a trial of the recipient's faith and integrity in mortality. Otherwise the appointment would not be made.

Doctrine and Covenants Evidence of Man's Pre-earth State

The Doctrine and Covenants states that both Christ and man had a pre-earth existence with the Father. To Joseph Smith the Lord said in a revelation:

And now, verily I say unto you, I was in the beginning with the Father, and am the Firstborn. . . .

Ye were also in the beginning with the Father; that which is Spirit, even the Spirit of truth. [^116]

(As was indicated earlier in this chapter, this revelation gives the most direct information concerning the primal life within man—that principle of life, or intelligence, that goes back in time before the organization of the human spirit in the pre-earth state.)

The Doctrine and Covenants indicates that the spirit of man is a conscious, organized being with independent agency. [^117] As indicated earlier in this chapter, this volume of scripture also declares that the spirit of man is "in the likeness" of his physical body. The same is true of "the spirit of the beast, and every other creature which God has created." [^118] Here the Doctrine and Covenants makes a direct contribution to man's understanding of the nature of spirits. Another important contribution is found in Joseph Smith's clarification of the nature of spirit as a substance. In a statement now found in the Doctrine and Covenants he wrote:

There is no such thing as immaterial matter. All spirit is matter, but it is more fine or pure, and can only be discerned by purer eyes;

We cannot see it; but when our bodies are purified we shall see that it is all matter. [^119]

Of this pure and fine substance man's organized spirit is composed.

Latter-day revelations give significant insights into the War in Heaven. Having been shown the pre-earth war in vision, Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon wrote:

. . . this we saw also, and bear record, that an angel of God who was in authority in the presence of God, who rebelled against the Only Begotten Son whom the Father loved and who was in the bosom of the Father, was thrust down from the presence of God and the Son,

And was called Perdition, for the heavens wept over him—he was Lucifer, a son of the morning.

And we beheld, and lo, he is fallen! is fallen, even a son of the morning!

And while we were yet in the Spirit, the Lord commanded us that we should write the vision; for we beheld Satan, that old serpent, even the devil, who rebelled against God, and sought to take the kingdom of our God and his Christ. . . . [^120]

In another revelation to the Prophet, the Lord said of Lucifer:

. . . he rebelled against me, saying, Give me thine honor, which is my power; and also a third part of the hosts of heaven turned he away from me because of their agency;

And they were thrust down, and thus came the devil and his angels;

And, behold, there is a place prepared for them from the beginning, which place is hell. [^121]

The Doctrine and Covenants also correlates the fall of Lucifer and his followers with man's probationary state on the earth [^122] and reveals certain principles and keys by which men who bear the Holy Priesthood in mortality may control the adverse influence of unclean spirits. [^123]

Conclusion

The Pearl of Great Price makes a substantial contribution to the knowledge of man's pre-earth state. He existed as a conscious, organized being in the same general form and stature that he now possesses, except that his pre-earth body was organized from a pure and fine substance called spirit. Spirits were the offspring of the Man of Holiness, with Christ as the Firstborn in the family of the Father, Elohim. As independent agents, the spirit children of the Father were free to progress or retrogress in their pre-earth state. To Abraham, the Lord revealed that a gradation of spirits existed, ranging in intelligence upward to the pre-earth Christ, who was more intelligent than all others. When it came time for the spirits in the pre-earth life to receive the added endowments and powers of the flesh, a series of councils was held to arrange for the creation of the earth and the placement of life upon it. A plan of redemption was also contemplated. Lucifer, a powerful spirit who held authority in the presence of God, set forth a counter-proposal to the expressed will of the Father; and when his plan was rejected, he rebelled and drew away one third of the spirits that would otherwise have come to receive bodies on this earth. The rebellion which Lucifer initiated is known as the War in Heaven. After Satan and his rebellious followers were cast out of God's presence, the Father called the remaining spirits together and organized them in preparation for their earthly existence. At this time, many noble and great spirits were also ordained to come to earth and hold the keys of power and blessings in this sphere of action.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] MS. XIII (March 15, 1851), pp. 90-93.
[^2] TPJS, p. 181.
[^3] For another illustration, see ibid., p. 301, in comparison with Abraham 5:7.
[^4] Abraham 3:1-3.
[^5] Abraham 4:11-12.
[^6] See ibid., 3:24 in relation to 4:1.
[^7] Doctrines of Salvation, I, pp. 75-76. (Italics in the original.)
[^8] See Moses 1:32-33; D&C 76:20-24.
[^9] Abraham 3:23-24.
[^10] Ibid., 4:1.
[^11] TPJS, p. 181.
[^12] JD, XVII, p. 143.
[^13] Ibid., IX, p. 317.
[^14] The Mormon, August 29, 1857.
[^15] Abraham 5:13.
[^16] See, for example, 2 Nephi 2:22.
[^17] The word "spiritual" as it is used here does not refer to the pre-earth "spirit" state, but to a physical state that is spiritualized by the influence of divine spiritual powers.
[^18] Moses 3:9.
[^19] Doctrines of Salvation, I, pp. 76-77.
[^20] D&C 88:27.
[^21] Alma 11:45.
[^22] 1 Corinthians 15:43-44.
[^23] D&C 29:31-33.
[^24] Ibid., 77:6.
[^25] See Psalms 90:4; 2 Peter 3:8.
[^26] Abraham 3:4; 5:13.
[^27] Ibid., 4:13. Later Abraham states that "they numbered the sixth time."—Ibid. 4:31. Having ascertained the essential points given above, the writer learned that C. Edward Jacob, formerly on the Brigham Young University faculty, had earlier set forth this view. The above analysis draws upon his reasoning published in a mimeograph work entitled "The Creation According to Revelations to Abraham and Moses Restored through Joseph Smith" (1951), p. 13.
[^28] Doctrines of Salvation, I, pp. 78, 79. (Italics in the original.)
[^29] See D&C 93:33.
[^30] See DHC, VI, pp. 308-309.
[^31] JD, XXI, p. 323.
[^32] The Seer, II, pp. 248-249.
[^33] See Abraham 4:2; Moses 2:2; TPJS, p. 181.
[^34] See, in particular, Abraham's statement on the activities of the Gods during these days of creation.
[^35] For example, a revelation states that man was not formed and placed on earth until the seventh. See D&C 77:12.
[^36] Moses 3:7.
[^37] Abraham 4:1-5.
[^38] Moses 2:1-5.
[^39] Genesis 1:1-5.
[^40] Abraham 3:24.
[^41] Abraham 4:2; Moses 2:2.
[^42] See the above statements along with Abraham 4:9; Moses 3:9; Genesis 1:9.
[^43] Moses 2:2.
[^44] Abraham 4:3; Moses 2:3; Genesis 1:3.
[^45] JD, XVIII, p. 327.
[^46] Abraham 4:6-8.
[^47] Moses 2:6-8.
[^48] Genesis 1:6-8.
[^49] Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine (Salt Lake City, 1958), pp. 260-261. (Italics in the original.)
[^50] Moses 1:38.
[^51] Abraham 4:9-13.
[^52] Moses 2:9-13.
[^53] Genesis 1:9-13.
[^54] Parley P. Pratt, Voice of Warning, pp. 90-91. (Italics in the original.) For citations of this statement by John Taylor and Joseph Fielding Smith, see Joseph Fielding Smith, Man, His Origin and Destiny, pp. 381-382.
[^55] Revelation 16:20.
[^56] Isaiah 62:4.
[^57] See Genesis 49:22-26; 3 Nephi 15:11-13.
[^58] D&C 133:23-24.
[^59] Abraham 4:12.
[^60] See Moses 3:5-6, 8-9 and the corresponding verses in Genesis 2.
[^61] Abraham 4:14-19.
[^62] Moses 2:14-19.
[^63] Genesis 1:14-19.
[^64] Abraham 4:14.
[^65] See ibid., 5:13.
[^66] This seems to be the way Brigham Young understood the matter. See JD, XVII, p. 143.
[^67] Abraham 4:20-23.
[^68] Moses 2:20-23.
[^69] Genesis 1:20-23.
[^70] Abraham 4:21.
[^71] Ibid., 4:22.
[^72] Moses 2:21.
[^73] See ibid., 2:22.
[^74] Abraham 4:24-31.
[^75] Moses 2:24-31.
[^76] Genesis 1:24-31.
[^77] Abraham 4:24.
[^78] Ibid., 4:25.
[^79] Ibid., 4:26.
[^80] Ibid., 4:27.
[^81] See D&C 77:12, also the report of activities by Abraham and Moses as they concern the seventh day.
[^82] Abraham 4:29-31.
[^83] Ibid., 4:29.
[^84] Ibid., 4:30.
[^85] Ibid., 4:31.
[^86] Moses 2:26.
[^87] Ibid., 2:27.
[^88] Abraham 5:1-21.
[^89] Moses 3:1-25.
[^90] Genesis 1:1-25.
[^91] Abraham 5:1.
[^92] Ibid., 5:2-3.
[^93] D&C 77:12.
[^94] See ibid.
[^95] Ibid., 101:23-25. See also Articles of Faith, No. 10.
[^96] Abraham 5:4-5.
[^97] Ibid., 5:5.
[^98] Moses 3:5, 7.
[^99] Ibid., 3:5.
[^100] Ibid.
[^101] Abraham 5:6; Moses 3:6; Genesis 2:6.
[^102] D&C 77:12.
[^103] Abraham 5:7-8.
[^104] Moses 3:7-8.
[^105] There are some who maintain that the word "flesh" has reference to mortality, but this limitation cannot be supported scripturally. For example, Joseph Smith wrote by revelation: "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also. . . ." (D&C 130:22.) Christ also said of His resurrected body: "Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have." (Luke 24:39.)
[^106] Abraham 5:20; Moses 3:19; Genesis 2:19.
[^107] See Abraham 4:2; Moses 2:2; Genesis 1:2.
[^108] Moses 3:5. See also Abraham 5:5.
[^109] Moses 1:34.
[^110] Abraham 1:3.
[^111] 1 Nephi 5:11.
[^112] Moses 4:26.
[^113] See D&C 130.
[^114] Ibid., 76:62, 77, 86.
[^115] Articles of Faith, No. 10.
[^116] See D&C 76:77.
[^117] Ibid., 84:101.
[^118] Ibid., 45:59.
[^119] JD, III, p. 344.
[^120] 2 Nephi 2:22.
[^121] D&C 101:32-35. For the Lord's explanation of the millennial state, as the basis upon which He makes this promise, see verses 23-31.
[^122] Ibid.
[^123] Luke 3:38.
