Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1967)

CHAPTER 5

THE CREATION AND PLACEMENT OF LIFE ON EARTH

Within the Pearl of Great Price are two accounts of the creation, one written by Abraham and one by Moses. The account given by Abraham is the oldest one given anywhere in the scriptures; and it is the only account which Joseph Smith actually published during his lifetime. In December, 1830, the Prophet made those corrections in the account in Genesis that are now found in the Book of Moses; but this information was not published until 1851, when it appeared in the Millennial Star [^1] and in the first edition of the Pearl of Great Price, published by Franklin D. Richards in England. As observed in chapter 1 of this volume, the material now contained in the Book of Moses was originally intended by the Prophet to be part of his Inspired Revision of the Bible. There is evidence that he intended to go over his work and make further corrections and revisions within the manuscript before publishing it, but this was not done. For example, in criticizing the statements now found in Moses 2:2 and Abraham 4:2, the Prophet said: "In the translation 'without form and void' it should read, 'empty and desolate.'" [^2] The term "without form and void" is found in the account of the creation given in the Book of Moses, whereas the term "empty and desolate" is found in the Book of Abraham. According to Joseph Smith, the wording in the Book of Abraham is more nearly correct. [^3] It is the writer's opinion that the Book of Abraham should be considered by Latter-day Saints as the basic source of information on the creation, giving the most accurate account of the organization of the earth. This does not mean, however, that the information found in the Book of Moses is of no value. When the Prophet made changes in the account given in Genesis, those changes are valid and are to be relied upon as being given to him by revelation. But when no changes were made in the text of Genesis and a definite difference of statement exists in the texts of Moses and Abraham, the statement by Abraham should take priority.

The Accounts Of Abraham And Moses

Conflicting opinions on the story of the creation

Several different views of the creation story may be found in Latter-day Saint literature, depending upon the approach the given writer takes in treating the subject. Some have viewed the creation in light of the "geological ages" of the earth, and some in light of the theory of evolution. Here the approach has been to interpret the creation according to the opinions of men. There are writers who have given primary attention to the account of the creation recorded in Genesis, at the exclusion of what is said in the Book of Abraham and the Book of Moses. Still others have drawn attention to the account given in the Book of Abraham as being merely a blueprint and not a statement, in addition, of that which was done. For these and other reasons, a conflict of opinion exists. In this chapter, the writer endeavors to avoid a partisan approach and to present the story of the creation as it is given in the scriptures, while paying particular attention to the clarifications that are found in the Book of Abraham and the Book of Moses.

Abraham's Blueprint and Account of the Creation

Each account of the creation found in the Pearl of Great Price contributes important insights by which man may better understand the organization of the earth. The statement given by Abraham is both a blueprint and an account of the creation. As such, it must be seen in context with the greater vision of the orderly cosmos that was given to him. The vision which Abraham beheld began with a view of the stars and the worlds which belong to that great system over which Kolob presides as the governing sphere. Describing the beginning of his vision, Abraham wrote: "I, Abraham, had the Urim and Thummim, which the Lord my God had given unto me, in Ur of the Chaldees; and I saw the stars, that they were very great, and that one of them was nearest unto the throne of God; and there were many great ones which were near unto it; and the Lord said unto me: These are the governing ones; and the name of the great one is Kolob, because it is near unto me, for I am the Lord thy God: I have set this one to govern all those which belong to the same order as that upon which thou standest." [^4] Having seen many of the great spheres in the orderly cosmos and having been instructed concerning them, Abraham was then shown the pre-earth existence of man as an organized intelligence; and, as indicated in the preceding chapter, he was instructed concerning the pre-earth life of man as an organized intelligence, or spirit. It was after he had seen all these things that Abraham beheld the creation of the earth as a place where the spirit children of God might go and receive physical tabernacles.

Because of such a setting, Abraham's account is in some respects a blueprint of the creation combined with an actual account of that which occurred in the organization of the earth. By means of the Urim and Thummim, Abraham was taken back in vision to the time of the Grand Council of the Gods in the pre-earth life. He was shown the plans and decisions of the Gods as they proposed to carry them out in preparing the physical earth for life. This statement of plans made prior to their fulfillment may be called a blueprint of the creation. It is combined in Abraham's record with an actual account of the preparations that were made during the six creative periods in which the physical earth was organized and brought to a state of paradisiacal glory on the seventh day. Thus, for example, the Gods are reported to have said on the third day: "Let us prepare the earth to bring forth grass," etc. Here is Abraham's report of their plans, or their blueprint. After reporting their plans as he had seen them formulated in the Council of the Gods in the pre-earth life, Abraham then related the actual implementation of those plans, stating: "And the Gods organized the earth to bring forth grass," etc. [^5] Evidence of a prior statement of intent is found in Abraham's report of the activities of the Gods on the first, [^6] third, fifth, sixth, and seventh days. In this way, Abraham combined a blueprint of the creation with an actual account of that which later took place.

Moses' Clarification of the Spirit Creation of Life

The account of the creation given by Moses has no setting such as Abraham's account. There is no prior statement that man had a pre-earth existence as an organized spirit. For this reason Moses makes clear that all life to be placed on earth had been organized in spirit form before its physical organization. This clarification he makes in the midst of his account of the physical creation of the earth.

Because latter-day scriptures teach that there was a pre-earth spirit organization of all life followed by the more gross organization, certain problems have arisen in relation to the creation story as given by Moses. Some writers have erroneously referred to Genesis 1 and Moses 2 as being accounts of the "spirit" creation of the earth, man, animals, etc. Having taken this view, they then conclude that the statements of the creation in Genesis 2 and Moses 3 are declarations concerning the physical organization of life. But this conclusion as it concerns Genesis 1 and Moses 2 is not consistent with what the Lord has revealed.

Though there was a spirit creation of the earth and of all life that was placed thereon, that creation occurred ages before the physical organization. It may therefore be argued that there was no need for God to give a detailed account of the spirit creation, since it was not related in time to the physical creation. A statement that all things were first organized in spirit form is sufficient. The spirit creation was an organization of life from that pure, fine substance called spirit. Spirit is light. This fact alone makes it evident that Genesis 1 and Moses 2 do not deal with the spirit organization of life. Darkness, for example, could not reign upon the face of the deep on an earth that was being formed from elements of light or spirit. How could the waters be gathered together unto one place and the dry land appear in such an organization? Was the organization of the earth in relation to the sun necessary in the pre-earth spirit creation, where all things were in the midst of everlasting burnings—in the presence of God? Did marine life in its spirit form swim in water amid the everlasting burnings of God? Obviously, the above chapters do not give an account of the spirit creation of the earth and of all life. President Joseph Fielding Smith has said:

There is no account of the creation of man or other forms of life when they were created as spirits. There is just the simple statement that they were so created before the physical creation. The statements in Moses 3:5 and Genesis 2:5 are interpolations thrown into the account of the physical creation, explaining that all things were first created in the spirit existence in heaven before they were placed upon this earth.

We were all created untold ages before we were placed on this earth. We discover from Abraham 3:22-28, that it was before the earth was formed that the plan of salvation was presented to the spirits, or "intelligences." This being true, then, man, animals and plants were not created in the spirit at the time of the creation of the earth, but long before. [^7]

Personalities in the Creation

As the Executive of the Father, Jesus Christ created the physical earth, while acting in the power and authority of the Father, Elohim. [^8] But, as indicated in the preceding chapter, there were others who assisted Him in the creation. These were the noble and great spirits of the pre-earth sphere, among whom were Abraham and other presiding personalities of like intelligence and stature. As Abraham reported his vision of the creation, he said that among the noble and great spirits there stood one who was like unto God, who said unto those who were with Him, "We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell." [^9] As the activities of the creation began, Abraham then said of the noble and great spirits, with the one who was like unto God at their head: "And they went down at the beginning, and they, that is the Gods, organized and formed the heavens and the earth." [^10] The Gods, or the noble and great spirits with Christ at their head, created the earth while acting under the authority, power, and direction of the Father.

The Earth Framed Near the Throne of God

Joseph Smith once observed that when this earth is redeemed from its fallen state and made a celestial sphere in the resurrection, it "will be rolled back into the presence of God." [^11] For the earth to be "rolled back" into the presence of God assumes that it was in His presence at the time it was created. Brigham Young explained in greater detail:

When the earth was framed and brought into existence and man was placed upon it, it was near the throne of our Father in heaven. And when man fell. . . . the earth fell into space, and took up its abode in this planetary system, and the sun became our light. . . . This is the glory the earth came from, and when it is glorified it will return again unto the presence of the Father, and it will dwell there, and these intelligent beings that I am looking at, if they live worthy of it, will dwell upon this earth. [^12]

Again, President Young said:

This earthly ball, this little opake [opaque] substance thrown off into space, is only a speck in the great universe; and when it is celestialized it will go back into the presence of God, where it was first framed. All belongs to God, and those who keep his celestial law will return to him. [^13]

John Taylor also taught that the earth "was organized near the planet Kolob." [^14]

The fact that the earth was in the presence of God, near unto Kolob, at the time of the creation finds scriptural support in the Book of Abraham. In giving the injunction to Adam not to partake of the forbidden fruit in the garden, the Gods cautioned, "In the time that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die." Abraham then observed: "Now I, Abraham, saw that it was after the Lord's time, which was after the time of Kolob; for as yet the Gods had not appointed unto Adam his reckoning." [^15] If the Gods had not then appointed unto this earth its present reckoning of time, it follows that until after the fall occurred the earth was on a different time schedule—the time schedule of Kolob. In other words, until after the fall the earth was not rotating around the sun in our solar system. As before indicated, it was not then placed under its present temporal law. Instead, it was in the presence of God; and while there, it was identified with Kolob in such a way as to be governed by that mighty sphere's system of time.

The Earth Made a Physical-Spiritual Sphere in the Creation

God's object was not to create a temporal sphere, except as the fall of Adam would later make the earth a temporal orb subject to a law different from that under which it was placed in the creation. The Lord's object was to create a physical-spiritual sphere capable of existing forever [^16] in the presence of God, amid the glory and power of the Father. This point is of vital importance. A physical sphere is one that is organized from gross elements. For such a sphere also to be spiritual it must be enveloped in glory and quickened in its organization by divine spiritual powers of intelligence, or life. To understand the story of the creation man must elevate his mind above the temporal, mortal state and see things in a higher and more meaningful relationship.

Evidence that physical life on earth was in a spiritual [^17] state of existence before the fall is found in Moses's account of the placement of life on the newly organized sphere. He reported the Lord as stating:

And out of the ground made I, the Lord God, to grow every tree, naturally, that is pleasant to the sight of man; and man could behold it. And it became also a living soul. For it was spiritual in the day that I created it; for it remaineth in the sphere in which I, God, created it, yea, even all things which I prepared for the use of man. [^18]

All things that the Lord prepared on earth for the use of man were spiritual in their physical organization at the time they were created. It follows that they were first made spiritual, or in a physical-spiritual state; and it was only after the fall of Adam that they were made temporal. President Joseph Fielding Smith has said:

The account of creation in Genesis was not a spirit creation, but it was in a particular sense, a spiritual creation. This, of course, needs some explanation. The account in Genesis, chapters one and two, is the account of the creation of the physical earth. The account of the placing of all life upon the earth, up and until the fall of Adam, is an account, in a sense, of the spiritual creation of all these, but it was also a physical creation. . . .

Adam's body was created from the dust of the earth, but at that time it was a spiritual earth. Adam had a spiritual body until mortality came upon him through the violation of the law under which he was living, but he also had a physical body of flesh and bones.

Now what is a spiritual body? It is one that is quickened by spirit and not by blood. Our Father in heaven and our Savior and all those who have passed through the resurrection have physical bodies of flesh and bones, but their bodies are quickened by spirit and not by blood, hence they are spiritual bodies and not blood bodies. The immortal body is quickened by spirit, but the mortal body is quickened by blood. . . .

Now when Adam was in the Garden of Eden, he was not subject to death. There was no blood in his body and he could have remained there forever. This is true of all the other creations. This statement may not be very pleasing to our evolutionists, but it is true. [^19]

To illustrate and give support to the above view, it should be noted that the resurrected body is a spiritual body. Said a revelation of the resurrection of the righteous: "Notwithstanding they die, they . . . shall rise again, a spiritual body." [^20] Observed Amulek: "This mortal body is raised to an immortal body, that is from death, even from the first death unto life, that they can die no more; their spirits uniting with their bodies, never to be divided; thus the whole becoming spiritual and immortal, that they can no more see corruption." [^21] The Apostle Paul also indicated that in temporal death man is "sown a natural body," while in the resurrection he is "raised a spiritual body." Said he, "There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body." [^22]

In the final analysis, man as a resurrected being will be a spiritual body; and in somewhat the same manner the earth and all things thereon were spiritual in the creation, even though they were organized physically at that time. These two spiritual organizations—the initial organization of physical life on earth and the final organization of life in the resurrection—were spoken of in a revelation that said:

. . . by the power of my Spirit created I them; yea, all things both spiritual and temporal—

First spiritual [in the initial creation of physical life on the earth], secondly temporal [in the subsequent re-organization of life under the present temporal law], which is the beginning of my work; and again [looking at things from our mortal state into the future] first temporal, and secondly spiritual, which is the last of my work—

Speaking unto you that you may naturally understand; but unto myself my works have no end, neither beginning. . . . [^23]

Some have supposed that the word "spiritual" in the first instance above has reference to the organization of life in the pre-earth spirit state, which occurred ages before the creation of the physical earth. This conclusion, however, is not warranted for the following reason: The second time the word "spiritual" is used in the above statement, it has definite reference to a physical state—the resurrected state. This being true, it follows that the first time the word "spiritual" is used in the above quotation it should also have reference to a physical state—to the state of physical life before the fall. Again, a revelation specifically refers to the seven thousand years of the earth's "temporal existence." [^24] The period of the earth's temporal existence began with the fall of Adam. Until then the earth was not a temporal sphere, but a physical-spiritual sphere.

The Time Schedule in the Creation

Though opinions differ as to the amount of time required to create the earth, the writer feels that a definite answer is given in the scriptures. Moses designates each creative period by the term "day"; and the scriptures state that a day of the Lord's time is equal to one thousand years of our mortal time. [^25] Having been informed specifically that a "day unto the Lord" is equal to "one thousand years" of man's mortal time, Abraham states, as has been shown, that the earth was associated with Kolob in the creation and until the fall of Adam, and that the creation was carried out according to "the Lord's time, which was after the time of Kolob." [^26] Furthermore, in the Book of Abraham, the terms "day" and "time" (which latter term Abraham uses to designate the periods of creation) are made synonymous. In relating the events of the third period of creation, Abraham said: "And it came to pass that they numbered the days; from the evening until the morning they called night; and it came to pass, from the morning until the evening they called day; and it was the third time." [^27] They numbered the days—first, second and third—and it (the night and day of the third day) was the third time. The terms "day" and "time" therefore mean the same thing: a period of one thousand years according to our mortal time. President Joseph Fielding Smith has said:

This earth was created on the Lord's time, which is celestial time. By revelation we know exactly the nature of that time, and just how many days of celestial time were required to create this earth. Moreover, we know how long this earth has endured, approximately, and how long it will endure according to our present rate of reckoning. . . .

When this earth was created, it was not according to our present time, but it was created according to Kolob's time, for the Lord has said it was created on celestial time which is Kolob's time. Then he revealed to Abraham that Adam was subject to Kolob's time before his transgression. "Now I Abraham, saw that it was after the time of Kolob; for as yet the Gods had not appointed unto Adam his reckoning. [^28]

From the evidence given in latter-day scripture, it seems apparent that the events of the creation (by which the earth was organized and life placed thereon in a physical-spiritual, paradisiacal-celestial state) were carried out during a period of 7,000 years, by our present computation of time; and since it has been about 6,000 since the fall of Adam, it follows that these events apparently began about 13,000 years ago.

But it should be remembered that Latter-day Saints accept, with scriptural authority, the view that the elements are eternal. [^29] Joseph Smith thus explained that the word create "means to organize, the same as a man would organize materials and build a ship." [^30] With such a view of the creation, Orson Pratt could explain: "When I speak of the beginning, I have reference to the beginning of the earth in its present organization; I do not have reference to the beginning of duration, for it had no beginning." [^31] Again, he wrote:

As the elements of all worlds were not created, but are eternal, and as they have always been the tabernacle or dwelling place of God, they must have eternally been acted upon by His Spirit; consequently must have passed through an endless series of operations without beginning. Instead of seeking to trace out evidences of a beginning to the elements, we shall at once pronounce them eternal. . . .

How many thousands of millions of times the elements of our globe have been organized and disorganized; or how many millions of shapes or forms the elements have been thrown into in their successive organizations and disorganizations; or how widely the particles have been diffused through boundless space; or of how many different worlds the particles have, at one time and another, formed component parts; or how long they have been parts of the solar system; or how long that system itself has formed a branch of our stellar heavens—is unknown to us mortals. [^32]

The points brought out in the statements above are important in that they lead to the conclusion that we must differentiate in some way between the evidences found in the earth as to the age of its materials, and the declarations made in the scriptures concerning the creation. Being eternal and having existed in a living universe, the elements should contain the marks of antiquity. But while this is true, the creation of the earth, as the account is given in the Scriptures, is evidently a relatively recent occurrence.

Major Outlines of the Creation

According to the story of the creation, the Gods took certain materials in space and, having brought them together to form the earth, prepared the newly formed orb in order for life to be placed upon it in a physical-spiritual state of existence. On the first day the earth was formed as an orb which was then empty and desolate. [^33] During that day and the five days that followed, the earth was prepared for life. [^34] There was no life placed upon the earth until the seventh day, [^35] when a garden was planted and man was placed upon the earth as the first flesh. [^36] With these points in mind it may be said that Abraham 4, Moses 2, and Genesis 1 are all concerned with the organization of the earth as a physical orb and the preparations that were made to prepare the earth for life to be placed upon it after it was sanctified at the beginning of the seventh day. Abraham 5, Moses 3, and Genesis 2 then relate the actual placement of life upon the earth, after making certain clarifications that are essential for the reader to understand in studying the given account.

The Story Of The Creation

The First Day of Creation

The several accounts of the first day of creation as found in the scriptures are as follows:

(Abraham)

. . . then the Lord said: Let us go down. And they went down at the beginning, and they, that is the Gods, organized and formed the heavens and the earth.

And the earth, after it was formed, was empty and desolate, because they had not formed anything but the earth; and darkness reigned upon the face of the deep, and the Spirit of the Gods was brooding upon the face of the waters.

And they (the Gods) said: Let there be light; and there was light.

And they (the Gods) comprehended the light, for it was bright; and they divided the light, or caused it to be divided, from the darkness.

And the Gods called the light Day, and the darkness they called Night. And it came to pass that from the evening until morning they called night; and from the morning until the evening they called day; and this was the first, or the beginning of that which they called day and night. [^37]

(Moses)

. . . it came to pass that the Lord spake unto Moses, saying: Behold, I reveal unto you concerning this heaven, and this earth; write the words which I speak. I am the Beginning and the End, the Almighty God; by mine Only Begotten I created these things; yea, in the beginning I created the heaven, and the earth upon which thou standest.

And the earth was without form, and void; and I caused darkness to come up upon the face of the deep; and my Spirit moved upon the face of the water; for I am God.

And I, God, said: Let there be light; and there was light.

And I, God, saw the light; and that light was good. And I, God, divided the light from the darkness.

And I, God, called the light Day; and the darkness, I called Night and this I did by the word of my power and it was done as I spake; and the evening and the morning were the first day. [^38]

(Genesis)

In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.

And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.

And God said, Let there be light: and there was light.

And God saw the light, that it was good; and God divided the light from the darkness.

And God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. And the evening and the morning were the first day. [^39]

The following points of major significance should be noted: First, on the initial day of creation the Gods formed the earth as an orb. Before that time, Christ declared to the noble and great spirits who were with Him: "We will go down, for there is s2pace there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell." [^40] On the first day of creation, they formed the earth from the materials to which the Lord referred.

Second, Abraham and Moses indicate that after the earth was formed on the first day, it was without life. Though Abraham states that the earth was "empty and desolate," Moses indicates that it was "without form, and void." [^41] To be void is to be empty and thus destitute of life. The scriptures also indicate that the earth at this time was inundated with water. [^42]

Third, darkness reigned upon the face of the deep that covered the newly formed earth. Here Moses makes a contribution not found in Abraham's account, when he reports God as saying: "And I caused darkness to come upon the face of the deep." [^43] The darkness was a result of divine action. The absence of light upon the earth during part of the first day confirms the view that the earth was void of life.

Finally, the Gods decreed on the first day, "Let there be light." The scriptures then report, "And there was light." [^44] This light did not come from the sun, but from the presence of God. John Taylor thus spoke of the Gods causing the light of their glory to shine upon the earth "before the sun appeared in the firmament." [^45]

The Second Day of Creation

The several accounts of the second day of creation given in the scriptures are as follows:

(Abraham)

And the Gods also said: Let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters, and it shall divide the waters from the waters.

And the Gods ordered the expanse, so that it divided the waters which were under the expanse from the waters which were above the expanse; and it was so, even as they ordered.

And the Gods called the expanse, Heaven. And it came to pass that it was from evening until morning that they called night; and it came to pass that it was from morning until evening that they called day; and this was the second time that they called night and day. [^46]

(Moses)

And again, I, God, said: Let there be a firmament in the midst of the water, and it was so, even as I spake; and I said: Let it divide the waters from the waters; and it was done;

And I, God, made the firmament and divided the waters, yea, the great waters under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament, and it was so even as I spake.

And I, God, called the firmament Heaven; and the evening and the morning were the second day. [^47]

(Genesis)

And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters.

And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament: and it was so.

And God called the firmament Heaven. And the evening and the morning were the second day: [^48]

To understand the activities of the second day, it is necessary to define the terms used in the above statements. Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written:

As used in the scriptures, firmament means expanse. The firmament of heaven is the expanse of heaven; it refers, depending upon the context, to either the atmospheric or the sidereal heavens. (Gen. 1; Moses 2; Abra. 4.) It is not true, as has been falsely supposed, that the ancient prophets believed that the firmament was a solid arch between the lower and upper waters in which the stars were set as so many stones in gold or silver. Such was rather the apostate view of the apostate Church in the dark ages. [^49]

A specific reference on which the word "heaven" or "heavens" alludes to the atmosphere around the earth is found in the Lord's statement: "As one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof even so shall another come." [^50] For the Gods to organize the firmament, or expanse, which is the earth's heaven, was for them to organize the atmosphere that it might perform its proper functions and that rain might fall upon the earth.

The Third Day of Creation

The various scriptural accounts of the creative activities of the third day are as follows:

(Abraham)

And the Gods ordered, saying: Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the earth come up dry; and it was so as they ordered;

And the Gods pronounced the dry land, earth; and the gathering together of the waters, pronounced they, great waters; and the Gods saw that they were obeyed.

And the Gods said: Let us prepare the earth to bring forth grass; the herb yielding seed; the fruit tree yielding fruit, after his kind, whose seed in itself yieldeth its own likeness upon the earth; and it was so, even as they ordered.

And the Gods organized the earth to bring forth grass from its own seed, and the herb to bring forth herb from its own seed, yielding seed after his kind; and the earth to bring forth the tree from its own seed, yielding fruit, whose seed could only bring forth the same in itself, after his kind; and the Gods saw that they were obeyed.

And it came to pass that they numbered the days; from the evening until the morning they called night; and it came to pass, from the morning until the evening they called day; and it was the third time. [^51]

(Moses)

And I, God, said: Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and it was so; and I, God, said: Let there be dry land; and it was so.

And I, God, called the dry land Earth; and the gathering together of the waters, called I the Sea; and I, God, saw that all things which I had made were good.

And I, God, said: Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, the fruit tree yielding fruit, after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed should be in itself upon the earth, and it was so even as I spake.

And the earth brought forth grass, every herb yielding seed after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed should be in itself, after his kind; and I, God, saw that all things which I had made were good;

And the evening and the morning were the third day. [^52]

(Genesis)

And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land appear: and it was so.

And God called the dry land Earth; and the gathering together of the waters called the Seas: and God saw that it was good.

And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in itself, upon the earth: and it was so.

And the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in itself, after his kind: and God saw that it was good.

And the evening and the morning were the third day. [^53]

The above statements reveal a view of the earth that is interesting and important. Parley P. Pratt has written an explanation of the third day's activities that has since been quoted and sanctioned by John Taylor and Joseph Fielding Smith:

When God had created the heavens and the earth, and separated the light from the darkness, His next great command was to the waters, Gen. 1:9. "And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land appear: and it was so." From this we learn a marvelous fact, which very few have ever realized or believed in this benighted age: we learn that the waters, which are now divided into oceans, seas, and lakes, were then all gathered into one vast ocean, and consequently, that the land which is now torn asunder, and divided into continents and islands almost innumerable, was then one vast continent or body, not separated as it now is. [^54]

This view of the earth is supported by scriptural statements that foretell the future restoration of the earth to its original state of organization. Having beheld the mighty convulsions of nature that are to occur before the coming of Christ in the last days, John wrote while on the Isle of Patmos: "And every island fled away, and the mountains were not found." [^55] To Israel of the last days, Isaiah declared: "Thou shalt no more be termed Forsaken; neither shall thy land any more be termed Desolate: but thou shalt be called Hephzibah, and thy land Beulah: for the Lord delighteth in thee, and thy land shall be married." [^56] The Lord gave the Western hemisphere as an inheritance to the tribe of Joseph, [^57] whereas the other tribes of Israel were given inheritances upon the Eastern hemisphere. In the great restitution of all things to occur in the last days, all the land given to Israel is to be married, or united together. Of this anticipated union, a revelation to Joseph Smith said: "He [i.e., God] shall command the great deep, and it shall be driven back into the north countries, and the islands shall become one land; and the land of Jerusalem and the land of Zion shall be turned back into their own place, and the earth shall be like as it was in the days before it was divided." [^58] The land of Jerusalem is the land that God gave to Israel as a general inheritance, and the land of Zion is the additional land the Lord gave to Joseph.

Having gathered the waters together unto one place and caused the earth to come up and become dry, the Gods then prepared the earth to bring forth grass, herbs, and trees. Abraham indicates that they did not place the various forms of vegetable life upon the earth at this time. Instead, they merely prepared it to sustain such life. Abraham therefore reports that "the Gods organized the earth to bring forth grass, . . . and the herbs, . . . and the tree from its own seed." [^59] A superficial reading of the account by Moses would seem to indicate that such forms of life as are here mentioned were placed upon the earth on the third day. But a more thorough study shows Moses to be in full harmony with Abraham. After relating the activities of the first six days of creation, Moses explains (as he begins his report of the seventh day) that God had not caused it to rain upon the earth. The Lord then made a mist come up and water the whole face of the ground, after which the various forms of vegetable life were placed upon the earth. [^60] It must therefore be concluded that God's statement regarding the third day that the earth brought forth grass, herbs, and trees is but an affirmation to Moses, many years after the creation, that His command concerning these forms of life had been fulfilled—not that His command was then, on the third day, fulfilled.

The Fourth Day of Creation

Of the activities of the fourth day, the various scriptural accounts state:

(Abraham)

And the Gods organized the lights in the expanse of the heaven, and caused them to divide the day from the night; and organized them to be for signs and for seasons, andfor days and for years.

And organized them to be for lights in the expanse of the heaven to give light upon the earth; and it was so.

And the Gods organized the two great lights, the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night; with the lesser light they set the stars also;

And the Gods set them in the expanse of the heavens, to give light upon the earth, and to rule over the day and over the night, and to cause to divide the light from the darkness

And the Gods watched those things which they had ordered until they obeyed.

And it came to pass that it was from evening until morning that it was night; and it came to pass that it was from morning until evening that it was day; and it was the fourth time. [^61]

(Moses)

And I, God, said: Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven, to divide the day from the night, and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and for years;

And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth; and it was so.

And I, God, made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night, and the greater light was the sun, and the lesser light was the moon; and the stars also were made even according to my word.

And I, God, set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth,

And the sun to rule over the day, and the moon to rule over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness, and I, God, saw that all things which I had made were it good; And the evening and the morning were the fourth day. [^62]

(Genesis)

And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years:

And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth: and it was so.

And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars also.

And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth,

And to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness: and God saw that it was good. And the evening and the morning were the fourth day. [^63]

It seems evident from Abraham's account of the fourth day that the Gods did not at this time create the sun, moon, and stars. Instead, they "organized the lights in the expanse of the heaven, and caused them to divide the day from the night; and organized them to be for signs and for seasons, and for days and for years." [^64] It was the organization of the earth in relation to the sun and the sidereal heavens, not the actual creation of the sun and the stars, that Abraham reports. Since the earth was organized according to the Lord's time and was then under the same governing law as Kolob pertaining to its time schedule, [^65] it must be concluded that the organizations that were made on the fourth day were in preparation for the time when the earth would be placed under its present temporal law. In the actions of the creation, the earth was made a physical-spiritual sphere in the presence of God. Under these circumstances, the sun was not necessary as the earth's source of light in the sense that it is now. [^66]

The Fifth Day of Creation

The accounts of the fifth day of creation given in the scriptures state:

(Abraham)

And the Gods said: Let us prepare the waters to bring forth abundantly the moving creatures that have life; and the fowl, that they may fly above the earth in the open expanse of heaven.

And the Gods prepared the waters that they might bring forth great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters were to bring forth abundantly after their kind; and every winged fowl after their kind. And the Gods saw that they would be obeyed, and that their plan was good.

And the Gods said: We will bless them, and cause them to be fruitful and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas or great waters; and cause the fowl to multiply in the earth.

And it came to pass that it was from evening until morning that they called night; and it came to pass that it was from morning until evening that they called day; and it was the fifth time. [^67]

(Moses)

And I, God, said: Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life, and fowl which may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven.

And I, God, created great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind; and I, God, saw that all things which I had created were good.

And I, God, blessed them, saying: Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the sea; and let fowl multiply in the earth;

And the evening and the morning were the fifth day. [^68]

(Genesis)

And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life, and fowl that may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven.

And God created great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind: and God saw that it was good.

And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the earth.

And the evening and the morning were the fifth day. [^69]

Regarding the fifth day of creation, Abraham states that "the Gods prepared the waters that they might bring forth great whales, and every living creation that moveth, which the waters were to bring forth abundantly after their kind; and every winged fowl after their kind." [^70] Again there was no actual placement of life upon the earth during the fifth day, merely a preparation of the waters for such life as is here mentioned. This view is supported by the fact that the Gods spoke in the future tense when, on the fifth day, they referred to the actual placement of marine life and fowls upon the earth, stating: "We will bless them and cause them to be fruitful and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas or great waters; and cause the fowl to multiply in the earth." [^71] The statement of the Lord to Moses, on the fifth day, that He "created great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, . . . and every winged fowl after his kind" [^72] is, again, God's affirmation to Moses several years later that the full intent of this day's activities had been realized. God also stated to Moses that He blessed these forms of life when they were placed upon the earth. [^73]

The Sixth Day of Creation

Of the activities of the sixth day of creation, the accounts state:

(Abraham)

And the Gods prepared the earth to bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle and creeping things, and beasts of the earth after their kind; and it was so, as they had said.

And the Gods organized the earth to bring forth the beasts after their kind, and cattle after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the earth after its kind; and the Gods saw they would obey.

And the Gods took counsel among themselves and said: Let us go down and form man in our image, after our likeness; and we will give them dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

So the Gods went down to organize man in their own image, in the image of the Gods to form they him, male and female to form they them.

And the Gods said: We will bless them. And the Gods said: We will cause them to be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and to have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.

And the Gods said: Behold, we will give them every herb bearing seed that shall come upon the face of all the earth, and every tree which shall have fruit upon it; yea, the fruit of the tree yielding seed to them we will give it; it shall be for their meat.

And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, behold, we will give them life, and also we will give to them every green herb for meat, and all these things shall be thus organized.

And the Gods said: We will do everything that we have said, and organize them; and behold, they shall be very obedient. And it came to pass that it was from evening until morning they called night; and it came to pass that it was from morning until evening that they called day; and they numbered the sixth time. [^74]

(Moses)

And I, God, said: Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle, and creeping things, and beasts of the earth after their kind, and it was so;

And I, God, made the beasts of the earth after their kind, and cattle after their kind, and everything which creepeth upon the earth after his kind; and I, God, saw that all these things were good.

And I, God, said unto mine Only Begotten, which was with me from the beginning: Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and it was so. And I, God, said: Let them have dominion over the fishes of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

And I, God, created man in mine own image, in the image of mine Only Begotten created I him; male and female created I them.

And I, God, blessed them and said unto them: Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.

And I, God, said unto man: Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree in the which shall be the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat.

And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to everything that creepeth upon the earth, wherein I grant life, there shall be given every clean herb for meat; and it was so, even as I spake.

And I, God, saw everything that I had made, and behold, all things which I had made were very good, and the evening and the morning were the sixth day. [^75]

(Genesis)

And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the earth after his kind: and it was so.

And God made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind: and God saw that it was good.

And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them.

And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.

And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in the which is the fruit of a tree, yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat.

And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, wherein there is life, I have given every green herb for meat: and it was so.

And God saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, it was very good. And the evening and the morning were the sixth day. [^76]

Again, it is evident from Abraham's account of the sixth day that no life was placed upon the earth at that time. Instead, he reports, "And the Gods prepared the earth to bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle and beasts of the earth after their kind." [^77] The Gods "organized the earth to bring forth the beasts"; [^78] they did not then place beasts upon the earth.

Nor was man actually placed upon the earth on the sixth day. Abraham states that at that time the Gods said, "Let us go down and form man in our image, after our likeness." [^79] Abraham also reports: "So the Gods went down to organize man in their own image." [^80] On the sixth day, the Gods therefore went down to the earth to organize man. But the actual organization of man was deferred until the seventh day. [^81] Meanwhile, the Gods spoke of man and the several forms of life which they intended to place upon the earth, stating of the man and woman whom they planned to create:

Behold, we will give them every herb bearing seed that shall come upon the face of all the earth, and every tree which shall have fruit upon it; yea, the fruit of the tree yielding seed to them we will give it; it shall be for their meat.

And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, behold, we will give them life, and also we will give to them every green herb for meat, and all these things shall be thus organized.

And the Gods said: We will do everything that we have said, and organize them. . . . [^82]

The above statements in italics indicate that, as the Gods concluded their activities of the sixth day, the several forms of life which they had prepared the earth to sustain had not then been placed upon the earth. They therefore spoke of "every herb bearing seed that shall come upon the face of all the earth, and every tree which shall have fruit upon it." When the tree which would bring forth fruit would be placed upon the earth, the Gods declared that they would "give it" to man. [^83] This was their intent, not a statement of that which they then did. Of the beast of the earth, the fowl of the air, and those forms of life that creep upon the earth, the Gods said: "We will give them life, . . . and all these things shall be thus organized." [^84] Finally, at the end of the sixth day, the Gods concluded: "We will do everything that we have said, and organize them." [^85] All this they would do on the seventh day.

In his report of the sixth day, Moses follows the same format that he uses in relating the activities of the preceding days. On that day the Man of Holiness said to His Only Begotten: "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness." To Moses, God then affirmed, "And it was so." [^86] There is no specific statement as to when it was so, merely the affirmation to Moses: "And I, God, created man in mine own image, in the image of mine Only Begotten created I him; male and female created I them." [^87]

The Seventh Day of Creation

The accounts of the activities of the seventh day as given in the scriptures state:

(Abraham)

And thus we will finish the heavens and the earth, and all the host of them.

And the Gods said among themselves: On the seventh time we will end our work, which we have counseled; and we will rest on the seventh time from all our work which we have counseled.

And the Gods concluded upon the seventh time, because that on the seventh time they would rest from all their works which they (the Gods) counseled among themselves to form; and sanctified it. And thus were their decisions at the time that they counseled among themselves to form the heavens and the earth.

And the Gods came down and formed these the generations of the heavens and of the earth, when they were formed in the day that the Gods formed the earth and the heavens.

According to all that which they had said concerning every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew; for the Gods had not caused it to rain upon the earth when they counseled to do them, and had not formed a man to till the ground.

But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.

And the Gods formed man from the dust of the ground, and took his spirit (that is, the man's spirit), and put it into him; and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul.

And the Gods planted a garden, eastward in Eden, and there they put the man, whose spirit they had put into the body which they had formed.

And out of the ground made the Gods to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food; the tree of life, also, in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

There was a river running out of Eden, to water the garden, and from thence it was parted and became into four heads.

And the Gods took the man and put him in the Garden of Eden, to dress it and to keep it.

And the Gods commanded the man, saying: Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat:

But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it; for in the time that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die. Now I, Abraham, saw that it was after the Lord's time, which was after the time of Kolob; for as yet the Gods had not appointed unto Adam his reckoning.

And the Gods said: Let us make an help meet for the man, for it is not good that the man should be alone, therefore we will form an help meet for him.

And the Gods caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam; and he slept, and they took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh in the stead thereof;

And of the rib which the Gods had taken from man, formed they a woman, and brought her unto the man.

And Adam said: This was bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh; now she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of man;

Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife, and they shall be one flesh.

And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.

And out of the ground the Gods formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air, and brought them unto Adam to see what he would call them; and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that should be the name thereof.

And Adam gave names to all cattle, to the fowl of the air, to every beast of the field; and for Adam, there was found an help meet for him. [^88]

(Moses)

Thus the heaven and the earth were finished, and all the host of them.

And on the seventh day I, God, ended my work, and all things which I had made; and I rested on the seventh day from all my work, and all things which I had made were finished, and I, God, saw that they were good;

And I, God, blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it; because that in it I had rested from all my work which I, God, had created and made.

And now, behold, I say unto you, that these are the generations of the heaven and of the earth, when they were created, in the day that I, the Lord God, made the heaven and the earth;

And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew. For I, the Lord God, created all things, of which I have spoken, spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth. For I, the Lord God, had not caused it to rain upon the face of the earth. And I, the Lord God, had created all the children of men; and not yet a man to till the ground; for in heaven created I them; and there was not yet flesh upon the earth, neither in the water, neither in the air;

But I, the Lord God, spake, and there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.

And I, the Lord God, formed man from the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul, the first flesh upon the earth, the first man also; nevertheless, all things were before created; but spiritually were they created and made according to my word.

And I, the Lord God, planted a garden eastward in Eden, and there I put the man whom I had formed.

And out of the ground made I, the Lord God, to grow every tree, naturally, that is pleasant to the sight of man; and man could behold it. And it became also a living soul. For it was spiritual in the day that I created it; for it remaineth in the sphere in which I, God, created it, yea, even which I prepared for the use of man; and man saw that it was good for food. And I, the Lord God, planted the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and also the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

And I, the Lord God, caused a river to go out of Eden to water the garden; and from thence it was parted, and became into four heads.

And I, the Lord God, called the name of the first Pison, and it compasseth the whole land of Havilah, where I, the Lord God, created much gold;

And the gold of that land was good, and there was bdellium and the onyx stone.

And the name of the second river was called Gihon; the same that compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia.

And the name of the third river was Hiddekel; that which goeth toward the east of Assyria. And the fourth river was the Euphrates.

And I, the Lord God, took the man, and put him into the Garden of Eden, to dress it, and to keep it.

And I, the Lord God, commanded the man, saying: Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat,

But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it, nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee; but, remember that I forbid it, for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.

And I, the Lord God, said unto mine Only Begotten, that it was not good that the man should be alone; wherefore, I will make an help meet for him.

And out of the ground I, the Lord God, formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air; and commanded that they should come unto Adam, to see what he would call them; and they were also living souls; for I, God, breathed into them the breath of life, and commanded that whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that should be the name thereof.

And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast of the field; but as for Adam, there was not found an help meet for him.

And I, the Lord God, caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam; and he slept, and I took one of his ribs and closed up the flesh in the stead thereof;

And the rib which I, the Lord God, had taken from man, made I a woman, and brought her unto the man.

And Adam said: This I know now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of man.

Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife; and they shall be one flesh.

And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed. [^89]

(Genesis)

Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them.

And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made; and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made.

And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in it he had rested from all his work which God created and made.

These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens.

And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew: for the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man to till the ground.

But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.

And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul.

And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the man whom he had formed.

And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

And a river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from thence it was parted, and became into four heads.

The name of the first is Pison; that is it which compasseth the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold;

And the gold of that land is good: there is bdellium and the onyx stone.

And the name of the second river is Gihon: the same is it that compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia.

And the name of the third river is Hiddekel: that is it which goeth toward the east of Assyria. And the fourth river is Euphrates.

And the Lord God took the man, and put him into the garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it.

And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat:

But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.

And the Lord God said, It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him an help meet for him.

And out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air; and brought them unto Adam to see what he would call them: and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name thereof.

And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast of the field; but for Adam there was not found an helpmeet for him.

And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof;

And the rib, which the Lord God had taken from man, made he a woman, and brought her unto the man.

And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man.

Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh.

And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed. [^90]

Abraham and Moses each make different contributions as they introduce the events of the seventh day. These differences stem from the approach each prophet takes in presenting the story of the creation. Abraham prefaces his account of the seventh day by quoting the intentions of the Gods as they reiterate their plans to finish the creation of the earth and its several forms of life. Of that which they planned to do on the seventh day, the Gods said: "And thus we will finish the heaven and the earth, and all the hosts of them." [^91] Again it is evident that, until the seventh day, the creation of the atmospheric heaven and the earth and all the varieties of life to be placed upon the earth was not completed. Abraham then reports the plans of the Gods concerning the seventh day:

And the Gods said among themselves: On the seventh time we will end our work, which we have counseled; and we will rest on the seventh time from all our work which we have counseled.

And the Gods' concluded upon the seventh time, because that on the seventh time they would rest from all their works which they (the Gods) counseled among themselves to form; and sanctified it. And thus were their decisions at the time that they counseled among themselves to form the heavens and the earth. [^92]

In the statement above, Abraham declares that on the seventh day the Gods sanctified the earth which they had formed. Joseph Smith also wrote by revelation: "God made the world in six days, and on the seventh day he finished his work, and sanctified it." [^93] The sanctification of the earth on the seventh day of creation is likened in the revelation to Joseph Smith to the sanctification of the earth when Christ comes in glory to usher in the millennial era. [^94] In the latter case, the earth will be sanctified by the manifestation of Christ's glory, when the veil is rent and the earth is renewed to its paradisiacal state of glory. [^95] It is not unreasonable therefore to conclude that the earth was sanctified on the seventh day of creation by being brought fully into the presence of God. Only then was it in the full sense of meaning a physical-spiritual sphere rolling in splendor in the presence of Elohim, the Man of Holiness, with the power of His divine intelligence shining upon it. Not until then was it fully prepared to have life placed upon it.

After the newly formed sphere was sanctified, Abraham reports that "the Gods came down and formed these the generations of the heaven and of the earth, . . . according to all that which they had said concerning every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew." [^96] They not only followed a blueprint in organizing and preparing the earth for life, but they also followed a pre-designed plan in placing life upon the earth on the seventh day. Abraham observed: "For the Gods had not caused it to rain upon the earth when they counseled to do them, and had not formed a man to till the ground." [^97]

Unlike Abraham, Moses did not make clear that man had a pre-earth existence as an organized spirit before he (Moses) wrote his account of the creation. Nor is it plain from Moses's account of the first six days that the actions then taken were merely preparations of the physical earth for life, not accounts of the actual placement of life upon the earth. For these reasons, Moses starts his account of the seventh day by making certain necessary clarifications.

First, Moses states that all life to be placed upon the earth on the seventh day had been organized in a pre-earth spirit state. Of this fact, the Lord said to Moses:

. . . and every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew. For I, the Lord God created all things, of which I have spoken, spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth. . . . I, the Lord God, had created all the children of men; and not yet a man to till the ground; for in heaven created I them. . . .

All things were before created; but spiritually were they created and made according to my word. [^98]

Second, like Abraham, Moses states that until the seventh day God "had not caused it to rain upon the face of the earth." [^99] This fact, as indicated earlier in the chapter, is supporting evidence that life was not placed upon the earth until the seventh day.

Finally, Moses states categorically that as the seventh day began, "there was not yet flesh upon the earth, neither in the water, neither in the air." [^100] This statement by Moses, along with the fact that he then proceeds to describe the actual placement of life upon the earth on the seventh day, is conclusive evidence that Moses did not mean to convey the idea that life had been placed upon the earth before the seventh day.

Before life was placed upon the earth on the seventh day, both Abraham and Moses state that "there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground." [^101] Having been refreshed and moistened, the newly formed and sanctified sphere was then ready for life.

The fact that man was formed and placed upon the earth on the seventh day is declared in a revelation to Joseph Smith which states: "God made the world in six days, and on the seventh day he finished his work, and sanctified it, and also formed man out of the dust of the earth." [^102] In reporting the creation of man on the seventh day, Abraham states:

And the Gods formed man from the dust of the ground, and took his spirit (that is, the man's spirit), and put it into him; and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul.

And the Gods planted a garden, eastward in Eden, and there they put the man, whose spirit they had put into the body which they had formed. [^103]

Of the creation of man, the Lord said to Moses:

And I, the Lord God, formed man from the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul, the first flesh upon the earth, the first man also. . . .

And I, the Lord God, planted a garden eastward in Eden, and there I put the man whom I had formed. [^104]

Two things are of special importance in the above statement: First, the Lord states clearly that in the creation man was the first flesh placed upon the earth. The context of the Lord's statement is important. (To get this context, read Moses 3:6-7.) At this point in his account of the creation, God is clearly and unmistakably speaking of the initial placement of life upon the earth, after the earth had been formed and sanctified and before the fall of Adam. And in speaking of the initial placement of life upon the earth, God declared that man was the "first flesh" to be put here. [^105] Man therefore arrived upon the earth before the various animals, etc. After Adam had been placed upon the earth, the animals, etc., were then formed out of the ground and brought "unto Adam to see what he would call them." [^106] Here again it is obvious that man arrived on earth first. But because man was placed upon earth as the first flesh, it does not follow that he resided here for a time in a desolate state. Before man was put upon the earth, a garden was planted, and there man was placed as a lone figure, until woman and the animals were formed.

The second point of importance in the quotation above is that God declared to Moses that Adam was the first man. There were no pre-Adamites. At the beginning of the creation, as the first day was concluded, the earth was empty and desolate. [^107] At the beginning of the seventh day, "there was not yet flesh upon the earth, neither in the water, neither in the air." [^108] Then man was formed, a garden was planted, and man was placed in the garden as the first flesh upon the earth. Such is the testimony of scripture. To Moses, God also declared of the many worlds He had created: "And the first man of all men have I called Adam, which is many." [^109] Abraham testified that for this earth Adam was "the first man" and "our first father." [^110] Nephi referred to Adam and Eve as "our first parents." [^111] Furthermore, the Book of Moses declares that Adam called his wife Eve, "because she was the mother of all living." In declaring this fact to Moses, the Lord added, "For thus have I, the Lord God, called the first of all women." [^112] Since there were no women on earth before Eve and since she was the mother of all living, it follows that there could have been no men on earth before Adam.

There is a point of conflict that cannot presently be reconciled between the account of the placement of life upon the earth as related by Abraham and that which is found in the Book of Moses. Abraham indicates that woman was made as a help meet for Adam before the animals were formed and placed upon the earth. But Moses seems to imply that the animals arrived before Eve was created. This may be one area to which Joseph Smith would have given further attention if he had made the final revisions necessary to publish his inspired revision of the creation story by Moses. It is the opinion of the writer that the Book of Abraham gives the correct sequence of events.

Clarifications On The Creation

The Earth Established in a Paradisiacal State of Glory

In being organized as a physical-spiritual sphere in the creation, the earth was established in a paradisiacal state of glory with the divine intelligence and power of the Father, Elohim, manifested upon it in rich abundance. Thereby the earth and all things that had been placed upon it were endowed to a great degree with the power and attributes of celestial life.

To be more specific, the earth in the creation was placed in a paradisiacal-celestial state of glory. The full meaning of this term can be better understood if each of the two words that comprise it are defined. The fact that the earth was in a paradisiacal state of glory means that there was no veil to shield it from the radiation of God's glory and power. Though the glory of God had not been made a part of the earth's organization on the same principle that it will be organized into the redeemed and glorified sphere, [^113] the earth was nevertheless in the presence of God. And having no veil to cover it, it was enveloped by the glory of God, which shone upon it. This is what is meant by a paradisiacal state of glory. But the earth at that time was in a paradisiacal-celestial state. The added meaning that the word "celestial" gives to the term may be seen when it is pointed out that a sphere is said to be telestial in organization when the Holy Spirit is the basic source of divine intelligence and power which it receives from God. It is terrestrial when the glory of the Son is its basic source of light and truth. But it is celestial if it is organized to receive the glory and power of the Father, Elohim. [^114] Since the glory of the Father was manifested upon the earth after the creation was completed, it was then in a paradisiacal-celestial state.

To illustrate the earth's paradisiacal-celestial state, it may be observed that during the millennium, when Christ comes to reign in glory among men, the earth "will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory." [^115] To be renewed means to be brought back to a state of glory similar to that which it occupied for a time after the creation. The renewal of the earth in the millennium, however, will not be a complete restoration of this sphere to a paradisiacal-celestial state, for in the millennium only the glory of Christ as the Son will be manifested and will be upon the earth. In the millennium, the earth will therefore be brought to a paradisiacal-terrestrial state of glory. This conclusion is warranted by the fact that the heathen nations and the honorable men of the earth who do not receive the Gospel will not be consumed when Christ comes in glory to usher in the millennium, for they will be of the terrestrial order and thereby able to abide the glory that Christ manifests as the Son. [^116]

When the paradisiacal state of glory that will exist in the millennium is ushered in, the corruption that has become associated with the earth will be destroyed, and the earth will become new and compatible to the continued manifestations of Christ's glory and power. A revelation states that in that day the earth will then be "clothed with the glory of her God," [^117] and another declares that Christ's "glory shall be upon" the people. [^118] Universal peace will prevail. Satan will have no power and there will be no death, in the sense that there will be no deterioration of the physical body, but life, love, and union will prevail. A vivid description of the renewal of the earth in its future paradisiacal state is given in Doctrine and Covenants 101:23-31. This statement by the Lord may be studied with profit as a means of confirming the points that have been made in this paragraph.

While the earth was in its paradisiacal-celestial state, it was immortal in that it was organized to endure forever. Orson Pratt declared, "Adam and Eve were immortal, the same as resurrected beings." [^119] Lehi wrote that, except for Adam's transgression, "all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained for ever and had no end." [^120] Special note should be made that this included all things on earth, and not merely those forms of life which were in the garden. Except for the fall, all things which were created—the earth and all forms of life thereon—would have remained forever in the physical-spiritual, paradisiacal-celestial state in which they were created, for in this state of existence they would have had no end. This is an inescapable conclusion.

Further Knowledge Promised Concerning the Creation

It is difficult for man as a temporal being to understand clearly the state of life that existed upon the earth when it was first created. How can a being who is temporal comprehend in detail that which is immortal in its nature? The temporal and the immortal are two different states of life. Two different systems of law prevail. It requires experience for man to comprehend any given state of existence. How, then, can mortal man understand significantly and appreciate meaningfully the order of life that prevailed upon the earth when it was first created? It is probably for this reason that God has declared that many details concerning the creation will not be revealed to man until the earth has been renewed to a paradisiacal state of glory. Only then will man have the necessary experience to comprehend in some measure how the Lord made the earth. Having explained the conditions that will prevail when the earth is renewed and enveloped again in glory, a revelation said:

. . . verily I say unto you, in that day when the Lord shall come, he shall reveal all things—

Things which have passed, and hidden things which no man knew, things of the earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereof—

Things most precious, things that are above, and things that are beneath, things that are in the earth, and upon the earth, and in heaven.

And all they who suffer persecution for my name, and endure in faith, though they are called to lay down their lives for my sake yet shall they partake of all this glory. [^121]

The "things which have passed" mentioned in this revelation refer not only to the actions that were carried out in the creation of the earth as a physical-spiritual sphere, but to the conditions that once prevailed upon the earth but are no more. Those "hidden things which no man knew" refer to the former state of life which was established in the creation, as well as to those things which God has not as yet revealed concerning the physical details of the creation. All these are matters that concern the earth, how it was made, "and the purpose and the end thereof." As has been indicated, the purpose of the creation was to organize not a temporal sphere, but an immortal, physical-spiritual sphere that could abide in a paradisiacal-celestial state of glory. When viewed in light of the eternal purposes and designs of God concerning the creation of this sphere, the things which Christ will reveal at His coming are things which are "most precious." They are "things that are above," as well as "things that are beneath." They will concern "things that are in the earth, and upon the earth, and in heaven." The fact that the Lord is not merely referring to the physical details of the creation is apparent from the declaration: "And all they who suffer persecution for my name, and endure in faith, though they are called to lay down their lives for my sake yet shall they partake of all this glory." [^122] The glory that man once enjoyed is to be given again to the Saints. It was for this purpose that the earth was created, not merely to be a physical abode for man. To understand the creation, man must comprehend how the divine was related to the physical in the organization of the earth. These things Christ will probably reveal when He comes to establish His glory upon the earth.

The Origin of Life on Earth

In considering the origin of life on earth, two principles seem to emerge from statements made by authorities on the subject: First, human as well as animal life was organized physically by procreation; plant life by germination. Second, the parent life from which the initial earth forms came existed on another sphere. Life was therefore transplanted from another earth.

Direct scriptural support for the doctrine that Adam received a physical body through the process of procreation is found in the pedigree of Christ, which, according to Luke, traces back to "Enos, which was the son of Seth, which was the son of Adam, which was the son of God." [^123] The Book of Moses also states: "This is the genealogy of the sons of Adam, who was the son of God, with whom God, himself, conversed." [^124] That grass, trees, and herbs from another sphere produced seeds which were then planted in the newly prepared earth to bring forth the vegetable kingdom is implied in the Lord's statement that He planted a garden eastward in Eden. [^125]

For every living organism placed upon the earth there was a living precursor. Joseph Smith once observed:

Where was there ever a son without a father? And where was there ever a father without first being a son? Wherever did a tree or anything spring into existence without a progenitor? And everything comes in this way. [^126]

In discussing the principle of procreation as the process by which life was organized initially on earth, Brigham Young said:

Numerous are the scriptures which I might bring to bear upon the subject of the personality of God. I shall not take time to quote them on this occasion, but will content myself by quoting two passages in the 1st chapter of Genesis, 26th and 27th verses. "And God said, let us make man in our image, after our likeness. . . . So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him, male and female created he them."

I believe that the declaration made in these two scriptures is literally true. God has made His children like Himself to stand erect, and has endowed them with intelligence and power and dominion over all His works and given them the same attributes which He Himself possesses. He created man, as we create our children; for there is no other process of creation in heaven, on the earth, in the earth, or under the earth, or in all the eternities, that is, that were, or that ever will be. [^127]

Other prominent authorities have made similar clarifications. President Joseph F. Smith, in his closing remarks at a stake conference in the Maricopa Stake, December 7, 1913, bore a strong testimony of the truthfulness of the Gospel and said in part:

I know that my Redeemer liveth; . . . I know that God is a being with body, parts, and passions and that His Son is in His own likeness, and that man is created in the image of God. The Son, Jesus Christ, grew and developed into manhood the same as you or I, as likewise did God, His Father grow and develop to the Supreme Being that He now is. Man was born of woman; Christ the Savior, was born of woman and God, the Father, was born of woman. Adam, our earthly parent, was also born of woman into this world, the same as Jesus and you and I. [^128]

More recently the Desert News: Church Section quoted the following from an official "Course Study For Priests":

Man has descended from God: In fact, he is of the same race as the Gods. His descent has not been from a lower form of life, but from the Highest Form of Life; in other words, man is, in the most literal sense, a child of God. This is not only true of the spirit of man, but of his body also. There never was a time, probably, in all the eternities of the past, when there was not men or children of God. This world is only one of many worlds which have been created by the Father through His Only Begotten. [^129]

From the above statements and others that could be cited, it is apparent that man did not originate on earth as the product of a special act of creation in which he had no affinity to God except as a creature produced by the genius of the master Mind. Instead, man's pure, original, sanctified physical body descended from God, as the offspring of God, inheriting in birth the physical image, likeness, and attributes of his exalted Parents. Here, as has been previously indicated, is a vital key to understanding the origin of life.

Procreation is the key to the origin of human life, so far as the method of its organization is concerned, and transplantation is the key to how man arrived on earth. Having formed a body and placed man's organized spirit therein, the Gods then "put" the man in the garden. Before this, however, seeds had been brought to the newly organized earth and planted to bring forth the garden in which Adam was placed. [^130] While repudiating the theory of organic evolution in its explanation of the origin of life, Joseph Fielding Smith wrote of the principle of transplantation as the means by which life was placed upon the earth:

. . . does it not appear to you that it is a foolish and ridiculous notion that when God created this earth he had to begin with a speck of protoplasm, and take millions of years, if not billions, to bring conditions to pass by which his sons and daughters might obtain bodies made in his image? Why not the shorter route and transplant them from another earth as we are taught in the scriptures? [^131]

Again from President Smith:

I tell you, life did not commence upon this earth spontaneously. Its origin was not here. Life existed long before our solar system was called into being. The fact is, there never was a time when man—made in the image of God, male and female—did not exist. . . .

The Lord has given us the information regarding his creations, and how he has made many earths, for there never was a beginning, never was a time when man did not exist somewhere in the universe, and when the time came for this earth to be peopled, the Lord, our God, transplanted upon it from some other earth, the life which is found here. . . . [^132]

The view expressed by President Smith finds support in a statement by Brigham Young, who said:

Shall I say that the seeds of vegetables were planted here by the Characters that framed and built this world—that the seeds of every plant composing the vegetable kingdom were brought from another world? This would be news to many of you. Who brought them here? It matters little to us whether it was John, James, William, Adam, or Bartholomew who brought them; but it was some Being who had power to frame this earth with its seas, valleys, mountains, and rivers and cause it to teem with vegetable and animal life.

Here let me state to all philosophers of every class upon the earth, When you tell me that father Adam was made as we make adobies from the earth, you tell me what I deem an idle tale. When you tell me that the beasts of the field were produced in that manner, you are speaking idle words devoid of meaning. There is no such thing in all the eternities where the Gods dwell. Mankind are here because they are offspring of parents who were first brought here from another planet, and power was given them to propagate their species, and they are commanded to multiply and replenish the earth. [^133]

Conclusion

Moses and Abraham each contribute important insights to man's understanding of the creation of the earth. Abraham combines a "blueprint" of the creation with an actual account of that which took place in the formation of the earth, while Moses gives a statement of the creation that is simply an account revealing that which occurred, many years after the events had transpired. When the accounts written by Abraham and Moses are studied together, and special attention is given to the contributions that they each make, it is found that they support each other in the views they express. An exception to this statement is the different sequence of events Abraham and Moses employ in relating the placement of woman and the animals upon the earth.

In the creation, the earth was not made a temporal sphere. By the actions that were then carried out, the earth was brought into the presence of God and crowned with paradisiacal-celestial glory. It was then a physical-spiritual sphere capable of enduring in its sanctified state forever. All life initially placed upon the earth was also physical-spiritual in the nature of its organization, and these several forms of life were also in a similar state of glory. These conclusions seem to be irrefutable when the story of the creation is studied in light of the contributions made in modern revelation.

The earth was created according to Kolob's time. During the first six days, or the first six thousand years as man now computes time, the physical sphere was formed and prepared for life to be placed upon it. On the seventh day, the earth was then sanctified. God caused a mist to rise and water the whole face of the earth. Adam was then formed as the first flesh and the first man; and, a garden having been planted, man was placed in it. Later, woman was formed as a companion for Adam, and the animals and other forms of life were placed upon the earth.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Lectures on Faith, No. 2.
[^2] Ibid.
[^3] John Taylor, The Government of God, pp. 106-115.
[^4] Smith, Man: His Origin and Destiny, pp. 383-384.
[^5] Pratt, The Voice of Warning, p. 91.
[^6] Moses 3:16-17. See also Abraham 5:12-13.
[^7] Moses 4:4.
[^8] Ibid., 4:5-12.
[^9] Moses 4:7.
[^10] Ibid., 4:8-9.
[^11] 1 Thessalonians 5:22; D&C 36:6.
[^12] Moses, 4:12.
[^13] 1 Timothy 2:14.
[^14] 2 Nephi 2:25.
[^15] Moses 4:11.
[^16] Ibid., 4:13-14.
[^17] Ibid., 4:15-20.
[^18] Ibid., 4:20-21.
[^19] Ibid., 4:21.
[^20] D&C 19:2-3.
[^21] Moses 4:22.
[^22] Ibid.
[^23] Ibid.
[^24] Ibid., 4:23-25.
[^25] Ibid., 5:11.
[^26] 2 Nephi 2:25.
[^27] A revelation seems to imply that Adam was placed upon the earth at the beginning of the seventh day. See D&C 77:12. If the seventh day was indeed a day of the Lord's time, and there is no reason to assume that it was not, Adam and Eve were evidently in the garden for the major portion of that period before the fall.
[^28] Moses 4:22.
[^29] 2 Nephi 2:23.
[^30] Moses 5:11.
[^31] See D&C 88:24, 32.
[^32] Ibid., 29:41. The first spiritual death is cushioned somewhat by the influence of the Light of Christ which is given to all men in mortality, but there is no cushioning power extended to those who undergo the second death.
[^33] Moses 5:4.
[^34] Ibid., 6:49.
[^35] Ibid., 5:58.
[^36] Moses 1:9.
[^37] Ibid., 1:31.
[^38] Ibid., 1:9.
[^39] Ibid., 1:10.
[^40] See Alma 42:7, 9; Moses 5:4; 6:49.
[^41] See Moses 1.
[^42] See Matthew 17:1-8; Mark 9:1-8; 2 Peter 1:16-18. In the renewal of the earth during the millennium, the earth will be transfigured in order that it might, in its temporal state, be returned to a paradisiacal state. See D&C 63:20-21.
[^43] See Acts 2.
[^44] Helaman 5:43-45.
[^45] Moses 3:17.
[^46] Ibid., 4:9.
[^47] Ibid., 4:25.
[^48] Ibid., 6:59.
[^49] Ibid., 6:48.
[^50] D&C 29:31-32.
[^51] See Moses 1:1, in light of verses 27-29.
[^52] See DHC, I, pp. 282-284.
[^53] Moses 6:48.
[^54] This point is evident by the fact that in the resurrection, "this corruption," that is this physical body, will be "raised in incorruption." See 2 Nephi 9:7; Mosiah 16:10; Alma 5:15; 40:2; 41:4.
[^55] Mosiah 25:11; Alma 26:17.
[^56] Mosiah 25:11; 26:4; Alma 26:17.
[^57] Mosiah 4:2; 26:4; 27:25; Alma 22:13; 41:11.
[^58] Mosiah 4:5.
[^59] Ibid., 3:16.
[^60] Moses 5:13.
[^61] Ibid., 6:55.
[^62] Ibid., 6:54.
[^63] Articles of Faith, No. 2.
[^64] This is an instance where predestination is a true principle.
[^65] DHC, VI, p. 5.
[^66] Moses 7:32.
[^67] See 2 Nephi 2:15-16.
[^68] TPJS, p. 181.
[^69] 2 Nephi 2:24.
[^70] DHC, IV, p. 597.
[^71] See the section entitled "The Earth Framed Near the Throne of God."
[^72] Times and Seasons, III (February 1, 1842), p. 672.
[^73] See Abraham 5:13.
[^74] See ibid., 3:4-9; D&C 130:4-5.
[^75] JD, XXI. p. 323.
[^76] Pratt, Voice of Warning, pp. 91-92. John Taylor also quotes this statement by Elder Pratt, indicating his acceptance of the ideas it contains. See Taylor, The Government of God, pp. 106-115.
[^77] JD, IX, p. 305.
[^78] 2 Nephi 2:22.
[^79] D&C 77:6.
[^80] Ibid. This includes the millennial period, which will still be a temporal state. However, the earth will then be transfigured by the power of Christ's glory, which will have a renewing effect upon life. See ibid., 63:20-21.
[^81] Moses 6:59.
[^82] Ibid., 6:48.
[^83] Alma 42:9.
[^84] DHC, VI, p. 366.
[^85] Doctrines of Salvation, I, pp. 77.
[^86] Moses 2:26.
[^87] Ibid., 2:27.
[^88] Abraham 5:1-21.
[^89] Moses 3:1-25.
[^90] Genesis 1:1-25.
[^91] Pratt, Voice of Warning, pp. 92-94.
[^92] D&C 93:38.
[^93] JD, IX, p. 287.
[^94] Abraham 3:18-19.
[^95] Ibid., 3:26.
[^96] Moses 6:55.
[^97] 2 Nephi 2:29.
[^98] See Moroni 8.
[^99] D&C 29:47.
[^100] Moses 8:17; D&C 84:43-53.
[^101] D&C 84:47-48.
[^102] 2 Nephi 2:26.
[^103] Ibid., 2:27.
[^104] TPJS, p. 189.
[^105] Mosiah 3:18.
[^106] Moses 5:13; 6:49; Mosiah 16:3; Alma 42:10; D&C 20:20.
[^107] Moses 5:13.
[^108] D&C 20:20.
[^109] Moses 1:34.
[^110] Abraham 1:3.
[^111] 1 Nephi 5:11.
[^112] Moses 4:26.
[^113] See D&C 130.
[^114] Ibid., 76:62, 77, 86.
[^115] Articles of Faith, No. 10.
[^116] See D&C 76:77.
[^117] Ibid., 84:101.
[^118] Ibid., 45:59.
[^119] JD, III, p. 344.
[^120] 2 Nephi 2:22.
[^121] D&C 101:32-35. For the Lord's explanation of the millennial state, as the basis upon which He makes this promise, see verses 23-31.
[^122] Ibid.
[^123] Luke 3:38.
[^124] 124. Moses 6:22.
[^125] 125. Abraham 5:8; Moses 3:8; Genesis 2:8.
[^126] 126. DHC, VI, p. 476.
[^127] 127. JD, XI, p. 122.
[^128] 128. Deseret Evening News, December 27, 1913, Sec. III, p. 7. More recently this statement was quoted in Deseret News: Church Section, September 19, 1936, pp. 2, 8.
[^129] 129. Course of Study For Priests, 1910, under the subject, "The Creation of Man," cited in Deseret News: Church Section, op. cit., p. 8.
[^130] 130. Abraham 5:7-8. See also Moses 3:7-8.
[^131] 131. Joseph Fielding Smith, Man: His Origin and Destiny, pp. 276-277.
[^132] 132. Doctrines of Salvation, I, pp. 139-140.
[^133] 133. JD, VII, pp. 285-286.
