Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1967)

CHAPTER 7

THE ATONEMENT OF JESUS CHRIST

The atonement of Jesus Christ is the central event in the whole plan of life and salvation pertaining to this earth. To this event the ancient prophets looked in faith, believing that thereby they would be redeemed from the fall of Adam and from the effects of their personal sins. By faith they were also shown in vision the coming of Christ in the flesh. Since the Pearl of Great Price does not deal directly with the history of Christ during His earthly ministry (except as it reports a prophetic statement given by the Savior), the contribution this volume makes on the subject of the atonement is to reveal and clarify the hope that ancient prophets had in the coming of Christ to fulfil His atoning mission.

The Doctrine Of The Atonement Expressed In The Pearl Of Great Price

Adam and Eve Given a Knowledge of the Atonement

When Adam and Eve were driven from the Garden, they were given "commandments, that they should worship the Lord their God, and should offer the firstlings of their flocks, for an offering unto the Lord." The record then states: "And Adam was obedient unto the commandments of the Lord." [^1] The law of sacrifice was given to teach Adam and his posterity of the coming of the Lamb of God who was to be sacrificed for the sins of the world. This Adam was taught after he had been obedient to the law of sacrifice for "many days." The Book of Moses states:

And after many days an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying, Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me.

And then the angel spake, saying: This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth.

Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forever-more. [^2]

After Adam had been informed by the angel concerning the redemption to be made by Christ,

. . . in that day the Holy Ghost fell upon Adam, which beareth record of the Father and the Son, saying: I am the Only Begotten of the Father from the beginning, henceforth and forever, that as thou hast fallen thou mayest be redeemed, and all mankind, even as many as will.

And in that day Adam blessed God and was filled, and began to prophesy concerning all the families of the earth, saying: Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God.

And Eve, his wife, heard all these things and was glad, saying: Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never would have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient.

And Adam and Eve blessed the name of God, and they made all things known unto their sons and their daughters. [^3]

From the above quotations several things are apparent: First, Adam lived in obedience to the law of sacrifice for a considerable period of time without knowing the full purpose of the commandment he had received, or its symbolic significance. Second, the law of sacrifice which Adam had received was a similitude of the future sacrifice of the Only Begotten Son of the Father; and as such it was like a signboard pointing to the future sacrifice of Jesus Christ—the Son of Man and the God of this earth. In order to redeem man, Christ would come to earth and be offered up as a lamb without spot or blemish. Third, as the redeemer, Jesus would have power to intercede for man before the eternal bar of justice; and because Christ was appointed to be the mediator between man and God, Adam was instructed to do all things pertaining to life and salvation in the name of Jesus Christ. Being subsidiary to Christ in the plan of redemption, he was to call upon God in the name of Jesus Christ forevermore. Fourth, by means of the Holy Ghost, Adam was given a testimony of the Only Begotten in His ministry as the Father and the Son; and in speaking for the Only Begotten, the Holy Ghost promised Adam that, inasmuch as he had fallen, he might be redeemed, with all those who would do the will of God. Fifth, having received this testimony by the Holy Spirit, Adam then realized the significance of his fall in relation to the plan of redemption and said: "Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God." [^4] The restoration of man in the flesh to the presence of God was the purpose for which the atonement would be made. Eve, having heard all these things, was also made glad and said: "Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient." [^5] She, too, understood that the atonement was designed to give the obedient eternal life—resurrection and an endowment with immortal glory in the presence of the Father. Finally, Adam and Eve taught all these things to their children. And thus the knowledge of the anticipated atonement was established in the minds of men in the earliest ages of the world.

Enoch's Knowledge of the Atonement

Enoch clearly understood the need for, and the significance of, the atonement in the plan of redemption. He taught these things to men in his day, stating that the name of the Only Begotten was "the Son of Man, even Jesus Christ, a righteous Judge, who shall come in the meridian of time." [^6] Enoch also quoted the word of the Lord to Adam, when God explained that the plan of salvation for all men would be brought about through the blood of the Only Begotten Son. [^7] Enoch's testimony was not based alone upon the word of the Lord to Adam, for he was taught personally by the Lord concerning the mission of Christ and was shown in vision the coming of the Son of Man in the flesh. Part of God's explanation concerning the atonement of Christ was made to Enoch when, through the power of the Holy Spirit, he saw the generation of men which would perish in the flood. Said God to the great patriarch:

. . . behold, these which thine eyes are upon shall perish in the floods; and behold, I will shut them up; a prison have I prepared for them.

And that which I have chosen [i.e., Jesus Christ] hath plead before my face. Wherefore, he suffereth for their sins, inasmuch as they will repent in the day that my Chosen shall return unto me, and until that day they shall be in torment. [^8]

Having also been shown in vision the flood and the repopulation of the earth by the descendants of Noah, Enoch cried to the Lord, saying: "When shall the day of the Lord come? When shall the blood of the Righteous be shed, that all they that mourn may be sanctified and have eternal life?"

The Lord replied: "It shall be in the meridian of time, in the days of wickedness and vengeance."

The record then states: "And behold, Enoch saw the day of the coming of the Son of Man, even in the flesh; and his soul rejoiced, saying: The Righteous is lifted up, and the Lamb is slain from the foundation of the world; and through faith I am in the bosom of the Father, and behold, Zion is with me." [^9]

The fact that Enoch rejoiced in anticipating the crucifixion of Christ is a matter of interest. In doing so, his mind was not focused upon the ordeal Jesus would undergo, but upon the benefits that would be derived therefrom. For example, a young couple may look forward with joy to the birth of a baby. Yet to give birth to the child may require the mother to be uncomfortable and to suffer extreme pain. But her travail in childbirth is swallowed up by joy when the results are obtained. Likewise Jesus travailed greatly in making the atonement. But in doing so He opened the way into a new stage of life, that all men might obtain new attributes and powers of life—those divine attributes and powers of life that lead to eternal life. Thereby Christ also made it possible to institute the resurrection. For these reasons Enoch rejoiced, because all who mourn in righteousness under the power of the fall could then be sanctified and obtain eternal life.

Later in his vision, Enoch inquired of God: "When the Son of Man cometh in the flesh, shall the earth rest? I pray thee, show me these things." Enoch was then shown the crucifixion of Christ and certain important events related to the death and resurrection of the Master. The record states:

And the Lord said unto Enoch: Look, and he looked and beheld the Son of Man lifted up on the cross, after the manner of men;

And he heard a loud voice; and the heavens were veiled; and all the creations of God mourned; and the earth groaned; and the rocks were rent; and the saints arose, and were crowned at the right hand of the Son of Man, with crowns of glory;

And as many of the spirits as were in prison came forth, and stood on the right hand of God; and the remainder were reserved in chains of darkness until the judgment of the great day.

And again Enoch wept and cried unto the Lord, saying: When shall the earth rest?

And Enoch beheld the Son of Man ascend up unto the Father. . . . [^10]

Noah Understood the Atonement

There are no recorded statements in the Pearl of Great Price of the teachings of Noah regarding the atonement. Nevertheless it is evident that he had a knowledge of the mission of Christ. The Book of Moses states that "Noah prophesied, and taught the things of God, even as it was in the beginning." [^11] It also states: "And the Lord ordained Noah after his own order, and commanded him that he should go forth and declare his Gospel unto the children of men, even as it was given unto Enoch." [^12] Since the atonement of Christ was understood from the beginning to be the foundation upon which the plan of the Gospel would rest, it is evident that Noah also taught the need of Christ to die for man. He probably also explained the relationship of that act of propitiation to the plan of redemption.

Abraham Knew of the Atonement

The only direct statement in the Book of Abraham concerning the atoning mission of Christ is given in his record of the pre-earth council of the Gods. The plan of life and salvation then formulated required that a redeemer be sent to the earth that was to be organized. Whereupon the Father selected one of two volunteers to fill the required mission. [^13]

Though the Book of Abraham does not record any direct expressions or teachings on the subject of the atonement, there can be no doubt that the Father of the Faithful understood the nature and significance of Christ's mission on earth. To the Jews of His day, Jesus said: "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad." [^14] This point is confirmed in Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of Genesis which relates God's promise to give Abraham the land of Canaan:

. . . Abraham said, Lord God, how wilt thou give me this land for an everlasting inheritance?

And the Lord said, though thou was dead, yet am I not able to give it thee?

And if thou shalt die, yet thou shalt possess it, for the day cometh, that the Son of Man shall live; but how can he live if he be not dead? He must first be quickened.

And it came to pass, that Abraham looked forth and saw the days of the Son of Man, and was glad, and his soul found rest, and he believed in the Lord. [^15]

Like Enoch, Abraham saw the anticipated redemption that had been planned before the foundation of the earth, and he rejoiced in the fact that the Lamb of God would be lifted up on the cross. Abraham also had a record of the patriarchs back to the beginning of the world. He was therefore aware of the manifestations of God that had been given to them, and he undoubtedly read their recorded teachings on the subject of redemption.

Clarification On The Doctrine Of The Atonement

The Need for an Infinite Atonement

The Lord is a God of law, order, and justice. To Joseph Smith, the Lord declared:

Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion.

Will I accept of an offering, saith the Lord, that is not made in my name?

Or will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed?

And will I appoint unto you, saith the Lord, except it be by law, even as I and my Father ordained unto you, before the world was?

I am the Lord thy God; and I give unto you this commandment—that no man shall come unto the Father but by me or by my word, which is my law, saith the Lord. [^16]

Law is the basis of all organized existence—the means by which life and order prevail in the cosmos. Nor can the hope of reward for meritorious action be made sure without law. With the strict enforcement of law, man's faith in truth and right is made possible and his desire to grow and develop in the gifts and endowments that lead to eternal life is given a sure foundation. With this view of things, Joseph Smith wrote in an inspired declaration: "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." [^17]

The rule of law also requires that strict justice be administered whenever and wherever it has claim upon a creature as a result of his transgression of law. If God failed to enforce a law He had ordained, justice would be set aside. And in this event, Alma taught that God would cease to be God. [^18] A perfect enforcement of the principle of justice requires that whenever a law of God is broken there must—somewhere, somehow, or sometime—be a payment, according to the penalty prescribed by divine truth and equity. Mercy cannot intervene arbitrarily. "What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice?" Alma declared. "I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God." [^19]

Because Adam transgressed the law of God, he and his posterity were in the grasp of justice; and as fallen beings, identified with mortal corruption and devoid of divine powers of life and truth, they could not themselves pay the debt required by eternal justice. Nor does fallen man have the necessary powers within himself to return to the presence of God. Jacob spoke of the requirements of divine justice and the consequences of the deteriorating forces of the fall upon man, if the "first judgment" had been allowed to go unmitigated by a plan of mercy. He said:

. . . because man became fallen they were cut off from the presence of the Lord.

Wherefore, it must needs be an infinite atonement—save it should be an infinite atonement this corruption could not put on incorruption. Wherefore, the first judgment which came upon man must needs have remained to an endless duration. And if so, this flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more.

O the wisdom of God, his mercy and grace! For behold, if the flesh should rise no more our spirits must become subject to that angel who fell from the presence of the Eternal God, and became the devil, to rise no more.

And our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself. . . . [^20]

The "first judgment" to which Jacob made reference is the judgment pronounced upon Adam and Eve and their posterity in the flesh at the time of their transgression in the garden. Without the mitigating power of the atonement, that initial judgment would have required the body to crumble to the mother earth to rise no more; and under these circumstances, man's spirit would have deteriorated in goodness under the baneful influences of spiritual death until, as an organized being, it would have become like the devil in its desire for wickedness. All these consequences would have followed, had the first judgment pronounced upon erring man been enforced without the institution of a plan of mercy.

To put the divine plan of mercy into operation, without setting aside the legitimate demands of justice as they concern fallen man, required that an infinite atonement be made. Amulek explained: "For it is expedient that there should be a great and last sacrifice; yea, not a sacrifice of man, neither of beast, neither of any manner of fowl; for it shall not be a human sacrifice; but it must be an infinite and eternal sacrifice." [^21] The task required that God Himself come down to earth and offer Himself as a sacrifice, with His infinite attributes and powers of life and with His sanctified endowments of physical life, in order to save that which had been placed in His power. No mortal, finite offering would suffice. Abinadi therefore declared: "I would that ye should understand that God himself shall come down among the children of men, and shall redeem his people." [^22] And in speaking of that generation of Jews who had Christ crucified, Jacob observed: "Thus it behooveth our God, and there is none other nation on earth that would crucify their God." [^23] Six hundred years before the birth of Christ, Nephi wrote in prophetic commentary:

. . . the very God of Israel do men trample under their feet; I say, trample under their feet but I would speak in other words—they set him at naught, and hearken not to the voice of his counsels.

And behold he cometh, according to the words of the angel, in six hundred years from the time my father left Jerusalem.

And the world, because of their iniquity, shall judge him to be a thing of naught; wherefore they scourge him, and he suffereth it; and they smite him, and he suffereth it. Yea, they spit upon him, and he suffereth it, because of his loving kindness and his long-suffering towards the children of men.

And the God of our fathers, who were led out of Egypt, out of bondage, and also were preserved in the wilderness by him, yea, the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, yieldeth himself, according to the words of the angel, as a man, into the hands of wicked men, to be lifted up, according to the words of Zenock, and to be crucified, according to the words of Neum, and to be buried in a sepulchre, according to the words of Zenos. . . . [^24]

To put the plan of mercy into effect required that a divine being come to earth formed in such a way that He could partake of mortality while possessing power within Himself to do four things: First, He had to be able to live on earth in its fallen state without yielding to sin and without subjecting Himself to a fallen situation similar to that of Adam and his posterity in which He would be under the bondage of sin or in the grasp of justice. Second, the Redeemer had to be endowed with powers of physical and eternal life sufficient to pay the debt of justice for Adam and for all others born on earth under the fall. Third, having paid the debt of justice by offering the attributes and endowments of life (both physical and eternal) which He possessed, the Savior had to have access to divine power sufficient to break the bands of temporal death, so that a resurrection might come to all men. Finally, He had to develop within Himself in the flesh the divine truth and light, or glory, which, when extended to man, would permit man to dwell again in the presence of God and become a continual recipient of His glory.

The Divine and Infinite Nature of the Lamb of God

In order for Christ to make an infinite atonement, He had to be conceived in the flesh with the divine nature of His Father in embryo within Him. That is, He had to come to earth with the glory of the Father implanted within Him. Only in this way could He be both a divine and a mortal being. That Jesus did possess such glory within Himself on earth is evident from the following declaration by Alma, made shortly before the birth of Christ:

Yea, thus saith the Spirit: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, for the kingdom of heaven is soon at hand; yea, the Son of God cometh in his glory, in his might, majesty, power, and dominion. Yea, my beloved brethren, I say unto you, that the Spirit saith: Behold the glory of the King of all the earth; and also the King of heaven shall very soon shine forth among all the children of men. [^25]

Again, Alma declared of Christ's coming in the meridian of time:

And not many days hence the Son of God shall come in his glory; and his glory shall be the glory of the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace, equity, and truth, full of patience, mercy, and long suffering, quick to hear the cries of his people and to answer their prayers. [^26]

That the glory of God was manifested in and through Christ during His earthly ministry is evident also from the testimony of Nephi, who saw in vision Christ's ministry among men and wrote: "I beheld that he went forth ministering unto the people, in power and great glory; and the multitudes were gathered together to hear him." [^27] John also bore record, saying: "We beheld his glory, the glory as of the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." [^28]

Joseph Smith made it clear that resurrected beings, by means of their physical organization, can withhold the outward manifestation of their glory, if they so desire. [^29] This undoubtedly was also true of Christ during the time of His ministry on earth. He was conceived by the power of God, so that the divine nature of the Father dwelt in Him while He was on earth. Abinadi's testimony of Christ concerns His earthly ministry; and in that ministry, He was both the Father and the Son, because the Father dwelt in him. [^30] In a revelation to Joseph Smith, Jesus testified: "I was in the world and received of my Father, and the works of him were plainly manifest." [^31] That He did have the divine, indwelling intelligence and power of the Father within Him during His earthly ministry is further attested to by His statement to Philip: "Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? the words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself: but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works." [^32]

Other evidence supports the fact that, as the Son of God, Jesus possessed the divine intelligence and power of the Father within Himself while on earth. Speaking of Jesus while He was yet in His youth, many years before He began His ministry, the Inspired Version of the Bible states:

And it came to pass that Jesus grew up with his brethren, and waxed strong, and waited upon the Lord for the time of his ministry to come. And . . . he spake not as other men, neither could he be taught; for he needed not that any man should teach him. [^33]

If Jesus, by virtue of his divine conception, had a relationship with the Father somewhat like Adam had before the fall (subject, of course, to the Father's will and to Christ's need at times during His life on earth to be like men and feel the hardships of this fallen state) and had been taught directly by the Father, He certainly would not have needed any man to teach Him.

The fact that He was conceived with divine powers of truth and life within Himself is also evident from His statement: "As the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself." [^34] How does the Father possess life within Himself, except by and through His divine nature? How, then, did Jesus have life within Himself, if He possessed life like His Father? Again, Christ said: "I lay down my life for the sheep. . . . No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again." [^35]

Having manifested His glory to the Nephites, after His resurrection, to the extent that they "were encircled about as if it were by fire" and transfigured by divine power, Jesus gave them to understand that He had possessed power to do the same for those in Jerusalem, during His earthly ministry, had they believed. Commented the Christ: "So great faith have I never seen among all the Jews; wherefore I could not show unto them so great miracles because of their unbelief." [^36] The restricting factor was not the lack of glory and power within Christ during His earthly ministry in Jerusalem, but the lack of faith on the part of the Jews. Had they believed in Him as did the Nephites, He could have manifested such glory and power to them as He did to the Nephites.

The Relationship of the Divine and the Mortal Within Christ

Having been conceived by an immortal and eternal Father, Jesus partook of both the physical and the divine nature of that exalted being; but being born of Mary, He partook of the physical and mortal nature of His mother. Combined within His person on earth were both divine and mortal elements, with the divine being a dominant factor and the mortal a recessive factor within Him. Because Jesus possessed this combination, He was able to fulfill His mission on earth. In the divine, He possessed infinite powers and capabilities. But by suppressing the action of the divine, He could, by means of the mortal elements within Himself, be like other men subject to the trials, temptations, and pains of the mortal sphere and experience all that mortal men experience, even death.

One must see the interrelationship and the interaction of the divine and the mortal within Christ in order to understand and appreciate the nature of His earthly mission. "None ever were perfect but Jesus; and why was He perfect?" inquired Joseph Smith. The Prophet then answered: "Because He was the Son of God, and had the fulness of the Spirit, and greater power than any man." [^37] But though Jesus was given unrestricted access to the Spirit, this does not mean that the Father was partial or unjust in dealing with His children. Instead, Jesus merited what He received. He was Jehovah, the God of this earth—a being of infinite capacity. As Abinadi foretold, "God himself shall come down among the children of men." [^38] Christ's conception as the Son of God merely opened the way for Him to receive that degree of the Holy Spirit which He justly merited. By means of His infinite atonement, others may receive that degree of the Holy Spirit which they justly merit, so that in the final analysis equity and justice prevail in the disposal of the gifts and blessings of the Father.

Though John testified that the Father gave not "the Spirit by measure unto Him," [^39] Jesus was required to discipline Himself and subdue the flesh on the same basis that man in mortality must do so. In order that Christ might discipline Himself and subdue and refine the physical endowments He received, the Father evidently placed Him under certain restrictions in the use of His divine glory and power. He was therefore permitted to manifest His power and glory only according to the faith of others, or to carry out some providential act in fulfilling the will of His Father. Satan, for example, tempted Christ to use His divine powers to gratify the flesh, after He had fasted for forty days and nights. "If thou be the Son of God," Lucifer said, while endeavoring to cast doubt on His divine conception, "command this stone that it be made bread." [^40] But Satan's suggestion was also an enticement for Christ to use the divine powers He possessed to gratify His physical desires. In essence, he was saying, "If thou art the Son of God, thou shouldst have power within thyself such as thy Father has—power to organize matter according to thy will. If this is true, use thy power to appease thy hunger." But though He was weak and spent from His long fast, Jesus did not misuse the powers of divinity within Himself. Abinadi testified of Him: "And thus the flesh becoming subject to the Spirit, or the Son to the Father, being one God, suffereth temptation, and yieldeth not to the temptation." [^41]

Christ's Preparation to Make an Infinite Atonement

Jesus had received the commandment from His Father to lay down His life and to take it up again; [^42] and to this end He directed His actions during His earthly mission, for thereby He would be given power to redeem the world. As He suppressed the manifestation of the Father's glory in gratifying His own desires, He also resisted the temptations that came upon Him; and by living a life of service and dedication to His Father's will, He went from grace to grace in acquiring the divine nature, until He received the glory of His Father to a relative degree of fulness in the flesh. He was then prepared to make an infinite atonement—to offer a divine sacrifice that was a sacrifice not of a man but of a God. As Abinadi testified, God Himself—even the God of this earth, the Father and the Son—was to come down among men and subject the flesh even unto death, the will of the Son (i.e., the flesh) being swallowed up in the will of the Father (i.e., the Spirit), that He, as God, might break the bands of death and be given power to make intercession for the children of men. [^43]

Christ's Infinite Sacrifice

The divine nature which Christ possessed on earth enabled Him to offer Himself as an infinite sacrifice and thereby redeem the earth and its inhabitants. This fact is better seen and appreciated when it is understood that the transgression of divine law requires the withdrawal of the Holy Spirit from the transgressor. This was the case with Satan and his followers, who fell by wilful transgression from the presence of God. [^44] It was true of Adam, whose transgression brought upon him and the earth a spiritual death. [^45] And it is true of man, who procrastinates the day of his repentance in this life until "the Spirit of the Lord" withdraws from him, leaving him in a state of spiritual darkness and anguish of soul. [^46] In order for the debts of transgression of Adam and of all men to be paid, Christ had to suffer spiritual death, the withdrawal of the Spirit or glory from within Himself, equivalent to that which would otherwise, in its combined power, be withdrawn from Adam and his posterity if they were subject to the full demands of justice for sin. During His earthly ministry, the nature of Christ was in some respects a compound of the nature of Adam before the fall and after the fall. Both divine and mortal were combined within Him. But beginning in Gethsemane, He experienced the darkening powers of spiritual death until, as he hung upon the cross, He suffered the consequences of spiritual death in its fulness. A revelation states that in making the atonement, Jesus "descended below all things." [^47] Yet He possessed integrity and dedication sufficient to keep the commandments of the Father and to fulfill the will of the Father, even unto death.

That the withdrawal of the divine nature which Christ possessed was an integral part of the atonement is attested to by the record of that divine act, by latter-day revelation, and by modern prophets, as well as by reason and consistency. Jesus trod the path of the atonement alone. And in the darkened moments of that ordeal He cried out, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" [^48] In a revelation through Joseph Smith directed to Martin Harris, the Lord said of His suffering in making the atonement: "Behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they repent; but if they would not repent they must suffer even as I; which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink." In commanding Martin Harris to repent, the Lord revealed the means by which such suffering was made possible. Unless Martin would repent, the Lord declared that he would "suffer these punishments of which I have spoken, of which in the smallest, yea, even in the least degree you have tasted at the time I withdrew my Spirit." [^49] Martin Harris had suffered the same kind of suffering that Jesus suffered but not to the same degree, and he experienced this suffering at a time when the Lord withdrew His Spirit. The time to which the Lord referred occurred when Martin lost the 116-page manuscript of the Book of Lehi. Of the withdrawal of the Spirit at that time, Lucy Mack Smith later wrote:

I well remember that day of darkness, both within and without. To us, at least, the heavens seemed clothed with blackness, and the earth shrouded with gloom. I have often said within myself, that if a continual punishment, as severe as that which we experienced on that occasion, were to be inflicted upon the most wicked character who ever stood upon the footstool of the Almighty—if even their punishment were no greater than that, I should feel to pity their condition. [^50]

If Martin experienced a withdrawal of the Spirit of God and as a result suffered in the smallest, or in the least degree, as Jesus suffered, what caused Jesus to suffer? Does not the revelation imply that Christ experienced a greater withdrawal of the powers of the Spirit? And in the withdrawal of the divine powers of truth and light and life which He possessed from His Father, Jesus experienced the darkness, anguish, and agony of hell to such an extent that the combined powers of darkness and death caused the tissues and organs of His sanctified physical body to break down and blood to come from every pore.

In these experiences, Jesus descended below all things so that He might intelligently comprehend all things and thereby know how to raise the sons of earth, and eventually the earth itself, from the first spiritual death unto life and glory. [^51] And by consenting to the withdrawal of the divine nature from Himself, He offered Himself as a divine and infinite sacrifice—a sacrifice extending in its nature and power beyond the comprehension of mortal man and beyond the limits of this finite sphere. Again, this was not a sacrifice of man or of the natural endowments of man, but of God, the God of the universe in whom dwelt the powers of life and of light and of truth for all things.

The withdrawal of the divine nature from Christ served three basic purposes: First, divine justice requires the withdrawal of the powers of the spirit for sin and transgression. As previously indicated, a state of hell is caused essentially by the withdrawal of the Spirit. This constitutes both the first and the second spiritual death. For Jesus voluntarily to take upon Himself the consequences of sin and thereby obtain power to destroy eventually the first spiritual death required that He suffer the full power of spiritual as well as temporal death for all men. To do so, He had to be endowed with sufficient powers of the Spirit, or of life, so that in their withdrawal He might pay the debt of divine justice for all men and suffer for them the bitterness, darkness, and agony of hell. Second, except for the withdrawal of the divine powers of life which He received from His Father, He could not have died. But in their full withdrawal He could pass through the portals of death into the spirit world. Third, by the withdrawal of the Spirit of the Father, Jesus was tested in His integrity commensurate with the light and truth He had received. Of this phase of Christ's experience, Brigham Young said:

I ask, is there a reason for men and women being exposed more constantly and more powerfully, to the power of the enemy, by having visions than by not having them? There is and it is simply this—God never bestows upon His people, or upon an individual, superior blessings without a severe trial to prove them, to prove that individual, or that people, to see whether they will keep their covenants with Him, and keep in remembrance that He has shown them. Then the greater the vision, the greater the display of the power of the enemy. And when such individuals are off their guard they are left to themselves, as Jesus was. For this express purpose the Father withdrew His Spirit from His Son, at the time he was to be crucified. Jesus had been with his Father, talked with Him, dwelt in His bosom, and knew all about heaven, about making the earth, about the transgression of man, and what would redeem the people, and that he was the character who was to redeem the sons of earth, and the earth itself from all sin that had come upon it. The light, knowledge, power, and glory with which he was clothed were far above, or exceeded that of all others who had been upon the earth after the fall, consequently at the very moment, at the hour when the crisis came for him to offer up his life, the Father withdrew Himself, withdrew His Spirit, and cast a veil over him. That is what made him sweat blood. If he had had the power of God upon him, he would not have sweat blood; but all was withdrawn from him, and a veil was cast over him, and he then plead with the Father not to forsake him. "No," says the Father, "you must have your trials, as well as others." [^52]

The shedding of Christ's blood was directly associated with the giving of His life on earth. In a meaningful sense, it was both the result and the evidence of His inward suffering for the sins of the world. Jesus did not die by the shedding of His blood in the ordinary way. That is, the life within Him did not ebb away as a result of the shedding of His blood, since He was already dead when the soldiers pierced His side so that blood flowed therefrom. [^53] He died for, and as a result of, the sins of the world. And here He gave up His life freely; no man took it from Him. And when His side was pierced, blood and water mixed together flowed as evidence of the internal disruption and breakdown that had occurred as a result of the withdrawal of the Spirit. Indeed, the blood that flowed from His pierced side, like that which came earlier from the pores of His body, was the result of His infinite suffering when in agony and death He freely took upon Himself the sins of men.

Having descended below all things, even unto death, and entered into the spirit world where He extended the plan of redemption to the spirits who were confined in spirit prison, [^54] "Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father" [^55]—by the divine intelligence and power which had been matured within Him and which the Father again extended unto Him in the spirit world. This gave Christ power to break the bands of death and to extend the benefits of His atonement unto men. It was with this purpose in mind that Enoch inquired: "When shall the blood of the Righteous be shed, that all they that mourn may be sanctified and have eternal life?" [^56]

Certain Benefits of the Atonement Applied Before Christ Died

Certain benefits of the atonement were designed to be extended to man before Christ's act of mercy and reconciliation was performed. A portion of Abraham's record that was not published to the world evidently gave helpful insight into this phase of the plan of salvation. Joseph Smith reported:

Everlasting covenant was made between three personages before the organization of this earth, and relates to their dispensation of things to men on the earth; these personages, according to Abraham's record, are called God the first, the Creator; God the second, the Redeemer; and God the third, the witness or Testator. [^57]

On the strength of the covenant that Christ made, in which He promised to redeem the world, all the benefits of the atonement with the exception of resurrection and full glorification of the faithful were given to man before Jesus came to earth. [^58] For this reason the Lord declared to Adam during his lifetime, "Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden." [^59] The forgiveness of original sin was made possible at that time by the power of the atonement that was yet to be made. [^60] Christ had covenanted to pay the debt of sin, and that covenant allowed God to draw upon the benefits of the atonement before the act of redemption was actually made.

Some General Benefits of Christ's Atonement

Christ made the atonement for all men, and certain benefits of His divine act are given to all men regardless of their individual worthiness to receive the grace of Christ. The first of these gifts is the gift of life. Except for the atonement, the power of the first spiritual death which Adam brought upon the world by his transgression in Eden would be complete. In this event, no truth or light or Spirit would be extended from the presence of God to benefit the inhabitants of this fallen sphere. This means that the Light of Christ would not be given to quicken the life within man in his mortal state; and without the quickening and sustaining influence of the Light of Christ, no organized light could exist. It is therefore written in the scriptures that in God "we live, and move, and have our being"; [^61] and that Christ is "the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world." [^62] By the power of His atonement, He gives life to all things on earth.

Another gift given to all men through the atonement is that of moral and spiritual agency. A previous chapter has shown that the Spirit of the Lord counterbalances the powers of corruption within the flesh and the enticements of the Adversary. This condition gives man the privilege of choosing either liberty and eternal life through the great mediation that has been made or captivity and death according to the will of the flesh and the evil which is therein, which gives the spirit of the devil power to captivate men and bring them down to hell. [^63]

It has also been shown that since God redeemed men from the fall, all infants are made innocent as they enter this fallen temporal state. They are therefore alive in Christ until they reach the time when they are made accountable before God. Of the time of their accountability, the Lord said as He instituted the covenant of circumcision with Abraham: "And I will establish a covenant of circumcision with thee, and it shall be my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations; that thou mayest know for ever that children are not accountable before me until they are eight years old." [^64]

The Pearl of Great Price provides significant support for the doctrine that little children are innocent before God through the power of the atonement. During the lifetime of Adam the Lord said unto him: "Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden." [^65] As a result of this declaration, the saying went abroad among the people at that early day that "the Son of God hath atoned for original guilt, wherein the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they are whole from the foundation of the world." [^66] The words in italics above indicate that the promised atonement did not destroy all the consequences of the fall at that time. Otherwise Adam and Eve would have been restored to the presence of God and the power of temporal death would have been abolished. Instead, the Lord declared only that the power of the atonement then acted to free little children from the legal consequences of parental transgression. If not, children would be condemned by original sin. But in freeing them from responsibility for the sins of their parents, children are alive in Christ, being made whole from the foundation of the world.

The Pearl of Great Price speaks of the resurrection as being brought about as a direct result of the atonement of Jesus Christ. Having had the sacrifice of the Only Begotten Son explained to him, Adam exclaimed that as a result of that act of grace he would "again in the flesh . . . see God." [^67] Enoch beheld in vision that at the resurrection of Christ, "the saints arose, and were crowned at the right hand of the Son of Man, with crowns of glory." Those spirits who were in prison also "came forth and stood on the right hand of God," but the remainder, who consisted of the wilfully wicked, "were reserved in chains of darkness until the judgment of the great day." [^68] Though Enoch does not say that the spirits who had been in prison were resurrected in the meridian of time, his statement implies that they would be. The Pearl of Great Price is consistent in its teachings with the declarations found in other scriptural works that the atonement of Christ will eventually bring about the resurrection of all men—some to the resurrection of life (i.e., glory) and some to the resurrection of damnation. [^69]

Conditional Benefits of Christ's Atonement

Though some benefits of the atonement are given to all men regardless of personal worthiness, the blessings and powers that are necessary if man is to acquire eternal life are extended to responsible individuals only by their obedience to the law of God. Furthermore, when that law is proclaimed by authorized agents, those who hear it must obey its requirements. Otherwise the atonement will not pay the debt of justice for their personal sins, and they cannot receive the powers of the Holy Spirit that are required to sanctify them and prepare them for eternal life. For this reason the Lord declared repentance to the posterity of Adam and decreed that "as many as believed in the Son, and repented of their sins, should be saved; and as many as believed not and repented not, should be damned." The record concludes: "And the words went forth out of the mouth of God in a firm decree; wherefore they must be fulfilled." [^70]

Those who are made accountable to the law of God are confronted with two alternatives: They may either obey its requirements or disregard them. If they obey the law of God in faith, the plan of mercy is opened to them through the power of the atonement. But if they disregard that law, they themselves must pay the debt of divine justice for their personal sins, because the Savior will not intercede in behalf of the disobedient. The blessings of the Holy Spirit are also withheld from them; and if they procrastinate repentance to the end of their mortal lives, the benefits of the Light of Christ are withdrawn, leaving them in a state of pain and darkness. [^71] Of the alternatives that confront man in his responsibility to the plan of mercy, Jesus said in a revelation to Joseph Smith:

. . . behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent;

But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I;

Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink . . . . [^72]

From these two statements it is apparent that there is an appropriate balance in the administration of justice and of mercy to responsible individuals. In making the atonement, Christ became a God of mercy as well as a God of justice; and He extends either justice or mercy to each individual according to his obedience to the law of redemption. Alma explained:

. . . according to justice, the plan of redemption could not be brought about, only on conditions of repentance of men in this probationary state, yea, this preparatory state; for except it were for these conditions, mercy could not take effect except it should destroy the work of justice. Now the work of justice could not be destroyed; if so, God would cease to be God.

And thus we see that all mankind were fallen, and they were in the grasp of justice; yea, the justice of God, which consigned them forever to be cut off from his presence.

And now, the plan of mercy could not be brought about except an atonement should be made; therefore God himself atoneth for the sins of the world, to bring about the plan of mercy, to appease the demands of justice, that God might be a perfect, just God, and a merciful God also. [^73]

In discussing the atonement as the basis of the plan of mercy, as it is extended to those who humbly and faithfully obey the law of God, Amulek said:

. . . there can be nothing which is short of an infinite atonement which will suffice for the sins of the world.

Therefore, it is expedient that there should be a great and last sacrifice . . .

and behold, this is the whole meaning of the law [of sacrifice], every white pointing to that great and last sacrifice; and that great and last sacrifice will be the Son of God, yea, infinite and eternal.

And thus he shall bring salvation to all those who shall believe on his name; this being the intent of this last sacrifice, to bring about the bowels of mercy, which overpowereth justice, and bringeth about means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance.

And thus mercy can satisfy the demands of justice, and encircles them in the arms of safety, while he that exercises no faith unto repentance is exposed to the whole law of the demands of justice; therefore only unto him that has faith unto repentance is brought about the great and eternal plan of redemption. [^74]

In summarizing his discussion of the doctrine of divine justice (which is centered in the immutable requirements of God's law) and of mercy (which is made possible through the atonement) as they relate to man and his responsibility to God, Alma said:

Now, repentance could not come unto men except there were a punishment, which also was eternal as the life of the soul should be, affixed opposite to the plan of happiness, which was as eternal also as the life of the soul.

Now, how could a man repent except he should sin? How could he sin if there was no law? How could there be a law save there was a punishment?

Now, there was a punishment affixed, and a just law given, which brought remorse of conscience unto man.

Now, if there was no law given—if a man murdered he should die—would he be afraid he would die if he should murder?

And also, if there was no law given against sin men would not be afraid to sin.

And if there was no law given, if men sinned what could justice do, or mercy either, for they would have no claim upon the creature?

But there is a law given and a punishment affixed, and a repentance granted; which repentance mercy claimeth; otherwise, justice claimeth the creature and executeth the law, and the law inflicteth the punishment; if not so, the works of justice would be destroyed, and God would cease to be God.

But God ceaseth not to be God, and mercy claimeth the penitent, and mercy cometh because of the atonement; and the atonement bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead; and the resurrection of the dead bringeth back men into the presence of God; and thus they are restored into his presence, to be judged according to their works, according to the law and justice.

For behold, justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved.

What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God.

And thus God bringeth about his great and eternal purposes, which were prepared from the foundation of the world. And thus cometh about the salvation and the redemption of men, and also their destruction and misery.

Therefore, . . . whosoever will may come and partake of the waters of life freely; and whosoever will not come the same is not compelled to come; but in the last day it shall be restored unto him according to his deeds.

If he has desired to do evil, and has not repented in his days, behold, evil shall be done unto him, according to the restoration of God. [^75]

Though the Pearl of Great Price does not explain the underlying theology concerning the operation of God's justice and mercy, this volume of scripture does refer to Him as possessing the attributes of justice and of mercy, and as manifesting them unto man. God explained to Adam that the Holy Spirit, as His agent manifesting His will throughout universal space, has "all power according to wisdom, mercy, truth, justice, and judgment." [^76] In speaking to the Lord, Enoch exclaimed: "Thou art just; thou art merciful and kind forever; . . . and naught but peace, justice, and truth is the habitation of thy throne; and mercy shall go before thy face and have no end." [^77] And in showing the expression of these divine principles and attributes in the plan of salvation, Joseph Smith wrote: "We believe that through the atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel." [^78]

Conclusion

The atonement is the foundation of the whole plan of life and salvation; and as such, the knowledge of this infinite act of mercy was revealed to ancient prophets whose testimonies are recorded in the Pearl of Great Price. To Adam, God first committed a knowledge of the atonement; and with him, Eve shared in the hope of redemption through Jesus Christ. In anticipation of the atonement, the righteous in ancient times offered the firstlings of their flocks as a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten. And because Christ would in this way intercede for man, the faithful were taught to do all things in His name, calling upon God in the name of the Son forevermore.

The need for the atonement must be seen in light of the immutable requirements of divine law. Justice must have its due and the penalty for sin must be exacted, or God would cease to be God. But such a policy, unmitigated by a plan of mercy, would destroy rather than elevate man in the scale of life. Consequently, an atonement was required in which the demands of justice would be paid in full, leaving the Redeemer free to extend mercy to the faithful without destroying the work of justice. This required Christ to come down among men and live on earth without sin, and then take upon Himself the full consequences of sin for Adam and all of his posterity. In order that He might do so, Jesus had to possess divine attributes and powers of life within Himself sufficient to make an infinite atonement. The atonement required a sacrifice of God, not of man. To this end, Christ was conceived in the flesh with the glory and power of His Father within Him in embryo; and by obedience, He matured in the endowments of immortal glory until He was prepared to offer Himself as an infinite and eternal sacrifice.

Certain benefits of the atonement are given to all men regardless of their personal worthiness. Among these are the gifts of life, agency, initial innocence, and final restoration of the spirit to the body in the presence of God. [^79] But other benefits of the atonement are given only to those who express living faith in Christ and obey His law. These benefits include a remission of personal sins for those who are made accountable to the law of God, and the manifestations of the Holy Spirit to sanctify the faithful from all sin and prepare them for eternal life. But when the law of God is offered and its benefits are rejected, the disobedient must pay the debt of divine justice themselves for their personal sins. Thus, in the atonement, the alternatives of justice or mercy are clearly set forth before man, and he determines which he shall receive.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Colossians 1:12-13.
[^2] Mosiah 27:25.
[^3] Ibid., 27:26.
[^4] Moses 5:5-15.
[^5] Ibid., 5:58-59.
[^6] Ibid., 6:52.
[^7] Ibid., 6:53-63.
[^8] Ether 3:2.
[^9] 2 Nephi 2:29.
[^10] 1 Corinthians 15:42-44.
[^11] Ether 12:27.
[^12] Moses 6:56.
[^13] John 17:3.
[^14] Moses 6:59.
[^15] John 8:12; 10:10.
[^16] Ibid., 11:25; 14:6.
[^17] Moses 6:59.
[^18] Ibid.
[^19] TPJS, pp. 324, 325.
[^20] D&C 84:45.
[^21] See ibid., 88:6-13.
[^22] See ibid., 18:33-36; 88:66-68.
[^23] Moses 6:59.
[^24] See D&C 132:22-24.
[^25] 2 Nephi 31:27-28; D&C 50:5.
[^26] Moses 6:60.
[^27] Moroni 8:25.
[^28] See Alma 13:12.
[^29] Moses 6:61.
[^30] Alma 7:13.
[^31] D&C 88:6-13, 41, 47-50.
[^32] Ibid., 88:13.
[^33] Romans 1:16-17.
[^34] Moses 6:62.
[^35] D&C 93:33.
[^36] Ibid., 93:19-20.
[^37] Moses 6:63.
[^38] 1 John 5:7-8.
[^39] 1 Nephi 19:10.
[^40] 3 Nephi 27:14-15.
[^41] Romans 6:3-6.
[^42] TPJS, p. 198.
[^43] Moses 8:13.
[^44] Ibid., 6:8.
[^45] Ibid., 8:15, 21.
[^46] D&C 39:1-4.
[^47] TPJS, p. 328.
[^48] Ephesians 4:11-15.
[^49] Romans 8:14.
[^50] John 1:12-13.
[^51] Moses 6:64-68.
[^52] Alma 32:27.
[^53] 2 Nephi 4:25.
[^54] I.V., Luke 4:5, 9.
[^55] Acts 8:39.
[^56] Moses 6:65.
[^57] Alma 5:14.
[^58] Mosiah 27:25-26.
[^59] D&C 84:26-27.
[^60] Matthew 3:11; Mark 1:8; Luke 3:16.
[^61] Moses 6:61.
[^62] Ibid., 6:67.
[^63] Ibid., 6:66.
[^64] John 11:26.
[^65] Moses 6:68.
[^66] D&C 93:17.
[^67] John 17:20-23.
[^68] Loc. cit.
[^69] Galatians 4:19.
[^70] 2 Corinthians 13:5.
[^71] I.V., Romans 8:10-11.
[^72] Moses 6:68.
[^73] Ibid.,
[^74] Ibid., 7:1.
[^75] Psalms 82:6; John 10:34-35.
[^76] Mosiah 27:25-26.
[^77] Alma 5:49.
[^78] Ibid., 5:7.
[^79] Ibid., 5:9, 26.
