Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1967)

CHAPTER 8

THE GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST

The Pearl of Great Price indicates that the Gospel of Jesus Christ is a divine formula by which man may be transformed from his natural fallen state in mortality to a spiritual state in which he is alive in Christ and is made a recipient of the sanctifying powers of the Holy Ghost. Thereby man is delivered from the powers of spiritual darkness and is made a partaker of the inheritance of the saints in light, being transformed into the kingdom of Jesus Christ. [^1] The Gospel is that divine plan by which men are "changed from their carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness, being redeemed of God, becoming his sons and daughters." [^2] The redeemed of God are, in the most literal and meaningful sense, "new creatures" in Christ. [^3] To receive the Gospel, man must partake of the glory and power of God.

Doctrines Of The Gospel Expressed In The Pearl Of Great Price

The Introduction of the Gospel Into the World

The preceding chapter has shown that the knowledge of the Gospel in its earliest expression was revealed to Adam in the law of sacrifice; and with the knowledge of the coming redeemer, the decree was sent forth by the Lord that "as many as believed in the Son, and repented of their sins, should be saved; and as many as believed not and repented not, should be damned." [^4] The Book of Moses states:

And thus the Gospel began to be preached, from the beginning, being declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost.

And thus all things were confirmed unto Adam, by an holy ordinance, and the Gospel preached, and a decree sent forth, that it should be in the world, until the end thereof; and thus it was. [^5]

The statement in the above quotation that all things were confirmed unto Adam by an holy ordinance means that the blessings, powers, and promises of the Gospel were given to Adam through the ordinances which he embraced. An ordinance is a religious rite or ceremony based upon the law or commandment of God. By faith expressed in the law of sacrifice, Adam received the initial manifestations of God in his fallen state. By repentance and baptism, he received a remission of sins. And by obtaining the gift of the Holy Ghost in the way ordained by God, he received the promise of the continued expressions of the Holy Spirit to guide him into all truth and to manifest all things requisite for him in his mortal state. In receiving these ordinances, Adam received them by covenant, in which covenant God obligated Himself to give Adam the blessings promised in the ordinance, so long as Adam kept the covenant which he made. Hence, the scripture said that all things pertaining to the Gospel were confirmed unto Adam by "an holy ordinance."

Enoch gave a more detailed report of the principles and ordinances of the Gospel which Adam received when he quoted the word of the Lord to the first man. To Adam, God said:

If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, asking all things in his name, and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given you. [^6]

The principles and ordinances mentioned here are generally designated as the First Principles and Ordinances of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. They consist of, first, faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; second, repentance of all sin; third, baptism by immersion for the remission of personal sins; and fourth, reception of the gift of the Holy Ghost, which has the mission of taking the things of God and revealing them to man and thereby guiding man into all truth. This is the divine plan by which fallen man, who is spiritually dead, may become a recipient of the divine powers of truth and light that were lost to the world in the fall, and develop therein until eventually he comes back into the presence of God. To do so, man must center his attention in living faith upon that divine being who is the truth and light and life of the world. Man must repent of all sin and be baptized, taking upon himself the name of Christ and covenanting to obey His law. Finally, man must have a lawful channel opened unto him through which he may draw upon the divine truth and power that is necessary to sanctify him and prepare him to return to the presence of God and abide in His glory. That channel is the gift of the Holy Ghost. Here is the basic program of the Gospel of Jesus Christ as it was given to Adam and as it has been given to man in all subsequent ages of time.

God's Explanation of the Doctrine of the Gospel

Having revealed the basic principles and ordinances of the Gospel to Adam, the Lord also gave him a classic explanation of his fallen state and the need for him and his posterity to be born into the kingdom of heaven by means of the Gospel. Only in this way could they be sanctified from all sin and attain eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory. This explanation is probably the finest statement in all scripture on the philosophy and doctrine of the Gospel. It should be studied by each student of the Gospel until he masters its deepest meaning. Adam asked the Lord, "Why is it that men must repent and be baptized in water?" The record states:

. . . the Lord said unto Adam; Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden.

Hence came the saying abroad among the people, That the Son of God hath atoned for original guilt, wherein the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they are whole from the foundation of the world.

And the Lord spake unto Adam, saying: Inasmuch as thy children are conceived in sin, even so when they begin to grow up, sin conceiveth in their hearts, and they taste the bitter, that they may know to prize the good.

And it is given unto them to know good from evil; wherefore they are agents unto themselves, and I have given unto you another law and commandment.

Wherefore teach it unto your children, that all men, everywhere, must repent, or they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God, for no unclean thing can dwell there, or dwell in his presence; for, in the language of Adam, Man of Holiness is his name, and the name of his Only Begotten is the Son of Man, even Jesus Christ, a righteous Judge, who shall come in the meridian of time.

Therefore I give unto you a commandment to teach these things freely unto your children, saying:

That by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death, and inasmuch as ye were born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit, which I have made, and so became of dust a living soul, even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory;

For by the water ye keep the commandment; by the Spirit ye are justified, and by the blood ye are sanctified;

Therefore it is given to abide in you; the record of heaven; the Comforter; the peaceable things of immortal glory; the truth of all things; that which quickeneth all things, which maketh alive all things; that which knoweth all things, and hath all power according to wisdom, mercy, truth, justice, and judgment.

And now, behold, I say unto you: This is the plan of salvation unto all men, through the blood of mine Only Begotten, who shall come in the meridian of time.

And behold, all things have their likeness, and all things are created and made to bear record of me, both things which are temporal, and things which are spiritual; things which are in the heavens above, and things which are on the earth, and things which are in the earth, and things which are under the earth, both above and beneath: all things bear record of me. [^7]

There are several important statements of principle and doctrine in the above explanation of the Lord to Adam, all of which reveal vital insights into the plan and purpose of the Gospel: First, as has been discussed in the previous chapter, the Lord forgave Adam for his transgression in Eden, which was made possible by Christ's covenant with the Father before the earth was created to pay the debt of sin on earth. On the strength of that covenant, the debt of original sin was absolved many centuries before Christ died on the cross. By the power of the atonement, children are therefore made whole, or innocent, from the foundation of the world, so that the sins of their parents cannot be visited in legal condemnation upon their heads. Under these circumstances man enters mortality, where he is fallen, yet free, in a probationary state. From this point of beginning the Gospel is designed to elevate man and bring him back into the presence of God.

Second, as has also been discussed previously, children are conceived on earth in sin. Thus all the effects of the fall were not abolished by the power of the atonement. The purpose of Adam's transgression was to institute a fallen, probationary state in which man could be tested and proven in the new physical endowments of life he would receive on earth, and where he could learn to walk by faith in reliance upon God. To this end, certain corrupt elements became associated with the flesh as a result of the fall and the subsequent transgressions of man. "Because of the fall," the brother of Jared therefore said in apology to the Lord, "our natures have become evil continually." [^8] The corruption, or evil, in the flesh gives "the spirit of the devil power to captivate" and to bring man down to hell, if he yields to the desires of the flesh and the enticements of the Adversary. [^9] These elements of corruption and forces of sin are implanted in the flesh at conception, and for this reason the scripture states that man is conceived in sin. Man's mortal body is organized in weakness as a corrupt body, whereas his resurrected body is organized in power as a spiritual body. [^10] Of the purpose of mortal weaknesses, the Lord said to Moroni:

. . . if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them. [^11]

Man must learn to rely upon Christ, for it is only in and through Christ that he can come unto the Father and be glorified. By experiencing the effects of mortal weakness and corruption in his flesh, man learns to rely upon Christ in order that he might receive of His grace and power unto redemption. When children begin to grow up physically, the elements of mortal weakness and corruption, with the enticing power of the Adversary, exert an influence that tends to pervert the endowments of the flesh in their expressions. Such perversions, in turn, result in a withdrawal of the Spirit of the Lord and bring remorse and anguish of soul. Consequently, when sin conceives in the heart of man, as a result of his being conceived in sin, he tastes the bitter that he may learn to prize the good. That which is good is given unto man through Christ by the power of His redemption.

Third, God explained that man knows good from evil because he is conceived in sin in mortality. This fact provides the basis of man's spiritual and moral agency and gives him the right to determine for himself that which he shall receive.

Fourth, having explained the conditions of man's mortal existence, God stated: "I have given unto you another law and commandment." [^12] This commandment concerns the law of redemption by which fallen man may be sanctified from all sin and elevated eventually into the presence of God. The Lord then explained the law of redemption, beginning with the declaration that man must repent of his sins in order to inherit the kingdom of God. The name of the Father, Elohim, is Man of Holiness, and the name of His Only Begotten Son is the Son of Man of Holiness, even Jesus Christ, a righteous Judge. For man to dwell in the presence of these two divine beings and be made like them in holiness, in truth, and in power, he must repent and be cleansed from all sin. No unclean thing can dwell in God's presence. God does not intend to save man in his sins, but from his sins. Hence man must repent. The Lord's explanation at this point has the same meaning as the statement of Jesus to the Jews: "This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." [^13] But man cannot know these two exalted personages and be made holy as they are without repenting of all sin and partaking of the divine nature (the truth and light, or glory) which they possess.

Fifth, the plan of salvation is expressed to man on earth in the commandment to be born again into the kingdom of heaven. Having stated that fallen man must repent and become like the exalted Man of Holiness, the Lord instructed Adam as to how this must be done. Adam was to teach his children that by reason of transgression came the fall, which brought death—spiritual and physical, with all its related consequences. The plan of salvation is based upon man's need to experience a new birth, or to be born into a newness of life. This newness of life is brought about by man's renewed relationship with divine spiritual powers of truth and light and life. In God's explanation of the need for the new birth, Adam was instructed to say to his children: "Inasmuch as ye are born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit, which I [i.e., God] have made, and so become of dust a living soul, even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the [Holy] Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten." [^14] Birth in the flesh is made a symbol of the new birth, and the likeness of the two births—physical and spiritual—is explained. Man is born into the physical world by water and blood and the organized spirit which God made in the pre-earth state. Birth into the kingdom of heaven involves the use of like elements: water, the blood of Jesus Christ, and the manifestations of the Holy Spirit of God. By birth into the physical world, man acquires the endowments and attributes of physical life. By birth into the kingdom of heaven, however, he may acquire the divine endowments and attributes that God possesses, even eternal life or immortal glory. The Gospel is the pathway to eternal life, for Jesus came that man might have life and that more abundantly. [^15] He is the resurrection and the life. [^16]

The specific objectives to be achieved by birth into the kingdom of heaven were explained by the Lord to Adam. By being born again man may "be sanctified from all sin." [^17] To be sanctified is to be made pure and holy by the action of divine power upon the human system. Birth into the kingdom of heaven is the channel by which man may receive such power. In the manifestations of the Holy Spirit, man may also "enjoy the words of eternal life in this world." [^18] These are the living words that constitute the revelations of the Holy Ghost. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that knowledge of divine truth "can only be obtained by experience through the ordinances of God set forth for that purpose." He declared: "I assure the Saints that truth, in reference to these matters, can and may be known through the revelations of God in the way of His ordinances, and in answer to prayer." [^19] A revelation to the Prophet explained that "the word of the Lord is truth, and whatsoever is truth is light, and whatsoever is light is spirit, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ." [^20] The living word is therefore truth, light, or Spirit—that divine substance that emanates from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space and that gives life, law, and government to all things. [^21] Among other things, this is the Spirit of revelation—the voice of the Lord— [^22] by which the words of eternal life are given to man. Finally, the Lord explained to Adam that by being born into the kingdom of heaven man may, as the final objective to be achieved through the Gospel, receive "eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory." [^23] Eternal life consists of attaining the endowments of immortal glory in the world to come, coming forth in the resurrection endowed with the divine attributes and powers of truth and light that constitute celestial glory and thereby possessing the same kind of life that God possesses—to be glorified as He is glorified so that man sees as He sees, hears as He hears, and has power to manifest his will in and through all things even as God manifests His intelligence and power throughout universal space. (Eternal life is not to have eternal increase. The term denoting the power to have a continuation of posterity forever and ever is "eternal lives," not "eternal life.") [^24] If man has faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repents of all sin, is baptized by immersion for the remission of sins, receives the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, and endures to the end in the manifestations of the Holy Spirit, the divine promise is that he will attain eternal life in the resurrection. [^25]

Sixth, in teaching Adam to be born again, the Lord observed: "For by the water ye keep the commandment; by the Spirit ye are justified, and by the blood ye are sanctified." [^26] By the water (i.e., by being baptized in water) man keeps the commandment—the new commandment by which fallen man may be made holy. (See Moses 6:56.) The new commandment mentioned above which God gave to Adam instructing him to repent included the requirement to be baptized, for it is by the water that man keeps the commandment that leads to eternal life. Baptism, Mormon observed in an epistle to his son Moroni, is "the first fruits of repentance." [^27] Since the tree and its fruits are inseparable, the commandment to repent includes the commandment to be baptized. Only by being baptized can man enter into the new spiritual state of life that leads to the holiness of God; and without entering therein and being sanctified by the powers of the Holy Spirit, repentance is not real and lasting.

The statement that man is justified by the Spirit has reference to the divine agent by which he is led, in his fallen state, to achieve justification before the bar of God. That agent is the Holy Spirit. There is both a condition of justification and a process of justification. In the case of the first, justification is the condition of being freed by the power of the atonement from the demands of divine law, by man's obedience to the principles and ordinances of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. This condition is made possible by the grace of Christ, as it is manifested in the Gospel. But since the Holy Spirit plays a vital role in leading man to obtain the benefits of the atonement that he might be brought to a condition of justification, it is appropriate to say that in the processes of the Gospel he is justified by the Spirit. By the influence of this divine agent, the man of faith is given strength and courage to comply with the principles and ordinances of the Gospel, and in this way the Spirit justifies man, or leads him to be a just man in Christ.

By the power of the Holy Spirit, man may also be sanctified and made pure before God. [^28] The process of being justified by the Holy Spirit is therefore directly related to the process of being sanctified by the Holy Spirit, for the divine agent acts to bring man to realize both objectives in the Gospel. To be sanctified by the blood of Jesus Christ means that though the Holy Spirit leads man to the condition of justification and is the sanctifying power by which he is cleansed from the effects of sin, the divine plan rests upon the blood of Christ, which He shed in making His infinite atonement.

Seventh, having taught Adam the doctrine of rebirth, the Lord summarized the objectives to be achieved by stating: "Therefore [by being born into the kingdom of heaven] it is given to abide in you; the record of heaven; the Comforter; the peaceable things of immortal glory; the truth of all things; that which quickeneth all things, which maketh alive all things; that which knoweth all things, which maketh alive all things; that which knoweth all things, and hath all power according to wisdom, mercy, truth, justice, and judgment." [^29] This is one of the most profound and meaningful statements in all scripture pertaining to the salvation of man. It declares positively and unequivocally that the divine nature of God is to be developed within man in its several manifestations by man's birth into the kingdom of heaven. In this way, man may be sanctified from all sin, enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and attain eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory. Therefore (or to the end that these objectives may be achieved) the following manifestations of God's glory are given to abide in those who are born again: the Record of Heaven—the divine substance of intelligence that records all things in heaven, past, present, and future; the Comforter—the Holy Ghost with its manifestations of truth, light, and power; the peaceable things of immortal glory—the fruits or peaceable things of the Holy Spirit, including love, peace, joy, kindness, gentleness, long-suffering, etc., which are the attributes of that divine intelligence that constitutes immortal glory; the truth of all things—that divine power or substance of truth which is called the Spirit of Truth and which knows all things; [^30] that which quickeneth all things, which maketh alive all things—the Light or Spirit which emanates from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space, that is in all things and through all things, and thereby quickens and makes alive all things; [^31] that which knoweth all things—the same divine and immanent substance of light and truth which, being intelligence, knows all things because it dwells in all things; and that which hath all power according to wisdom, mercy, truth, justice, and judgment—the Spirit or glory of God which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God who sits upon His throne in the bosom of eternity, in the midst of all things. [^32] These several manifestations of the glory and power of God are to be developed within man by his birth into the kingdom of heaven. This is the central purpose of the Gospel, to which all other considerations are secondary factors. The Gospel of Jesus Christ is "the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth, . . . for therein is the righteousness of God [i.e., His divine truth, power, and attributes] revealed from faith to faith." [^33] The central purpose of the divine plan of redemption is not alone to give man a philosophy of life, a body of moral and ethical principles, or a system of temporal well-being. Nor is it to give man a divinely approved dietary code. In the all-inclusive plan of life and salvation, each of these has its place, and each relates and contributes to the central purpose of the Gospel. But man cannot receive the Gospel by embracing and internalizing such principles and tenets alone. Though all such things, if they are wholesome and uplifting, contribute to the welfare of man and are of great importance, the plan of redemption requires in addition that man accept and internalize those processes of faith by which the truth, light, and power of God are developed within his life.

Eighth, having stressed that the Gospel is the divine plan by which man may be sanctified from all sin and have the glory of God developed within him in its several manifestations, the Lord declared emphatically: "And now, behold, I say unto you: This is the plan of salvation unto all men, through the blood of mine Only Begotten, who shall come in the meridian of time." [^34] This declaration should remove all doubt as to the divine intent and purpose of the Gospel. The central purpose of the Gospel is to achieve the spiritual renewal, regeneration, and maturation of man by developing within him the divine intelligence and power of God in their several manifestations. This is the plan of salvation for all men.

It is a matter of utmost importance that man understand the plan of life and salvation as the Lord explained it to Adam. That divine plan as it pertains to this earth has its center in two birth processes. By birth into the fallen mortal state, man is given the physical attributes and endowments of life, being conceived in sin so that the powers of sin or corruption within the flesh provide the means of testing his allegiance to God. This is an integral part of the over-all plan of life, for only by receiving a tabernacle of gross elements, by being tested and proven in the new endowments of life, and by having his body inseparably united with his organized spirit in the resurrection can man attain a fulness of joy. [^35] But this is not all. If man is to become like the exalted Man of Holiness, in addition to receiving a corporeal body that will eventually be perfected in all its physical attributes and powers, he must acquire the divine nature of his glorified Father. To this end, man must be born into the kingdom of heaven to be cleansed from sin and have the powers and attributes of God's divine nature developed within him. Having begun to receive these things, he may eventually be glorified in Christ, as Christ has been glorified in the Father. This is the plan of salvation; and only by understanding these points of doctrine and by learning to apply them in his life can man know what to worship and how to worship. [^36]

Finally, the Lord explained an important truth to Adam: "All things have their likeness, and all things are created and made to bear record of me." Christ is the center of the plan of life and salvation; and in that over-all plan, all things have their likeness and are made to bear record of Him, "both things which are temporal, and things which are spiritual; things which are in the heavens above, and things which are on the earth, and things which are in the earth, and things which are under the earth, both above and beneath." [^37] A scripture declares, for example:

. . . there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are one.

And there are three that bear witness in earth, the spirit, and the water, and the blood: and these three agree in one. [^38]

The crucifixion of Christ also has its likeness in the plan of life and salvation. As He made the atonement, Christ was "to be lifted up" upon the cross. [^39] After having been crucified, Jesus said to the Nephites:

. . . I came into the world to do the will of my Father, because my Father sent me.

And my Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross; and after that I had been lifted up upon the cross, that I might draw all men unto me, that as I have been lifted up by men even so should men be lifted up by the Father, to stand before me, to be judged of their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil—

And for this cause have I been lifted up; therefore, according to the power of the Father I will draw all men unto me, that they may be judged according to their works. [^40]

The likeness of birth into the kingdom of heaven to physical birth has been mentioned earlier in this chapter. Baptism and the reception of the Holy Ghost are also likened unto the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ. The Apostle Paul wrote:

Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death?

Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life.

For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection:

Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. [^41]

There are several symbolic elements in this statement by Paul. In baptism, man is buried with Christ into death, the "old man" being crucified with Christ. When the body is beneath the water, it is symbolic of Christ's body in the tomb. As Christ was raised up by the glory of the Father, filled with a fulness of the Father's divine nature, so should man come forth from the liquid tomb to a "newness of life," being filled with the divine powers that are given in the new birth to abide in him. Finally, in baptism man is like a seed that must be planted in order to spring forth into a new life. God's promise is that those who are planted together in the likeness of Christ's death will be also in the likeness of His resurrection. The new life they will come forth to possess in the resurrection is eternal life, or the kind of glorified life that Christ possesses. Joseph Smith explained:

God has set many signs on the earth, as well as in the heavens; for instance, the oak of the forest, the fruit of the tree, the herb of the field, all bear a sign that seed hath been planted there; for it is a decree of the Lord that every tree, plant, and herb bearing seed should bring forth of its kind, and cannot come forth after any other law or principle. Upon the same principle do I contend that baptism is a sign ordained of God, for the believer in Christ to take upon himself in order to enter into the kingdom of God, "for except ye are born of water and of the Spirit ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of God," said the Savior. It is a sign and a commandment which God has set for man to enter into His kingdom. Those who seek to enter in any other way will seek in vain; for God will not receive them, neither will the angels acknowledge their works as accepted, for they have not obeyed the ordinances, nor attended to the signs which God ordained for the salvation of man, to prepare him for, and give him a title to, a celestial glory. [^42]

There are many other symbolic elements in the plan of life and salvation. The thoughtful student of the Gospel will endeavor to seek them out and understand the witness they bear to the work of God.

Becoming Sons and Daughters of God—of Jesus Christ

The Pearl of Great Price teaches that those who are born into the kingdom of heaven enter into a new stage of life, and in receiving new, divine attributes of life they become sons and daughters of God—of Jesus Christ. For instance, the Book of Moses states: "Noah and his sons hearkened unto the Lord, and gave heed, and they were called the sons of God." [^43] Members of the Church of Christ in that early period were designated as "the children of God," [^44] while non-members were known as "the sons of men." [^45] In modern times, the Lord revealed the same doctrine to Joseph Smith. A revelation declared:

Hearken and listen to the voice of him who is from all eternity to all eternity, the Great I AM, even Jesus Christ—

The light and the life of the world; a light which shineth in darkness and the darkness comprehendeth it not;

The same which came in the meridian of time unto mine own, and mine own received me not;

But to as many as received me, gave I power to become my sons; and even so will I give unto as many as will receive me, power to become my sons. [^46]

Chapter three of this volume states that Jesus Christ is the Father of the regenerating and sanctifying powers of life that lead ultimately, through the Gospel, to eternal life or glory. In this sense, Christ is referred to properly as the Father of all who are born into the kingdom of heaven. Mortal man is born in the flesh under the restrictions of the fall of parents who cannot transmit in conception the divine powers and attributes that lead to eternal life. Consequently, fallen man must subscribe to "the articles of adoption" [^47]—the First Principles and Ordinances of the Gospel of Christ—by which he becomes a son of Jesus Christ. In this way he enters into the kingdom of heaven as a son of God, with the legal right to draw upon the divine endowments of truth and light which his new Father possesses. He must then grow up in Christ until he attains the divine stature of the fulness of Christ. [^48]

The new birth by which man may become a son of God is not a physical but a divine process. The Apostle Paul wrote: "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God." [^49] John said of those who accepted Christ: "As many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believed on his name: which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God." [^50] By undergoing this divine process, Adam became a son of God. Of his experience in making the transition to this spiritual state, Enoch said, after relating the teachings of God to Adam on the subject of birth into the kingdom of heaven:

And it came to pass, when the Lord had spoken with Adam, our father, that Adam cried unto the Lord, and he was caught away by the Spirit of the Lord, and was carried down into the water, and was laid under the water, and was brought forth out of the water.

And thus he was baptized, and the Spirit of God descended upon him, and thus he was born of the Spirit, and became quickened in the inner man.

And he heard a voice out of heaven, saying: Thou art baptized with fire, and with the Holy Ghost. This is the record of the Father, and the Son, from henceforth and forever;

And thou art after the order of him who was without beginning of days or end of years, from all eternity to all eternity.

Behold, thou art one in me, a son of God; and thus may all become my sons. [^51]

There are important ideas that should be noted in the above quotation: First, Adam expressed a desire to be born into the kingdom of heaven, and the experience that followed came as a result of that desire. To receive the blessings and powers of the Gospel, man must reach up with an expressed desire for the mercy and grace of God. As Alma sought to bring the people of his day to experience the inner transformation of birth into the kingdom of God, he challenged them, saying: "Behold, if ye will awake and arouse your faculties, even to an experiment upon my words, and exercise a particle of faith, yea, even if ye can no more than desire to believe, let this desire work in you, even until ye believe in a manner that ye can give place for a portion of my words." [^52] Desire is the forerunner of faith, and only by faith can man enter the kingdom of heaven.

Second, the manner in which Adam received the administration of the basic ordinances of the Gospel is of interest. There was no authorized person on earth at that time who could have administered these ordinances unto Adam. Nor would it have been proper for him to receive them from one of his sons in the flesh, since Adam alone was given the keys of the Holy Priesthood over this earth, under Christ, and in the patriarchal order of the Priesthood it was his right to receive the Gospel before any of his posterity and administer the ordinances of salvation unto them. Consequently, he was baptized by the Lord, with the Spirit of the Lord acting as the agent in that ordinance. This is not the only example of levitation mentioned in the scriptures. Nephi wrote of his experiences, stating: "Upon the wings of his [i.e., God's] Spirit hath my body been carried away upon exceeding high mountains." [^53] By revelation Joseph Smith corrected Luke's account of the temptations of Jesus to indicate that it was the Holy Spirit, not Satan, that carried Jesus upon a high mountain and later upon the pinnacle of the temple in Jerusalem, after the Lord had fasted for forty days in the wilderness. [^54] Finally, the experience of Philip should also be cited. After he had baptized the Ethiopian eunuch, the record states: "The Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, that the eunuch saw him no more." [^55]

Third, in receiving the ordinance of baptism and the bestowal of the Holy Spirit, Adam "became quickened in the inner man." [^56] This is the required experience to which Alma the younger referred when he declared:

. . . I ask of you, my brethren of the church, have ye spiritually been born of God? Have ye received his [divine] image in your countenances? Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts? [^57]

Such a transformation by divine power is required of all men, if they are to become new creatures in Christ and have a place in the kingdom of God. To Alma, the Lord declared:

Marvel not that all mankind, yea, men and women, all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, must be born again; yea, born of God, changed from their carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness, being redeemed of God, becoming his sons and daughters;

And thus they become new creatures; and unless they do this, they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God. [^58]

Fourth, the manifestation of power that enveloped Adam after his baptism by water constituted the baptism of fire (i.e., glory) and the Holy Ghost. This divine gift constitutes the Gospel in its basic powers. John the Baptist could not bestow the gift of the Holy Ghost since he held only the keys of the preparatory Gospel. [^59] But Jesus came to baptize with the Holy Ghost and with fire. [^60] The baptism of the Spirit set the Gospel of Jesus Christ apart from the lesser law and program administered by John. It may also be noted that if baptism in water requires man to be immersed in the required element, the baptism of the Holy Spirit must in like manner be an immersion in the heavenly substance. Indeed, if man is to be sanctified by the action of the Spirit, the divine substance must eventually envelop every organ and function of his body.

Fifth, as was indicated earlier in this chapter, the divine substance that constitutes God's glory and is referred to as the Holy Spirit, the Holy Ghost, etc., acts in the role of a recorder. This is the record of heaven that is the truth of all things and that knows all things. [^61] With reference to the power of the Holy Ghost, the voice from heaven said to Adam: "This is the record of the Father, and the Son, from henceforth and forever." [^62]

Sixth, when our father Adam was born of water and of the Spirit, the Lord declared that he was "after the order of him who was without beginning of days or end of years, from all eternity to all eternity." [^63] In the opinion of the writer, this statement may not refer only to the order of the Holy Priesthood, but to the fact that Adam, having been born into the kingdom of heaven, now belonged to that divine order of life that leads to eternal life. He had been quickened in the inner man and was thereby transformed to a new spiritual plane of life. He was living in a newness of life that pertained to eternity, and would continue by faithfulness forever. Jesus alluded to this when He said, "Whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die." [^64]

Confirmation of the above conclusion comes in the next statement which the voice out of heaven made to Adam: "Behold, thou art one in me, a son of God." [^65] In the order or relationship of eternal life, there is an extension of the divine powers of life or glory from a primary being to a subordinate being, so that the divine mind, glory, and power of the first person dwells in the subordinate being. When Jesus received the fulness of His Father's glory, John bore record: "The glory of the Father was with him, for he dwelt in him." [^66] As the Father extends His divine intelligence and power to dwell in the Son, Christ extends the glory which He has received from the Father to dwell in man, in the divine order of eternal life. This is the central purpose of the Gospel. For this Jesus prayed prior to His betrayal, saying of his disciples:

Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word;

That they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me.

And the glory which thou gavest me I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are one:

I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one. [^67]

Jesus desired that His disciples be one, as the Father was in Him and as He was in the Father. This divine union was to be achieved by Christ's extending the glory of the Father which He had received to abide in them. "The glory which thou gavest me I have given them," He prayed; "that they may be one, even as we are one: I in them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one." [^68] Here is the hope of true Christians. For this reason the Apostle Paul wrote to the converts he made at Galatia: "My little children, of whom I travail in birth again until Christ be formed in you." [^69] "Examine yourselves, whether ye be in the faith; prove your own selves," he exhorted the saints at Corinth. "Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates." [^70] Of the benefits of this indwelling relationship, Paul said:

If Christ be in you, though the body shall die because of sin, yet the Spirit is life, because of righteousness.

And if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in you." [^71]

Finally, as Adam became a recipient of those divine spiritual powers that lead upward to God and eternal life, the heavenly voice declared that in this way he had become "a son of God." [^72] The voice then concluded: "And thus may all become my sons." [^73] This has been the universal message of salvation taught in all generations of time when the Gospel has been on the earth. Having declared this doctrine, Enoch explained: "Behold, our Father Adam taught these things, and many have believed and become the sons of God." [^74] Israel understood in ancient times that they were called gods unto whom the word of God came. This also Jesus declared. [^75] In a revelation, the Lord informed Alma that all mankind who are accountable before Him must be born again and in this way become His sons and daughters. [^76] Alma was called by the Lord to preach unto men "that they must repent and be born again." [^77] He therefore taught his people how to "awake unto God," that their souls might be "illuminated by the light of the everlasting word," [^78] that they might experience "a change of heart" and "sing the song of redeeming love." [^79] For this reason, he inquired: "I ask of you, my brethren of the church, have ye spiritually been born of God? Have ye received his [divine] image in your countenances?" [^80]

An important insight into the ultimate purpose of the Gospel is the opening of the view that the destiny that man may eventually become as God. It has previously been observed that there are three stages of life in the over-all program of existence that begins in the pre-earth state and extends in the future to the resurrection, when the faithful are endowed with celestial glory and power. These three stages are (1) spirit life, (2) physical life, and (3) eternal life; and in each new birth the central, primal intelligence within man is given attributes and powers of life that it could not previously exercise. In the relationship of eternal life, the individual is endowed with the attributes and powers that lead to celestial glory. These are the attributes and powers of Deity; and in being a recipient of them, one becomes a son or a daughter of God, for thereby new divine attributes and powers are given to abide in him. That man who becomes a son of God and grows up in Christ to receive the divine attributes and powers of deity in their fulness becomes a god to all others in whom he has power to develop the divine nature. In this way man may ultimately become a god, with power to develop the divine attributes and powers of Deity in his posterity in eternity. [^81] In speaking of those who receive the glory of the celestial kingdom in the resurrection and the relationship they have with Christ and with God, His Father, a revelation said:

Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God—

Wherefore, all things are theirs, whether life or death, or things present, or things to come, all are theirs and they are Christ's, and Christ is God's. [^82]

Clarifications Of The Doctrine Of The Gospel Of Christ

Basic Propositions of the Gospel Plan

To see clearly that the Gospel is a system of divine power, blessings, and endowments by which man may be born out of his lost and fallen state into a newness of life that leads upward eventually to full spiritual union with Christ, it is necessary to see the relationship that the Gospel has to the over-all program of life. First, by way of review, Adam, as a physical-spiritual being, was placed in the Garden of Eden after the earth had been formed and brought up to a paradisiacal state of glory. Second, he fell from that glorious state and thereby suffered a spiritual death—a withdrawal of the divine powers of God's glory from himself and the earth. Third, Christ came to the earth in its fallen state conceived and born with the glory of His Father in Him in embryo, yet so constituted that He was able to be like man and die for the sins of the world. Fourth, by offering the divine endowments of life which He possessed, along with His sanctified flesh and blood, Jesus made an infinite and eternal sacrifice, sufficient to pay the debt of sin for Adam and all men; and having descended below all things, He was able to comprehend all things and thereby receive the fulness of the Father's glory and power, so that He might in turn be in and through all things, the light of truth. [^83] Fifth, by making the atonement, Christ was then in a position to forgive man for his sins and develop within him the divine intelligence and power that Christ received from His Father, and endow man in the resurrection which He instituted with the fulness of His glory. In brief, this is the plan of salvation. In the light of that divine plan, it must be concluded that unless man partakes, by faith in Jesus Christ, of the revelations, gifts, endowments, and fruits of the Holy Spirit he is devoid of the Gospel and is yet in his sins. [^84] By the power of the Holy Ghost, man may "have all things made manifest." [^85] The plan of the Gospel is for man to be cleansed from sin and receive that divine power, and mature therein until he grows up spiritually in Christ and receives of His fulness.

The fact should be stressed that there is a difference between true and false spiritual manifestations. Every saint should have sufficient experience with the Holy Ghost and its power to be able to discern the operation of an alien or opposing influence. The Lord has admonished: "Wherefore, beware lest ye are deceived; and that ye may not be deceived seek ye earnestly the best gifts [of the Holy Spirit], always remembering for what they are given." [^86] Again the Lord said:

That which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness.

That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day. [^87]

Those who are actuated by the Holy Spirit desire to build up the kingdom of God on earth under the direction of its constituted authorities. God manifests His intelligence and power through authorized channels, including the prophets and apostles whom He has chosen to direct His Church; and those who are recipients of the Holy Spirit are of necessity spiritually in tune with the constituted authorities of the Holy Priesthood. Lucifer was, and still is, called the accuser of the brethren. [^88] That there might be appropriate checks against the manifestations of false spirits in the Church, God has given the presiding authorities the power "to discern all those gifts lest there shall be any among you professing [spiritual manifestations] and yet be not of God." [^89]

The Way Into the Kingdom of Heaven

Jesus taught Nicodemus that the process of being born again requires man first to be born to see the kingdom of God; and, then, to consummate the process, he must be born of water and of the Spirit to enter the kingdom. [^90] A report of Joseph Smith's explanation of the teachings of Jesus to Nicodemus states:

He read the 3rd chapter of John, and explained much of it, making it so plain that a child could not help understanding it, if he paid attention. I recollect distinctly the substance of his remarks on the 3rd verse—"Except a man is born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God."

The birth here spoken of [i.e., being born to see the kingdom of God], the Prophet said, was not the gift of the Holy Ghost, which was promised after baptism, but was a portion of the Spirit which attended the preaching of the Gospel by the Elders of the Church. The people wondered why they had not previously understood the plain declarations of scripture, as explained by the Elders, as they had read them hundreds of times. When they read the Bible it was a new book to them. This was being born again to see the Kingdom of God. They were not in it, but could see it from the outside, which they could not do until the Spirit of the Lord took the veil from before their eyes. It was a change of heart but not of state; they were converted, but were yet in their sins. Although Cornelius [for example] had seen an holy angel, and on the preaching of Peter the Holy Ghost was poured out upon him and his household, they were only born again to see the Kingdom of God. Had they not been baptized afterwards they would not have been saved (See Acts, tenth chapter.). Explaining the fifth verse, he said, "To be born of water and of the Spirit" meant to be immersed in water for the remission of sins and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost thereafter. This was given by the laying on of the hands of one having authority given him of God. [^91]

"It is one thing to see the kingdom of God, and another thing to enter into it," Joseph Smith explained. "We must have a change of heart to see the kingdom of God, and subscribe to the articles of adoption to enter therein." [^92] The part of the rebirth process that enables man to see the kingdom of God must precede, in the normal sequence of conversion, the birth of water and the Spirit by which he enters the kingdom. Since the things of God can only be seen and understood by the Spirit of God, [^93] it follows that the Holy Spirit must manifest its blessings to man in some measure before he officially embraces the Gospel.

Alma spoke of man's being born so that he can see the kingdom of God when he challenged the people of his day to perform an experiment by which their minds would be enlightened by the powers of the Holy Spirit. They were to consider the word of God to be a seed which they were to plant in their hearts. Of the word which they were to plant, he said:

. . . begin to believe in the Son of God, that he will come to redeem his people, and that he shall suffer and die to atone for their sins; and that he shall rise again from the dead, which shall bring to pass the resurrection, that all men shall stand before him, to be judged at the last and judgment day, according to their works.

And now, my brethren, I desire that ye shall plant this word in your hearts, and as it beginneth to swell even so nourish it by your faith. And behold, it will become a tree, springing up in you unto everlasting life. [^94]

Man must respond with his whole soul to the testimony of Jesus: that He was and is a divine being who came to earth and suffered and died to redeem man; that He rose from the dead a tangible, glorified being and thereby instituted the resurrection which will unite the spirits and bodies of all men and bring them back into the presence of God to be judged; and that it is Christ's purpose to cleanse man from sin and develop the divine attributes and powers of His glory in him, beginning now but reserving the full manifestation of His glory in man until the resurrection. The process by which man is born to see the kingdom of God is based upon the absolute reality of these facts and of man's acceptance of them. In response to the testimony of Jesus, man must reach up to God in faith and, with an honest heart, ask in true humility for Christ's mercy and grace. Man must also begin to do all things that God has commanded him to do in searching for the kingdom of God and applying its righteousness in his life. In this way man may plant the word, as a seed, in his heart. Of its development within man, Alma said:

Now, if ye give place, that a seed may be planted in your heart, behold, if it be a true seed, or a good seed, if ye do not cast it out by your unbelief, that ye will resist the Spirit of the Lord, behold, it will begin to swell within your breasts; and when you feel these swelling motions, ye will begin to say within yourselves—It must needs be that this is a good seed, or that the word is good, for it beginneth to enlarge my soul; yea, it beginneth to enlighten my understanding, yea, it beginneth to be delicious to me. [^95]

Man's being born to see the kingdom of God is a practical reality, as real as life. Concerning it, Alma said:

. . . ye know that the word hath swelled your souls, and ye also know that it hath sprouted up, that your understanding doth begin to be enlightened, and your mind doth begin to expand.

O then, is not this real? I say unto you, Yea, because it is light; and whatsoever is light is good, because it is discernible, therefore ye must know that it is good. . . . [^96]

Through the manifestations of the Holy Spirit, the humble recipient sees and understands that which the world with its learning knows nothing about. The true saints are in a class by themselves, in a divine union of truth and light with Christ and with others who have been born again. Of the knowledge of God and the way it is manifested, the Apostle Paul wrote:

. . . we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom, which God ordained before the world unto our glory:

Which none of the princes of this world knew: for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.

But as it is written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him.

But God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God.

For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God.

Now we have received not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God; that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God.

Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual things with spiritual.

But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.

But he that is spiritual judgeth all things, yet he himself is judged of no man. [^97]

Having begun to see the kingdom of God, man learns that there are certain prescribed principles and ordinances with which he must comply to enter therein as a lawful member. These principles and ordinances, as have been previously mentioned, constitute the articles of adoption by which the faithful become sons and daughters of Jesus Christ. Joseph Smith wrote: "We believe that the first principles and ordinances of the Gospel are: first, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; second, Repentance; third, Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; fourth, Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost." [^98]

The Spiritual Life of the Gospel

To mature spiritually toward the goal of eternal life, man must accept and live by "every word that proceeds from the mouth of God," seeking in faith to apply the principles and powers of the Gospel in his life. In the Articles of Faith, Joseph Smith wrote:

We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men; indeed, we may say that we follow the admonition of Paul—We believe all things, we hope all things, we have endured many things, and hope to be able to endure all things. If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy, we seek after these things. [^99]

This declaration commits the Latter-day Saints to accept all true and virtuous principles from whatever source they may come, particularly when expressed in the word of God. In his quest for truth, man should seek the guidance of the Holy Spirit and measure all things by the Light of Truth. To Adam, the Lord explained the purpose of the gift of the Holy Ghost, stating that it was given that man might ask "all things in his name." Promised the Lord: "And whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given him." [^100] Moroni explained:

Behold, I say unto you that whoso believeth in Christ, doubting nothing, whatsoever he shall ask the Father in the name of Christ it shall be granted him; and this promise is unto all, even unto the ends of the earth. . . .

Hearken unto the words of the Lord, and ask the Father in the name of Jesus for what things soever ye shall stand in need. Doubt not, but be believing, and begin as in times of old, and come unto the Lord with all your heart, and work out your own salvation with fear and trembling before him.

Be wise in the days of your probation; strip yourselves of all uncleanness; ask not, that ye may consume it on your lusts, but ask with a firmness unshaken, that ye will yield to no temptation, but that ye will serve the true and living God. [^101]

This is the meaning of acquiring knowledge by faith, and through the ordinances of the Gospel. [^102] It is the means by which the patriarchs and prophets whose testimonies are recorded in the Pearl of Great Price obtained their knowledge, which far surpassed that of other men in their day. Joseph Smith also applied this principle in a manner unsurpassed by any of the great prophets in ancient or modern times. From the background of his experience he observed: "Could you gaze into heaven five minutes, you would know more than you would by reading all that ever was written on the subject." [^103] Again he declared as he held up the Bible:

I thank God that I have got this old book; but I thank him more for the gift of the Holy Ghost. I have got the oldest book in the world; but I [also] have the oldest book in my heart, even the gift of the Holy Ghost. [^104]

The gift of the Holy Ghost must be a channel of revelation to those who receive it. "No man can receive the Holy Ghost without receiving revelations," the Prophet declared. "The Holy Ghost is a revelator." [^105] He promised the Saints: "God shall give unto you knowledge by his Holy Spirit, yea, by the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost." [^106] Of the Nephite saints, the Book of Mormon said:

There are many among us who have many revelations, for they are not all stiffnecked. And as many as are not stiffnecked and have faith, have communion with the Holy Spirit, which maketh manifest unto the children of men, according to their faith. [^107]

Only by acquiring knowledge through the powers and ordinances of the Gospel of Jesus Christ can man be saved with that salvation which the Gospel offers. "There could not anything be given, pertaining to life and godliness, without knowledge," the latter-day Seer explained. "A knowledge of the priesthood alone will do this." [^108] Again he declared: "Knowledge through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is the grand key that unlocks the glories and mysteries of the kingdom of heaven." [^109] The revelations of the Holy Spirit are given to man through the Gospel to direct him in the way to eternal life.

Man must utilize the Holy Spirit in his quest for truth, and in discerning the difference between truth and error. He must also draw upon this intelligent power to develop its divine fruits in his life. The Lord informed Adam that the Holy Spirit is given to man in the Gospel that he might enjoy "the peaceable things of immortal glory." [^110] Of the several fruits of the Holy Spirit, the Apostle Paul wrote: "The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law." [^111] Fallen man cannot live the Christian law in the full and intelligent expression of love unless he partakes of the blessings of the Holy Spirit. Charity, the pure love of Christ, is an attribute that may only be developed within man in its true Christian expression by the influence of the Spirit. Mormon therefore wrote to his son Moroni that the Comforter fills man "with hope and perfect love." [^112] And Moroni in turn admonished: "Wherefore, my beloved brethren, pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love, which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ; that ye may become the sons of God; that when he shall appear we shall be like him." [^113]

The supernatural gifts mentioned in the scriptures are also essential expressions of the Holy Spirit. These divine gifts are given to those who manifest true and living faith in Christ and desire to do His will. It may be concluded that if saving faith exists in the hear of man, the gifts of the Spirit will be manifested in his life. Joseph Smith wrote in an Article of Faith: "We believe in the gift of tongues, prophecy, revelation, visions, healings, interpretation of tongues, etc." [^114] The Prophet held that the testimonies of the prophets and apostles concerning Christ—His death, burial, resurrection, and ascension into heaven—lay at the center of the Gospel plan. "But in connection with these," he stated, "we believe in the gift of the Holy Ghost, the power of faith, [and] the enjoyment of the spiritual gifts according to the will of God." [^115] Of the indispensable need of the gifts and manifestations of the Spirit in the life of man, Mormon said:

No man can be saved, according to the words of Christ, save they shall have faith in his name; wherefore, if these things [the gifts and manifestations of the Spirit] have ceased, then has faith ceased also; and awful is the state of man, for they are as though there had been no redemption made. [^116]

Moroni also stressed in his final testimony to the world:

And now I speak unto all the ends of the earth—that if the day cometh that the power and gifts of God shall be done away among you, it shall be because of unbelief.

And wo be unto the children of men if this be the case; for there shall be none that doeth good among you, no not one. For if there be one among you that doeth good, he shall work by the power and gifts of God. [^117]

Not all spiritual gifts are manifested immediately or outwardly in such a way that others may see their tangible operations. Joseph Smith explained that "the greatest, the best, and most useful gifts would be known nothing about by an observer." Among these he listed the gift of wisdom, of knowledge, edge, of faith, and the discernment of spirits. It takes time and circumstances to call these gifts forth and to manifest them among men. [^118]

Man in mortality is living under the powerful effects of the fall. Many who are otherwise dedicated to wholesome principles do not have the kind and quality of faith required to realize the manifestations of the Spirit in a distinct or phenomenal way. In a revelation, the Lord said: "To some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know that Jesus is the Son of God, and that he was crucified for the sins of the world." [^119] Here is a superior gift—to know independently by revelation to oneself that Jesus is the Christ. The Lord continued: "To others it is given to believe on their words, that they also might have eternal life if they continue faithful." [^120] This may be termed a dependent gift, since it requires the operation of a superior gift to make it functional. It is easier to obtain the Spirit of revelation in the presence of one who possesses and manifests it than it is to obtain it independent of its manifestation through another. But though the latter gift is a dependent one, it is nevertheless a gift of the Spirit. In fact, it is the gift that every new convert must initially receive; and if a person is faithful, it will lead him to other gifts and eventually to eternal life. The basic requirement of the Gospel is that man believe sincerely in Jesus Christ and possess an honest desire to come unto Him in the way the Gospel points out. Having enumerated some of the gifts and blessings that are given through the Gospel as they pertain to the healing of the sick, the Lord said by revelation: "And they who have not faith to do these things, but believe in me, have power to become my sons; and inasmuch as they break not my laws thou shalt bear their infirmities." [^121] By infirmities, the Lord seems to have meant spiritual as well as physical weaknesses. The purpose of the Gospel is to save and uplift man. But God works among people according to their faith; and the Saints should be taught how to exercise faith, for they cannot be transformed from their fallen spiritual state in mortality unless they receive the manifestations of the Holy Spirit.

Finally, if man exercises saving faith and demonstrates his desire to do the will of God, the attributes and qualities built into his soul by the influence of the Holy Spirit will manifest themselves outwardly in works of righteousness and service. The Apostle James was referring to this when he said: "Shew me thy faith without thy works, and I will shew thee my faith by my works." [^122] He was not teaching that good works alone will save man, but that true faith will manifest itself in good works. In his treatise on works, James had reference to the kind and quality of faith that man must have to be saved. If man's faith does not manifest itself in good works, it is not saving faith. Consequently faith without works is dead. The faith that man possesses cannot bring him to salvation if it cannot motivate him to do good works. As was indicated in chapter two of this volume, man must receive grace for grace in attaining the spiritual endowments that lead to immortal glory. Service, motivated by faith, in doing the will of God is the key to spiritual development.

Final Objectives of the Gospel

In discussing the application of the Gospel in the lives of men, Joseph Smith said: "Let us here observe, that after any portion of the human family are made acquainted with the important fact that there is a God, who has created and does uphold all things, the extent of their knowledge respecting his character and glory will depend upon their diligence and faithfulness in seeking after him, until, like Enoch, the brother of Jared, and Moses, they shall obtain faith in God, and power with him to behold him face to face." [^123] Again, the Prophet inquired:

How do men obtain a knowledge of the glory of God, his perfections and attributes? By devoting themselves to his service, through prayer and supplication incessantly strengthening their faith in him, until, like Enoch, the brother of Jared, and Moses, they obtain a manifestation of God to themselves. [^124]

As Joseph Smith indicated, Enoch, Moses, and other great prophets demonstrated the final objectives of the Gospel by developing the kind of faith that was necessary to bring them back into God's presence and be taught personally by Him in open communion. According to the latter-day Seer, this is "the established order of the kingdom of God" [^125]—the purpose for which the Gospel is given to man. Again he explained:

We consider that God has created man with a mind capable of instruction and a faculty which may be enlarged in proportion to the heed and diligence given to the light communicated from heaven to the intellect; and that the nearer man approaches perfection, the clearer are his views, and the greater his enjoyments, till he has overcome the evils of his life and lost every desire for sin; and like the ancients, arrives at that point of faith where he is wrapped in the power and glory of his Maker and is caught up to dwell with Him. But we consider that this is a station to which no man ever arrived in a moment: he must have been instructed in the government and laws of that kingdom by proper degrees, until his mind is capable in some measure of comprehending the propriety, justice, equality, and consistency of the same. [^126]

Having developed in the blessings of the Gospel, man may eventually receive "the more sure word of prophecy," by making his calling and election sure. [^127] At this point in the divine plan of redemption, the powers of the Holy Priesthood may act to seal him up unto eternal life. [^128] It is then his privilege to receive the second Comforter. Essentially this Comforter is "the promise . . . of eternal life, even the glory of the celestial kingdom." [^129] But it carries with it certain privileges and blessings, even the right (subject to the will of God) to enter into glory and commune directly with those who reside in the presence of God. Of the second Comforter and its related blessings, Joseph Smith said:

There are two Comforters spoken of. One is the Holy Ghost, the same as given on the day of Pentecost, and that all Saints receive after faith, repentance, and baptism. . . .

The other Comforter spoken of is a subject of great interest, and perhaps understood by few of this generation. After a person has faith in Christ, repents of his sins, and is baptized for the remission of sins and receives the Holy Ghost (by the laying on of hands), which is the first Comforter, then let him continue to humble himself before God, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, and living by every word of God, and the Lord will soon say to him, Son, thou shalt be exalted. When the Lord has thoroughly proved him, and finds that the man is determined to serve Him at all hazards, then the man will find his calling and his election made sure, then it will be his privilege to receive the other Comforter, which the Lord hath promised the Saints, as is recorded in the testimony of St. John, in the 14th chapter, from the 12th to the 27th verses. [^130]

In the Lord's promise to His disciples, He stated: "I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you." Again: "If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him." [^131] "The appearing of the Father and the Son, in that verse," said the Prophet of the last verse quoted above, "is a personal appearance; and the idea that the Father and the Son dwell in a man's heart is an old sectarian notion, and is false." [^132] The latter-day Seer explained:

Now what is this other Comforter? It is no more nor less than the Lord Jesus Christ Himself; and this is the sum and substance of the whole matter; that when any man obtains this last Comforter, he will have the personage of Jesus Christ to attend him, or appear unto him from time to time, and even He will manifest the Father unto him, and they will take up their abode with him; and the visions of the heavens will be opened unto him, and the Lord will teach him face to face, and he may have a perfect knowledge of the mysteries of the Kingdom of God; and this is the state and place the ancient Saints arrived at when they had such glorious visions—Isaiah, Ezekiel, John upon the Isle of Patmos, St. Paul in the three heavens, and all the Saints who held communion with the general assembly and Church of the First Born. [^133]

It is evident from this statement that the blessings of the second Comforter include, in addition to the manifestation of the Father and the Son, communion with the general assembly and church of the First Born, which has reference here to the sanctified and sealed church beyond the veil. One who has the second Comforter might also commune with the spirits of just men made perfect—faithful men who have obeyed the Gospel and overcome the world, and are perfected by the power of God's glory when they depart this life.

The established order of the kingdom of God is for men to develop in the fruits, gifts, powers, and blessings of the Gospel until they are capable of being sealed to eternal life and are given the privilege of coming back into the presence of God. Joseph Smith therefore declared "that the order of the High Priesthood was that they have power given them to seal up the Saints to eternal life." [^134] But to realize these final goals, man must receive the Gospel and its divine powers. The Prophet said:

A man may be saved, after the judgment, in the terrestrial kingdom, or in the telestial kingdom, but he can never see the celestial kingdom of God without being born of water and the Spirit. He may receive a glory like unto the moon, or a star, but he can never come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels; to the General Assembly and Church of the First Born, which are written in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and of the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, unless he becomes as a little child, and is taught by the Spirit of God. [^135]

Those spiritual giants in former dispensations who followed this divine formula, which enabled them to come back into the presence of God, were taught by divine means the mysteries of godliness. Of them, the Prophet wrote:

. . . They saw the flood before it came; they saw angels ascending and descending upon a ladder that reached from earth to heaven; they saw the stone cut out of the mountain, which filled the whole earth; they saw the Son of God come from the regions of bliss and dwell with men on earth; they saw the deliverer come out of Zion, and turn away ungodliness from Jacob; they saw the glory of the Lord when he showed the transfiguration of the earth on the mount; they saw every mountain laid low and every valley exalted when the Lord was taking vengeance upon the wicked; they saw truth spring out of the earth, and righteousness look down from heaven in the last days, before the Lord came the second time to gather his elect; they saw the end of wickedness on earth, and the Sabbath of creation crowned with peace; they saw the end of the glorious thousand years, when Satan was loosed for a little season; they saw the day of judgment when all men received according to their works, and they saw the heaven and the earth flee away to make room for the city of God, when the righteous receive an inheritance in eternity. [^136]

Among these spiritual giants were Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and Moses. The truths that are revealed in the Pearl of Great Price came to us because these prophets had faith to obtain the second Comforter and thereby speak with the Lord face to face. We should remember that the same divine formula applied in our day should lead to the acquisition of like blessings; and the same challenge that was given to the ancients by the Gospel is given to modern man. This the Prophet Joseph Smith stressed when he applied the challenge of the Gospel directly to man in our day, saying:

And fellow sojourners upon earth, it is your privilege to purify yourselves and come up to the same glory, and see for yourselves, and know for yourselves. Ask, and it shall be given you; seek and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. [^137]

Conclusion

According to the Pearl of Great Price, the Gospel of Jesus Christ is a divine formula by which the mercy, power, and blessings of God are given to fallen man. This divine plan requires that man exercise living faith in Jesus Christ, repent of all sin, be baptized by immersion for the remission of sins, and receive the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. This latter gift gives man a legal right to draw upon the truth, power, and blessings that are administered to man through the Holy Ghost. In this way, man may be regenerated and enter into a newness of life. As the Apostle Paul wrote: "If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are passed away; behold all things are become new." [^138] Having been born into the kingdom of God, the faithful have power to become sons and daughters of Christ by growing up in Him unto eternal life. After man has matured sufficiently in the fruits, gifts, and blessings of the Gospel, the Holy Priesthood may act to seal him unto eternal life. By faith and subject to the will of God, he may then come back into the presence of God and commune with those who reside in glory. This is the plan of salvation for all men through the power and atonement of Jesus Christ.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 22:1.
[^2] Ibid., 20:25-26.
[^3] The Evening and Morning Star, Independence, Missouri (April, 1833), I, p. 85. Hereafter this publication will be abbreviated EMS, followed by the appropriate date, volume, and page numbers. During the time this periodical was being printed, Elder Phelps was a president of the Church in Missouri and the "Lord's Printer."
[^4] Ibid., p. 81.
[^5] Moses 5:13-14.
[^6] EMS (April, 1833), I, p. 81.
[^7] EMS (May, 1833), I, p. 94.
[^8] EMS (March, 1833), I, p. 73.
[^9] D&C 78:16.
[^10] TPJS, p. 158.
[^11] Ibid., pp. 167-168.
[^12] Ibid., p. 157
[^13] Ibid, p. 168.
[^14] Lectures on Faith, No. 2.
[^15] Ibid.
[^16] Moses 5:9-10.
[^17] Lectures on Faith, No. 2.
[^18] Alma 12:28-30.
[^19] Ibid., 12:33-34.
[^20] D&C 84:24.
[^21] TPJS, p. 159.
[^22] Ibid., pp. 158-159.
[^23] D&C 107:53-57.
[^24] Moses 7:47.
[^25] Ibid., 7:16-17.
[^26] Reported by Joseph Young, Sr. in A Brief Glance at Enoch and His City, p. 11.
[^27] JD, III, p. 320.
[^28] Ibid.
[^29] See Alma 13:11-12; D&C 84:24.
[^30] JD, III, p. 320.
[^31] Jacob 4:4, 11.
[^32] Alma 12:36; 13:12-16; 16:17.
[^33] Ibid., 13:11-12.
[^34] Moses 7:27.
[^35] Ibid., 8:13.
[^36] Ibid., 8:14-15.
[^37] Ibid., 8:16.
[^38] Ibid., 8:17.
[^39] Ibid., 8:18. Once when Joseph Smith was in the shop of Dimick Huntington waiting for some work to be done, he began talking about the past history of the earth. Elder Huntington later reported that Joseph said that while Noah was building the ark and preaching "the wicked people mobbed and drove him four times."—Young Woman's Journal, II, p. 467; "Diary of Charles L. Walker," under date of December 5, 1891. See also a manuscript entitled "Sayings of Joseph Smith," as reported by those who heard the Prophet and later related what he said, in "Joseph Smith, Jr. Papers," Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah, where it is reported: "As regards Noah, he was mobbed and broken up four times while building the ark."
[^40] Moses 8:19.
[^41] Ibid., 8:20-21.
[^42] Ibid.,
[^43] JD, XXVI, p. 90.
[^44] Moses 8:22.
[^45] Ibid., 8:23-24.
[^46] Ibid., 8:25.
[^47] Genesis 6:6.
[^48] Moses 8:29-30.
[^49] Ibid., 8:30.
[^50] Ether 13:2.
[^51] D&C 45:12.
[^52] Alma 13:17-19.
[^53] D&C 107:1-4.
[^54] I.V., Genesis 14:26-34.
[^55] Ibid., 14:30-31.
[^56] D&C 50:27.
[^57] Ibid., 107:18-19.
[^58] In support of the view that to dwell in glory is to dwell in heaven, see ibid., 129:1, 3.
[^59] I.V., Genesis 14:34.
[^60] Alma 13:15-16.
[^61] D&C 119:4.
[^62] See again Alma 13:15.
[^63] See Abraham 2:8-11.
[^64] Ibid., 2:6. Abraham also went into Egypt and, presumably, he preached the Gospel to some extent to the Egyptians.
[^65] Ibid., 2:15.
[^66] 1 Nephi 17:35.
[^67] Hebrews 11:24-26.
[^68] MS (July, 1842), III, p. 47.
[^69] Quincy, op. cit., p. 386.
[^70] See 3 Nephi 10:16 in conjunction with 1 Nephi 5:14.
[^71] 1 Nephi 19:10.
[^72] See 2 Nephi 3:9-10, 16.
[^73] Exodus 13:19.
[^74] Exodus 2:15-21.
[^75] D&C 84:6.
[^76] See Moses 1:17 which mentions the episode of the burning bush as having transpired before Moses received this manifestation.
[^77] See ibid., 1:25-26 which mentions the future deliverance of Israel and the crossing of the Red Sea.
[^78] D&C 84:19-26.
[^79] TPJS, pp. 180-181.
[^80] Ibid.
[^81] DHC, V, p. 555.
[^82] I.V., Exodus 34:1-2.
[^83] Ibid., 34:1.
[^84] Isaiah 4:5.
[^85] See Smith 1:1.
[^86] See ibid., 1:5-25, which concerns this subject.
[^87] Hebrews 7:11-12.
[^88] Hebrews 5:1-6; 6:20; 7:15-21.
[^89] John 3:3-5.
[^90] Ibid., 20:22.
[^91] Luke 24:49; Acts 2:1-4.
[^92] Acts 2:38-39.
[^93] Ibid., 8:12-19; 19:6.
[^94] See DHC, III, pp. 379-380; V, pp. 387-389, 401-403.
[^95] 2 Corinthians 3.
[^96] Hebrews 3:16-19; 4:1-2.
[^97] Revelation 14:6.
[^98] Hebrews 13:20.
[^99] 1 Peter 2:19-20.
[^100] Revelation 13:8.
[^101] Matthew 25:34.
[^102] Act 4:11-12.
[^103] DHC, II, pp. 15-18. (Italics in the original.)
[^104] Ibid., p. 349.
[^105] DHC, VI, p. 58.
[^106] D&C 121:26.
[^107] Jarom 4.
[^108] Ibid., p. 305.
[^109] Ibid., p. 298.
[^110] Moses 6:61.
[^111] Galatians 5:22-23.
[^112] Moroni 8:26.
[^113] Ibid., 7:48.
[^114] Articles of Faith, No. 7.
[^115] TPJS, p. 121.
[^116] Moroni 7:38.
[^117] Ibid., 10:24-25.
[^118] See DHC, V, pp. 29-30.
[^119] D&C 46:13.
[^120] Ibid., 46:14.
[^121] Ibid., 42:52.
[^122] James 2:18.
[^123] Lecture on Faith, No. 2.
[^124] Ibid.
[^125] TPJS, p. 325.
[^126] Ibid., p. 51.
[^127] See address by Elder Marion G. Romney, Conference Report, October 1965.
[^128] See D&C 130:5; TPJS, pp. 298-299, 304-306.
[^129] D&C 88:3-4.
[^130] TPJS, 149-150.
[^131] John 14:18, 23.
[^132] D&C 130:3.
[^133] TPJS, 150-151.
[^134] 134. Journal History, October 25, 1831.
[^135] 135. TPJS, p. 12.
[^136] 136. Ibid., pp. 12-13.
[^137] 137. Ibid., p. 13.
[^138] 138. 2 Corinthians 5:17
