Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1967)

CHAPTER 9

THE GOSPEL THROUGH THE AGES

One of the greatest contributions of the Pearl of Great Price is the understanding it gives of the Gospel and its program in ancient times. From this valuable scripture comes the knowledge that Adam and subsequent patriarchs and prophets were given a knowledge of Jesus Christ and the plan of salvation that had been formulated before the earth was created. As was indicated in the previous chapter, that divine plan, as revealed to man, consists of the knowledge of the atonement and the established principles and ordinances by which the mercy and power of God are given to transform fallen man into a newness of spiritual life and to develop him in the divine powers of truth and light until he is able to dwell again in the presence of God. The formula of the Gospel was revealed to man from the beginning, and by it the righteous from the days of Adam applied their faith to come back into the presence of God. For this reason, a revelation given to Joseph Smith referred to baptism as a "new and an everlasting covenant, even that which was from the beginning." [^1] Another revelation also declared that Christ died "that as many as would believe and be baptized in his holy name, and endure in faith to the end, should be saved—not only those who believed after he came in the meridian of time, in the flesh, but all those from the beginning, even as many as were before he came, who believed in the words of the holy prophets, who spake as they were inspired by the gift of the Holy Ghost, who truly testified of him in all things, should have eternal life." [^2]

The Gospel In Antediluvian Times

Introduction of the Gospel into the World

An extended period of time passed after Adam and Eve were driven from the Garden of Eden before they were given a knowledge of the Gospel. Basing his statement on information found in the forepart of Moses 5, William W. Phelps wrote: "It ought to be known, for it is published, that after Adam and Eve were driven out of the garden of Eden, they had many children, and the children went forth two by two and began to multiply and replenish the earth; yea, and all this too, before Adam had the gospel preached unto him or was baptized." [^3] Of the period until the plan of redemption was made known to Adam and Eve, Elder Phelps wrote, deriving his information again from Moses 5:

For after that he [i.e., Adam] had been driven out, he began to till the earth, and to have dominion over all the beasts of the field, and to eat his bread by the sweat of the brow, as the Lord had commanded him: and Eve also, his wife, did labor with him, and he knew her, and she bare unto him sons and daughters, and they began to multiply and to replenish the earth. And from that time forth, the sons and daughters of Adam began to divide two and two in the land, and to till the land and to tend flocks; and they also begat sons and daughters.

And Adam called upon the name of the Lord, and Eve also his wife, and they heard the voice of the Lord from the way towards the garden of Eden, speaking unto them and they saw him not, for they were shut out from his presence.—And he gave unto them commandment, that they should worship the Lord their God, and should offer the firstlings of their flocks, for an offering unto the Lord. And Adam was obedient unto the commandments of the Lord.

And after many days an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying, why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him, I know not, save the Lord commanded me. And then the angel spoke saying, this thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth. Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore. [^4]

After receiving a knowledge of the Gospel, Adam and Eve made known the sacred truths and promises to their children. But Satan came among them and enticed them to disbelieve the testimony and admonitions of their parents; and they believed not, and loved Satan more than God. Nevertheless, the Lord gave the power of the Holy Ghost, God's Witness of divine truth in all ages of time, and under its enlightening influence the gospel message was established among men in their probationary state. [^5] Of the Gospel during the period before the flood, William W. Phelps wrote:

The Gospel to Adam was: If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized even by water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, which is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, [ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost]: and ye shall ask all things in his name; and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given.

The gospel that Enoch preached was the same, for he called upon the people to repent, and he received a commandment to baptize, &c.; and when men repented and were brought into the kingdom of God, he continued his preaching in righteousness, that the saints might know the mysteries of the kingdom; even see and know for themselves, and through the power and manifestation of the Spirit, while in the flesh, they might be able to bear the presence of God in the world of glory; for Enoch and all his people walked with God, and were translated, even taken up into the bosom of God.

The Gospel that Noah preached to the inhabitants before the flood, was the same that had been preached to his fathers before him; for he was a just man, and perfect in his generations, and walked with God. [^6]

Though many disbelieved the message of the Gospel, there were others who accepted the plan of redemption and developed in the truths and powers of the Spirit to a remarkable degree. "We said we would not pretend to say how far the knowledge of the world extended as one great family," Elder Phelps observed in speaking of the spread of the Gospel in the early ages of the world. "But as to the saints, we have a right to say from facts revealed, that, before the flood, they knew more than the world will believe now: yes they had a knowledge of the mysteries of eternity, that have been hid from the eyes of wicked men for ages and generations; mysteries and glories which have been sought for by holy men, and seen by an eye of faith, even the city of Enoch, that was taken up to the bosom of the Father." [^7]

Adam's Place in the Gospel Plan

In the early days of this dispensation, when the information now contained in the Book of Moses was being given to the Saints, William W. Phelps wrote: "Adam was the first member of the Church of Christ on earth, and the first high priest after the order of the Son of God." [^8] In the commission he received, Adam was also given the keys to administer the divine plan of salvation to others, including his children to the latest generation of time. This was the divine order that was established in relation to the Gospel. A revelation thus declared of Adam, or Michael (his name in the pre-earth sphere), that God had "established his feet, and set him upon high, and given unto him the keys of salvation under the counsel and direction of the Holy One, who is without beginning of days or end of life." [^9] For this reason, Joseph Smith declared: "Christ is the Great High Priest; Adam next." [^10] Again the Prophet explained:

Commencing with Adam, who was the first man, who is spoken of in Daniel as being the "Ancient of Days," or in other words, the first and oldest of all, the great grand progenitor of whom it is said in another place he is Michael, because he was the first and father of all, not only by progeny, but the first to hold the spiritual blessings, to whom was made known the plan of ordinances for the salvation of his posterity unto the end, and to whom Christ was first revealed, and through whom Christ has been revealed from heaven, and will continue to be revealed from henceforth. Adam holds the keys of the dispensation of the fullness of times; i.e., the dispensation of all the times have been and will be revealed through him from the beginning to Christ, and from Christ to the end of the dispensations that are to be revealed. [^11]

"The keys have to be brought from heaven whenever the Gospel is sent," Joseph Smith observed as he discussed the place of Adam in revealing the Gospel to men on this earth. "When they are revealed from heaven, it is by Adam's authority." [^12] There is divine purpose in this procedure, and that purpose is concerned with the end to be achieved in the redemption of the earth and its righteous inhabitants. The Prophet Joseph explained:

Now the purpose in Himself in the winding up scene of the last dispensation is that all things pertaining to that dispensation should be conducted precisely in accordance with the preceding dispensations.

And again, God purposed in Himself that there should not be an eternal fullness until every dispensation should be fulfilled and gathered together in one, and that all things whatsoever, that should be gathered together in one in those dispensations unto the same fullness and eternal glory, should be in Christ Jesus; therefore He set the ordinances to be the same forever and ever, and set Adam to watch over them, to reveal them from heaven to man, or to send angels to reveal them. [^13]

In this statement may be seen the need for consistency in revealing the plan of redemption in each dispensation of the Gospel that has been committed to man since the days of Adam. Here, also, may be seen the purpose of the final dispensation of the Gospel—to gather all former dispensations together in Christ, into one great and eternal fulness. Adam holds the keys of spiritual blessings over all these dispensations; and with the keys he has the responsibility of revealing the gospel program to man in a consistent pattern throughout the several generations of time when the Gospel is on the earth.

Early Efforts to Apply The Gospel

To Adam the Gospel had a special meaning that should be seen and appreciated by all who have the hope of acquiring eternal life. Though he fell from his state of paradisiacal glory, Adam did not lose his memory of the divine endowments of life and power which he had previously enjoyed. Joseph Smith therefore wrote: "Though man did transgress, his transgression did not deprive him of the previous knowledge with which he was endowed relative to the existence and glory of his Creator." [^14] Again he explained: "Though our first parents were driven out of the garden of Eden, and were even separated from the presence of God by a veil, they still retained a knowledge of his existence, and that sufficiently to move them to call upon him." [^15] With the knowledge of the divine nature of God and with the memory of the state of life he had once occupied in God's presence, the Gospel was to Adam essentially the formula by which he and his posterity in the flesh could attain a remission of their sins and receive the divine endowments of truth and light during their probationary state to prepare them to enjoy the fulness of God's glory in the resurrection. To Adam, the Gospel was a formula of divine truth and power. In the fall he had lost the glory and power which he had enjoyed during the earth's paradisiacal state. By the Gospel he could be restored to that which had been taken away. This central purpose and objective is inherent in the declaration God made to Adam, when the latter was informed: "As thou hast fallen, thou mayest be redeemed, and all mankind, even as many as will." Realizing very vividly what he had lost and what was meant by redemption from the fall, Adam then exclaimed: "Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God." [^16]

Adam, in turn, committed to his children the knowledge which he had concerning God and the hope of eternal life. Joseph Smith explained: "Adam, thus being made acquainted with God, communicated the knowledge which he had unto his posterity; and it was through this means that the thought was first suggested to their minds that there was a God, which laid the foundation for the exercise of their faith, through which they could obtain a knowledge of his character and also of his glory." [^17] In the early revelations of God to man, the divine nature of God was reaffirmed and the hope of glory was given added strength to those that believed. Alma explained:

God . . . saw that it was expedient that man should know concerning the things whereof he had appointed unto him;

Therefore he sent angels to converse with them, who caused men to behold of his glory.

And they began from that time forth to call on his name; therefore God conversed with men, and made known unto them the plan of redemption, which had been prepared from the foundation of the world; and this he made known unto them according to their faith and repentance and their holy works. [^18]

Of the plan of the Gospel and its final objective, as revealed to man in the early ages of the world, Alma said:

God did call on men, in the name of his Son, (this being the plan of redemption which was laid) saying: If ye will repent, and harden not your hearts, then will I have mercy upon you, through mine Only Begotten Son;

Therefore, whosoever repenteth, and hardeneth not his heart, he shall have claim on mercy through mine Only Begotten Son, unto a remission of his sins; and these shall enter into my rest. [^19]

Scripturally the term "rest" means "the fulness of his [i.e., God's] glory." [^20] It is that state of glory which the man of faith attains when he has been sanctified by the Gospel and matured under the influence of its divine powers until he is permitted to enter into the presence of God and enjoy the endowments of His divine nature. This is the great objective which man may achieve through the Gospel. This Adam was taught; and this in turn he taught his children.

In discussing man's efforts to apply the Gospel, Joseph Smith observed that there were those in the "first ages of the world" who sought to bring mankind into the presence of God. He said: "There were Eliases raised up who tried to restore these very glories, but did not obtain them." [^21] Adam initiated these efforts by teaching the Gospel to his children. Three years previous to his death, he also gathered the righteous of his posterity into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman and there gave them his last blessing. Joseph Smith observed: "This is why Adam blessed his posterity; he wanted to bring them into the presence of God." [^22] Of that great meeting, a revelation said:

Three years previous to the death of Adam, he called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, who were all high priests, with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing.

And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the prince, the archangel.

And the Lord administered comfort unto Adam, and said unto him: I have set thee to be at the head; a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou art a prince over them forever.

And Adam stood up in the midst of the congregation; and notwithstanding he was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy Ghost, predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation.

These things were all written in the book of Enoch, and are to be testified of in due time. [^23]

Enoch was the most successful of the antediluvian patriarchs and prophets in getting his people to apply the Gospel to achieve its end results. Enoch perfected a divine religious, socio-economic, and political order that was centered in a family-oriented society; and as he and his people purified their hearts by establishing the celestial system in their midst, they were able to utilize more fully the powers of the Holy Spirit that are manifested through the Gospel, until they acquired the necessary knowledge, power, and maturity to come into the presence of God. Having brought his people to this state of glory and power, Enoch rejoiced and said: "Through faith I am in the bosom of the Father, and behold, Zion is with me." [^24] Even before Enoch and his people were translated, they realized many of the greater blessings and objectives that are made available through the Gospel. The Book of Moses states of the ancient Zion during this earlier period:

. . . the Lord came and dwelt with his people, and they dwelt in righteousness.

The fear of the Lord was upon all nations, so great was the glory of the Lord which was upon his people. [^25]

Enoch applied that which Joseph Smith referred to as "a divine philosophy." By its practice, the patriarch's "people and the city, and the foundations of the earth on which it stood, had partaken of so much of the immortal elements [i.e., the elements of that divine intelligent substance called the Holy Spirit], bestowed upon them by God through the teachings of Enoch, that it became philosophically impossible for them to remain any longer upon the earth" in its fallen state. By utilizing divine powers developed through the Gospel, they and their city and a large portion of the earth had "assumed an aerial position within the limits of our solar system; and this in consequence of their faith." [^26] Brigham Young also explained that Enoch had learned enough "from Adam and his associates to know how to handle the elements" so that eventually "he obtained power to take his portion of the earth and move out a little while." [^27]

For Enoch and his people to acquire such a command of divine powers as was necessary to be translated, Brigham Young observed that they were required to develop in the program of the Gospel until they could "enter into their rest." [^28] To do so, they had to be sanctified by the powers of the Gospel to the extent that they could go back into the presence of God and partake of the glory and power of that state of existence. [^29] As a church and a people, they therefore made their calling and election sure and were sealed by the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood unto those higher family relationships by which they could be exalted within celestial society and glory. Having achieved these objectives, they could then enter into the fulness of God's glory. Only then, President Young explained, did Enoch obtain "power to translate himself and his people, with the region they inhabited, their houses, garden, fields, cattle, and all their possessions." [^30]

To see the correlation that exists between the teachings of the Pearl of Great Price and other scriptural works on the divine purpose of the Gospel, we may note that it was the intent and desire of the Nephite prophets to bring their people to the standard of spiritual excellence required to enter into the presence of God and receive such communion as was described above. Jacob recorded his desire to enter into the Lord's rest that his descendants might know that he, with all the holy prophets before his day, "knew of Christ and had a hope of his glory many hundred years before his coming." [^31] Alma admonished his people to righteousness, so that they might achieve this goal, and warned that by taking a contrary course they could "not enter into the rest of the Lord." [^32] Said he of those who received the Holy Priesthood and entered by its powers into the Lord's rest:

. . . they were called after his holy order, and were sanctified, and their garments were washed white through the blood of the Lamb. Now they, after being sanctified by the Holy Ghost, having their garments made white, being pure and spotless before God, could not look upon sin save it were with abhorrence; and there were many, exceeding great many, who were made pure and entered into the rest of the Lord their God. [^33]

Even after Enoch and his city had been translated, there were many who received the Gospel; and in applying its principles and powers in their lives, they too were translated to glory. The Book of Moses states: "And Enoch beheld angels descending out of heaven, bearing testimony of the Father and Son; and the Holy Ghost fell on many, and they were caught up by the powers of heaven into Zion." [^34] This apparently means that by the time the flood was sent upon the earth, those who were worthy had joined Enoch and his people, leaving only Noah and his immediate family to fulfil the purposes of the Lord in re-populating the earth.

Noah and the Gospel

The Book of Moses informs us that "Noah and his sons hearkened unto the Lord, and gave heed, and they were called the sons of God," [^35] because they were recipients of the regenerating powers of the Gospel. But when Noah's sons began to multiply and daughters were born unto them, the sons of men (non-members of the Church) beheld that they were fair, and they took them as wives. This caused the Lord to say to Noah: "The daughters of thy sons have sold themselves; for behold mine anger is kindled against the sons of men, for they will not hearken to my voice." [^36]

In an effort to check the growing disbelief and corruption in the world, "Noah prophesied, and taught the things of God, even as it was in the beginning." [^37] The same plan of salvation that God gave to Adam was therefore in effect in the days of Noah. As it became apparent that the people would not repent, the Lord said to Noah: "My Spirit shall not always strive with man, for he shall know that all flesh shall die; yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years; and if men do not repent, I will send in the floods upon them." [^38]

Noah's task of preaching the Gospel to a degenerate world and at the same time construct the ark which the Lord commanded him to build was a difficult one. Men not content to disbelieve came out in opposition to Noah and the work of God. The Book of Moses states: "And in those days there were giants on the earth, and they sought Noah to take away his life; but the Lord was with Noah, and the power of the Lord was upon him." [^39]

But despite the opposition that confronted him, Noah was actively engaged in proclaiming the word of God to the world. The record states: "And the Lord ordained Noah after his own order [i.e., to the Holy Priesthood after the order of the Son of God], and commanded him that he should go forth and declare his Gospel unto the children of men, even as it was given unto Enoch." [^40] Continuing, the Book of Moses says:

And it came to pass that Noah called upon the children of men that they should repent; but they hearkened not unto his words;

And also, after they [i.e., those who were members of the Church] had heard him, they came up before him, saying: Behold, we are the sons of God; have we not taken unto ourselves the daughters of men? And are we not eating and drinking, and marrying and giving in marriage? And our wives bear unto us children, and the same are mighty men, which are like unto men of old, men of great [worldly] renown. And they hearkened not unto the words of Noah. [^41]

From this statement it is apparent that there were those numbered among the people of God who did not accept the words of Noah. Many who were called "the sons of God" (that is, had their names on the records of the Church) married "the daughters of men" (non-members of the Church) and were following the ways of the world. Of these it states: "And they hearkened not unto the words of Noah." [^42] This reveals the apostate condition within the Church of Jesus Christ shortly before the flood. John Taylor explained:

One of the great evils that existed among the people was that the sons of God married the daughters of men; or, in other words, many who were connected with the Church mixed themselves up with those who were not; and thus their hearts were drawn away from God, and in the sight of God they were no better than those who rejected His servants; and consequently they perished with the disobedient and wicked. [^43]

Of the prevailing wickedness, the Book of Moses says: "And God saw the wickedness of men had become great in the earth; and every man was lifted up in the imagination of the thoughts of his heart, being only evil continually." [^44] Nevertheless, Noah continued preaching unto the people, saying: "Hearken, and give heed unto my words; believe and repent of your sins and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, even as our fathers, and ye shall receive the Holy Ghost, that ye may have all things made manifest; and if ye do not this, the floods will come in upon you." [^45] Here again is a plain declaration of the Gospel, as it was given in ancient times. But when the people still did not hearken to his words, the record states: "And it repented Noah, and his heart was pained that the Lord had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at the heart." [^46]

The last statement above is an interesting correction of the text of Genesis, which states: "And it repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart." [^47] The question should be asked, Is it possible that a divine being who knows the future as well as the past and the present should find it necessary to repent? Again, should the plan to clothe the spirit children of God with physical tabernacles never have been put into operation after all, because a generation of men became corrupt? Did God err on this great issue of life and find it necessary to repent? If He did repent, why did He not translate Noah and his immediate family to a state of glory and wipe the earth clean of all its inhabitants? Instead of God repenting, it is more consistent that Noah, who was required to meet the corruption of that generation, repudiate man as he saw him in his corrupt state and justly desire in his heart that God had not created man.

Divine justice required the Lord to take heed of the situation of man on the earth. "God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth." And the Lord said unto Noah: "The end of all flesh is come before me, for the earth is filled with violence, and behold I will destroy all flesh from off the earth." [^48]

It should be observed that the flood was universal in its coverage of the earth. God decreed: "I will destroy all flesh from off the earth." [^49] This could not be accomplished if the flood was confined to a given locality. That the flood covered the land now designated as the Western hemisphere is evident from a statement by Moroni as he abridged the record of the Jaredites. Of Ether a great Jaredite prophet, Moroni said: "He truly told them of all things, from the beginning of man; and that after the waters had receded from off the face of this land it became a choice land above all other lands, a chosen land of the Lord." [^50] It is evident that the flood covered the face of the land that is now designated as North and South America.

Gospel Dispensations From Noah To Jesus

Melchizedek and the Gospel

The standard of spiritual excellence and power which Enoch and his people attained became an ideal for the righteous of later generations. That which Enoch achieved, exemplified and foreshadowed the millennial era of righteousness that would prevail upon all the face of the earth. This day of peace and power and glory the righteous sought to obtain, if not as a system with universal power, at least for the benefits that the application of its law would give unto them. By revelation, the Lord designated Enoch's people as "a city reserved until a day of righteousness shall come—a day which was sought for by all holy men, and they found it not because of wickedness and abomination." [^51]

Among those who sought to attain the spiritual excellence and righteousness which the Gospel makes possible was Melchizedek. Of him Alma said:

Now this Melchizedek was a king over the land of Salem; and his people had waxed strong in iniquity and abomination; yea, they had all gone astray; they were full of all manner of wickedness;

But Melchizedek having exercised mighty faith, and received the office of the high priesthood according to the holy order of God, did preach repentance unto his people. And behold, they did repent; and Melchizedek did establish peace in the land in his days; therefore he was called the prince of peace, for he was the king of Salem; and he did reign under his father.

Now, there were many before him, and also there were many afterwards, but none were greater; therefore, of him they have more particularly made mention. [^52]

That the Church was organized among the righteous of that day is evident from statements made in a revelation to Joseph Smith. By revelation the Prophet wrote that the highest order of the Priesthood is called the Melchizedek Priesthood "because Melchizedek was such a great high priest." Before his day it was called the Holy Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God. Continuing, Joseph Smith wrote: "But out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid the too frequent repetition of his name, they, the church, in ancient days, called that priesthood after Melchizedek, or the Melchizedek Priesthood." [^53] There was therefore a church in the days of Melchizedek over which he presided as a great High Priest; and because he was such a great High Priest, the church by official action changed the name of the Priesthood and called it after him, that they might not use the sacred term "Son of God" as a common expression among them.

From Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of the Bible come the following insights into the nature of the system that Melchizedek established and its foundation in the Holy Priesthood:

Now Melchizedek was a man of faith, who wrought righteousness; and when a child he feared God, and stopped the mouths of lions and quenched the violence of fire.

And thus, having been approved of God, he was ordained an high priest after the order of the covenant which God made with Enoch,

It being after the order of the Son of God; which order came, not by man, nor the will of man; neither by father nor mother; neither by beginning of days nor end of years; but of God;

And it was delivered unto men by the calling of his own voice, according to his own will, unto as many as believe on his name.

For God having sworn unto Enoch and unto his seed with an oath by himself; that every one being ordained after this order and calling should have power, by faith, to break mountains, to divide the seas, to dry up waters, to turn them out of their course;

To put at defiance the armies of nations, to divide the earth, to break every band, to stand in the presence of God; to do all things according to his will, according to his command, subdue principalities and powers; and this by the will of the Son of God which was from before the foundation of the world.

And men having this faith, coming up unto this order of God, were translated and taken up into heaven.

And now, Melchizedek was a priest of this order; therefore he obtained peace in Salem, and was called the Prince of peace.

And his people wrought righteousness, and obtained heave [i.e., came by the power of the Gospel back into God's presence], and sought for the city of Enoch which God had before taken, having reserved it unto the latter days, or the end of the world. . . . [^54]

There are certain statements in the above quotation that should be given special attention: First, the Holy Priesthood, the divine channel through which the Gospel is administered, is a system of power—not merely the right to act authoritatively in the name of Christ. God swore with a solemn oath unto Enoch and his seed "that every one being ordained after this order and calling should have power, by faith, to break mountains, to divide the seas, to dry up waters, to turn them out of their course; to put at defiance the armies of nations, to divide the earth, to break every band, to stand in the presence of God; to do all things according to his will, according to his command, subdue principalities and powers; and this by the will of the Son of God which was from before the foundation of the world." [^55] Latter-day revelation given through Joseph Smith stresses these same points. Of one who is properly ordained, a revelation said: "Wherefore, he is possessor of all things; for all things are subject unto him, both in heaven and on the earth, the life and the light, the Spirit and the power, sent forth by the will of the Father through Jesus Christ, his Son." [^56] Of the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood as the channel of divine truth and power by which man may come up and stand in the presence of God, another revelation said: "The power and authority of the higher, or Melchizedek Priesthood, is to hold the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the church—to have the privilege of receiving the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, to have the heavens opened unto them, to commune with the general assembly and church of the Firstborn, and to enjoy the communion and presence of God the Father, and Jesus the mediator of the new covenant." [^57]

Second, all men who had faith to receive the blessings of the Gospel and had come up unto this order of God, meriting and receiving the blessings which pertain thereto, were translated and taken up into heaven. This was the spiritual standard required to apply the powers of translation. To be translated required that men be sanctified and enter into the rest of the Lord as recipients of His power and glory.

Finally, the people of Melchizedek wrought righteousness and "obtained heaven." In the writer's opinion, this means that through the power of the Gospel they came back into the presence of God—into His glory, which is a state of heaven [^58]—and received those blessings that pertain to the second Comforter. They also "sought for the city of Enoch which God had before taken." Technically, the record does not say that they obtained a translated state like that of the city of Enoch. It states that they "obtained heaven" and "sought for the city of Enoch." [^59] It is the opinion of some Latter-day Saint scholars, however, that Melchizedek and his people were finally translated like the city of Enoch.

Particular attention was given to the law of tithing in Melchizedek's days. The Nephite prophet Alma explained:

. . . it was this same Melchizedek to whom Abraham paid tithes; yea, even our father Abraham paid tithes of one-tenth part of all he possessed.

Now these ordinances were given after this manner, that thereby the people might look forward on the Son of God, it being a type of his order, or it being his order, and this that they might look forward to him for a remission of their sins, that they might enter into the rest of the Lord. [^60]

The law of tithing is said by Alma to constitute the order, or system, of the Son of God. To build up that holy order of society on earth, the people must receive and apply the law of tithing. For this reason, the Lord declared to the Saints in modern times that "this shall be a standing law unto them forever, for my holy priesthood." [^61] By the practice of this law the saints manifest their faith in Christ and thereby retain a remission of their sins through the power of the atonement, and develop spiritually until they eventually enter into the Lord's rest. [^62]

Abraham and the Gospel

Abraham was given special promises in the Gospel that concerned the blessings and responsibilities that were to be given to his seed. These matters will be discussed in detail in chapter eleven of this volume. For the present it should be noted that the blessings and promises which God gave to Abraham carried with them the responsibility for him and his seed to preach the Gospel to all families of the earth. [^63] Pursuant to this obligation, Abraham served as a missionary in the land of Canaan—the land that God promised to give him and his posterity when they lived worthy to receive that inheritance. Of his commission, Abraham wrote:

. . . I, Abraham, and Lot, my brother's son, prayed unto the Lord, and the Lord appeared unto me, and said unto me: Arise, and take Lot with thee; for I have purposed to take thee away out of Haran, and to make of thee a minister to bear my name in a strange land which I will give unto thy seed after thee for an everlasting possession, when they hearken to my voice. [^64]

Evidently Abraham had already been preaching the Gospel prior to this time, for when he and Lot left Haran to go to the land of Canaan, they took with them "the souls" they had "won in Haran." [^65]

The Book of Mormon gives evidence corroborating the fact that the Gospel was preached among the people who lived in the land which God promised to Israel prior to the time the Israelites entered that area under Moses and Joshua. It also explains why the Lord commanded the Israelites to destroy the people of that land. Nephi declared:

Behold, the Lord esteemeth all flesh in one; he that is righteous is favored of God. But behold, this people had rejected every word of God, and they were ripe in iniquity; and the fulness of the wrath of God was upon them; and the Lord did curse the land against them, and bless it unto our fathers; yea, he did curse it against them unto their destruction, and he did bless it unto our fathers unto their obtaining power over it. [^66]

Modern scripture, including the Pearl of Great Price, throws light on a problem that has perplexed biblical scholars and caused some people to wonder how Jehovah, as the God of the Old Testament, could have any relationship with Jesus and His emphasis upon love and mercy. The point is that God holds men and nations responsible for their deeds; and when they so pervert the ways of truth as to make mercy no longer a virtue, He destroys that which is corrupt. This was the case with the antediluvian peoples, with the people of Canaan mentioned above, with the Jaredites, and with the Nephites; and it will be true also of our modern Gentile civilization if its people fail to repent after hearing the Gospel.

Moses and the Gospel

Prior to the time Moses was sent to redeem the Israelites from Egyptian bondage, he was himself a recipient of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. It is not known when he first learned the sacred principles of salvation. Evidently it was while he was still in Egypt, because the Apostle Paul wrote: "By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompence of the reward." [^67]

It may be that as a prince in Egypt, Moses had access to the writings of Abraham and of the patriarch's grandson Joseph. Of the record that came into the possession of Joseph Smith, Parley P. Pratt wrote:

The record . . . proves to be a record written partly by the father of the faithful, Abraham, and finished by Joseph when in Egypt. After his death, it is supposed they were preserved in the family of the Pharaohs and afterwards hid up with the embalmed body of the female with whom they were found. [^68]

There is other evidence to indicate that Moses was acquainted with the writings of the two earlier patriarchs. After Joseph Smith exhibited the Egyptian mummies and papyri to Charles Francis Adams and Josiah Quincy, the latter reported:

"That is the handwriting of Abraham, the Father of the Faithful," said the prophet. "This is the autograph of Moses, and these lines were written by his brother Aaron. Here we have the earliest account of the Creation, from which Moses composed the First Book of Genesis." [^69]

If Moses used the format of Abraham's account of the creation to write his own inspired statement, he obviously was familiar with the writings of Abraham.

Many of the writings of the patriarch Joseph, if not all, were recorded on the Brass Plates of Laban, a family record of the tribe of Joseph that also contained the writings of certain prophets who were of the lineage of Joseph. [^70] Zenos and Zenock, two of these prophets, prophesied in detail concerning Christ and His death on the cross. [^71] Since this record was perpetuated through the period of Israel's bondage in Egypt, the information it contained was at least available to certain individuals among the Israelites. On the Brass Plates was a prophecy by the patriarch Joseph concerning the coming of Moses whom God promised Joseph He would raise up to deliver the House of Israel from Egypt. [^72] Probably this is the reason the scripture states: "And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him [in the exodus]: for he had straitly sworn the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you; and ye shall carry up my bones away hence with you." [^73]

After Moses was forced to flee from Egypt, he dwelt with Jethro, a High Priest in the Holy Priesthood who lived in the land of Midian. [^74] From Jethro, Moses received the Holy Priesthood. [^75] Thereafter he developed in the Gospel until he attained the stature of a prophet and received such manifestations as are reserved for those who "make their calling and election sure" and are given the blessings of the second Comforter. The manifestations recorded in Moses 1, for instance, were given to Moses after the episode of the burning bush [^76] and before he went into Egypt to deliver the Israelites. [^77]

Like Enoch and Melchizedek, Moses desired to bring his people, the Israelites, to that point of sanctification where they could abide in the presence of God and be made recipients of His divine intelligence and power. A revelation to Joseph Smith explained:

And this greater priesthood [i.e., the Melchizedek Priesthood] administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key to the knowledge of God.

Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest.

And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh.

For without this [i.e., without the power of godliness being manifest] no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live.

Now this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God;

But they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence; therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, sware that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory.

Therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also;

And the lesser priesthood continued. . . . [^78]

This statement gives great insight into the objectives of the Gospel which Moses sought to bring Israel to achieve. He sought to sanctify his people through the spiritual powers of the Gospel, so that they might behold the face of God and "enter into His rest," the fulness of His glory. But unlike the people of Enoch, the Israelites hardened their hearts against the manifestations of divine truth and power. So the Lord was forced to take the Holy Priesthood as a system from among them and give them a lesser law. In answer to the question, "Was the Priesthood of Melchizedek taken away with Moses?" Joseph Smith replied:

All Priesthood is Melchizedek, but there are different portions or degrees of it. That portion which brought Moses to speak with God face to face was taken away; but that which brought the ministry of angels remained. All the [Israelite] prophets had the Melchizedek Priesthood and were ordained by God himself. [^79]

The Melchizedek Priesthood in its entirety was not withdrawn from Israel. Instead, the order of the Holy Priesthood—its ordinances, its law, and its program—was in general withdrawn from among the people. But holy prophets were raised up from time to time, all of whom were ordained by the Lord to the Melchizedek Priesthood. [^80]

The decision to withdraw the higher Priesthood and its sanctifying powers from the Israelites was made after they reverted back to the carnal practices of idolatrous worship while Moses was upon the mount receiving the law from God. As Moses returned from the mount and found the Israelites engaged in these practices, he broke the tablet of stone upon which the full law of the Gospel had been written. Joseph Smith therefore observed: "The law revealed to Moses in Horeb never was revealed to the children of Israel as a nation." [^81] In clarifying the nature of the law which Moses later received on the second set of tablets, in comparison to the original law, the Inspired Revision of the Bible states:

And the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee two other tables of stone, like unto the first, and I will write upon them also, the words of the law, according as they were written at the first on the tables which thou brakest; but it shall not be according to the first, for I will take away the priesthood out of their midst; therefore my holy order, and the ordinances thereof, shall not go before them; for my presence shall not go up in their midst, lest I destroy them.

But I will give unto them the law as at the first, but it shall be after the law of a carnal commandment; for I have sworn in my wrath, that they shall not enter into my rest, in the days of their pilgrimage. [^82]

The implied relationship that exists between the order of the Melchizedek Priesthood and the right of man, by faith, to come into the presence of God should be given special attention. The order of the Melchizedek Priesthood is designed to bring man to the standard of spiritual excellence that is necessary for him to return to the presence of God. When the system of law and government that pertains to the Melchizedek Priesthood is put into practice, God's presence will be manifested among His people. Hence the Lord said, after Israel rejected the higher law: "My holy order, and the ordinances thereof, shall not go before them; for my presence shall not go up in their midst, lest I destroy them." [^83] The "holy order" consists of the spiritual, patriarchal, social, economic and political law and program of God—the Kingdom of God in its full law and practice. In modern times, Latter-day Saints have been given the Melchizedek Priesthood, but the full order that pertains to that Priesthood has not yet been established. When it is put into practice, the prophecy of Isaiah concerning the last days will be fulfilled, which states: "And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defence." [^84]

The Gospel in New Testament Times

Little is said in the Pearl of Great Price of the gospel program in New Testament times. Smith 1, in reporting the ministry of Christ to the Jews, registers instead their rejection of the Master [^85] and records some of His prophetic declarations concerning the future destruction of the Jews as a people in Palestine. [^86] The remaining part of Smith 1 gives Christ's explanation to His disciples about His Second Coming and the events leading up to that great event.

But the Pearl of Great Price implies that with the coming of Christ, as the Messenger of the Father, a new effort would be made to raise Israel to the higher spiritual law which their fathers had rejected. The Apostle Paul reasoned:

If therefore perfection were by the Levitical priesthood, (for under it the people received the law,) what further need was there that another priest should rise after the order of Melchisedec, and not be called after the order of Aaron?

For the priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the law. [^87]

The order of the Priesthood was not done away with the coming of Christ, but it was changed from the Aaronic, or Levitical, order to the higher order of Melchizedek. Under the lesser law that had prevailed in Israel since Moses, the people could not be perfected, for the lesser Priesthood and law which they had could not administer the sanctifying powers of the Holy Ghost. Only through the Melchizedek Priesthood can the power of godliness be given to perfect man and provide the means by which he may come into the presence of God. This is a solemn thought that the Christian world of modern times should ponder, for there are none among the several churches that claim to possess the Melchizedek Priesthood. The Priesthood having changed from the lesser to the higher order at the coming of Christ, of necessity there was a change made in the law. The higher law was the law of the Gospel administered by prophets, priests, and apostles who were ordained to the Melchizedek Priesthood—that order or system of which Christ is the great High Priest. [^88]

The scriptures indicate that the Gospel which Christ and His Apostles proclaimed was the same as that which was taught from the days of Adam until Israel was given a lesser law and program. Jesus stressed man's need to be born again—born first to see the kingdom of God, then born of water and of the Spirit to enter that kingdom. [^89] The Apostles, having received the gift of the Holy Ghost [^90] and having been endowed with power from on high, [^91] proclaimed the need of faith in Jesus Christ, of repentance, and of baptism for the remission of sins; and on compliance with these conditions, they promised all men the gift of the Holy Ghost, [^92] which they conferred upon the obedient by the laying on of hands. [^93] Both Paul and Peter admonished those who had embraced the Gospel to continue in the path of truth and make their calling and election sure, that they might have the more sure word of prophecy by which to know that they were sealed by the power of the Melchizedek Priesthood to eternal life. [^94] Paul explained that the glory Moses was given while receiving the Law of Carnal Commandments on the Mount would be exceeded by the glory that might be developed in the faithful through the higher program of the Gospel. [^95] Using ancient Israel as an example of a people who would not enter by means of the Gospel into the Lord's rest because of unbelief, he admonished the Saints of his day: "Let us therefore fear, lest, a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should come short of it." [^96]

Biblical Evidence Of The Gospel Before Christ

The Basic Issue of the Everlasting Gospel

In considering the view that the Gospel was given to man before the earthly mission of Christ, several biblical declarations should be studied. First, the plan of redemption is designated as the "everlasting gospel," [^97] established "through the blood of the everlasting covenant," [^98] or the blood of Christ that made the everlasting covenant of full force and efficacy. Second, Jesus was "foreordained before the foundation of the world" to redeem fallen man. [^99] Third, Christ is therefore referred to as "the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world." [^100] Fourth, it is the mission of the Savior to bring the obedient into "the kingdom prepared . . . from the foundation of the world." [^101] Finally, the name of Jesus Christ is the only name given whereby man may be saved." [^102] The central point to be derived from these declarations may thus be stated: If all things for the redemption of man were prepared from the foundation of the world, it is only consistent that the Gospel be given to redeem man from the earliest ages of the world.

Joseph Smith Gives Evidence of the Everlasting Gospel

In a brilliant analysis of biblical evidence, Joseph Smith shows conclusively that the Pearl of Great Price is in full harmony with the Bible in teaching that the Gospel was given to man before the earthly mission of Christ. The latter-day prophet wrote:

. . . that man was not able himself to erect a system, or plan with power sufficient to free him from a destruction which awaited him, is evident from the fact that God, as before remarked, prepared a sacrifice in the gift of His own Son who should be sent in due time, to prepare a way, or open a door through which man might enter into the Lord's presence, whence he had been cast out for disobedience. From time to time these glad tidings were sounded in the ears of men in different ages of the world down to the time of Messiah's coming. By faith in this atonement or plan of redemption, Abel offered to God a sacrifice that was accepted, which was the firstlings of the flock. Cain offered of the fruit of the ground, and was not accepted, because he could not do it in faith, he could have no faith, or could not exercise faith contrary to the plan of heaven. It must be shedding the blood of the Only Begotten to atone for man; for this was the plan of redemption, and without the shedding of blood was no remission; and as the sacrifice was instituted for a type, by which man was to discern the great Sacrifice which God had prepared; to offer a sacrifice contrary to that, no faith could be exercised, because redemption was not purchased in that way, nor the power of atonement instituted after that order; consequently Cain could have no faith; and whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. But Abel offered an acceptable sacrifice, by which he obtained witness that he was righteous, God Himself testifying of his gifts. Certainly, the shedding of the blood of a beast could be beneficial to no man, except it was done in imitation, or as a type, or explanation of what was to be offered through the gift of God Himself; and this performance done with an eye looking forward in faith on the power of that great Sacrifice for a remission of sins. But however various may have been, and may be at the present time, the opinions of men respecting the conduct of Abel, and the knowledge which he had on the subject of atonement, it is evident in our minds, that he was instructed more fully in the plan than what the Bible speaks of, for how could he offer a sacrifice in faith, looking to God for a remission of his sins in the power of the great atonement, without having been previously instructed in that plan? And further, if he was accepted of God, what were the ordinances performed further than the offering of the firstlings of the flock?

It is said by Paul in his letter to the Hebrew brethren, that Abel obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts. To whom did God testify of the gifts of Abel, was it to Paul? We have very little on this important subject in the forepart of the Bible. But it is said that Abel himself obtained witness that he was righteous. Then certainly God spoke to him: indeed, it is said that God talked with him: and if He did, would He not, seeing that Abel was righteous, deliver to him the whole plan of the Gospel. And is not the Gospel the news of the redemption? How could Abel offer a sacrifice and look forward with faith on the Son of God for a remission of his sins, and not understand the Gospel? The mere shedding of the blood of beasts or offering anything else in sacrifice, could not procure a remission of sins, except it were performed in faith of something to come; if it could, Cain's offering must have been as good as Abel's. And if Abel was taught of the coming of the Son of God, was he not taught also of His ordinances? We all admit that the Gospel has ordinances, and if so, had it not always ordinances, and were not its ordinances always the same? Perhaps our friends will say that the Gospel and its ordinances were not known till the days of John, the son of Zacharias, in the days of Herod, the king of Judea. But we will here look at this point: For our own part we cannot believe that the ancients in all ages were so ignorant of the system of heaven as many suppose, since all that were ever saved, were saved through the power of this great plan of redemption, as much before the coming of Christ as since; if not, God has had different plans in operation (if we may so express it), to bring men back to dwell with Himself; and this we cannot believe, since there has been no change in the constitution of man since he fell; and the ordinance or institution of offering blood in sacrifice, was only designed to be performed till Christ was offered up and shed His blood—as said before—that man might look forward in faith to that time. It will be noticed that, according to Paul, (see Gal. iii:8) the Gospel was preached to Abraham. We would like to be informed in what name the Gospel was then preached, whether it was in the name of Christ or some other name. If in any other name, was it the Gospel? And if it was the Gospel, and that preached in the name of Christ, had it any ordinances? If not, was it the Gospel? And if it had ordinances what were they? Our friends may say, perhaps, that there were never any ordinances except those of offering sacrifices before the coming of Christ, and that it could not be possible for the Gospel to have been administered while the law of sacrifices of blood was in force. But we will recollect that Abraham offered sacrifice, and notwithstanding this, had the Gospel preached to him. That the offering of sacrifice was only to point the mind forward to Christ, we infer from these remarkable words of Jesus to the Jews: "Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad". (John viii:56.) So, then, because the ancients offered sacrifice it did not hinder their hearing the Gospel; but served, as we said before, to open their eyes, and enable them to look forward to the time of the coming of the Savior, and rejoice in His redemption. We find also, that when the Israelites came out of Egypt they had the Gospel preached to them, according to Paul in his letter to the Hebrews, which says: "For unto us was the Gospel preached, as well as unto them: but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it" (see Heb. iv:2). it is said again, in Gal. iii:19, that the law (of Moses, or the Levitical law) was "added" because of transgression. What, we ask, was this law added to, if it was not added to the Gospel? It must be plain that it was added to the Gospel, since we learn that they had the Gospel preached to them. From these few facts, we conclude that whenever the Lord revealed Himself to men in ancient days, and commanded them to offer sacrifice to Him, that it was done that they might look forward in faith to the time of His coming, and rely upon the power of that atonement for a remission of their sins. And this they have done, thousands who have gone before us, whose garments are spotless, and who are, like Job, waiting with an assurance like his, that they will see Him in the latter day upon the earth, even in their flesh.

We may conclude, that though there were different dispensations, yet all things which God communicated to His people were calculated to draw their minds to the great object, and to teach them to rely upon God alone as the author of their salvation, as contained in His law.

From what we can draw from the Scriptures relative to the teachings of heaven, we are induced to think that much instruction has been given to man since the beginning which we do not possess now. This may not agree with the opinions of some of our friends who are bold to say that we have everything written in the Bible which God ever spoke to man since the world began, and that if he had ever said anything more we should certainly have received it. But we ask, does it remain for a people who never had faith enough to call down one scrap of revelation from heaven, and for all they have now are indebted to the faith of another people who lived hundreds and thousands of years before them, does it remain for them to say how much God has spoken and how much he has not spoken? We have what we have, and the Bible contains what it does contain: but to say that God never said anything more to man than is there recorded, would be saying at once that we have at last received a revelation; for it must require one to advance thus far, because it is nowhere said in that volume by the mouth of God, that He would not, after giving, what is there contained, speak again; and if any man has found out for a fact that the Bible contains all that God ever revealed to man he has ascertained it by an immediate revelation, other than has been previously written by the prophets and apostles. But through the kind providence of our Father a portion of His word which He delivered to His ancient saints, has fallen into our hands, is presented to us with a promise of a reward if obeyed, and with a penalty if disobeyed. That all are deeply interested in these laws or teachings, must be admitted by all who acknowledge their divine authenticity. [^103]

Conclusion

The purpose of a new dispensation is to reaffirm, reestablish, and clarify the doctrines of the Gospel, as well as commit divine authority to administer the Gospel to man. Here the Pearl of Great Price contributes significantly to an understanding of the program of the last dispensation. One area of thought and doctrine that needs clarification concerns the plan of salvation given to man before the earthly ministry of Christ. According to this modern scripture, the Gospel was first introduced to Adam, and he was given the keys of the spiritual blessings for his posterity to the last generation of time. Because the Gospel is the only way by which man may be sanctified and return to the presence of God, there were many who sought in the early ages of the world to achieve these great objectives. Though in general they failed because of the wickedness of the world, Enoch and his people succeeded in achieving a state of glory and power. It was on the basis of their achievement that they acquired power to be translated.

Other great prophets and patriarchs in later ages sought to emulate the example of Enoch and his people. Noah taught the same doctrines that Enoch had taught. After the flood, Melchizedek and his people successfully applied these principles and ordinances until they obtained heaven. Abraham was selected to proclaim the saving truths of the Gospel, and from his descendants came the people whom God chose to build up and perpetuate the divine plan on earth. But when Moses sought to sanctify the Israelites so that they might see the face of God and enter into His presence, they hardened their hearts against the Lord. From that time Israel was given a lesser law which continued until Christ came and changed the order of the Priesthood, giving the people another opportunity to accept the higher law and blessings their fathers had rejected. It is only in light of these essential facts that students of the scriptures are able to see the consistency and continuity of the gospel plan from the beginning of the world.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 105:5.
[^2] Moses 7:30-31.
[^3] Ibid., 7:62.
[^4] D&C 105:3-5.
[^5] Moses 6:21.
[^6] Ibid., 6:26.
[^7] Ibid., 6:34.
[^8] Ibid., 6:35-36.
[^9] Ibid., 6:37.
[^10] Ibid., 6:39.
[^11] Ibid., 6:47.
[^12] Ibid., 7:13-15.
[^13] Ibid., 7:15-16.
[^14] Ibid., 7:17.
[^15] Ibid., 7:19.
[^16] Ibid., 7:18.
[^17] The Seer, II (May, 1854), p. 262. (Italics in the original.)
[^18] Joseph Young, Sr., Enoch and His City, p. 11.
[^19] TPJS, p. 170.
[^20] D&C 38:31-32.
[^21] DHC, V, pp. 61-66.
[^22] Moses 7:17.
[^23] Ibid., 7:18.
[^24] Ibid.
[^25] The Seer, op. cit., p. 265.
[^26] D&C 38:24.
[^27] EMS, I (December, 1832), p. 54.
[^28] D&C 1:19-20.
[^29] D&C 42:30.
[^30] Ibid., 104:54-55.
[^31] Ibid., 42:32; 51:5.
[^32] Ibid., 51:3.
[^33] Ibid., 42:33-34; 90:29.
[^34] Ibid., 70:14; 78:6.
[^35] Ibid., 72:3.
[^36] The right a steward has to draw funds from the storehouse is discussed below.
[^37] D&C 82:17-18; 104:68-77.
[^38] Ibid., 104:76.
[^39] Ibid., 51:5-6.
[^40] This is the implied meaning in a revelation that declares: "He that receiveth me receiveth my father; and he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him."—Ibid., 84:37-38. It is also said of those who have part in celestial society: "They are Christ's, and Christ is God's."—Ibid., 76-59.
[^41] Ibid., 104:54-56.
[^42] D&C 82:18.
[^43] See Ibid., 70.
[^44] DHC, I, p. 270.
[^45] Alma 13:16.
[^46] D&C 119:4.
[^47] Journal History, September 11, 1833.
[^48] See D&C 45:66-71.
[^49] See again Moses 7:67.
[^50] Ibid., 7:61-64.
[^51] Isaiah 1:27.
[^52] See Moses 7:61; Smith 1:33; D&C 45:45-48; 49:23.
[^53] See again TPJS, p. 84.
[^54] Ibid.
[^55] DHC, III, p. 389.
[^56] TPJS, p. 84.
[^57] Moses 7:63-64.
[^58] TPJS, p. 159.
[^59] D&C 45:9-16.
[^60] I.V., Genesis 9:17-23.
[^61] D&C 88:3-5.
[^62] JD, XXI, p. 253.
[^63] D&C 84:99-102.
[^64] The Seer, op. cit. See also Isaiah 52:8-10.
[^65] Moses 7:18.
[^66] Mosiah 16:1. See also 15:28-31.
[^67] DHC, IV, p. 605.
[^68] Smith 1:4.
[^69] Ibid., 1:26.
[^70] DHC, V, p. 337.
[^71] Loc. Cit.
[^72] Sayings of Joseph Smith as reported by those who claimed to hear him make the statements, "Joseph Smith Papers," Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City. Utah.
[^73] See, for example, D&C 29:11-12; Smith 2:37.
[^74] Smith 1:27.
[^75] Ibid., 1:28-29.
[^76] Ibid., 1:30.
[^77] Ibid., 1:10.
[^78] Ibid., 1:31.
[^79] Ibid., 1:32.
[^80] Ibid., 1:33.
[^81] D&C 45:48.
[^82] Ibid., 45:51-52; Zechariah 12:10; 13:6.
[^83] DHC, V, pp. 290-291.
[^84] Ibid., p. 337.
[^85] Smith 1:36.
[^86] John 17:11-16.
[^87] D&C 45:22-23.
[^88] See Ibid., 29:22-23; 43:32.
[^89] Smith 1:4.
[^90] Ibid., 1:55.
[^91] Deuteronomy 18:18-19.
[^92] Acts 3:22-23.
[^93] 3 Nephi 20-23.
[^94] Ibid., 21:9-11, 14-21. This prophecy is an application of Micah 5:8-15 to the gentiles of the last days.
[^95] Smith 2:40.
[^96] Smith 1:37.
[^97] Ibid., 1:44-45.
[^98] 1 Thessalonians 4:15-17. The sequence of events concerning the resurrection is expressed in the following statement:
[^99] (D&C 29:11-13; 45:45-48.
[^100] Smith 1:40.
[^101] Ibid., 1:34. Christ's statement as recorded in Smith 1 clears up the problem of which generation Christ was referring. The King James version of Matthew's account indicates that it was the generation living when Christ uttered His prophecy. But by revelation Joseph Smith was given to understand that it is the generation that could be living when the signs are given which Christ describes.
[^102] Ibid., 1:46.
[^103] Moses 7:18.
