Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1967)

CHAPTER 10

ZION AND THE LAST DAYS

The building of Zion is an important part of the gospel program because it is the means by which the Saints may come into the presence of the Lord. To this end, those who embrace the Gospel must be organized under the law of God in their family relationships and in their socio-economic and political affairs. A revelation to Joseph Smith explained: "Zion cannot be built up, unless it is by the principles of the law of the celestial kingdom; otherwise I cannot receive her unto myself." [^1] The Pearl of Great Price bears the same witness. Having observed that if it were possible for man to number the particles of the earth, even of millions of earths like this, it would not be a beginning to the number of God's creations, Enoch added, as he addressed the Lord: "And thou hast taken Zion to thine own bosom, from all thy creations, from all eternity to all eternity." [^2] The building up of Zion has therefore been carried out in the many worlds that God has created and peopled from all eternity, and by this means the faithful in all these creations have been brought into the presence of God.

The requirement to build up Zion has some important expressions in Latter-day Saint thought: First, if the Saints are to become part of the great celestial system of eternity in the resurrection, they must, as a people, practice the law of Zion. Second, essentially the same program was required of Enoch and his people, so that they might enter into the presence of the Lord and be translated to a state of glory. Finally, the same challenge confronts the Saints in the last days. They, too, must build up Zion so that Christ can receive them unto Himself when He comes to reign on earth in His glory. This means that there are certain prerequisites that must be achieved by the Saints before Christ comes. The Lord told Enoch that in the last days Zion, the New Jerusalem, would be built "that my people may gird up their loins, and be looking forth for the time of my coming." [^3] The implication in this statement is that the Saints cannot look intelligently for the Second Coming and expect to be accepted by Christ unless they have built the society of Zion. When the New Jerusalem is built, Zion will be established upon the principles of the law of the celestial kingdom. [^4] Here is a prerequisite that must be fulfilled before the coming of Christ; and here is the challenge of the Saints.

The Zion Of Enoch

The Building of Enoch's Zion

One of the most interesting undertakings carried out in ancient times was the building of Zion by Enoch and his people. Enoch was the son of Jared, the sixth great patriarch from Adam. The Book of Moses states: "And Jared taught Enoch in all the ways of God." [^5] While Enoch journeyed in the land among the people, "the Spirit of God descended out of heaven, and abode upon him." [^6] God then spoke to him and instructed him to proclaim His will among the people. The Lord said: "Behold my Spirit is upon you, wherefore all thy words will I justify; and the mountains shall flee before you, and the rivers shall turn from their course; and thou shalt abide in me, and I in you; therefore walk with me." [^7]

On this occasion Enoch was given a sacred manifestation in which his spiritual eyes were quickened so that he saw and beheld many "things which were not visible to the natural eye." As a result, the saying went abroad in the land, "A seer hath the Lord raised up unto his people. [^8]

Having been called of God, "Enoch went forth in the land, among the people, standing upon the hills and the high places, and cried with a loud voice, testifying against their works; and all men were offended because of him." [^9] But when they came to hear Enoch, "no man laid hands on him; for fear came on all them that heard him; for he walked with God." [^10] The record states further: "And as Enoch spake forth the words of God, the people trembled, and could not stand in his presence." [^11]

Enoch began to gather the humble and obedient; and he established these people under the law of God. The Book of Moses declares:

And so great was the faith of Enoch that he led the people of God, and their enemies came to battle against them; and he spake the word of the Lord, and the earth trembled, and the mountains fled, even according to his command; and the rivers of water were turned out of their course; and the roar of the lions was heard out of the wilderness; and all nations feared greatly, so powerful was the word of Enoch, and so great was the power of the language which God had given him.

There also came up a land out of the depth of the sea, and so great was the fear of the enemies of the people of God, that they fled and stood afar off and went upon the land which came up out of the depth of the sea.

And the giants of the land, also, stood afar off. . . . [^12]

As the righteous were gathered together under the leadership of Enoch, a general division began among the people. The record explains: "And there went forth a curse upon all people that fought against God; and from that time forth there were wars and bloodshed among them; but the Lord came and dwelt with his people, and they dwelt in righteousness." [^13]

It was the power of God manifested through the Gospel that caused the wicked to fear. That same intelligent power blessed those who were worthy of its manifestations. "The fear of the Lord was upon all nations, so great was the glory of the Lord, which was upon his people," the Book of Moses reports. Continuing, it states: "And the Lord blessed the land, and they were blessed upon the mountains, and upon the high places, and did flourish." [^14]

Enoch's people were a distinct and happy people—a people to whom God gave the blessings of the Gospel. Enoch "built a city that was called the City of Holiness, even ZION." [^15] Of the meaning of Zion, the Book of Moses states: "And the Lord called his people ZION, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them." [^16] Using other scriptural definitions, Orson Pratt gave a more complete definition of the term Zion:

What is the meaning of the word Zion? The Prophet Enoch answers this question in the following language:—"And the Lord called His people Zion, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them." The Lord by the mouth of Joseph the Prophet gave the following definition:—"Let Zion rejoice, for this is Zion—The pure in heart." Enoch was called of God, when but a young man, and was sent forth unto the antediluvian nations to preach Faith, Repentance, and Baptism for the remission of sins, and to prophesy and warn the people of approaching judgment. Many among the nations hearkened to his voice, and received the Gospel, and became the sons of God; for the Holy Ghost fell upon them, and they were born of God. These, by the commandment of God, were gathered out from the nations, by themselves, and they were established upon the high places of the earth, and upon the mountains, and became sanctified before the Lord; "and the Lord came and dwelt with His people, and they dwelt in righteousness. The fear of the Lord was upon all nations, so great was the glory of the Lord which was upon His people."

It was under these circumstances that the Lord called His people Zion. [^17]

Joseph Smith declared of the Church of Enoch "that they did not die; that they had not then gone through their last changes and greatest refinement; and that they had, nevertheless, triumphed over death." [^18] Their state of existence is that of translated beings. Joseph Smith also explained:

Now, this Enoch God reserved unto Himself, that he should not die at that time, and appointed unto him a ministry unto terrestrial bodies, of whom there has been but little revealed. He is reserved also unto the presidency of a dispensation, and more shall be said of him and terrestrial bodies in another treatise. He is a ministering angel, to minister to those who shall be heirs of salvation, and appeared unto Jude as Abel did unto Paul; therefore Jude spoke of him (14, 15 verses). And Enoch, the seventh from Adam, revealed these sayings: "Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousand of His Saints."

Paul was also acquainted with this character, and received instructions from him. "By faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death, and was not found, because God had translated him; for before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God; but without faith, it is impossible to please Him, for he that cometh to God must believe that He is, and that He is a revealer to those who diligently seek Him." (Hebrews 11:5.)

Now the doctrine of translation is a power which belongs to the Priesthood. There are many things which belong to the powers of the Priesthood and the keys thereof, that have been kept hid from before the foundation of the world; they are hid from the wise and prudent to be revealed in the last times.

Many have supposed that the doctrine of translation was a doctrine whereby men were taken immediately into the presence of God, and into an eternal fullness, but this is a mistaken idea. Their place of habitation is that of the terrestrial order, and a place prepared for such characters He held in reserve to be ministering angels unto many planets, and who as yet have not entered into so great a fullness as those who are resurrected from the dead. [^19]

Zion Founded and Built Upon the Gospel

The enlightening and regenerating powers of the Gospel provide the only foundation upon which the society of Zion can be built. Enoch began the work of building Zion by preaching the Gospel. Having found those who would exercise faith in Christ and develop the spiritual powers of the Gospel, he gathered them together and taught them the law of God in all the affairs of the home and of society. This Joseph Smith also sought to do in his ministry. God's purpose was to purify and perfect His people by having them follow His law. As the Lord commanded the Saints to gather together in Ohio, He therefore explained: "That ye might escape the power of the enemy, and be gathered unto me a righteous people, without spot and blameless—wherefore, for this cause I gave unto you the commandment that ye should go to the Ohio; and there I will give unto you my law." [^20]

To organize and regulate a free society in such a way as to establish peace, prosperity, and social justice requires, Joseph Smith observed, "the wisdom of God, the intelligence of God, and the power of God." [^21] Only by the enlightening influence of divine truth and power can man be regenerated, sanctified, and raised to a spiritual plane that makes possible the establishment of true brotherhood and economic union, without infringing upon individual freedom. When the Saints respond intelligently to the manifestations of the Holy Spirit, they are stimulated by its enlightening powers to live outside themselves in service to others and to sustain willingly and eagerly the authority that ministers truth and light to the system. Only in such a society can individual freedom, social union, and economic well-being be combined. The influence of the Holy Spirit changes the whole order of society and makes possible human relationships that cannot otherwise be attained. It was upon this foundation that Enoch established the society of Zion in his day, and upon this foundation the Latter-day Saints must also build up Zion in preparation for the second coming of Christ and the return of Enoch's city.

Economic prosperity follows as a result of spiritual regeneration. Enoch and his people developed the powers of the Gospel in their midst to the extent that the glory of the Lord was manifested among them. The Book of Moses states: "And the Lord blessed the land, and they were blessed upon the mountains, and upon the high places, and did flourish." [^22] They were also blessed in other ways. The record continues: "And the Lord called his people Zion, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them." [^23] These statements indicate the nature of the social and economic order Enoch and his people developed among themselves. In building up the society of Zion, they perfected a system of free and open union that was ideal in individualism. On this basis "they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness," and they successfully met the challenge of economic progress and well-being until it could be said in truth that "there was no poor among them." [^24] Even though these were objectives that have been achieved by very few people on earth, the central purpose for building Zion was spiritual—that the people might be perfected so that they could dwell in the presence of God. The spiritual program was therefore both the beginning and the end of Zion's law.

Orson Pratt said of Enoch's Zion, as he explained the basic idea upon which it was built:

One of the most beautiful characteristics of the antediluvian Zion, was that "they were of one heart and one mind, and there were no poor among them," a perfect union of sentiment and feeling: no bitterness—no hatred—no slandering or reviling—no defrauding or taking advantage one of another—no person seeking to aggrandize himself by heaping up riches while others were poor—no selfishness or pride—no hypocrisy or affectation: but every one loved his neighbour as himself—every one studied the welfare of the whole—every one considered himself as only a steward over the things committed to his charge: it was all considered the Lord's, and ready to be appropriated for any purpose which the Lord should direct. They were equal in earthly things, therefore the Lord made them equal in heavenly things. Nothing short of continued revelation could ever have brought about an order of things so perfect. Such union was strength and power; such oneness was after the order of heaven: the powers of the earth could not hold them—the laws of nature could not retain them: their faith laid hold on immortality—on eternal life—on the powers of heaven—on heavenly things; the veil was parted and could no more be closed—the city of Zion fled from earth to heaven there to be reserved until a day of righteousness should come, when the earth should rest. . . . [^25]

Zion's Law of Consecration

If the Saints in any age build up Zion, they must accept a more meaningful orientation of human values and goals than is generally found in the world. They must have a higher motive than the achievement of economic gain. Zion is a society of free men united by the spiritual truths and powers of the Gospel in one heart and one mind, under the law of God. To establish Zion, the love of God and of fellow man must prevail in the midst of the Saints as precious fruits of the Holy Spirit, along with the love of truth and the love of justice, to the extent that every man loves his neighbor as himself and desires to administer justice and equity to all. A revelation admonished: "Let every man esteem his brother as himself, and practice virtue and holiness before me." [^26] William W. Phelps probably reflected the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith when he wrote, as he and others sought to establish the society of Zion in Missouri:

It was said, when the righteous gathered together, in the days of Enoch, that the Lord called his people Zion, because they were of one heart and of one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them: and such must be the case in these last days, when the Lord is pruning his vineyard for the last time, and gathering his elect from the four quarters of the earth. One can not be above another in wealth, nor below another for want of means, for the earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof. Neither shall men labor for the Lord for wages. As it is written in the Book of Mormon: Behold, the Lord hath forbidden this thing; wherefore, the Lord God hath given a commandment, that all men should have charity, which charity is love. And except they should have charity, they were nothing: wherefore, if they have charity, they would not suffer the laborer in Zion to perish. But the laborer in Zion shall labor for Zion; for if they labor for money, they shall perish.

Men have no right to trust in an arm of flesh, and for this reason, that Zion may again be built up on earth, that faith may increase, and the saints rely upon the mercies of God, and as the Lord hath said in the preface of his commandments [i.e., Section 1 of the Doctrine and Covenants]: Wherefore I the Lord, knowing the calamity which should come upon the inhabitants of the earth, called upon my servant Joseph, and spake unto him from heaven, and gave him commandments; and also gave commandments to others, that they should proclaim these things unto the world, and all this that it might be fulfilled, which was written by the prophets: The weak things of the world should come forth and break down the mighty and strong ones; that man should not counsel his fellow man, neither trust in the arm of flesh, but that every man might speak in the name of God, the Lord, even the Savior of the world; that faith also might increase in the earth; that mine everlasting covenant might be established; that the fulness of my gospel might be proclaimed by the weak and the simple, unto the ends of the world; and before kings and rulers. [^27]

There is no greater ideal of individualism than that found in the revelation Elder Phelps quoted above. Under the law of God, man of himself "should not counsel his fellow man, neither trust in the arm of flesh." Instead, every man, being filled with the truth and power of the Holy Spirit through the Gospel, should be a free, mature, and independent being under God. And in this divine relationship, every man should then "speak in the name of God the Lord, even the Savior of the world." [^28] This is the ideal of individualism upon which Zion must be built.

But as a free, mature, and enlightened individual, each man is obligated by Zion's law to consecrate himself and all he possesses by covenant to God, to establish and maintain a system wherein social and economic justice and union prevail. In this covenant relationship, the individual retains his freedom but obligates himself to give of his wealth and means so that every other person may have an equal right and opportunity to obtain and enjoy the spiritual and temporal blessings of life. This is the nature, or essence, of his covenant obligation, and the system that is thereby established is known as the Law of Consecration and Stewardship. The covenant of consecration and the system that is founded upon it is part of that great covenant to which the Lord referred in the revelation quoted by Elder Phelps and which is God's design to establish on the earth.

Those who consecrate themselves and their possessions to God do so with a deed and a covenant that cannot be broken. [^29] Such consecrations are made through the bishop of the Church; and a union of property is established, with all property belonging thereafter to the Lord. [^30] The deed of consecration secures the property to the Lord according to the law of the land; and the covenant of consecration secures it according to the law of the Church.

By the covenant of consecration, the Saints become heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ. As an heir, each man has the right under the law of Zion to be a steward over a portion of the Lord's property, which is delegated to him and secured to him by a deed of stewardship, giving him the right to hold and manage it. [^31] The basic criteria used in delegating stewardships are (1) family, (2) circumstances, (3) wants, and (4) needs, [^32] with one's ability to manage property or direct economic concerns as an added factor when more property, etc., is delegated than the steward needs to provide for his family. Having received a stewardship, each steward is then obligated to manage it in such a way as to sustain his family and support the Lord's program on earth.

Within each community a storehouse is established as the center of the economic activities of the Saints in that area. Wealth accrues in the storehouse in two ways. First, after delegating out stewardships from what has been received by consecration, the surplus, or residue, is kept in the storehouse. Second, surplus income produced by the several stewardships is to be turned over to the storehouse. [^33]

The problem of determining surplus is an important one. As a basis for doing so, the Lord said: "In your temporal things you shall be equal, and this not grudgingly, otherwise the abundance of the manifestations of the Spirit shall be withheld." [^34] The Lord also declared that each steward must give a periodic account of his stewardship. [^35] If the Saints are to be equal and accountable, there must be a set of criteria for determining what constitutes an equal standard of living for the several families within the system, and these criteria must include the size of a steward's family, circumstances, wants, needs, and ability. On the basis of these criteria, the system requires that all stewards turn over to the storehouse all surplus which remains from the income of their stewardships after caring for their families according to the established standard.

In the account that each steward gives to the bishop, no inquiry is made of how he has used the funds kept out of his income for family purposes, other than to check the amount retained for the family to see if it corresponds with the standard that is set for the size of his family and its circumstances. With this exception, the account that a steward renders is concerned with the operation of his business and the disposition he has made of funds drawn from the storehouse for business purposes. [^36]

Wealth in the storehouse is used in three essential ways: First, it is used to delegate stewardships to the worthy poor who consecrate their all to the Lord, so that they might have an equal right with others to obtain the temporal blessings of life. Second, it is used to supply community needs. Third, each steward, as an heir of God and a joint-heir with Christ, has an equal right with other stewards to draw upon the storehouse for funds to operate and expand his stewardship. [^37] Since all income except that required to sustain a steward's family is turned over to the storehouse, the storehouse is in a practical way the economic center of the community. A steward does not keep his profits in a separate fund from which he draws to operate his business. Instead, he turns his income over to the storehouse (except that kept out for family needs) and is then given an equal right with other stewards to draw upon the common fund to manage and to expand his stewardship. In this respect the stewards have all things in common, and this is what is meant by the term. Here, the steward's right to draw from the storehouse may be subject to such criteria as the size of his stewardship, his ability to manage it, his immediate need for funds to expand, etc.

In the operation of the storehouse the Christian law that requires each man to love his neighbor as himself is applied. From the storehouse each man is given a stewardship sufficient to support himself and family on an equal standard with others within the system. Though men of ability and integrity may receive larger stewardships than that which is necessary to sustain their families, each steward is required to turn all surplus over to the storehouse. Thus there is diversity of responsibility within the system but equality in the amount each family uses for its own purposes. In the society of Zion, men do not work for wages, nor do they loan money for interest to brethren within the system. Instead, stewards work to fulfil their obligations to their families, to their fellowmen, and to the Lord, because they are joint-heirs with Christ in a divine society where truth, justice, and love prevail. Having established a common operating fund in the storehouse, each steward, as has been explained, has an equal right to draw upon that fund to operate and expand his stewardship, according to the needs of his stewardship and according to the principles of justice and equity upon which the system is based.

Though each steward is equal to all others in the living standard of his family and in his right to draw upon the storehouse to operate and expand his stewardship, there are appropriate checks against the improper use of funds drawn from the storehouse. Each steward must show a legitimate reason for that which he withdraws from the common fund. This makes the treasurer in charge of that fund responsible as well as the steward. A revelation therefore said of the possible dissipation of the treasury by an unwise steward: "In case of transgression, the treasurer shall be subject unto the council and voice of the order." [^38] In releasing funds to a steward, the treasurer has the obligation to check the wisdom of the proposed expenditure.

It has been stated that under the Law of Consecration and Stewardship men are joint-heirs with Christ in all that the Father possesses. This means, technically speaking, that there is no private property within the system, as that term is generally defined. Instead, man is a joint-heir with Christ in all that God possesses; and, in addition, he is made a steward (a steward is a person entrusted with the management of estates or affairs not his own) over a portion of that common property, wealth, etc. Nevertheless, his stewardship is secured to him by a legal deed that is sustained by the law of the land; and in a legal sense, according to the law of the land, he is a private property owner, with the right to take his stewardship out of the system if he desires. [^39] But so long as he remains within the system, he is considered a joint-heir with Christ and a steward over a portion of the common property, with the obligation to manage his stewardship in the interest of Christ and His program on earth.

This system of economics has its center in the concept of heirship. As the Heir of the Father, Christ has inherited all that the Father possesses. This is His right as the Firstborn of the Father in celestial society. In like manner, others may inherit all that the Father possesses through Christ. [^40] Having obtained heirship first, Christ grants others the right to inherit all that the Father possesses through Him. For this reason Christ declared in a revelation:

And again, a commandment I give unto you concerning your stewardship which I have appointed unto you.

Behold, all these properties are mine, or else your faith is vain, and ye are found hypocrites, and the covenants which ye have made unto me are broken;

And if the properties are mine, then ye are stewards; otherwise ye are no stewards.

But verily I say unto you, I have appointed unto you to be stewards over mine house, even stewards indeed. [^41]

As joint-heirs within the society of Zion, stewards have certain private rights: First, each man who becomes a joint-heir with Christ by consecration has the right to be a steward—to have property or income-producing responsibility delegated to him by deed, according to his needs and his ability to manage.

Second, each heir has the right to negotiate with the bishop in determining the kind and size of his stewardship. And if he and the bishop cannot mutually agree on these matters, the individual cannot be forced to accept the bishop's decision. Instead, the bishop must turn the case over to an independent body of twelve high priests (possibly the High Council) to consider the matter and make the decision.

Third, each steward has the right to be secure in the possession of his stewardship by means of a legal deed to the property, etc. Thus secured, it cannot be taken from him without his consent.

Fourth, each steward has the right to manage and develop his stewardship. Here the eternal principle of freedom is exercised under the Law of Consecration and Stewardship. Each steward sells his produce on the open market and receives a return based upon the principles of supply, demand, etc. He does not turn his produce over to the storehouse, merely surplus profit. The steward, however, has the responsibility to manage his stewardship in the Lord's interest and in cooperation with other stewards, and to turn his surplus profit over to the Lord's storehouse.

Fifth, each steward has the right to a voice and a vote in the determination of community expenditures from the storehouse.

Sixth, each steward has the right to draw upon the storehouse for funds to operate and expand his stewardship. He must exercise this right, however, in conjunction with the equal right of others to do the same; and it is limited by the fact that he must demonstrate integrity and ability in the management of his stewardship before receiving large outlays of cash or property from the storehouse. Under this provision, men of ability and integrity may have the support of the storehouse in expanding and developing their stewardships. This right is therefore a vital and stimulating factor within the system. Thereby, each steward "may improve upon his talent [i.e., financial holdings], that every man may gain other talents, yea, even an hundred fold, to be cast into the Lord's storehouse." [^42]

Seventh, each steward has the right to draw upon the storehouse to supply family needs in the event of a legitimate deficit in the income of his stewardship.

Eighth, young people who are born under the covenant of consecration have the right, as heirs in Zion, to receive stewardships from the storehouse when they establish their own families.

Ninth, widows and children who become fatherless have the right to support from the storehouse.

Tenth, each steward has the right to take his stewardship out of the system and consider it private property in the event of apostasy. This does not include, however, that which he may have consecrated or turned in to the storehouse as surplus.

Within the society of Zion which the Saints endeavored to establish in Ohio and Missouri, both individual and corporative stewardships were organized. The Literary Firm [^43] and the United Firm [^44] which Joseph Smith organized were examples of corporative stewardships. Corporative stewardships were composed of several stewards organized together in the form of a corporation, with both managers and members within the corporation placed under the Law of Consecration.

For purposes of over-all management and direction, all elements of the economic system of Zion were organized into one centralized program called the United Order. As the name implies, the United Order was designed to coordinate the economic interests of all communities, corporations, and individual stewardships into one united system under the Law of Consecration and Stewardship.

When the society of Zion is fully developed, the law of tithing will operate along with the Law of Consecration and Stewardship as a part of the economic program of the Saints. Not only is the payment of tithing "a type" of the order or divine system of society of the Son of God, but it is "his order." [^45] A revelation declared the payment of tithing to be a standing law unto the Saints "forever." [^46] While endeavoring to build up Zion in Missouri, the Saints discussed the subject of tithing and its correlation with consecration. [^47] Those economic functions directly related to the Law of Consecration and Stewardship are designed to be carried out at the community level so that one consecrates his property to his local bishop, receives a stewardship from his community storehouse, and turns surplus in to that storehouse. The law of tithing must function to bring needed funds to the central authority of the Church to be used for the spiritual needs of the people and to provide funds to be expended for the benefit of the whole Church.

It is possible that such a program as the Welfare Plan may also, under some circumstances, be maintained for a time as a part of the over-all economic system of Zion, even after the Saints have established the Law of Consecration and Stewardship. For instance, the philosophy of the Welfare Plan and the initial practice of its principles came in this dispensation when the Saints were endeavoring to live the Law of Consecration and Stewardship. The expression of this philosophy and the practice of these principles were necessary to meet the needs of the day. The time will come when all who will not take up their swords against their neighbors must flee to the New Jerusalem for safety. [^48] Not all who then come to Zion will be Saints; and not all who are called saints will be able to live the Law of Consecration and Stewardship. Many of them may stand in need of the necessities of life. World conditions in the last days and man's need to be rejuvenated and taught a higher law, many times step by step, indicate that there will be ample need for such a program as the Welfare Plan during the rise of Zion and until the earth is swept clean, by the manifestations of the glory and power of Jesus Christ, of the baneful effects of the fall of man.

The Zion Of Enoch And The Zion Of The Last Days

Enoch's Vision of Zion in the Last Days

A previous chapter has shown that Enoch saw in vision the future to the end of the world when the earth will be cleansed and renewed to its paradisiacal glory at the second coming of Christ. [^49] Prior to that day, Enoch beheld that Zion would again be built up upon the earth by the people of God in the latter days. As the Lord revealed the vision of the last days to Enoch, He explained:

. . . the day shall come that the earth shall rest, but before that day the heavens shall be darkened, and a veil of darkness shall cover the earth; and the heavens shall shake, and also the earth; and great tribulations shall be among the children of men, but my people will I preserve;

And righteousness will I send down out of heaven; and truth will I send forth out of the earth, to bear testimony of mine Only Begotten; his resurrection from the dead; yea, and also the resurrection of all men; and righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out mine elect from the four quarters of the earth, unto a place which I shall prepare, an Holy City, that my people may gird up their loins, and be looking forth for the time of my coming; for there shall be my tabernacle, and it shall be called Zion, a New Jerusalem.

And the Lord said unto Enoch: Then shalt thou and all thy city meet them there, and we will receive them into our bosom, and they shall see us; and we will fall upon their necks, and they shall fall upon our necks, and we will kiss each other;

And there shall be mine abode, and it shall be Zion, which shall come forth out of all the creations which I have made; and for the space of a thousand years the earth shall rest. [^50]

Several points in the above statement should receive further emphasis and explanation: First, Enoch saw that before the day of millennial rest there would be great tribulations among men. This will be the day when the latter-day City of Zion will be built. Isaiah declared: "Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and her converts with righteousness." [^51] Enoch saw that in the latter days the heavens will be darkened and a veil of darkness shall cover the earth; and the heavens shall shake and also the earth, for the earth shall reel to and fro as a drunken man. [^52] These are the final signs that will herald the coming of Christ in glory and the return of Enoch's city.

Second, in preparation for His coming Christ declared that righteousness would be sent down out of heaven and truth would be sent forth out of the earth to bear testimony of the Only Begotten, of His resurrection from the dead and of the resurrection of all men. As was indicated in chapter 1, righteousness being sent down out of heaven had reference to the visitation of angels to men in the latter days; and the coming forth of truth out of the earth had reference to the unearthing of the word of the Lord in the form of sacred records that bear testimony of Christ, of His resurrection and of the resurrection of all men. [^53]

Third, of the statement that righteousness and truth will sweep the earth in the latter days, Joseph Smith said: "Men and angels are to be co-workers in bringing to pass this great work: and a Zion is to be prepared; even a New Jerusalem, for the elect that are to be gathered from the four quarters of the earth, and to be established an holy city: for the tabernacle of the Lord shall be with them." [^54] The righteous of all ages are concerned in the latter day work, for in this work is a consummation of their hopes. This fact Joseph Smith stressed when he spoke of the patriarchs of past ages and said:

These men are in heaven, but their children are on the earth. Their bowels yearn over us. God sends down men [in the form of ministering angels] for this reason. "And the Son of Man shall send forth His angels, and they shall gather out of His kingdom all things that give offense and them that do iniquity." (Matt. 13:41.) All these authoritative characters will come down and join hand-in-hand in bringing about this work. [^55]

Fourth, the Saints in the latter days must prepare themselves for the coming of Christ by building Zion, the New Jerusalem. On this point, Joseph Smith reasoned: "Now Enoch was in good company in his views upon this subject: 'And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and He will dwell with them, and they shall be His people, and God Himself shall be with them, and be their God' (Revelation xxi:3)." Continuing, the Prophet said:

I discover by this quotation, that John upon the isle of Patmos, saw the same things concerning the last days, which Enoch saw. But before the tabernacle can be with men, the elect must be gathered from the four quarters of the earth. [^56]

Finally, after the New Jerusalem has been built, the latter-day Zion will be united with the Zion of Enoch as the latter returns with Christ when He appears in glory in the clouds of heaven. That union will be a delightful one. Quickened by the glory of Christ and filled with His pure and holy love, with mutual respect for the achievements of each other, the saints of Enoch's city and the Saints of the latter days will fall upon each other's necks and embrace and kiss each other. The united body will then be the Lord's abode; and for the space of a thousand years the earth shall rest. [^57]

Correlations Between the Ancient and Modern Zion

A direct correlation is made in the Pearl of Great Price between the program of the Lord that was carried out before the flood and that which is designed to be accomplished in the last days. In that early day, a prophet was sent in the person of Enoch, with a special commission to fulfill the Lord's purposes; the righteous were gathered and taught the law of Zion; having been sanctified, they entered into the rest of the Lord, and their city was translated; and, finally, the wicked were destroyed. Similarly, in the latter days a prophet has been sent in the person of Joseph Smith, and through him a program of gathering the elect has been instituted. Zion is to be built up according to the heavenly pattern and design, and in this way the Saints are to be sanctified and enter into the Lord's rest. At the coming of Christ in glory, the latter-day Zion is to be caught up to meet Him in the clouds. Finally, the wicked are to be destroyed, this time by an envelopment of the earth in fire—the fiery floods of glory that are then manifest.

This indicates that before Christ comes in glory in the clouds of heaven, the Saints in the latter days must attain the same standard of spiritual truth and power that Enoch and his people did. Having referred to the fact that many righteous men in former times sought, through the Gospel, to return the earth to its paradisiacal glory and failed, Joseph Smith said: "But they prophesied of a day when this glory would be revealed. Paul spoke of the dispensation of the fullness of times, when God would gather together all things in one." [^58] Not only did the righteous of the earth in subsequent ages idealize Enoch's city, but they looked forward in faith to the day when that same standard of spiritual excellence would be established upon the earth and spread over the whole sphere. That day would be in the last dispensation. The Lord explained in a revelation to Joseph Smith:

. . . I have sent mine everlasting covenant into the world, to be a light to the world, and to be a standard for my people, and for the Gentiles to seek to it, and to be a messenger before my face to prepare the way before me.

Wherefore, come ye unto it, and with him that cometh I will reason as with men in days of old, and I will show unto you my strong reasoning.

Wherefore, hearken ye together and let me show unto you even my wisdom—the wisdom of him whom ye say is the God of Enoch, and his brethren,

Who were separated from the earth, and were received unto myself—a city reserved until a day of righteousness shall come—a day which was sought for by all holy men, and they found it not because of the wickedness and abominations;

And confessed they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth;

But obtained a promise that they should find it and see it in their flesh.

Wherefore, hearken and I will reason with you, and I will speak unto you and prophesy, as unto men in days of old.

And I will show it plainly as I showed it unto my disciples as I stood before them in the flesh, and spake unto them. . . . [^59]

To build up Zion upon the earth in the last days, the Saints must ultimately accept and establish the whole law of God as it concerns the heavenly society. Their responsibility to do so is expressed in a covenant that God made initially with Enoch and renewed with Noah concerning the last days. Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of the Bible records this covenant. To Noah, God said:

. . . I will establish my covenant with you, which I made unto Enoch, concerning the remnants of your posterity. And God made a covenant with Noah, and said, This shall be the token of the covenant I make between me and you, and for every living creature with you, for perpetual generations;

I will set my bow in the cloud; and it shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth.

And it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen in the cloud; and I will remember my covenant, which I have made between me and you, for every living creature of all flesh. And the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.

And the bow shall be in the cloud; and I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant, which I made unto thy father Enoch; that, when men should keep all my commandments, Zion should again come on the earth, the city of Enoch which I have caught up unto myself.

And this is mine everlasting covenant, that when thy posterity shall embrace the truth, and look upward, then shall Zion look downward, and all the heavens shall shake with gladness, and the earth shall tremble with joy;

And the general assembly of the church of the first-born shall come down out of heaven, and possess the earth, and shall have place until the end come. And this is mine everlasting covenant, which I made with thy Father Enoch. [^60]

As is indicated, the Lord made the rainbow a token of His covenant with Enoch and Noah. As such, it apparently represents the veil that separates fallen man from God and from those who are residing in His presence. When the Saints on earth keep all God's commandments and begin to look upward under the influence of the spiritual powers that are extended to them through the Gospel and its program, then shall the Zion of Enoch look downward. Only then will the General Assembly of the Church of the Firstborn, consisting of those former saints who have the promise of eternal life and a legal right to the glory of God, [^61] come down out of heaven and possess the earth, as Christ appears in glory.

As the Zion of Enoch descends, the latter-day Zion will be given the powers of translation that Enoch and his people were given anciently. President John Taylor said:

We will build up our Zion after the pattern that God will show us, and we will be governed by His law and submit to His authority and be governed by the Holy Priesthood and by the word and will of God. And then when the time comes that these calamities we read of shall overtake the earth, those that are prepared will have the power of translation, as they had in former times, and the city will be translated. And Zion that is on the earth will rise, and the Zion above will descend, as we are told, and we will meet and fall on each other's necks and embrace and kiss each other. And thus the purposes of God to a certain extent will then be fulfilled. [^62]

The Lord also spoke of the translation of the latter-day Zion, as the Zion of Enoch descends and the earth is renewed to glory at the second coming. At this time a song will be sung, the words of which are:

The Lord hath brought again Zion;

The Lord hath redeemed his people, Israel,

According to the election of grace,

Which was brought to pass by the faith

And covenant of their fathers.

The Lord hath redeemed his people;

And Satan is bound and time is no longer.

The Lord hath gathered all things in one.

The Lord hath brought down Zion from above.

The Lord hath brought up Zion from beneath.

The earth hath travailed and brought forth her strength;

And truth is established in her bowels;

And the heavens have smiled upon her;

And she is clothed with the glory of her God;

For he stands in the midst of his people.

Glory, and honor, and power, and might

Be ascribed to our God;

For he is full of mercy,

Justice, grace and truth, and peace,

Forever and ever, Amen. [^63]

Orson Pratt observed that when that great day comes, the words of Isaiah shall be fulfilled which state: "Thy watchmen shall lift up their voice, and with the voice together shall they sing; for they shall see eye to eye when the Lord shall bring again Zion." [^64] The free and open union that Enoch developed among his people through the Gospel, by which they were of one heart and one mind, [^65] will then prevail on earth. The Nephite prophet Abinadi foretold: "The time shall come when all shall see the salvation of the Lord; when every nation, kindred, tongue, and people shall see eye to eye and shall confess before God that his judgments are just." [^66] It is for this reason that the Saints in modern times are given the challenge to establish Zion again upon the earth, and for this reason Joseph Smith taught that they must purify their hearts and purge iniquity from their midst. He explained: "Then the veil will be rent, and the blessings of heaven will flow down—they will roll down like the Mississippi River." [^67]

The Sign of the Son of Man

Many signs will be given to indicate the approach of Christ in His glory. Of these the final sign to be given is the Sign of the Son of Man. Much of Christ's prophecy recorded in Smith 1 is concerned with events leading up to the manifestation of the Sign of the Son of Man. His prophecy may be divided into four general units: First, verses 1 through 4 consist of an introductory statement explaining the setting in which this prophecy is made and establishing the general topics with which it is concerned. Second, verses 5 through 25 is a report of Christ's prophecy concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, which was fulfilled in A.D. 69-70 at the siege of Jerusalem by a Roman army under Titus, and subsequent difficulties that were to come upon the Jewish people. Third, verses 26 through 36 give Christ's statement of events leading up to the manifestation of the Sign of the Son of Man. Finally, verses 37 through 55 record the Savior's summary and admonition to the Saints to be prepared for His coming at the end of the world. The last two divisions of the Lord's prophecy will be considered at this time.

The disciples inquired of Jesus as they came to Him upon the Mount of Olives: "Tell us . . . what is the sign of thy coming, and the end of the world, or the destruction of the wicked, which is the end of the world?" [^68] Of that final great sign, Jesus said: "As the light of the morning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west, and covereth the whole earth, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be." [^69] In other words, the Sign of the Son of Man is a brilliant light like the morning that comes out of the east and covers the whole earth. As Joseph Smith spoke of the coming of Christ in glory, he referred to the preliminary events that must occur and said:

. . . then will appear one grand sign of the Son of Man in heaven. But what will the world do? They will say it is a planet, a comet, etc. But the Son of Man will come as the sign of the coming of the Son of Man, which will be as the light of the morning cometh out of the east. [^70]

When seen in light of the promise of the Lord to Enoch that he and his city would return with Christ when He comes in glory, the Prophet's statement that the Sign of the Son of Man will be thought at first by uninformed men to be "a planet, comet, etc.," [^71] is most interesting. Some years after the death of the Prophet, Wandle Mace reported that he had heard Joseph Smith "speak of the sign of the coming of the Son of Man, which all should see." According to Elder Mace, the Prophet said: "It was the return of the City of Enoch to the earth." [^72] When He appears in glory, Christ will not be alone; He will be attended by the righteous hosts of past ages. [^73] Among these will be Enoch and his city. It seems, therefore, that the initial manifestation of Christ's glory and that of the attending hosts in the heavens, which will include Enoch and his people, will constitute the Sign of the Son of Man.

Having mentioned the Sign of the Son of Man in His prophetic statement to His disciples, Jesus then explained some of the major occurrences that will lead up to the manifestation of that sign, followed by His appearance in the clouds of heaven. He said:

And now I show unto you a parable. Behold, wheresoever the carcass is, there will the eagles be gathered together; so likewise shall mine elect be gathered from the four quarters of the earth. [^74]

Having foretold the gathering of the elect in the latter days, Jesus then spoke of world conditions that would prevail in the day of gathering, stating of His elect:

And they shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars.

Behold I speak for mine elect's sake; for nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes, in divers places. [^75]

After speaking of the gathering of the elect and describing the world conditions that would then prevail, Jesus designated three occurrences that would again transpire in the latter days, each of which had initially occurred shortly after Christ's ministry on earth and in conjunction with the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans in A.D. 70. Jesus declared: "And again, because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold; but he that shall not be overcome, the same shall be saved." [^76] A similar condition had existed shortly before the destruction of Jerusalem. [^77] In the latter days, love and natural affection would again dwindle in the hearts of men. By this His disciples might know that the day of His coming was nigh at hand.

Jesus also stated: "And again, this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come, or the destruction of the wicked." [^78] By His own ministry and that of the Apostles, the Gospel was preached to the world in their day. The fact that it would again be preached in the latter days implies that there would be both an apostasy from the truth and a restoration of the Gospel in its ancient power in the day of which Jesus spoke.

Of the third event which will mark the period of His coming in the last days, Jesus said: "And again shall the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, be fulfilled." [^79] The first time the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel concerning Jerusalem was poured out it resulted in the destruction of Jerusalem in A.D. 70. The city was then overrun by gentile forces. Again in the latter days, shortly before the coming of Christ, the "abomination of desolation" will be fulfilled in Jerusalem, and gentile and heathen might will be arrayed against the Jews. The opposing forces will besiege Jerusalem for three and one-half years; and when it finally capitulates, they will overrun much of the city.

The siege of Jerusalem, at which the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel will again be fulfilled, is one of the final events to transpire before the last great signs are manifested that precede the Sign of the Son of Man. To His disciples, Jesus said: "And immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken." [^80]

These signs will follow as a result of the cataclysmic upheaval that occurs when Jesus appears in Jerusalem and stands upon the Mount of Olives to deliver the elect of Judah from the complete destruction that otherwise would await them at the hands of their oppressors. This appearance will take place prior to His coming in the clouds of heaven when the Sign of the Son of Man is given. A revelation to Joseph Smith spoke of Christ's appearance to the Jews and revealed the order of events to follow: "Then shall the Lord set his foot upon this mount [i.e., of Olives], and it shall cleave in twain, and the earth shall tremble, and reel to and fro, and the heavens also shall shake." [^81] While the enemies of the Jewish people are destroyed by these convulsions and by turning one against another in deadly strife, the Jews who remain will flee into the valley caused by the cleavage of the Mount of Olives. There they will look upon the Messiah whom they have so long rejected and ask, "What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet?"

Jesus will then answer, "These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God." [^82]

Then shall the Jews weep because of their iniquities. Then shall they lament because they have persecuted their king and crucified their God. And then, as the mercy and grace of the Lord is given unto them, shall a nation be born into the kingdom of God in a day.

Only after the mighty convulsions occur following the abomination of desolation that is fulfilled at Jerusalem will the Sign of the Son of Man be shown. When a man by the name of Hyrum Redding, of Ogle County, Illinois, claimed to have seen the Sign of the Son of Man, Joseph Smith wrote: "I shall use my right, and declare that, notwithstanding Mr. Redding may have seen a wonderful appearance in the clouds one morning about sunrise (which is nothing very uncommon in the winter season) he has not seen the sign of the Son of Man, as foretold by Jesus; neither has any man, nor will any man, until after the sun shall have been darkened and the moon bathed in blood." [^83] Again the Prophet declared: "There will be wars and rumors of wars, signs in the heavens above and on the earth beneath, the sun turned into darkness and the moon to blood, earthquakes in divers places, the seas heaving beyond their bounds; then will appear one grand sign of the Son of Man in heaven." [^84] The same point was stressed by Jesus when He said to His disciples, as recorded in Smith 1: "And, as I said before, after the tribulation of those days [i.e., after the abomination of desolation at Jerusalem], and [after] the powers of the heavens shall be shaken, then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in heaven, and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn; and they shall see the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory." [^85]

The End of the World

The terms "earth" and "world," as they are sometimes used in the scriptures, have reference to different things. The word "earth" has reference to the sphere on which man lives but the term "world" has reference to the fallen and corrupt state of the human family. Jesus thus referred to Himself and His true disciples as being in the world, but not of the world. [^86] On another occasion He said to His disciples: "Ye say that ye know that the end of the world cometh; ye say also that the heavens and the earth shall pass away; and in this ye say truly, for so it is." [^87] The end of the world will come when Christ appears in heaven and consumes the wicked with fire, which is the brightness of His glory, but the end of the earth will be the disorganization or destruction of this sphere after the millennium is over. [^88]

As reported in Smith 1, the disciples of Christ inquired of Him: "Tell us . . . what is the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world, or the destruction of the wicked, which is the end of the world?" [^89] According to this statement, the end of the world is the destruction of the wicked, which will occur when the Sign of the Son of Man is manifested. Smith 1 is therefore Christ's statement of events that will lead up to the end of the world. For this reason, He concluded His prophetic declaration with this comment: "And thus cometh the end of the wicked, according to the prophecy of Moses, saying: They shall be cut off from among the people; but the end of the earth is not yet, but by and by." [^90]

Moses spoke of the destruction of the wicked, or the end of the world, when he recorded the word of the Lord, who said to him:

I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him.

And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him. [^91]

Later, the Apostle Peter explained:

. . . Moses truly said unto the fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you.

And it shall come to pass, that every soul, which will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people. [^92]

To the Nephites, Jesus declared as He spoke to them of the New Jerusalem to be built in the latter days and the extension of His law throughout the earth:

Behold, I am he of whom Moses spake, saying: A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass that every soul who will not hear that prophet shall be cut off from among the people. [^93]

In speaking to the Nephites, Jesus also correlated the fulfilment of this prophecy with the mission of Joseph Smith and the work he would be called to do in bringing forth the word of God in the last days. Christ said:

. . . in that day, for my sake shall the Father work a work, which shall be a great and a marvelous work among them; and there shall be among them those who will not believe it, although a man shall declare it unto them.

But behold, the life of my servant shall be in my hand; therefore they shall not hurt him, although he shall be marred because of them. Yet I will heal him, for I will show unto them that my wisdom is greater than the cunning of the devil.

Therefore it shall come to pass that whosoever will not believe in my words, who am Jesus Christ, which the Father shall cause him to bring forth unto the Gentiles, and shall give unto him power that he shall bring them forth unto the Gentiles, (it shall be done even as Moses said) they shall be cut off from among my people who are of the covenant. . . .

Yea, wo be unto the Gentiles except they repent; for it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Father, that I will cut off thy horses out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy chariots;

And I will cut off the cities of thy land, and throw down all thy strongholds;

And I will cut off witchcrafts out of thy land, and thou shalt have no more soothsayers;

Thy graven images I will also cut off, and thy standing images out of the midst of thee, and thou shalt no more worship the works of thy hands;

And I will pluck up thy groves out of the midst of thee; so will I destroy thy cities.

And it shall come to pass that all lyings, and deceivings, and strifes, and priestcrafts, and whoredoms, shall be done away.

For it shall come to pass, saith the Father, that at that day whosoever will not repent and come unto my Beloved Son, them will I cut off from among my people, O house of Israel;

And I will execute vengeance and fury upon them, even as upon the heathen, such as they have not heard. [^94]

Finally, when the time arrived to restore the Gospel in modern times, the Angel Moroni explained the prophetic declaration of Moses to Joseph Smith, as that prophecy was repeated by the Apostle Peter. Of Moroni's explanation, Joseph Smith wrote:

He quoted . . . the third chapter of Acts, twenty-second and twenty-third verses, precisely as they stand in our New Testament. He said that that prophet was Christ; but the day had no yet come when "they who would not hear his voice should be cut off from among the people," but soon would come. [^95]

Of events that will transpire immediately before He descends in glory to cut off the wicked and consume them by the brightness of His glory, Jesus said to His disciples: "The Son of Man shall come, and he shall send his angels before him with the great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together the remainder of his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other." [^96] Continuing, Christ explained: "Then shall be fulfilled that which is written, that in the last days, two shall be in the field, the one shall be taken, and the other left; two shall be grinding at the mill, the one shall be taken, and the other left." [^97] In writing of the coming of Christ in glory, the Apostle Paul also said:

For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep [i.e., dead].

For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: And the dead in Christ shall rise first:

Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord. [^98]

The righteous dead will be resurrected immediately before the earth reels to and fro as a drunken man, as the Lord sets His foot upon the Mount of Olives in His appearance to the Jews. [^99] Then, as the final signs are in progress, the angels of God will gather together the elect who are alive from the four parts of the earth. Not only will the City of Zion, or the New Jerusalem, be caught up to meet Christ and those who come with Him, but all the righteous throughout the earth will be raised and united with the heavenly host as they descend to earth in glory. But of the exact day and hour when this shall take place Jesus said: "No one knoweth; no, not the angels of God in heaven, but my Father only." [^100] Nevertheless, the Lord declared as He related the great signs that will be manifested before His coming: "Verily, I say unto you, this generation, in which these things shall be shown forth, shall not pass away until all I have told you shall be fulfilled." [^101] For this reason, He admonished: "Watch, therefore, for you know not at what hour your Lord doth come." [^102]

Conclusion

The building of Zion has been the requirement given to the Lord's people in all ages of time. Anciently, the people of Enoch were successful in building Zion according to the Gospel program. In doing so, they established love, union, peace, truth, and social justice in their midst; and they acquired the powers of the Holy Spirit to the extent that the glory of God rested upon them, and the Lord came to dwell in their midst.

Zion can only be built up upon the foundation of true freedom and brotherhood, which are products of the Holy Spirit and its influence upon man. Under the influence of the Holy Spirit, free and mature men may unite in the covenants of the Gospel to establish a social and economic order that preserves freedom and initiative, promotes union, and achieves social justice. This Enoch and his people did, for it is said of them that "they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them." [^103] In the latter days, Zion must again be built up according to the divine plan, to prepare the Saints for the second coming of the Lord. Only then will Christ come; and as He appears in glory, the people of Enoch and the righteous of all generations will be with Him. The free and open union among men that the Gospel makes possible and by which the righteous become of one mind and one heart, will then be developed throughout the earth until every nation, kindred, tongue, and people shall see eye to eye and acknowledge that the judgments of God are just.

As the Saints begin to gather and build up Zion, and the events of the last days begin to unfold, the righteous should be looking for the manifestation of the Sign of the Son of Man. Before that time, iniquity will abound among the people of the earth, the Gospel will be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations, and the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel will again be poured out upon Jerusalem. Immediately after this last event, the sun will be darkened and the moon turned to blood. Then will appear the Sign of the Son of Man in heaven, as the veil is rent and His glory covers the earth as the light of the morning that comes out of the east and shines to the west. The righteous dead will be resurrected amid the cataclysmic events that occur immediately prior to Christ's coming in glory; and as the Lord's glory fills the earth at His coming, the righteous who are living upon the earth will be translated and caught up to meet Him in the cloud. As the earth is renewed and brought back to a paradisiacal state of glory, all that is corrupt will be consumed. The prophecy of Moses will then be fulfilled, which states that the wicked will be cut off from the earth. As Malachi foretold, they shall be as stubble which is burned and left neither root nor branch. Moroni clarified: "They that come shall burn them." [^104]

Footnotes

. . . before the arm of the Lord shall fall, an angel shall sound his trump, and the saints that have slept shall come forth to meet me in the cloud.

Wherefore, if ye have slept in peace blessed are you; for as you now behold me and know that I am, even so shall ye come unto me and your soul shall live, and your redemption shall be perfected; and the saints shall come forth from the four quarters of the earth.

Then shall the arm of the Lord fall upon the nations.

And then shall the Lord set His foot upon the mount, and it shall cleave in twain, and the earth shall tremble, and reel to and fro, and the heavens also shall shake. D&C 45:45-48.

---
Notas:
[^1] DHC, IV, p. 493.
[^2] Abraham 1:3.
[^3] Moses 8:19. It will be shown later in this chapter that the divine patriarchal order carries the responsibility of teaching the Gospel to all mankind.
[^4] See ibid., 5:52. 54-56; 6:15; 8:14-15, 20.
[^5] Ibid., 6:8, 17, 68; 7:1; 8:13.
[^6] D&C 78:16.
[^7] Daniel 12:1.
[^8] DHC, V, pp. 1-2.
[^9] Ibid., IV, pp. 492-493. This earth will be made a celestial sphere only after the millennium.
[^10] Moses 6:68.
[^11] TPJS, p. 167.
[^12] Moses 6:8, 17; 8:13.
[^13] D&C 107:54.
[^14] See ibid., 131; 132.
[^15] See Discourses of Brigham Young, ed., John A. Widtsoe (Salt Lake City. 1946), p. 398.
[^16] See D&C 132:18-24 in light of verses 30-31.
[^17] Ibid., 107:1-4. There is also an order of priesthood, as an appendage to the Holy Priesthood, known later in the world's history as the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood.
[^18] Ibid., 107:8.
[^19] TPJS, p. 337.
[^20] I. V., Hebrews 7:3.
[^21] See D&C 107:40ff.
[^22] See, for example, D&C 84:6-16 for the descent of the keys of the Holy Priesthood, and compare with ibid., 107:41-52 which gives the descent of the keys of the Patriarchal Priesthood.
[^23] DHC, V, p. 555.
[^24] Ibid., pp. 1-2.
[^25] Ibid., VI, p. 319.
[^26] D&C 107:40.
[^27] Ibid., 107:13-15.
[^28] See Psalms 89:20-36; TPJS, p. 339.
[^29] See chapter 4 of this volume.
[^30] TPJS, p. 189.
[^31] D&C 107:42.
[^32] See Moses 6:1ff; D&C 107:39-57.
[^33] D&C 84:16.
[^34] Moses 6:2.
[^35] Ibid., 6:3.
[^36] Ibid., 6:4-6.
[^37] D&C 107:41-52.
[^38] Moses 6:8-25.
[^39] Ibid., 8:1-13.
[^40] Abraham 1:25-26.
[^41] Moses 8:19.
[^42] DHC, III, p. 386.
[^43] Ibid., IV, p. 209.
[^44] That this restoration must witness the establishment of the divine patriarchal order is evident from the Lord's statement in D&C 86:8-10, and from Joseph Smith's explanation in DHC, IV, pp. 492-493.
[^45] D&C 27:6-7.
[^46] Luke 1:16.
[^47] D&C 27:6-7.
[^48] Ibid., 110:12. For a statement by President Joseph Fielding Smith that it was Noah, as Elias, who conferred the dispensation of the Gospel of Abraham upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, see Conference Report, April 4, 1960, p. 72; Deseret News: Church Section, April 23, 1960.
[^49] Luke 1:17; D&C 27:7.
[^50] Luke 1:17.
[^51] D&C 84:26-28.
[^52] TPJS, p. 335.
[^53] That is, the First Principles and Ordinances of the Gospel.
[^54] Revelation 7:3.
[^55] TPJS, p. 321.
[^56] Ibid., p. 330.
[^57] D&C 77:9.
[^58] Ibid., 77:14.
[^59] Abraham 1:18-19.
[^60] Ibid., 1:2-4.
[^61] Ibid., 2:9.
[^62] Ibid., 3:12, 14.
[^63] D&C 132:30.
[^64] See, for example, ibid., 132:22.
[^65] TPJS, p. 189; Romans 9:4.
[^66] Abraham 2:11.
[^67] Romans 9:4; TPJS, p. 189.
[^68] See, for example, 1 Chronicles 5:1-2; Jeremiah 31:9.
[^69] Exodus 30:30-31.
[^70] Ibid., 40:13-15.
[^71] TPJS, p. 319.
[^72] It will be upon this basis that those who are not members of the Church may be identified with the Kingdom of God and, in a political sense, have membership therein. For a treatment of this political system, see Hyrum L. Andrus, Joseph Smith and World Government, Salt Lake City, Utah; Deseret Book Co., 1958.
[^73] Romans 9:4.
[^74] See again Abraham 1:25-26.
[^75] Isaiah 2:2-4; Micah 4:1-3.
[^76] In behalf of the Twelve Apostles, Parley P. Pratt wrote of the redemption of Jerusalem at the coming of Christ:
[^77] 1 Chronicles 5:21 Chronicles 5:2.
[^78] 2 Samuel 7:16.
[^79] Psalms 89:20-37.
[^80] Romans 9:4.
[^81] D&C 107:39ff.
[^82] Moses 6:1.
[^83] Ibid., 6:23.
[^84] Galatians 3:26-29.
[^85] Matthew 19:28-29; Mark 10:28-30; Luke 18:28-30. See also D&C 132:55, where this promise is correlated directly with the divine family order.
[^86] Abraham 2:9-11.
[^87] TPJS, p. 189.
[^88] Moses 6:7-8.
[^89] Abraham 1:31.
[^90] D&C 86:8-10.
[^91] Ibid., 86:10.
[^92] Ibid., 124:91.
[^93] TPJS, p. 319.
[^94] D&C 68:16-21. See also ibid., 107:13-17, 68-76.
[^95] Ibid., 109:62-63.
[^96] TPJS, p. 339.
[^97] Abraham 1:3.
[^98] 1 Thessalonians 4:15-17. The sequence of events concerning the resurrection is expressed in the following statement:
[^99] (D&C 29:11-13; 45:45-48.
[^100] Smith 1:40.
[^101] Ibid., 1:34. Christ's statement as recorded in Smith 1 clears up the problem of which generation Christ was referring. The King James version of Matthew's account indicates that it was the generation living when Christ uttered His prophecy. But by revelation Joseph Smith was given to understand that it is the generation that could be living when the signs are given which Christ describes.
[^102] Ibid., 1:46.
[^103] Moses 7:18.
[^104] Smith 2:37.
