Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1967)

CHAPTER 11

THE DIVINE PATRIARCHAL ORDER

The celestial kingdom consists of a divine family order that is patriarchal in its organization. According to Joseph Smith, this celestial order is "a kingdom of priests and kings to God and the Lamb, forever." [^1] In the early ages of the world, the divine patriarchal order was instituted on the earth and was the means of governing the human family in the ages before the flood. That system had its origin in the celestial society that existed before the earth was created. Abraham wrote of its institution and perpetuation on earth, stating: "It came down from the fathers, from the beginning of time, yea, even from the beginning, or before the foundations of the earth to the present time, even the right of the firstborn, on the first man, who is Adam, our first father, through the fathers unto me." [^2] Undoubtedly the Book of Moses reports the appointment of Noah to a place of presidency in the eternal family order when it says: "And the Lord ordained Noah after his own order, and commanded him that he should go forth and declare his Gospel unto the children of men, even as it was given unto Enoch." [^3]

The Concept Of The Divine Patriarchal Order

The Family of Jesus Christ

The divine patriarchal order has its basis in the principles and ordinances of the Gospel by which the obedient are born into the kingdom of God and become the sons and daughters of Jesus Christ in that divine relationship of life that leads to eternal life, or full celestial glory. Having entered by baptism of water and of the Holy Spirit into this new stage of life, the faithful may then be organized, by complying with the covenants and ordinances of the Holy Priesthood as now administered in the Temple of God, into a divine family order, wives are sealed to righteous husbands, and children to rightous parents. In this way, one generation is sealed to another back in time to the great patriarchs within the divine family order. Ultimately all the righteous are organized in this way under Jesus Christ. This is the celestial family of Christ, over which He presides as God and Father.

From the statement above it may be concluded that there were two family orders upon the earth in the early ages of time: (1) the physical family of Adam, and (2) the divine family that drew its membership from the obedient among Adam's posterity who accepted the Gospel. Those who were identified only with the first family order were called "sons of men," [^4] but those who belonged to the regenerated family of Christ were called "the children of God," "the people of God," and "the sons of God." [^5]

The Place of Adam in the Divine Patriarchal Order

Under Christ, Adam is the presiding figure over the divine patriarchal order for this earth. We can best understand his place within this divine system by observing again that within the over-all plan of life there are three stages of life—(1) spirit life, (2) physical life, and (3) eternal life. Adam is the father of physical life for all who are born on earth except Christ, who is the Only Begotten Son of the Man of Holiness in the flesh. But even here, Adam is the father of Jesus through Mary, His mother. Under Christ, Adam is also the father in the divine attributes and powers that lead ultimately to eternal life, of all his posterity in the flesh who are born into the kingdom of God. This means that for those who embrace the Gospel, Adam acts in a dual capacity—as a father of their physical endowments of life, with the right to preside as the great patriarch of the human family, and as a father in an additional sense to those who receive the divine attributes and powers that lead finally to eternal life, with the right to act as the presiding authority over the righteous of the earth. Of Adam's position in the latter relationship, a revelation declared: "[God]... hath appointed Michael your prince, and established his feet, and set him upon high, and given unto him the keys of salvation under the counsel and direction of the Holy One, who is without beginning of days or end of life." [^6] This statement is in harmony with Daniel's declaration that Michael is "the great prince which standeth for the children of thy [i.e. God's] people." [^7]

As the father of the divine, as well as the physical, endowments and powers of life for this earth, Adam presides (under the direction of the Holy One) over the divine patriarchal order for this sphere. That eternal family order was designated by Joseph Smith as "the ancient order of things" and as the order that pertains "to the Ancient of Days"—to the oldest man, Adam, in his spiritual prerogatives and powers. Within this patriarchal order, the Prophet continued, there exists "all those plans and principles by which any one is enabled to secure the fullness of those blessings which have been prepared for the Church of the Firstborn, and come up and abide in the presence of the Elohim [i.e., the Gods] in the eternal worlds." [^8] To do so, the faithful must be organized by the sacred ordinances and covenants of the Holy Priesthood according to the divine family order that exists in the celestial kingdom. For this reason, Joseph Smith wrote that in modern times God "has begun to restore the ancient order of His kingdom unto His servants and His people,. . . to prepare the earth for the return of His glory, even a celestial glory." [^9] Only when this divine patriarchal order has been established, perfected, and extended from Adam down to the latest generation among those who are born into the kingdom of God can the earth be made a celestial sphere and man attain his true and full relationship with God in eternity.

According to Joseph Smith, Adam is called Michael because of his place in the divine patriarchal order. He was the first person on earth to be born into the kingdom of God by obeying the principles and ordinances of the Gospel; and thereby he obtained power to become a son of God. [^10] Adam was also given the keys of the Holy Priesthood over his posterity in the flesh, with the right to dispense to them the spiritual endowments and powers that lead ultimately to eternal life. He is Michael because he stands as the father of both physical and divine endowments of life for all who come to this earth with the exception of Christ, who, in physical and eternal life, is the Son of God. Joseph Smith made this declaration concerning Adam when he said: "He is Michael, because he was the first and father of all, not only by progeny, but the first to hold the spiritual blessings, to whom was made known the plan of ordinances for the salvation of his posterity unto the end, and to whom Christ was first revealed, and through whom Christ has been revealed from heaven, and will continue to be revealed from henceforth. [^11]

According to biblical scholars, the name Michael means "Who is like God?" But latter-day revelation, including the disclosures contained in the Pearl of Great Price, makes possible further insights into the meaning of this name. Those who are born into the divine family order are called the "children of God" and the "sons of God" and the "people of God." [^12] As the presiding figure in the divine family order for this earth, Adam stands as a father and a god over his faithful posterity in the divine relationships that lead to eternal life. For this reason the righteous of his posterity who were gathered at the great patriarchal council in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman "rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael." [^13] They were probably honoring and sustaining him in the divine patriarchal rights to which he was appointed, to preside under Christ in the divine endowments and powers of life that lead to immortal glory.

The Place of a Righteous Man in the Divine Patriarchal Order

Under Adam, it is the privilege of every man who embraces the Gospel and qualifies to receive the sacred covenants and endowments of the Holy Priesthood, including the New and Everlasting Covenant of Marriage, [^14] to be a father of his posterity both in the relationship of the flesh and in the divine endowments and powers of the Holy Spirit that lead ultimately to eternal life. Like Adam, each righteous man within the divine family order may therefore acquire a dual responsibility of fatherhood over his posterity. Of these two patriarchal obligations, that which pertains to the divine endowments of eternal life is the more important. A man who lacks the faith to be born into the newness of life which the gospel makes possible or who thereafter fails to mature in the endowments of the Holy Spirit so that he can develop the divine truths and powers that lead to eternal life within his children in the flesh cannot be made a father over his posterity in the resurrection. By contrast, that man who becomes a son of Jesus Christ through the Gospel, who qualifies to receive the covenants of the Holy Priesthood, and who develops in the divine endowments of the Holy Spirit until he receives a fulness of glory and power in the resurrection will then have added to the power of procreation in the flesh the power to beget spirit children within the eternal marriage covenant; [^15] and, in addition, he will have the right to develop the glory and power which he has received in his descendants to the endless generations of eternity, thereby becoming both a father and a god unto his continuing posterity. [^16] This is the premise upon which the divine patriarchal order is established.

Priesthood Orders and Promises

Two major priesthood orders, or systems, were associated with the people of God; and under the law of these two priesthoods they were organized in their family, social, economic, and political affairs. The first of these priesthoods was the Holy Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God, later named Melchizedek Priesthood. [^17] By revelation, Joseph Smith wrote: "The Melchizedek Priesthood holds the right of presidency, and has power and authority over all the offices in the church in all ages of the world, to administer in spiritual things." [^18] Those who possess the fulness of this priesthood and its keys have the right "to receive, obtain, and perform all the ordinances belonging to the kingdom of God." [^19] To His chosen people on earth, the Lord has given the promise of receiving and exercising all priesthood rights within the Kingdom of God. But aside from this fact there is no specific lineage in the flesh to which the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood has been promised. Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of Hebrews 7 therefore says in part:

. . . this Melchizedek was ordained a priest after the order of the Son of God, which order was without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life. And all those who are ordained unto this priesthood are made like unto the Son of God, abiding a priest continually. [^20]

The second major order, or system, is that of the Patriarchal Priesthood. [^21] The Melchizedek and the Patriarchal Priesthoods are essentially the same Priesthood, but they differ in their organization and in the rights and prerogatives they possess. The Patriarchal Priesthood is the Melchizedek Priesthood organized according to a family order. Hence it is called the Patriarchal Priesthood. By contrast, the Melchizedek Priesthood is organized according to a system of quorums and presiding offices. Though the rights and privileges of the Melchizedek Priesthood are not appointed by promise to a given lineage within the chosen family, those of the Patriarchal Priesthood belong by right to a chosen lineage which God has appointed.

Within the Kingdom of God, the Holy (or Melchizedek) Priesthood is the presiding authority, and each right or privilege that pertains to the patriarchal order must be appointed or sanctioned by the presiding High Priest who holds the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood. At times, the keys of both the Holy Priesthood and the Patriarchal Priesthood centered in one man. This was true of Adam and of Noah. It was also true of Enoch, for those over whom he had jurisdiction. [^22] At other times, the keys of the two orders of priesthood were centered in different men. This was true in Abraham's day, when Melchizedek presided over the Church and also reigned, by virtue of the Holy Priesthood and its political rights, as King of Salem, while Abraham was given the keys of the Patriarchal Priesthood under Melchizedek, and the promises associated with the divine family order in later generations.

It is by means of the higher ordinances within the Gospel plan—those ordinances that are now centered in the House of the Lord—that the divine patriarchal order is built up in the earth. In discussing the Patriarchal Priesthood, Joseph Smith observed: "Go to and finish the temple and God will fill it with power, and you will then receive more knowledge concerning this priesthood." [^23] Having administered the higher ordinances of the House of the Lord to certain brethren, the Prophet observed that he had attended to "washings, anointings, endowments and the communication of keys pertaining to the Aaronic Priesthood, and so on to the highest order of the Melchizedek Priesthood, setting forth the order pertaining to the Ancient of Days." [^24] Again he commented:

. . . as soon as the Temple and baptismal font are prepared, we calculate to give the Elders of Israel their washings and anointings, and attend to those last and most impressive ordinances, without which we cannot obtain celestial thrones. But there must be a holy place prepared for this purpose,. . . that men may receive their endowments and be made kings and priests unto the most High God. [^25]

It is apparent that the early patriarchs and prophets had the essential covenants, ordinances, etc., that pertain to the divine patriarchal order. For instance, Facsimile No. 2, Figure 3, in the record of Abraham represents "the grand key-words of the Holy Priesthood, as revealed to Adam in the Garden of Eden, as also Seth, Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, and all to whom the Priesthood was revealed." Joseph Smith said that Figure 7 "represents God sitting upon his throne, revealing through the heavens the grand Key-words of the Priesthood." Finally, the Prophet said Figure 8 "contains writing that cannot be revealed unto the world; but is to be had in the Holy Temple of God."

Many of the details concerning the organization of the divine patriarchal order are not available for the period prior to the flood. But within the divine family order, as it was built up to some degree among the Israelites, the firstborn son of each family (or another by special appointment) exercised the birthright, which consisted of the right to be the heir of the father; and as the heir, the firstborn son had the responsibility, under the direction of his father, of directing other children within the family and of caring for their needs. In addition to the organizations and arrangements that were made within each separate family unit, a designated branch of the elect family was appointed to preside over the patriarchal functions of the whole system. In speaking of the Patriarchal Priesthood, Joseph Smith wrote: "The order of this priesthood was confirmed to be handed down from father to son, and rightly belongs to the literal descendants of the chosen seed, to whom the promises were made." [^26] Another branch was appointed to preside over the preparatory Gospel and the temporal priestly functions, [^27] and still another was appointed to direct the political affairs of the system as a whole. [^28] Many of these functions, however, were to be administered through each respective family head, so that each head of a family would be a patriarch, a priest, and a king over his posterity, under the direction of the respective central authorities of the system. In this way, the functions of the whole system were to be coordinated under their respective presiding authorities, who were in turn to act under the direction of the presiding High Priest of the Melchizedek Priesthood.

It should be stressed that birth in the flesh as an heir to certain blessings does not guarantee that an individual will receive that which he has a claim to by promise. The doctrine of election in the flesh has its basis in the appointments that were made in the Grand Organizational Council that was held before man was placed upon the earth. [^29] These appointments were contingent in nature, depending upon the exercise of man's agency on earth and upon his worthiness to receive the promised blessings. Joseph Smith said of the Lord's policy: "He passes over no man's sins, but visits them with correction, and if His children will not repent of their sins He will discard them." [^30]

The History Of The Divine Patriarchal Order

The Antediluvian Period

That the divine patriarchal order might be built up and perpetuated in the earth, God appointed a righteous lineage from among Adam's children and promised to center the blessings, rights and obligations of the divine order within that family. Of this appointment, a revelation to Joseph Smith said: "Seth . . . received the promise of God by his father, that his posterity should be the chosen of the Lord, and that they should be preserved unto the end of the earth." [^31] After Seth, the blessings, rights, and obligations of the divine patriarchal order were given successively to each of the great patriarchs who were born in his lineage till Noah. [^32] This means that to that lineage God promised the blessings of the Gospel and the right to bear the Priesthood. With these and related privileges they were given the obligation to teach the Gospel to other families of the earth and to build up the divine family order.

Moses chapters 6, 7, and 8 give a history of the presiding figures within the divine patriarchal order before the flood, giving the names of those great patriarchs and a brief report of their activities and teachings. It is not clear what position Abel may have had in the divine family order. He was, however, a presiding figure, under his father, in the Melchizedek Priesthood. [^33] When Seth was born after the death of Abel, Adam glorified the name of God, saying: "God hath appointed me another [chosen?] seed, instead of Abel, whom Cain slew." [^34] Of Seth the scripture states: "And God revealed himself unto Seth, and he rebelled not, but offered an acceptable sacrifice, like unto his brother Abel." [^35] Thus was begun the line of patriarchs in the divine patriarchal order in the antediluvian world. When Enos the son of Seth was born, the Book of Moses states:

And then began these men to call upon the name of the Lord, and the Lord blessed them;

And a book of remembrance was kept, in the which was recorded, in the language of Adam, for it was given unto as many as called upon God to write by the spirit of revelation;

And by them their children were taught to read and write, having a language which was pure and undefiled. [^36]

The Book of Remembrance to which reference is made in the statement above was a record of the principles, teachings, and ordinances of the divine patriarchal order—the principles, teachings, ordinances, etc., of the Gospel—and the appointments that God made concerning the rights and privileges that were given to those lineages in the flesh that were chosen to perpetuate the divine family order and preside in its several responsibilities. Among other things, this was a genealogy of the righteous in ancient times. Such a record must be kept in every age when the Gospel is on the earth. Here it may be noted that the scriptural writings that have come down to us from the past are, in the main, histories of families. Eventually, the total records of the past, with the record of those vicarious ordinances that have been performed for the dead who have died without the opportunity to hear the Gospel, must be gathered together. To begin this great work, Adam set the precedent; others must follow the example which he gave.

The scriptures give two major statements concerning the history of the divine patriarchal order in the period before the flood. One of these is found in a revelation to Joseph Smith which says:

This order was instituted in the days of Adam, and came down by lineage in the following manner:

From Adam to Seth, who was ordained by Adam at the age of sixty-nine years, and was blessed by him three years previous to his (Adam's) death, and received the promise of God by his father, that his posterity should be the chosen of the Lord, and that they should be preserved unto the end of the earth;

Because he (Seth) was a perfect man, and his likeness was the express likeness of his father, insomuch that he seemed to be like unto his father in all things, and could be distinguished from him only by his age.

Enos was ordained at the age of one hundred and thirty-four years and four months, by the hand of Adam.

God called upon Cainan in the wilderness in the fortieth year of his age; and he met Adam in journeying to the place Shedolamak. He was eighty-seven years old when he received his ordination.

Mahalaleel was four hundred and ninety-six years and seven days old when he was ordained by the hand of Adam, who also blessed him.

Jared was two hundred years old when he was ordained under the hand of Adam, who also blessed him.

Enoch was twenty-five years old when he was ordained under the hand of Adam; and he was sixty-five and Adam blessed him.

And he saw the Lord, and he walked with him, and was before his face continually; and he walked with God three hundred and sixty-five years, making him four hundred and thirty years old when he was translated.

And Methuselah was one hundred years old when he was ordained under the hand of Adam.

Lamech was thirty-two years old when he was ordained under the hand of Seth.

Noah was ten years old when he was ordained under the hand of Methuselah. [^37]

Since the Prophet Joseph Smith was here recording the presiding figures within the divine patriarchal order, each of the ordinations indicated above was to the office of patriarch, not merely ordinations to the Priesthood.

The other major statement concerning the above patriarchs is given in the Book of Moses. Having indicated that a genealogy was kept of the children of God, known as the book of the generations of Adam, the Book of Moses says:

In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him;

In the image of his own body, male and female, created he them, and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the day when they were created and became living souls in the land upon the footstool of God.

And Adam lived one hundred and thirty years, and begat a son in his own likeness, after his own image, and called his name Seth.

And the days of Adam, after he had begotten Seth, were eight hundred years, and he begat many sons and daughters;

And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years, and he died.

Seth lived one hundred and five years, and begat Enos, and prophesied in all his days, and taught his son Enos in the ways of God; wherefore Enos prophesied also.

And Seth lived, after he begat Enos, eight hundred and seven years, and begat many sons and daughters.

And the children of men were numerous upon all the face of the land. And in those days Satan had great dominion among men, and raged in their hearts; and from thenceforth came wars and raged in their hearts; and from thencefirth came wars and bloodshed; and a man's hand was against his own brother, in administering death, because of secret works, seeking for power.

All the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years, and he died.

And Enos lived ninety years, and begat Cainan. And Enos and the residue of the people of God came out from the land, which was called Shulon, and dwelt in a land of promise, which he called after his own son, whom he had named Cainan.

And Enos lived, after he begat Cainan, eight hundred and fifteen years, and begat many sons and daughters. And all the days of Enos were nine hundred and five years, and he died.

And Cainan lived seventy years, and begat Mahalaleel; and Cainan lived after he begat Mahalaleel eight hundred and forty years, and begat sons and daughters. And all the days of Cainan were nine hundred and ten years, and he died.

And Mahalaleel lived sixty-five years, and begat Jared; and Mahalaleel lived, after he begat Jared, eight hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters. And all the days of Mahalaleel were eight hundred and ninety-five years, and he died.

And Jared lived one hundred and sixty-two years, and begat Enoch; and Jared lived, after he begat Enoch, eight hundred years, and begat sons and daughters. And Jared taught Enoch in all the ways of God.

And this is the genealogy of the sons of Adam, who was the son of God, with whom God, himself, conversed.

And they were preachers of righteousness, and spake and prophesied, and called upon all men, everywhere, to repent; and faith was taught unto the children of men.

And it came to pass that all the days of Jared were nine hundred and sixty-two years, and he died.

And Enoch lived sixty-five years, and begat Methuselah. [^38]

At this point in the Book of Moses, the experiences and teachings of Enoch are reported, after which the general history of the divine patriarchal order is continued as follows:

And all the days of Enoch were four hundred and thirty years.

And it came to pass that Methuselah, the son of Enoch, was not taken, that the covenants of the Lord might be fulfilled, which he made to Enoch; for he truly covenanted with Enoch that Noah should be of the fruit of his loins.

And it came to pass that Methuselah prophesied that from his loins should spring all the kingdoms of the earth (through Noah), and he took glory unto himself.

And there came forth a great famine into the land, and the Lord cursed the earth with a sore curse, and many of the inhabitants thereof died.

And it came to pass that Methuselah lived one hundred and eighty-seven years, and begat Lamech;

And Methuselah lived, after he begat Lamech, seven hundred and eighty-two years, and begat sons and daughters.

And all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred and sixty-nine years, and he died.

And Lamech lived one hundred and eighty-two years, and begat a son,

And he called his name Noah, saying: This son shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed.

And Lamech lived, after he begat Noah, five hundred and ninety-five years, and begat sons and daughters.

And all the days of Lamech were seven hundred and seventy-seven years, and he died.

And Noah was four hundred and fifty years old, and begat Japheth; and forty-two years afterward he begat Shem of her who was the mother of Japheth, and when he was five hundred years old he begat Ham.

And Noah and his sons hearkened unto the Lord, and gave heed, and they were called the sons of God. [^39]

From evidence given in the Book of Abraham it is clear that the divine patriarchal order that existed before the flood held political, as well as ecclesiastical, jurisdiction in the earth. Within this divine family order such righteous figures as Adam and Noah reigned as kings over the earth, as well as functioning as prophets, priests, and patriarchs within the divine order. For example, Abraham said of the first government of Egypt, which was established shortly after the flood:

Now the first government of Egypt was established by Pharaoh, the eldest son of Egyptus, the daughter of Ham, and it was after the manner of government of Ham, which was patriarchal.

Pharaoh, being a righteous man, established his kingdom and judged his kingdom and judged his people wisely and justly all his days, seeking earnestly to imitate that order established by the fathers in the first generations, in the days of the first patriarchal reign, even in the reign of Adam, and also of Noah. . . . [^40]

The following points should be noted from the above report: First, the first government of Egypt was patterned after the government of Ham, which was patriarchal. Second, this government was an imitation of that political order established by the fathers in the first generations, in the first patriarchal reign. Finally, both Adam and Noah are said to have reigned with political power in the early patriarchal government.

The Place of Noah

Of the calling of Noah, the Book of Moses states: "And the Lord ordained Noah after his own order, and commanded him that he should go forth and declare his Gospel." [^41] The nature of the authority that Noah received superseded that which was given to his progenitors back to Adam. Noah is Gabriel. Of him, Joseph Smith said: "He stands next in authority to Adam in the Priesthood; he was called of God to this office, and was the father of all living in this day [i.e., after the flood], and to him was given the dominion." [^42]

In the above statement, the Prophet indicated that the primary reason why Noah stands next in authority to Adam in the priesthood of this earth is that he was the father of all living in his day. For this reason, his jurisdiction in the Patriarchal Priesthood differed from that of the patriarchs before him back to Adam. These earlier figures were patriarchs within the divine patriarchal order of their day, while Adam and Noah had patriarchal authority over the systems that were built up during and after their day. None of the patriarchs between Adam and Noah had the right, by actual parental authority, to preside over all men who lived on earth. Only Adam and Noah were truly fathers of all living during and after the day they lived.

Adam and Noah were given the keys of both the Holy and the Patriarchal Priesthood over the earth in ancient times. Enoch was one of the great patriarchs within the divine patriarchal order of his day, and he was given the keys of the Holy Priesthood over his people. Joseph Smith refers to him as being reserved "unto the presidency of a dispensation." [^43] But the scope of his authority seems to have been limited in some ways when compared with the authority given to Adam and Noah. Though Enoch had the responsibility of preaching the Gospel to the world and gathering believers to Zion, there were patriarchs and/or prophets living in his day who held authority in the priesthood over him, and some patriarchs who were senior in authority to Enoch continued to live on earth after he was translated. After Adam, only Noah held both the keys of the Holy and the Patriarchal Priesthood, with no other living person on earth to whom he was responsible in the priesthood.

Since Noah, as a second Adam, is the presiding figure under the Ancient of Days over all men who have lived on earth since the flood, he has been appointed to bring to pass the restoration of all things in the latter days. This includes, as a major development, the restoration of the divine patriarchal order upon the earth, in order that Christ might reign through that divine family order over the earth as King of kings and Lord of lords. [^44] For example, a revelation states that Elias visited Zacharias, the father of John the Baptist, and promised him that he would have a son. [^45] It was Gabriel who visited Zacharias. [^46] Gabriel, or Noah, is therefore Elias. To this Elias the Lord states in the above revelation: "I have committed the keys of bringing to pass the restoration of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began, concerning the last days." [^47]

The designation of Noah as "Elias" may give a clue to the meaning of this name. In the sense in which it is used in the above revelation, it apparently applies to Noah as a presiding figure within the divine patriarchal order of this earth. Noah, as Elias, in modern times restored the keys of the divine patriarchal order that were given earlier to Abraham, with all the related rights and promises that pertain to that system. This occurred in the Kirtland Temple, April 3, 1836. [^48] Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of John 1:28 also designates Christ as Elias, not as a forerunner, but as the central presiding figure within the Gospel program of this earth. As the Father of all who are born into the kingdom of God, Christ is the great Elias over all the righteous of every age. Here again Elias seems to be a name-title given to one who presides over the divine patriarchal order.

Members of the divine family order are charged with the responsibility of teaching the Gospel to all the families of the earth. When a messenger or a prophet goes forth to proclaim the Gospel with a commission such as John the Baptist was given, he therefore goes forth in "the spirit of Elias," [^49] which is the Spirit or power of the Gospel, or the Spirit and power that is associated with the divine patriarchal order. As a representative of the divine family, it is his duty "to turn [not seal] the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord." [^50]

But Noah's calling to preside, as Elias, over the divine patriarchal order and John the Baptist's calling to preach the preparatory Gospel in the spirit of Elias, as a legal representative of the divine family order, are two different commissions, with unlike responsibilities and different areas of jurisdiction. John held the keys of the preparatory Gospel. [^51] The spirit of Elias in which he ministered, according to Joseph Smith, "is to prepare the way for a greater revelation of God." [^52] By contrast, Noah's calling is to preside over the divine patriarchal order into which the obedient are introduced by the influence of the spirit of Elias and by their obedience to the principles and ordinances of the Gospel.

It is also Noah's responsibility to build up the divine patriarchal order in the latter days and thereby restore all things. To do so requires that the modern remnants of Israel be gathered and introduced into the divine patriarchal order by subscribing to the articles of adoption, [^53] and organized under the covenants of the Holy Priesthood into their rightful place within the divine family. Though other great figures who have lived since the flood have authority to participate in the work of building the divine patriarchal order in the latter days and have restored keys that are necessary for this purpose, Noah holds the central keys of bringing to pass the restoration of that ancient order of things. He is the central presiding figure in the priesthood this side of the flood, and it is under his direction that these great purposes are to be carried out. For example, John the Apostle saw in vision the latter days when four destroying angels would bring judgments upon the inhabitants of the earth. John then beheld another angel ascending from the east, having the seal of the living God, who said: "Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads." [^54] Joseph Smith explained that this "signifies sealing the blessings upon their heads, meaning the everlasting covenant, thereby making their calling and election sure." [^55] "The Saints have not too much time to save and redeem their dead, and gather together their living relatives, that they may be saved also, before the earth will be smitten, and the consumption decreed falls upon the world," the Prophet declared. "I would advise all the Saints to go with their might and gather together all their living relatives to this place, that they may be sealed and saved, that they may be prepared against the day that the destroying angel goes forth." [^56] Before the final judgments are poured out upon the wicked, the divine patriarchal order must be built up upon the earth, and those within it must receive the sealing powers of the Holy Priesthood. As Joseph Smith referred to the angel whose concern it was to build up the divine patriarchal order before the four destroying angels fulfil their mission, he wrote by revelation: "And, if you will receive it, this is Elias which was to come to gather together the tribes of Israel and restore all things." [^57] Again, having referred to a mission that was given to John the Apostle to gather the tribes of Israel in the last days, the Prophet said of that mission and John's relationship to it: "Behold, this is Elias, who, as it is written, must come and restore all things." [^58]

The Place of Abraham

After the time of Noah, the rights and promises that pertain to the divine patriarchal order were given to Abraham and promised thereafter to his elect posterity. To Abraham, the Lord said:

Behold, I will lead thee by my hand, and I will take thee, to put upon thee my name, even the Priesthood of thy father, and my power shall be over thee.

As it was with Noah so shall it be with thee; but through thy ministry my name shall be known in the earth forever, for I am thy God. [^59]

Thus Abraham was appointed to the blessings of the fathers, with the right to preside as a father within the divine patriarchal order from his day forward. And since to this divine family order is given the obligation to teach the Gospel to other families of the earth, God promised Abraham that through his ministry the name of the Lord would be known in the earth forever.

In reporting his call to these divine patriarchal rights and promises, Abraham said:

. . . finding there was greater happiness and peace and rest for me, I sought for the blessings of the fathers, and the right whereunto I should be ordained to administer the same; having been myself a follower of righteousness, desiring also to be one who possessed great knowledge, and to be a greater follower of righteousness, and to possess a greater knowledge, and to be a father of many nations, a prince of peace, and desiring to receive instructions, and to keep the commandments of God, I became a rightful heir, a High Priest, holding the right belonging to the fathers.

It was conferred upon me from the fathers; it came down from the fathers, from the beginning of time, yea, even from the beginning, or before the foundations of the earth to the present time, even the right of the firstborn, on the first man, who is Adam, our first father, through the fathers unto me.

I sought for mine appointment unto the Priesthood according to the appointment of God unto the fathers concerning the seed. [^60]

In conferring the rights and blessings of the former patriarchs upon Abraham, God gave him the promises associated with the divine patriarchal order. First, the Lord stated: "I will make of thee a great nation." [^61] As Abraham spoke with God on another occasion, the Lord explained this promise in greater detail. Of his experience, Abraham said:

. . . he put his hand upon mine eyes, and I saw those things which his hands had made, which were many; and they multiplied before mine eyes, and I could not see the end thereof. . . .

And it was in the night time when the Lord spake these words unto me: I will multiply thee, and thy seed after thee, like unto these, and if thou canst count the number of sands, so shall be the number of thy seeds. [^62]

To Joseph Smith, the Lord made clear the nature of this promise, stating: "Abraham received promises concerning his seed, and of the fruit of his loins . . . which were to continue so long as they were in the world; and as touching Abraham and his seed, out of the world they should continue; both in the world and out of the world should they continue as innumerable as the stars; or, if ye were to count the sand upon the seashore ye could not count them." [^63] From the italicized words of this statement, it is apparent that the promise given to Abraham of a continuing posterity had its basis in the New and Everlasting Covenant of Marriage. This is the marriage covenant that is administered to those who enter the divine patriarchal order by baptism and continue in faithfulness until, in the House of the Lord, they receive the blessings that pertain to exaltation in the divine family order. [^64] Only by receiving the New and Everlasting Covenant of Marriage could Abraham receive the promise that his posterity would continue to multiply out of the world. It is therefore evident that all other blessings given to Abraham pertaining to the divine patriarchal order were derived in like manner from the New and Everlasting Covenant of Marriage and were directly associated with it.

The idea of a continuation of posterity in eternity within the divine patriarchal order is meaningful when it is noted that, should the posterity of one married couple double in numbers with each succeeding generation of their descendants for 31 generations, the number of descendants in the last generation would reach a stupendous 4,294,967,296—a figure representing over one-third more people than the number now living upon the earth. Within the divine patriarchal order, the children of the righteous will continue, both in the world and out of the world. In the latter sense, they are to continue forever, generations without end. And faithful fathers are to be priests and kings (and women are to be priestesses and queens) over their ever-increasing posterity through all subsequent generations of time, and throughout all eternity, worlds without end.

The second promise given to Abraham was that his elect posterity (i.e., his posterity through Isaac and Jacob) would be lawful heirs in the flesh to the Gospel and its blessings. Joseph Smith declared as he quoted the Apostle Paul concerning the rights and promises given to Israel: "To them belonged the adoption and the covenants, &c." [^65] The "adoption" to which Paul and the Prophet referred is the right to enter into the divine family of Jesus Christ, by subscribing to the articles of adoption (the First Principles and Ordinances of the Gospel) and receiving power to become His sons and daughters. This right is given to the chosen seed of Abraham as one of the blessings appointed to them in the flesh. The "covenants" to which Paul and Joseph Smith referred are the additional covenants of the Holy Priesthood by which the divine patriarchal order is organized and man obtains an exaltation within it. He who is of Israel in the flesh is also an heir to these sacred ordinances, as a right that is given to him by promise, providing he meets the requirements of faith and righteousness that are necessary to obtain them. Each righteous man can, in his own right, seek and obtain the blessings that were given to Abraham and the fathers before him. These covenants are administered in the House of the Lord and are bestowed upon all who qualify to receive the New and Everlasting Covenant of Marriage.

Third, Abraham's elect posterity were given a legal claim in the flesh to the Priesthood. As the Lord gave this promise to Abraham, He said: "I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee; and in thee (that is, in thy Priesthood) and in thy seed (that is, thy Priesthood), for I give unto thee a promise that this right shall continue in thee, and in thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body). . . . [^66]

Fourth, the Apostle Paul declared, and the Prophet Joseph Smith reaffirmed, that to Israel as the chosen people was promised "the glory" of God. [^67] By building up the divine patriarchal order, it was Israel's right to be a recipient of the presence and power of the Lord. It is for this reason that the Gospel and the Holy Priesthood are given to man; and when the institutions of heaven are built up among the faithful, God honors the divine order by manifesting His glory to those who are established upon its law. Like the people of Enoch who built up the divine patriarchal order before them, the Israelites became in some degree recipients of the glory of God, according to the right given to the chosen people by the above promise of God. But the Israelites could not endure the presence of the Lord as did their fathers before them.

Fifth, in addition to the general promise that the seed of Abraham would be heirs in the flesh to the Priesthood, there were certain branches among his elect posterity that were promised the right to preside in the various orders of the Priesthood. The keys of the Patriarchal Priesthood, as a specific order, descended from Abraham to Isaac, to Jacob, and then (by the forfeiture of Reuben) to Joseph. Thereafter the right to preside over this order of the Priesthood was centered by promise in the lineage of Ephraim. [^68]

The right to bear the priesthood that is designed to administer the preparatory Gospel and its related program of temporal activities was given to the tribe of Levi. The right to preside within this order of the priesthood was given by promise to the firstborn among the sons of Aaron. To Moses, the Lord said:

. . . thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons, and consecrate them, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office.

And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, This shall be an holy anointing oil unto me throughout your generations. [^69]

Again, the Lord declared:

And thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy garments, and anoint him, and sanctify him; that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.

And thou shalt bring his sons, and clothe them with coats:

And thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office: for their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations. [^70]

Of the promise of God as given to Aaron and his sons, Joseph Smith said:

The Levitical Priesthood is forever hereditary—fixed on the head of Aaron and his sons forever, and was in active operation down to Zacharias the father of John. Zacharias would have had no child had not God given him a son. He sent his angel to declare unto Zacharias that his wife Elizabeth should bear him a son, whose name was to be called John.

The keys of the Aaronic Priesthood were committed unto him, and he was as the voice of one crying in the wilderness saying: "Prepare ye the way of the Lord and make his paths straight." [^71]

Political authority within the divine patriarchal order (and political authority as it may be extended beyond the immediate elect family to govern others who voluntarily sustain the divine family order in administering the political law of God) [^72] was given by promise to a third branch of Israel. According to the Apostle Paul, one right that God promised to Israel was "the giving of the law." [^73] This was the order that prevailed upon the earth under the patriarchal program before the flood, when both Adam and Noah reigned as kings over the earth. [^74] This same system will be established again on earth when Israel is gathered in the latter days and the true order of Israel—the divine patriarchal order—is restored. In that future day, the law will go forth from Zion, [^75] and a similar program will be administered from Jerusalem. [^76]

Of the tribe of Israel in whom the promise of political authority was centered, the Bible states: "Judah prevailed above his brethren, and of him came the chief ruler." [^77] Within the tribe of Judah, the royal rights of kingship within the divine patriarchal order were given by promise to David. The Lord promised him: "Thine house and thy kingdom shall be established forever before thee: thy throne shall be established forever." [^78] The psalmist also declared:

I have found David my servant; with my holy oil have I anointed him:

With whom my hand shall be established: mine arm also shall strengthen him.

The enemy shall not exact upon him; nor the son of wickedness afflict him.

And I will beat down his foes before his face, and plague them that hate him.

But my faithfulness and my mercy shall be with him: and in my name shall his horn be exalted.

I will set his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers.

He shall cry unto me, Thou art my Father, my God, and the rock of my salvation.

Also I will make him my firstborn, higher than the kings of the earth.

My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall stand fast with him.

His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven.

If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments;

If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments;

Then will I visit their transgressions with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes.

Nevertheless my loving-kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail.

My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips.

Once have I sworn by my holiness that I will not lie unto David.

His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me.

It shall be established for ever as the moon, and as a faithful witness in heaven. [^79]

In receiving the above rights and promises, the elect posterity of Abraham was obligated to teach the Gospel to all other families of the earth. As was previously indicated, this is a major responsibility given to those who become members of the divine patriarchal order. Here was the obligation of Israel pertaining to "the service of God." [^80] This may be the reason an evangelical minister, who is a patriarch, [^81] is also designated as a preacher of the Gospel. Adam set the precedent. In giving a history of the divine patriarchal order, the Book of Moses states: "And Adam hearkened unto the voice of God, and called upon his sons to repent." [^82] Of the great patriarchs before the flood, this record also states: "They were preachers of righteousness, and spake and prophesied, and called upon all men, everywhere, to repent; and faith was taught unto the children of men." [^83]

By obeying the Gospel and becoming sons and daughters of Jesus Christ, those since the time of Abraham who are not of Israel in the flesh are adopted into the family of Abraham and become his seed. It is at this point that the provision that the obedient become sons and daughters of Christ is correlated with the promise given to Abraham that the righteous of the earth in future generations would be accounted as his seed. As children of Christ, they are to be given membership within the divine patriarchal order among the generations of the righteous under Abraham. [^84] For this reason, Jesus promised those who would serve Him in the divine plan of regeneration that is made possible by the Gospel: "Every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name's sake, shall receive an hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting life." [^85] Of the obligation of Abraham's elect seed to teach the Gospel and of the fact that recipients of the Gospel from other families would thereby become the seed of Abraham, the Lord said to the Father of the Faithful:

. . . I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations;

And I will bless them through thy name; for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father. . . .

I give unto thee a promise that this right shall continue in thee, and in thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of eternal life. [^86]

The Divine Patriarchal Order to be Restored

In discussing the promises that God made to Abraham concerning his posterity in the flesh, Joseph Smith said: "The election of the promised seed still continues, and in the last days, they shall have the Priesthood restored unto them, and they shall be the 'saviors on Mount Zion,' the ministers of our God." [^87] Since the divine patriarchal order is an eternal system designed to be perpetuated among the righteous in all generations of time, it must be established in the latter days and united under the priesthood with the earlier system. The Book of Moses therefore states:

Now this same [i.e., Patriarchal] Priesthood, which was in the beginning, shall be in the end of the world also.

Now this prophecy Adam spake, as he was moved upon by the Holy Ghost, and a genealogy was kept of the children of God. And this is the book of the generations of Adam. . . . [^88]

If the divine patriarchal order was to be perpetuated in the earth and the rights and responsibilities associated with it given to the proper lineages in later generations, a record would have to be kept of the children of God. This was the Book of Remembrance which Adam kept and which was handed down to Abraham from his fathers. He thus observed that "the records of the fathers, even the patriarchs, concerning the right of Priesthood, the Lord my God preserved in mine own hands." [^89]

Even with the efforts of the ancient patriarchs to keep records, the scattering of Israel among all nations and the universal apostasy from the true Gospel of Christ have made it necessary for God to clarify certain lineages and the promises that are theirs in modern times. In discussing the parable of the wheat and the tares, the Lord referred to the latter-day gathering of the wheat (the modern remnants of Israel who obey the Gospel) from among the tares. He then spoke of the great program to be carried out through His elect of the last days in restoring the ancient order of things upon the earth, saying:

Therefore, thus saith the Lord unto you, with whom the priesthood hath continued through the lineage of your fathers—

For ye are lawful heirs, according to the flesh, and have been hid from the world with Christ in God—

Therefore your life and the priesthood have remained, and must needs remain through you and your lineage until the restoration of all things spoken by the mouths of all the holy prophets since the world began. [^90]

Here the Lord indicates that the Saints in the latter days are descendants of the ancient fathers—of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. For this reason, the priesthood has been restored to them, being continued or sent down from heaven to the Saints through the lineage of their fathers according to the appointment that God has made concerning the seed of Israel. The Saints are lawful heirs in the flesh to the ancient promises, having been hid from the world with Christ in God. Among them the divine patriarchal order is to be built up in the last days. For this reason the Lord declared: "Therefore your life and the priesthood have remained, and must needs remain through you and your lineage until the restoration of all things." [^91] This restoration will not be complete until the modern remnants of Israel have been gathered, the rights that pertain to each branch clarified and assigned to the rightful lineage in the flesh, and the divine family order given its proper place in the government of the earth.

The restoration of the Patriarchal Priesthood and the designation of the branch of Israel that has a right to direct its functions is a vital part of the above program. It was made known to Joseph Smith that he descended through that line of the tribe of Ephraim that has a right to the keys of the Patriarchal Priesthood. With the rights of this priesthood centered in him by appointment, he ordained his father, Joseph Smith, Sr., to be the first presiding patriarch under him (the Prophet) in this dispensation. After the death of the elder Joseph, the office of patriarch was given to his oldest living son, Hyrum Smith. The revelation appointing Hyrum to this office stated that he was to "take the office of Priesthood and Patriarch, which was appointed unto him by his father, by blessing and also by right." [^92] Accordingly, he was ordained by the Prophet. In this way, the Patriarchal Priesthood was restored and the keys of presidency assigned to the proper lineage in the flesh. It now remains for the Saints to develop a true family-centered society, where the family accepts and administers most, if not all, the functions that have heretofore been given to the auxiliary organizations of the Church.

The restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood is another important item in the building of the divine patriarchal order in the latter days. After citing biblical evidence concerning the appointment that was given to Aaron and his sons in later generations, Joseph Smith said: "Here is a little of law which must be fulfilled." [^93] In other words, the descendants of Aaron must also be gathered and given their rightful place within the divine patriarchal order. By revelation, the Lord said of the office of Bishop and the way it is to function in this day:

. . . if they be literal descendants of Aaron they have a legal right to the bishopric, if they are the firstborn among the sons of Aaron;

For the firstborn holds the right of the presidency over this priesthood, and the keys or authority of the same.

No man has a legal right to this office, to hold the keys of this priesthood, except he be a literal descendant and the firstborn of Aaron.

But, as a high priest of the Melchizedek Priesthood has authority to officiate in all the lesser offices, he may officiate in the office of bishop when no literal descendant of Aaron can be found, provided he is called and set apart and ordained unto this power, under the hands of the First Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood.

And a literal descendant of Aaron, also, must be designated by this Presidency, and found worthy, and anointed, and ordained under the hands of this Presidency, otherwise they are not legally authorized to officiate in their priesthood.

But, by virtue of the decree concerning their right of the priesthood descending from father to son, they may claim their anointing if at any time they can prove their lineage, or do ascertain it by revelation from the Lord under the hands of the above named Presidency. [^94]

(Since all the tribes of Israel have not yet been gathered and the firstborn line of Aaron's sons has not been designated and appointed, all bishops who now serve in the Church must first be ordained High Priests, as the revelation above indicates.)

When the Kingdom of God is established on earth in its full power, its political program will be developed and the royal rights of kingship in Israel will be given to the proper branch of the chosen family. It was for this that Joseph Smith prayed when he said in the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland temple: "We . . . ask thee to have mercy upon the children of Jacob, that Jerusalem, from this hour, may begin to be redeemed; and the yoke of bondage may begin to be broken off from the house of David." [^95] On another occasion, the Prophet spoke of King David and the appointment to political responsibility that must be made to a descendant of David in the latter days. The Prophet said: "Although David was a king, he never did obtain the spirit and power of Elijah and the fullness of the Priesthood; and the Priesthood that he received, and the throne and kingdom of David is to be taken from him and given to another by the name of David in the last days, raised up out of his lineage." [^96] Though David forfeited his right in eternity to reign as a king in the divine patriarchal order, the appointment concerning his seed still continues. In the last days, the throne and kingdom which David once possessed will be given to another by the name of David, raised up as a king in latter-day Israel out of his lineage. This David will be given the anointing of his ancient progenitor, and in eternity he will receive the throne that David of old would otherwise have received.

Conclusion

Celestial society is patriarchal in its organization. The divine patriarchal order existed in eternity before the creation of the earth; and the law that pertains to the celestial family was established upon this earth in the early ages of the world. "It came down from the fathers, from the beginning of time, yea, even from the beginning, or before the foundations of the earth." [^97] This family order is based upon the principles and ordinances of the Gospel by which the obedient become sons and daughters of Jesus Christ in the divine endowments that lead to eternal life. Next to Christ, Adam presides as a father in eternal life over the righteous of the earth. Under him, each righteous man has a similar right to preside over his worthy posterity in the flesh, including those who are adopted into his family through the covenants and sealing powers of the priesthood. Having become members of the family of Christ by obeying the Gospel, the faithful must therefore go to the House of the Lord and receive the covenants of the priesthood by which they are organized according to the law of the divine patriarchal order. Each generation of this divine system must be sealed from Adam until the latest age of time.

Having been built up in the early ages of the world, the divine patriarchal order was perpetuated through the ancient patriarchs. Among the Israelites as a chosen people, the Lord also sought to establish the divine family system. Accordingly, certain branches of Israel were given promises of power and authority within the over-all system. To Ephraim was given the right to preside over the Patriarchal Priesthood. The sons of Aaron were given the right to preside over the Aaronic Priesthood. And the sons of David were given the promise of royal, or political, power in Israel.

As a significant part of the restoration of all things in the latter days, the divine patriarchal order is to be re-established upon the earth before the Lord comes in His glory. To this end the Gospel must be preached and the branches of Israel gathered and given their promised rights within the divine system. Zion must be built up according to the ancient pattern. In the great events that take place in the latter days, Christ's kingdom will be established, that when He comes He may reign over the earth by means of the divine patriarchal order, as King of kings and Lord of lords.

Footnotes

The Jews as a nation become holy from that day forward, and their city and sanctuary become holy. There also the Messiah establishes His throne and seat of government.

Jerusalem then becomes the seat of empire, and the great centre and capital of the old world.—"Proclamation of the Twelve Apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," MS, October 22, 1845.

---
Notas:
[^1] Moses 5:13.
[^2] Ibid., 5:18-33.
[^3] Ibid., 5:23.
[^4] TPJS, pp. 169-170.
[^5] Ibid., p. 169.
[^6] TPJS, p. 58. Israel was later commanded to bring the first fruits of the field to the priests as an offering to the Lord. But these offerings were, in the main, to be given to the poor, the widows, and the fatherless. See Deuteronomy 26. In some instances they were also used in conjunction with the sacrifice of lambs, but not as a substitute for the shedding of blood. See Leviticus 23:10, 17-18.
[^7] It should be remembered, however, that in yielding to the weaknesses of the flesh man's disposition is altered to where, eventually, he wilfully transgresses the law of God.
[^8] Hebrews 10:26. Joseph Smith reaffirmed this declaration in modern times. See TPJS, p. 128.
[^9] Moses 5:24-25.
[^10] Ibid., 5:24.
[^11] DHC, VI, p. 314.
[^12] D&C 132:27.
[^13] DHC, V, p. 391.
[^14] Ibid., VI, pp. 314-315.
[^15] 3 Nephi 27:32.
[^16] 4 Nephi 38.
[^17] Revelation 20:7-9.
[^18] Moses 5:23.
[^19] See D&C 29:26.
[^20] DHC, VI, p. 317.
[^21] TPJS, p. 181.
[^22] Moses 5:34-41.
[^23] Ibid., 5:39.
[^24] Ibid., 5:41.
[^25] See Ibid., 5:4; 6:49.
[^26] D&C 107:18-19.
[^27] Moses 5:41-42.
[^28] Ibid., 5:47-57.
[^29] From the context of this statement, it seems that this was the condition that prevailed about 1,000 years after the fall.
[^30] Moses 6:15.
[^31] Ibid., 8:22, 28-30.
[^32] Ibid., 8:18.
[^33] Ibid., 7:24-26, 28, 32-34, 36, 41-43.
[^34] JD, XXII, pp. 301-302. See also ibid., XXI, pp. 17-18; XXIV, pp. 290-291; XXVI, pp. 90-91.
[^35] Moses 7:37-39.
[^36] Revelation 21:8. To have their part in hell where they suffer the powers of the second death does not necessarily mean that they remain there permanently. It means that they have their part under such judgments. Eventually death and hell deliver up the dead which are in them. See ibid., 20:13.
[^37] D&C 76:84.
[^38] Moses 6:29.
[^39] Ibid., 7:39.
[^40] Ibid., 7:56-57.
[^41] D&C 76:72-74.
[^42] Ibid., 76:51, 53.
[^43] Moses 6:57.
[^44] D&C 58:42.
[^45] Moses 5:40.
[^46] Ibid., 7:8.
[^47] Ibid., 7:22.
[^48] DHC, IV, p. 501.
[^49] Ibid., I, p. 191.
[^50] Abraham 1:24.
[^51] Moses 7:12, 22.
[^52] Abraham 1:21-24, 26-27.
[^53] Abraham 1:20.
[^54] Ibid., 1:26.
[^55] TPJS, pp. 269-270.
[^56] Journal History, August 22, 1895.
[^57] According to Joseph Smith, the day will come that Negroes will be permitted to receive the priesthood, either here on earth or in eternity. See Journal History, December 25, 1869.
[^58] L. John Nuttal Diary, under date of May 31, 1879.
[^59] JD, II, pp. 142-143.
[^60] Letter dated November 3, 1947.
[^61] Statement dated August 17, 1951.
[^62] Genesis 10:22-25. See also D&C 133:23-24.
[^63] Ether 1:3.
[^64] See Abraham 1:28, 31.
[^65] Ether 8:7-9.
[^66] Ibid., 8:13-18.
[^67] Ibid., 9:4.
[^68] See Ibid., 9:1-13.
[^69] Ibid., 8:21. See also ibid., 9:26-27; 10:33; 11:7, 15, 22; 13:15, 18; 14:8-10, 25.
[^70] I.V., Genesis 17:4-7.
[^71] Abraham 1:5-11.
[^72] Ibid., 1:12-14. See also Facsimile No. 1.
[^73] Ibid., 1:15-17.
[^74] Ibid., 1:20.
[^75] Ibid., 1:30.
[^76] Ibid., 2:5.
[^77] Ibid., 2:4.
[^78] Ibid., 2:18.
[^79] See Ether 8:21.
[^80] 2 Nephi 9:9.
[^81] Mosiah 8.
[^82] Alma 37:27.
[^83] Ibid., 37:21.
[^84] Helaman 6:26-27.
[^85] Ether 8:21. For the role of the secret combinations among the Nephites, see Alma 37:21-32; Helaman 1:11, 12; 2:3-14; 3:23; 6:17-30, 37-41; 7:4, 5, 20, 21, 25; 8:1, 4, 27, 28; 9:6; 10:3; 11:2, 10, 25-33; 3 Nephi 1:27-30; 2:10-19; 3; 4; 5:4-6; 6:28-30; 7:6, 9-12; 9:9; 4 Nephi 42, 46; Mormon 1:18; 2:8, 10, 27; 8:27, 40.
[^86] Deuteronomy 4:26-27.
[^87] Matthew 23:37.
[^88] Ibid., 23:38.
[^89] Smith 1:1.
[^90] Ibid., 1:2.
[^91] Ibid., 1:3.
[^92] Ibid., 1:4. They also inquired about the sign of His coming in the last days and the end of the world, as discussed in a previous chapter.
[^93] Ibid., 1:5-11.
[^94] Acts 8:8, 13, 18-24.
[^95] 2 Corinthians 11:13.
[^96] 2 Timothy 2:17-18.
[^97] Cited in James E. Talmage, Jesus The Christ (1947), p. 587.
