Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1967)

CHAPTER 12

APOSTASY AND JUDGMENT

According to the Pearl of Great Price, apostasy from the ways of the Lord began early among the sons and daughters of Adam. Crime and perversion were also established upon an organized basis; and with the advantages of organization, the forces of wickedness developed until they engulfed the world and made the flood a practical necessity. In the Pearl of Great Price, insights are also given into the development of wickedness among men after the time of the flood. A general continuity extended from the early ages of the world down to later generations. In seeing the development of apostasy in past ages, man is better able to understand and appreciate the problems that confront him in the modern world. In these and other ways, this Standard Work makes valuable contributions to students of the scriptures.

Apostasy Before The Flood

Early Departure From the Truth

It is evident from Moses 5 that the forces of sin and apostasy were active among the children of Adam and Eve at an early time. After Adam and Eve had had children and grandchildren, they were told the meaning of the law of sacrifice which they had received at an earlier date, and which they had faithfully obeyed. In this explanation, they were taught the Gospel of Jesus Christ. But when they made these things known to their children,

. . . Satan came among them, saying: I am also a son of God; and he commanded them, saying: Believe it not; and they believed it not, and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish. [^1]

From the evidence given in the Book of Moses it seems evident that this early departure from the teachings of the Gospel occurred before the birth of Cain and Abel. The forces of wickedness had therefore gained some influence in the world before Cain murdered his brother.

The Sinfulness of Cain

The story of Cain and Abel as given in the Pearl of Great Price is much more detailed than the account given in Genesis. Though the first of Adam's children rejected the Gospel and turned to carnal practices, Cain went even farther into sin. The Book of Moses states:

. . . Cain loved Satan more than God. And Satan commanded him, saying: Make an offering unto the Lord.

And in the process of time it came to pass that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the Lord.

And Abel he also brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of the fat thereof. And the Lord had respect unto Abel, and to his offering;

But unto Cain, and to his offering, he had not respect. Now Satan knew this, and it pleased him. And Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell.

And the Lord said unto Cain: Why art thou wroth? Why is thy countenance fallen?

If thou doest well, thou shalt be accepted. And if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door, and Satan desireth to have thee; and except thou shalt hearken unto my commandments, I will deliver thee up, and it shall be unto thee according to his desire. And thou shalt rule over him;

For from this time forth thou shalt be the father of his lies; thou shalt be called Perdition; for thou wast also before the world.

And it shall be said in time to come—That these abominations were had from Cain; for he rejected the greater counsel which was had from God; and this is a cursing which I will put upon thee, except thou repent.

And Cain was wroth, and listened not any more to the voice of the Lord, neither to Abel, his brother, who walked in holiness before the Lord.

And Adam and his wife mourned before the Lord, because of Cain and his brethren.

And it came to pass that Cain took one of his brothers' daughters to wife, and they loved Satan more than God.

And Satan said unto Cain: Swear unto me by thy throat, and if thou tell it thou shalt die; and swear thy brethren by their heads, and by the living God, that they tell it not; for if they tell it, they shall surely die; and this that thy father may not know it; and this day I will deliver thy brother Abel into thine hands.

And Satan sware unto Cain that he would do according to his commands. And all these things were done in secret.

And Cain said: Truly I am Mahan, the master of this great secret, that I may murder and get gain. Wherefore Cain was called Master Mahan, and he gloried in his wickedness.

And Cain went into the field, and Cain talked with Abel, his brother. And it came to pass that while they were in the field, Cain rose up against Abel, his brother, and slew him.

And Cain gloried in that which he had done, saying: I am free; surely the flocks of my brother falleth into my hands. [^2]

Several points in the above statement should be given special attention: First, Cain permitted his attitude and disposition to turn toward evil. He then began to love Satan more than God; and he gloried in his wickedness, even in murder. God explained to him: "If thou doest well, thou shalt be accepted. And if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door." [^3] But he chose to do evil instead of good. Joseph Smith therefore said: "If Cain had fulfilled the law of righteousness as did Enoch, he could have walked with God all the days of his life, and never failed of a blessing." [^4]

Second, in offering a sacrifice, Cain perverted this sacred ordinance of the priesthood. Cain held the priesthood and could legally offer sacrifices, but he did so for the wrong reason. It was only when Satan commanded him to make an offering unto the Lord that he did so, in response to the perverse influence of the Adversary, and therefore in mockery to God. Joseph Smith explained:

The power, glory and blessings of the Priesthood could not continue with those who received ordination only as their righteousness continued; for Cain also being authorized to offer sacrifice, but not offering it in righteousness, was cursed. It signifies, then, that the ordinances must be kept in the very way God has appointed; otherwise their Priesthood will prove a cursing instead of a blessing. [^5]

Third, Cain perverted the ordinance of sacrifice because he lacked faith in Christ. His act was not an expression of faith; and any act relating to the Gospel that is not performed in faith is a sin. Because he lacked faith, Cain offered those things which were not authorized as being an appropriate similitude of the sacrifice of the Son of God. Being a tiller of the soil, he offered the fruit of the ground as a sacrifice, which was not symbolic of Christ's great act of redemption. Abel was a keeper of sheep; and in his sacrifice, he offered the firstlings of his flock as a similitude of the anticipated sacrifice of the Lamb of God. Cain may have justified himself in his actions by reason of his occupation. Instead of purchasing a lamb or another animal that would serve as an appropriate sacrifice, he offered what he produced, even as Abel offered that which he produced. But this kind of rationalization would destroy the divine purpose behind the law of sacrifice, for it was instituted to direct the minds of men toward the sacrifice of Christ and be an appropriate symbol of that offering. Joseph Smith stated:

By faith in this atonement or plan of redemption, Abel offered to God a sacrifice that was accepted, which was the firstlings of the flock. Cain offered of the fruit of the ground, and was not accepted, because he could not do it in faith, he could have no faith, or could not exercise faith contrary to the plan of heaven. It must be shedding the blood of the Only Begotten to atone for man; for this was the plan of redemption; and without the shedding of blood was no remission; and as the sacrifice was instituted for a type, by which man was to discern the great Sacrifice which God had prepared; to offer a sacrifice contrary to that, no faith could be exercised, because redemption was not purchased in that way, nor the power of the atonement instituted after that order; consequently Cain could have no faith; and whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. [^6]

Fourth, Cain entered upon a program of premeditated and calculated wickedness. There is a difference between wilful sin and giving way to the weaknesses of the flesh. The Lord can have mercy upon the latter, [^7] but of the former it is written: "If we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins." [^8] Having married his brother's daughter, both Cain and his wife loved Satan more than God. With this attitude, Cain entered into a secret combination with others of Adam's sons; and acting under the darkening influence of Satan, they established a secret order in which Cain was called Master Mahan. Their first order of business was to murder the righteous Abel.

Fifth, in warning Cain that he was embarking upon an improper course of action, the Lord stated: "From this time forth thou shalt be the father of his [i.e., Satan's] lies. . . . And it shall be said in time to come—That these abominations were had from Cain." [^9] Here was an ominous warning. Not only would Cain do evil himself, if he continued his course, but, through him, organized crime would be built up and perpetuated in the earth. In this role, Cain would be the father of Satan's lies.

Sixth, in referring to Cain's open opposition, the Lord declared: "Thou shalt be called perdition." [^10] To become perdition, Cain would have to commit the unpardonable sin. "No one can commit the unpardonable sin," Joseph Smith explained, ". . . until he receives the Holy Ghost." [^11] Having received the Holy Ghost, one must then commit murder, wherein he sheds innocent blood. [^12] Said the Prophet: "The unpardonable sin is to shed innocent blood, or be accessory thereto." [^13] Innocent blood is the blood of the righteous. It is sanctified blood. And to shed innocent blood, one must come out in open opposition to the kingdom of God so as to assent unto the death of Christ. Explained Joseph Smith:

All sins shall be forgiven, except the sin against the Holy Ghost; for Jesus will save all except the sons of perdition. What must a man do to commit the unpardonable sin? He must receive the Holy Ghost, have the heavens opened unto him, and know God, and then sin against Him. After a man has sinned against the Holy Ghost, there is no repentance for him [that is, he cannot repent, for he is as much darkened as he was once enlightened. See DHC, II, p. 23]. He has got to say that the sun does not shine while he sees it; he has got to deny Jesus Christ when the heavens have been opened unto him, and to deny the plan of salvation with his eyes open to the truth of it; and from that time he begins to be an enemy. This is the case with many apostates of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

When a man begins to be an open enemy to this work, he hunts me, he seeks to kill me, and never ceases to thirst for my blood. He gets the spirit of the devil—the same spirit that they had who crucified the Lord of Life—the same spirit that sins against the Holy Ghost. You cannot save such persons; you cannot bring them to repentance; they make open war, like the devil, and awful is the consequence. [^14]

The Prophet's implication that many apostates in his day may have become sons of perdition seems to repudiate the view that only a very few will become such during their mortal probation. The Lord, for example, spoke of the fourth generation after His appearance upon the Western hemisphere as being close to, if not directly in, this category of sin. [^15] And in writing of this generation, Mormon said, "They did not dwindle in unbelief, but they did wilfully rebel against the Gospel of Christ." [^16] This would seem to imply that many in that day may have become sons of perdition. Likewise, those who rebel against the Lord in the latter period of His millennial reign are pictured as coming out in open opposition against the truth. [^17] Since they make open war with the Saints and seek to destroy them, it may be concluded that there will be many among them who will become sons of perdition.

Finally, the Lord warned Cain that unless he gave heed to His commandments, He would permit Satan's desires concerning him to be realized. He said: "And thou shalt rule over him." [^18] This statement seems to be an allusion to the future status of Cain and Lucifer. As a son of perdition, Cain will be resurrected and thus receive his physical body again from the grave. [^19] Nevertheless, the Second Death will have power over him. Joseph Smith explained of those who are consigned to this judgment: "As they concoct scenes of bloodshed in this world, so they shall rise to that resurrection which is as the lake of fire and brimstone." [^20] As a resurrected being in that state of total spiritual death, Cain will rule over Satan. "All beings who have bodies have power over those who have not," declared the Prophet. [^21] Undoubtedly this will be true of Cain's future relationship to Satan.

The Judgment of God Upon Cain

After Cain killed Abel, the Lord spake unto him, saying: "Where is Abel, thy brother?"

Cain replied: "I know not. Am I my brother's keeper?" The Book of Moses then reports:

And the Lord said: What hast thou done? The voice of thy brother's blood cries unto me from the ground.

And now thou shalt be cursed from the earth which hath opened her mouth to receive thy brother's blood from thy hand.

When thou tillest the ground it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength. A fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth.

And Cain said unto the Lord: Satan tempted me because of my brother's flocks. And I was wroth also; for his offering thou didst accept and not mine; my punishment is greater than I can bear.

Behold thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the Lord, and from thy face shall I be hid; and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to pass, that he that findeth me will slay me, because of mine iniquities, for these things are not hid from the Lord.

And I the Lord said unto him: Whosoever slayeth thee, vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold. And I the Lord set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should kill him.

And Cain was shut out from the presence of the Lord, and with his wife and many of his brethren dwelt in the land of Nod, on the east of Eden. [^22]

In the judgments which God pronounced upon Cain, the latter was driven out from the presence of the Lord. Cain lamented: "Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the Lord, and from thy face shall I be hid." [^23] In affirming this fact, the Book of Moses states: "And Cain was shut out from the presence of the Lord, and with his wife and many of his brethren dwelt in the land of Nod." [^24] To be shut out from the presence of the Lord means that Cain was deprived of the blessings of the priesthood. In their fall from their state of paradisiacal glory, Adam and Eve had been shut out from the presence of the Lord. [^25] But the Holy Priesthood which Adam received gave him "the privilege of receiving the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven." Those who are ordained to that priesthood may "have the heavens opened unto them . . . and . . . enjoy the communion and presence of God the Father, and Jesus the mediator of the new covenant." [^26] Cain's being shut out from the presence of the Lord by his transgression could only mean, first, that, after Adam had been shut out from the presence of God by the fall, he and others of his posterity (including Cain) had been given the Holy Priesthood, and thereby had communion with God and in some degree came again into His presence. Second, by his heinous crime, Cain was then denied the right of the Holy Priesthood by which he could come into the presence of the Lord.

Cain, the Father of Subversive Activities

After the death of Abel, Cain and his associates dwelt no longer among the posterity of Adam. Instead, they lived in the land of Nod, east of Eden, where Cain built a city which he named after his son, Enoch. [^27] In later generations another city would be built, by the seventh great patriarch from Adam, also called the city of Enoch. Though the latter city was righteous, the city built by Cain was a breeding place for wickedness and subversion. From the city of the patriarch Enoch, the Gospel was sent forth; and in that city the powers of the Holy Spirit were developed until the people were finally translated to a state of glory and power. But from the city of Enoch built by Cain, wickedness and subversion went forth until eventually corruption engulfed the world and it became necessary for God to cleanse the earth by the flood.

Of the perpetuation of secret, subversive activities among the seed of Cain and others who were not members of the church in ancient times, the Book of Moses states, as it relates the actions of Lamech, a fifth-generation descendant of Cain:

And Lamech said unto his wives, Adah and Zillah: Hear my voice, ye wives of Lamech, hearken unto my speech; for I have slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt.

If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech shall be seventy and seven fold;

For Lamech having entered into a covenant with Satan, after the manner of Cain, wherein he became Master Mahan, master of that great secret which was administered unto Cain by Satan; and Irad, the son of Enoch [and the great grandfather of Lamech], having known their secret, began to reveal it unto the sons of Adam;

Wherefore Lamech, being angry, slew him, not like unto Cain, his brother Abel, for the sake of getting gain, but he slew him for the oath's sake.

For, from the days of Cain, there was a secret combination, and their works were in the dark, and they knew every man his brother.

Wherefore the Lord cursed Lamech, and his house, and all them that had covenanted with Satan; for they kept not the commandments of God, and it displeased God, and he ministered not unto them, and their works were abominations, and began to spread among all the sons of men.

And it was among the sons of men, and among the daughters of men these things were not spoken, because that Lamech had spoken the secret unto his wives, and they rebelled against him, and declared these things abroad, and had not compassion;

Wherefore Lamech was despised, and cast out, and came not among the sons of men, lest he should die.

And thus the works of darkness began to prevail among all the sons of men.

And God cursed the earth with a sore curse, and was angry with the wicked, with all the sons of men whom he had made;

For they would not hearken unto his voice, nor believe on his Only Begotten Son, even him whom he declared should come in the meridian of time, who was prepared from before the foundation of the world. [^28]

This statement briefly relates the development of secret combinations in the antediluvian world. Of the condition existing in the days of the patriarch Enos, [^29] the grandson of Adam, the Book of Moses says:

And the children of men were numerous upon all the face of the land. And in those days Satan had great dominion among men, and raged in their hearts; and from thenceforth came wars and bloodshed; and a man's hand was against his own brother, in administering death [a lamentable condition, particularly in a patriarchal society], because of secret works, seeking for power [in that patriarchal system]. [^30]

To such extent had subversive practices developed in the world and so great was the power of these secret combinations that by the time Noah came on the scene,

. . . God saw that the wickedness of men had become great in the earth; and every man was lifted up in the imagination of the thoughts of his heart, being only evil continually. . . .

The earth was corrupt before God, and it was filled with violence.

And God looked upon the earth, and behold, it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth.

And God said unto Noah: The end of all flesh is come before me, for the earth is filled with violence, and behold I will destroy all flesh from off the earth. [^31]

The power of subversive organizations, with the corruption it fostered, had become so great that it was no longer right for God to forbear and withhold divine justice.

God's Judgment Expressed In The Flood

Reasons for the Flood

Though the Lord is a God of mercy and forbearance, He is also a God of justice and judgment. Prior to the flood, organized iniquity had gained such a hold upon the world that the righteous could not live in peace except by the direct intervention of God in their behalf. Noah, who was a king as well as a prophet and patriarch, was in jeopardy of his life; and it was necessary for God to extend His power to preserve Noah's life upon the earth. [^32] Spiritual darkness prevailed. As Enoch beheld in vision the wickedness of man,

. . . there came generation upon generation; and Enoch was high and lifted up, even in the bosom of the Father, and of the Son of Man; and behold, the power of Satan was upon all the face of the earth.

And he saw angels descending out of heaven; and he heard a loud voice saying: Wo, wo be unto the inhabitants of the earth.

And he beheld Satan; and he had a great chain in his hand, and it veiled the whole face of the earth with darkness; and he looked up and laughed, and his angels rejoiced. . . .

And it came to pass that the God of heaven looked upon the residue of the people, and he wept; and Enoch bore record of it, saying: How is it that the heavens weep, and shed forth their tears as the rain upon the mountains? . . .

The Lord said unto Enoch: Behold these thy brethren; they are the workmanship of mine hands, and I gave unto them their knowledge, in the day I created them; and in the Garden of Eden, gave I unto man his agency;

And unto thy brethren have I said, and also given commandment, that they should love one another, and that they should choose me, their Father; but behold, they are without affection, and they hate their own blood;

And the fire of mine indignation them; and in my hot displeasure will I send in the floods upon them fierce anger is kindled against them. . . .

Wherefore, I can stretch forth mine hands and hold all the creations which I have made; and mine eye can pierce them also, and among all the workmanship of mine hands there has not been so great wickedness as among thy brethren. . . .

And it came to pass that the Lord spake unto Enoch, and told Enoch all the doings of the children of men; wherefore Enoch knew, and looked upon their wickedness, and their misery, and wept and stretched forth his arms, and his heart swelled wide as eternity; and his bowels yearned; and all eternity shook.

And Enoch also saw Noah, and his family; that the posterity of all the sons of Noah should be saved with a temporal salvation;

Wherefore Enoch saw that Noah built an ark; and that the Lord smiled upon it, and held it in his own hand; but upon the residue of the wicked the floods came and swallowed them up. [^33]

There is a further reason, other than the rendering of judgments, why God swept the earth clean of its inhabitants by means of the flood. This reason was explained by John Taylor, who said:

. . . as men began to increase upon the earth, so wickedness increased until it was decided that they should be destroyed, that they might be deprived of the privilege of perpetuating their species. Why? Let us go back to the time when Satan rebelled against the Almighty and drew away one-third of the hosts of heaven. We find that there were pure spirits that stood the test and who had given to them the promise of bodies on this earth. Let us suppose that you and I were there as spirits, awaiting the privilege of taking bodies, and that we could see the wickedness and corruption that was going on upon the earth, and that we could see Prophets going about teaching the principles of righteousness and warning the people of judgments that should come, of the flood that should overwhelm them and of the prisons prepared in which the ungodly should be cast. And we say, "Father, you see the people on the earth that they are wicked and depraved, fallen and corrupt!" "Yes." "Is it right and just that we who have done no wrong should have to enter into such corrupt bodies and partake of the influences with which they are surrounded?" "No," says the Father, "it is not just, and I will cut them off, I will cause the floods to come upon them to destroy them, and I will send those wicked and disobedient spirits into prison," which he did.

Here was an act of justice. Some men who profess to be very wise, think God was unjust in this destroying so many of his creatures. They know nothing about it because they do not comprehend the law of God and the purposes of God. It was an act of justice and righteousness according to the eternal justice that dwells in the bosom of the Father. [^34]

Destiny of Those Who Perished in the Flood

Since the organized spirit of man continues to exist as a conscious being after its departure from this mortal tabernacle, it is necessary to understand the decrees of God concerning those who perished in the flood, if the full picture of the Lord's justice and mercy concerning them is to be seen. Here the Pearl of Great Price gives meaningful insights. Of those who would perish in the flood, God said to Enoch:

. . . their sins shall be upon the heads of their fathers; Satan shall be their father, and misery shall be their doom; and the whole heavens shall weep over them, even all the workmanship of mine hands; wherefore should not the heavens weep, seeing these shall suffer?

But behold, these which thine eyes are upon shall perish in the floods; and behold, I will shut them up; a prison have I prepared for them.

And that which I have chosen [i.e., Christ] hath pleaded before my face. Wherefore, he suffereth for their sins; inasmuch as they will repent in the day that my Chosen shall return unto me, and until that day they shall be in torment. [^35]

There is a difference between being consigned to hell in the spirit world and being sent to spirit prison. In the above statement, the Lord declares that the sins of those who perished in the flood would be upon the heads of their fathers, for they had turned from the Gospel and built up the corrupt practices by which their children were overcome. Consequently, those who perished in the flood were not as responsible for their plight as their fathers. Though they were overcome by the world and thus rejected the Gospel, the fact should be kept in mind that they did not build up the system of corruption to which they succumbed. In the final analysis, therefore, their condemnation would be less than that pronounced upon their fathers. Their fathers were consigned to hell, but those who perished in the flood were placed in spirit prison—a place of lesser condemnation in hell.

Of the wilfully perverse the scriptures say: "But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: which is the second death." [^36] Concerning this class of men, the Lord said in modern revelation: "These are they who are thrust down to hell." [^37] Excluding those who become sons of perdition, these are they who are redeemed eventually to telestial glory, after they have had their part in hell and suffered the judgments of God. Of such men in the early ages of the world, God said: "Wherefore, they have foresworn themselves, and, by their oaths, they have brought upon themselves [spiritual] death; and a hell I have prepared for them, if they repent not." [^38]

By contrast, those who perished in the flood were shut up in spirit prison, where the torment they suffered caused many to repent and turn to God. To Enoch the Lord said of the atoning power of Christ as it would affect them: "Wherefore, he suffereth for their sins; inasmuch as they will repent in that day that my Chosen shall return unto me, and until that day they shall be in torment." [^39] Unlike their more wicked fathers who were thrust down to hell, they were not required to wait for the final judgment to be released from the demands of divine justice. It may be that those in spirit prison who repented when Christ went to the spirit world after His crucifixion were also resurrected, after the faithful were redeemed. Having declared that at Christ's resurrection "the saints arose and were crowned at the right hand of the Son of Man, with crowns of glory," the Book of Moses says: "And as many of the spirits as were in prison came forth, and stood on the right hand of God; and the remainder [i.e., those who were thrust down to hell] were reserved in chains of darkness until the judgment of the great day." [^40] It should be noted, however, that those who were sent to spirit prison and later repented are only redeemed to the terrestrial kingdom in the resurrection. Joseph Smith wrote by revelation of some of the inhabitants of the terrestrial world: "Behold, these are . . . the spirits of men kept in prison, whom the Son visited, and preached the gospel unto them, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh; who received not the testimony of Jesus in the flesh, but afterwards received it." [^41] Though they were not responsible for building up wicked practices in the world, they did not have faith to overcome the world and be sanctified by the truth and power of the Gospel while in the flesh. Thus they failed to prepare themselves for celestial glory.

Certain generalizations can be drawn from the above discussion: First, to obtain celestial glory in the resurrection, man must utilize the power of the Gospel to overcome the world. Of those who attain the celestial kingdom, a revelation states: "These are they . . . who overcome by faith." [^42] In the day of judgment, God does not balance on a scale the good deeds of a man who believes in Christ against his evil deeds to see whether he has more good than evil within him. The Lord declared to Adam that no unclean thing can dwell in the presence of God. [^43] This means that to dwell in the presence of God man must repent of all his sins and overcome the world, and be sanctified by the powers of the Gospel so that he is pure and holy. His former sins will then be forgotten, [^44] not balanced against his good deeds in the day of judgment. Second, those who come forth to the terrestrial kingdom lack the faith to overcome the world. They do not become perverse creatures, so far as their basic desires are concerned. Instead, they adapt themselves to the social order and go along with the masses rather than stand alone for Christ in the strength of the Holy Spirit. If the social order is corrupt, they become victims of its influence, not having the faith to rise above it and attain the righteousness which the Gospel makes possible. These reasons indicate that they are spiritually deficient, and they must be corrected by the judgments of God in spirit prison to attain terrestrial glory. Third, God consigns to hell only those who allow their desires to center upon the corrupt things of the world and who wilfully pervert the ways of truth and right. This class of men are not redeemed until the last resurrection, after they have been thrust down to hell; and in their redemption, they are brought forth to the telestial kingdom of glory.

Cain And The Negro People

Negroes are Descendants of Cain

From the information given in the Pearl of Great Price it is apparent that Cain is the father of the Negro people. The Book of Moses reports that "the Lord set a mark upon Cain." [^45] Though this statement does not say that the mark consisted of a black skin, it does say at a later point in the record that "there was a black skin come upon all the children of Canaan." [^46] That the Canaanites were the descendants of Cain is evident from the further statement that "the seed of Cain were black." [^47] Joseph Smith also spoke specifically of the Negroes as being "sons of Cain." [^48] On another occasion, he referred to them as "descendants of Ham," [^49] who evidently married a Canaanite woman and thus perpetuated the seed of Cain through the flood.

Negroes Denied the Right to Bear the Priesthood

Abraham observed that "from Ham sprang that race which preserved the curse in the land." [^50] The curse to which he referred consisted of certain restrictions in the rights and blessings of the priesthood. These restrictions apparently had their origin in the pronouncements of God upon Cain after he killed his brother Abel, and the denial of the priesthood placed upon Cain was also denied his posterity. The Book of Moses declares that the blessings of the Gospel were not taken by missionaries to the seed of Cain, and that the seed of Cain "had no place" among the other people of the earth. [^51] With specific reference to the denial of the priesthood to the seed of Cain, Abraham said, as he wrote of the first Pharaoh of Egypt:

Now this king of Egypt was a descendant from the loins of Ham, and was a partaker of the blood of the Canaanites by birth.

From this descent sprang all the Egyptians, and thus the blood of the Canaanites was preserved in the land.

The land of Egypt being first discovered by a woman, who was the daughter of Ham, and the daughter of Egyptus, which in the Chaldean signifies Egypt, which signifies that which is forbidden.

When this woman discovered the land it was under water, who afterward settled her sons in it; and thus, from Ham, sprang that race which preserved the curse in the land. . . .

Pharaoh, being a righteous man . . . [was] blessed . . . with the blessings of the earth, and with the blessings of wisdom, but cursed . . . as pertaining to the Priesthood.

Now, Pharaoh being of that lineage by which he could not have the right of the Priesthood, notwithstanding the Pharaohs would fain claim it from Noah, through Ham, therefore my father was led away by their idolatry. . . . [^52]

It is clear from this statement that there is a difference between priesthood rights and civil, political, or economic rights, as they relate to the Negro people. Even though the posterity of Cain were denied the right to bear the priesthood, some were blessed in other ways. Politically, the name "Pharaoh signifies king of royal blood." [^53] As a descendant of Ham, Pharaoh was honored with political authority. It also states that he was blessed "with the blessings of the earth, and with the blessings of wisdom." [^54] Joseph Smith registered a similar view of the Negro people when he said of Negroes under slavery in comparison with those who were free:

Elder [Orson] Hyde inquired the situation of the negro. I replied, they came into the world slaves, mentally and physically [under the order of things that then prevailed in the South]. Change their situation with the whites, and they would be like them. They have souls, and are subjects of salvation. Go into Cincinnati or any city, and find an educated negro, who rides in his carriage, and you will see a man who has risen by the powers of his own mind to his exalted state of respectability. The slaves in Washington are more refined than many in high places, and the black boys will take the shine off many of those they brush and wait on.

Had I anything to do with the negro, I would confine them by strict law to their own species, and put them on a national equalization. [^55]

Modern Statements on the Status of the Negro

The former decree of God concerning the Negro has been reaffirmed in modern times. According to George Q. Cannon, the Prophet Joseph Smith taught the following doctrine: "That the seed of Cain could not receive the Priesthood nor act in any of the offices of the Priesthood until the seed of Abel should come forward and take precedence over Cain's off-spring." [^56] Other reports confirm the fact that Joseph Smith taught that the Negro cannot yet receive the priesthood. [^57] In May, 1879, President John Taylor and other prominent men in the Church who had known the Prophet personally discussed the status of the Negro. Among these men was Zebedee Coltrin, who was intimately associated with Joseph Smith and had been appointed by him a member of the First Council of Seventy, when that Council was organized in this dispensation. President Taylor opened the discussion with the comment:

Some parties have said to me that Zebedee Coltrin had talked to the Prophet Joseph Smith on this subject, and they said that he (Coltrin) thought it was not right for them [i.e., Negroes] to have the Priesthood. Whereupon, Joseph Smith said to him that Peter, on a certain occasion had a vision wherein he saw heaven open, and a certain vessel descended unto him, as it had been a great sheet knit at the four corners, and let down to the earth, wherein were all manner of four footed beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air. And there came a voice to him, Rise Peter! Kill and eat, but Peter said, Not so Lord; for I have never eaten anything that is common or unclean. And the voice spake unto him again the second time, What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common (speaking of the Gentiles).

President Taylor then asked Brother Coltrin, "Did the Prophet Joseph Smith ever make such a statement to you?"

Brother Coltrin, "No sir, he never said anything of the kind in his life to me."

President Taylor, "What did he say?"

Brother Coltrin, "The spring that we went up in Zion's Camp, in 1834, Brother Joseph sent Brother J. P. Greene and me out south to gather up means to assist in gathering out the Saints from Jackson County, Mo. On our return home, we got into a conversation about the Negro having the right to the Priesthood, and I took the side that he had no right. Brother Greene argued that he had. The subject got so warm between us that he said he would report me to Brother Joseph when we got home, for preaching false doctrine, which doctrine that I advocated was that the Negro could not hold the Priesthood. 'All right,' I said, 'I hope you will.' And when we got home to Kirtland, we both went in to Brother Joseph's office together, to make our returns; and Brother Greene was as good as his word, and reported to Brother Joseph that I had said that the Negro could not hold the Priesthood. Brother Joseph kind of dropped his head and rested it on his hand for a minute, and then said, 'Brother Zebedee is right, for the Spirit of God saith the Negro has no right nor cannot hold the Priesthood.' He made no reference to scripture at all. But such was his decision. I don't recollect ever having any conversation with him [on the subject] afterwards, but I have heard him say in public, that no person having the least particle of Negro blood can hold the Priesthood." . . .

President Abraham O. Smoot said, "D. W. Patten, Warren Parrish, and Thomas B. Marsh were laboring in the Southern States in 1835 and 1836. There were Negroes who made application for baptism, and the question arose with them whether Negroes were entitled to hold the Priesthood; and by those brethren it was decided they would not confer the Priesthood until they had consulted the Prophet Joseph. Subsequently they communicated with him and his decision, as I understood, was they were not entitled to the Priesthood, nor yet to be baptized without the consent of their masters. In after years, when I became acquainted with Joseph myself in Far West, about the year 1838, I received from Joseph substantially the same instructions. It was on my application to him what should be done with the Negro in the South, as I was preaching to them. He said I could baptize them by consent of their masters, but not to confer the Priesthood upon them." [^58]

Those men who knew Joseph Smith and received their understanding of the priesthood and its rights from him taught the same doctrine that he expressed. Brigham Young stated:

Cain conversed with his God every day, and knew all about the plan of creating this earth, for his father told him. But, for the want of humility, and through jealousy, and an anxiety to possess the kingdom, and to have the whole of it under his own control, and not allow any body else the right to say one word, what did he do? He killed his brother. The Lord put a mark on him. . . . When all the other children of Adam have had the privilege of receiving the Priesthood, and of coming into the kingdom of God, and of being redeemed from the four quarters of the earth, and have received their resurrection from the dead, then it will be time enough to remove the curse from Cain and his posterity. He deprived his brother of the privilege of pursuing his journey through life, and of extending his kingdom by multiplying upon the earth; and because he did this, he is the last to share the joys of the kingdom of God. [^59]

The fact that descendants of Cain are presently denied the right to hold the priesthood is not based wholly upon the actions of their fathers. Deeper reasons go back into the pre-earth life, to the appointments that were made in sending spirits into the world to obtain bodies among the several families of the earth. Here one must understand the great doctrinal points taught in the Pearl of Great Price concerning the placement of man on earth. The problem must be viewed in light of the demands of eternal truth and justice, not merely in light of an immediate issue, for man is an eternal entity and God deals with him accordingly. In a letter to a student at Brigham Young University, President David O. McKay expressed his views on the subject as follows:

In your letter to me of October 28, 1947, you say that you and some of your fellow students have been "perturbed about the question of why the Negro race cannot hold the Priesthood."

In reply I send you the following thoughts that I expressed to a friend on the same subject:

Stated briefly your problem is simply this, . . . Since, as Paul states, "the Lord hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on the face of the earth," why is there shown in the Church of Christ discrimination against the colored race? . . .

I believe, as you suggest, that the real reason dates back to our pre-existent life. This means that the true answer to your question (and it is the only one that has given me any satisfaction) has its foundations in faith . . . (1) Faith in a God of justice, (2) Faith in the existence of an eternal plan of salvation for all God's children. . . .

It was the Lord who said that Pharaoh, the first governor of Egypt, though a righteous man, blessed with the blessings of the earth, with the blessings of wisdom . . . "could not have the right of the Priesthood."

Now if we have faith in the justice of God, we are forced to the conclusion that this denial was not a deprivation of merited right. It may have been entirely in keeping with the eternal plan of salvation for all the children of God.

Revelation assures us that this plan antedates man's mortal existence, extending back to man's pre-existent state. . . .

Manifestly, from this revelation (Abraham 3:22-23) we may infer two things: first that there were among those spirits different degrees of intelligence, varying grades of achievement, retarded and advanced spiritual attainments; second that there were no national distinctions among these spirits such as Americans, Europeans, Asiatics, Australians, etc. Such "bounds of habitation" would have to be "determined" when the spirits entered upon their earthly existence or second estate. . . .

If in their eagerness to take upon themselves bodies, the spirits were willing to come through any lineage for which they were worthy, or to which they were attracted, then they were given the full reward of merit, and were satisfied, yes, even blessed.

Accepting this theory of life, we have a reasonable explanation of existing conditions in the habitations of man. How the law of spiritual attraction works between the spirit and the expectant parents has not been revealed, neither can finite minds fully understand. . . .

By the operation of some eternal law which men do not yet understand, spirits come through the parentage for which they are worthy—some as Bushmen of Australia, some as Solomon Islanders, some as Americans, as Europeans, as Asiatics, etc., with all the varying degrees of mentality and spirituality manifest in the parents of the different races that inhabit the earth.

Of this we may be sure, each was satisfied and happy to come through the lineage for which he or she was prepared.

The Priesthood was given to those chosen as leaders. There were many who could not receive it, yet who knew that it was possible for them at some time in the eternal plan to achieve that honor. Even those who knew that they would not be prepared to receive it during their mortal existence were content in the realization that they could attain every earthly blessing, progress intellectually and spiritually and possess to a limited degree the blessings of wisdom.

George Washington Carver was one of the noblest souls that ever came to earth. He held a close kinship with his Heavenly Father, and rendered a service to his fellow men such as few have ever excelled. For every righteous endeavor, for every good deed performed in his useful life, George Washington Carver will be rewarded, and so will every other man—red, white, black, or yellow; for God is no respecter of persons.

Sometime in God's eternal plan, the Negro will be given the right to hold the Priesthood. . . . [^60]

From a statement of the First Presidency to President Ernest L. Wilkinson of the Brigham Young University, the position of the Church may also be ascertained. On that occasion, they wrote:

The attitude of the Church with reference to Negroes remains as it has always stood. It is not a matter of the declaration of policy but of direct commandment from the Lord, on which is founded the doctrine of the Church from the days of its organization, to the effect that Negroes may become members of the Church but that they are not entitled to the Priesthood at the present time. . . .

The position of the Church regarding the Negro may be understood when another doctrine of the Church is kept in mind; namely, that the conduct of spirits in the pre-mortal existence has some determining effect upon the conditions and circumstances under which these spirits take on mortality, and that while the details of the principle have not been made known, the principle itself indicates that the coming to this earth and taking on mortality is a privilege that is given to those who maintain their first estate; and that the worth of the principle is so great that spirits are willing to come to earth and take on bodies no matter what the handicap may be as to the kind of bodies they are to secure; and that among the handicaps, failure of the right to enjoy in mortality the blessings of the priesthood, is a handicap which spirits are willing to assume in order that they might come to earth. Under this principle there is no injustice whatsoever involved in this deprivation as to the holding of the Priesthood by Negroes. [^61]

Apostasy Since The Time Of The Flood

Evil Practices of Cain Perpetuated Among the Jaredites

Though the flood cleansed the earth of wickedness, it was not long before man again began to depart from the ways of the Lord, and God found it necessary to confound the language of man at the tower of Babel. From that place, men were scattered throughout the earth. Among those who left the tower of Babel were Jared and his brother, with a company of associates. Because of their faith and righteous desires, the Lord did not confound their language. Instead, God directed them to take their journey to the Western hemisphere, which had been formed after the flood when the earth was divided in the days of Peleg, a great-great-grandson of Shem, the son of Noah. [^62] In making their journey, the Jaredites were actually going back to the land where life was originally placed upon the earth—the land where Adam dwelt.

The Jaredites took with them a record that gave an account of the history of the world before the flood, including an account of "the creation of the world, and also of Adam." [^63] This record was probably much like the account of the ante-diluvian world which Abraham had in his possession. [^64] On the record which the Jaredites possessed was an account of the secret combinations that had been built up before the flood, by which evil and designing men obtained kingdoms and power. These murderous combinations were the same that Cain had instituted while yielding to the darkening influences of Satan.

Having arrived in the promised land, the Jaredites eventually established a system of government beginning with Orihah, one of the sons of Jared. Some time later, Omer, the great-great-grandson of Jared, was made their king. During his reign, his son Jared rebelled against him and sought to displace his father. For a time he was successful, but the remaining sons of Omer finally succeeded in re-establishing their father upon the throne. The record then states:

And now Jared became exceeding sorrowful because of the loss of the kingdom, for he had set his heart upon the kingdom and the glory of the world.

Now the daughter of Jared being exceeding expert, and seeing the sorrows of her father, thought to devise a plan whereby she could redeem the kingdom unto her father.

Now the daughter of Jared was exceeding fair. And it came to pass that she did talk with her father, and said unto him: Whereby hath my father so much sorrow? Hath he not read the record which our fathers brought across the great deep? Behold, is there not an account concerning them of old, that they by their secret plans did obtain kingdoms and great glory? [^65]

Following the ancient practices, the daughter of Jared suggested that her father invite Akish, a man to whom she was attracted, to come so that she might dance for him and that he might then desire to have her for his wife. However, the conditions of marriage would be that Akish must bring Jared the head of Omer, the king. Akish agreed to do the bidding of Jared. At this point the record states:

And it came to pass that Akish gathered in unto the house of Jared all his kinsfolk, and said unto them: Will ye swear unto me that ye will be faithful unto me in the thing which I shall desire of you?

And it came to pass that they all sware unto him, by the God of heaven, and also by the heavens, and also by the earth, and by their heads, that whoso should vary from the assistance which Akish desired should lose his head; and whoso should divulge whatsoever thing Akish made known unto them, the same should lose his life.

And it came to pass that thus they did agree with Akish. And Akish did administer unto them the oaths which were given by them of old who also sought power, which had been handed down even from Cain, who was a murderer from the beginning.

And they were kept up by the power of the devil to administer these oaths unto the people, to keep them in darkness, to help such as sought power to gain power, and to murder, and to plunder, and to lie, and to commit all manner of wickedness and whoredoms.

And it was the daughter of Jared who put it into his heart to search up these things of old; and Jared put it into the heart of Akish; wherefore, Akish administered it unto his kindred and friends, leading them away by fair promises to do whatsoever thing he desired.

And it came to pass that they formed a secret combination, even as they of old; which combination is most abominable and wicked above all, in the sight of God. [^66]

The evil design of Jared would probably have been carried out had not the Lord warned Omer in a dream to flee. But when Jared was "anointed king over the people, by the hand of wickedness," [^67] Akish continued his secret works, and Jared was murdered upon his throne. Thereafter secret combinations continued to flourish until the opposing factions largely destroyed themselves, and Omer was established again as king. [^68] But the works of darkness did not cease among the Jaredites, for they eventually gained such power that Moroni wrote, as he abridged the history of the Jaredites: "They have caused the destruction of this people of whom I am now speaking." [^69] Thus the subversive activities which were instituted initially by Cain were again successful in bringing to destruction an ancient civilization.

Apostasy in the Days of Abraham

The forces of spiritual darkness were also at work among the people with whom Abraham associated. Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of Genesis gives the following statement of God to Abraham concerning the apostate tendencies of that day:

And God talked with him, saying, My people have gone astray from my precepts, and have not kept mine ordinances, which I gave unto their fathers;

And they have not observed mine anointing, and the burial or baptism wherewith I commanded them;

But have turned from the commandment, and taken unto themselves the washing of children, and the blood of sprinkling;

And have said that the blood of the righteous Abel was shed for sins; and have not known wherein they are accountable before me. [^70]

The Book of Abraham corroborates this view of the apostate conditions that then prevailed and adds further insights into the nature of the corrupt practices. In reporting that his fathers had turned away from the Lord, Abraham said:

My fathers having turned from their righteousness, and from the holy commandments which the Lord their God had given unto them, unto the worshiping of the gods of the heathen, utterly refused to hearken to my voice;

For their hearts were set to do evil, and were wholly turned to the god of Elkenah, and the god of Libnah, and the god of Mahmackrah, and the god of Korash, and the god of Pharaoh, king of Egypt;

Therefore they turned their hearts to the sacrifice of the heathen in offering up their children unto their dumb idols, and hearkened not unto my voice, but endeavored to take away my life by the hand of the priest of Elkenah. The priest of Elkenah was also the priest of Pharaoh.

Now, at this time it was the custom of the priest of Pharaoh, the king of Egypt, to offer up upon the altar which was built in the land of Chaldea, for the offering unto these strange gods, men, women, and children.

And it came to pass that the priest made an offering unto the god of Pharaoh, and also unto the god of Shagreel, even after the manner of the Egyptians. Now the god of Shagreel was the sun.

Even the thank-offering of a child did the priest of Pharaoh offer upon the altar which stood by the hill called Potiphar's Hill, at the head of the plain of Olishem.

Now, this priest had offered upon this altar three virgins at one time, who were the daughters of Onitah, one of the royal descent directly from the loins of Ham. These virgins were offered up because of their virtue; they would not bow down to worship gods of wood or of stone, therefore they were killed upon this altar, and it was done after the manner of the Egyptians. [^71]

Like the three virtuous daughters of Onitah, Abraham would not bow down and worship the gods of wood and stone which the apostates of the day had devised. Evidently for this reason he also was singled out as a victim for their sacrificial altar. He wrote:

And it came to pass that the priests laid violence upon me, that they might slay me also, as they did those virgins upon this altar; and that you may have a knowledge of this altar, I will refer you to the representation at the commencement of this record.

It was made after the form of a bedstead, such as was had among the Chaldeans, and it stood before the gods of Elkenah, Libnah, Mahmackrah, Korash, and also a god like unto that of Pharaoh, king of Egypt.

That you may have an understanding of these gods, I have given you the fashion of them in the figures at the beginning [of the Book of Abraham], which manner of the figures is called by the Chaldeans Rahleenos, which signifies hieroglyphics. [^72]

As they were about to slay him, Abraham prayed fervently to God. The vision of the Almighty then filled his soul, and the angel of God's presence stood beside him and unloosed his bands. The Lord then spoke to Abraham, saying:

Abraham, Abraham, behold, my name is Jehovah, and I have heard thee, and have come down to deliver thee, and to take thee away from thy father's house, and from all thy kins-folk, into a strange land which thou knowest not of;

And this because they have turned their hearts away from me, to worship the god of Elkenah, and the god of Libnah, and the god of Mahmackrah, and the god of Korash, and the god of Pharaoh, king of Egypt; therefore I have come down to visit them, and to destroy him who hath lifted up his hand against thee, Abraham, my son, to take away thy life. [^73]

So "the Lord broke down the altar of Elkenah, and the gods of the land, and utterly destroyed them, and smote the priest that he died; and there was great mourning of Chaldea, and also in the court of Pharaoh." [^74]

Nevertheless, man in general continued his departure from the ways of the Lord. When God sent a severe famine throughout all the land of Chaldea, Abraham's father turned for a time from his idolatrous ways. [^75] But when better times arrived, he returned to the worship of heathen gods. [^76] Having left Ur and traveled to a land which he called Haran, [^77] where he stayed for a time, Abraham then took his journey to the land of Canaan, which the Lord promised to give as an everlasting inheritance to his descendants. As he approached this land, he observed the apostate condition of the people. Later he wrote: "We had already come into the borders of the land of the Canaanites, and I offered sacrifice there in the plains of Moreh, and called on the Lord devoutly, because we had already come into the land of this idolatrous nation." [^78] The contrast of religious principles here reflected continued down the years, setting the stage for conflict between righteousness and wickedness. The seeds of apostasy, having been planted, continued to flourish, even among the elect posterity of Abraham as they sought to establish themselves upon their promised. Israel was beset continually with the sin of worshiping false gods.

Secret Combinations Among the Nephites

Because the Pearl of Great Price reports the setting up of secret combinations in the antediluvian world, it is important that we trace their development and note the effects of their influence upon later cultures. Though they were a more righteous branch of Israel, the Nephites were confronted with the problem of secret combinations until, eventually, these corrupt practices spread among the people and gained sufficient power to bring them to destruction. [^79] At an early time in Nephite history, Jacob, the brother of Nephi, warned that Satan "stirreth up the children of men unto secret combinations of murder and all manner of secret works of darkness." [^80] Later, when the Nephites found the twenty-four gold plates containing the record of the Jaredites, [^81] it was learned that they contained a knowledge of the secret combinations that were practiced among the Jaredites, which they had learned from Cain and those who built up the murderous combinations before the flood. In transmitting these records to his son Helaman, Alma therefore admonished him to keep the oaths, covenants, and agreements of these secret combinations, with their secret signs, etc., from the Nephites, "Lest peradventure they should fall into darkness also and be destroyed." [^82] Alma encouraged his son to stress to the Nephites that it was because of their murders, robbings, plunderings, and wickedness that the Jaredites were destroyed. [^83]

Nevertheless, secret combinations were developed among the Nephites, particularly among the Gadianton robbers. But, as Mormon explained in his history: "Those secret oaths and covenants did not come forth unto Gadianton from the records [of the Jaredite civilization] which were delivered unto Helaman; but behold, they were put into the heart of Gadianton by that same being who did entice our first parents to partake of the forbidden fruit—yea, that same being who did plot with Cain, that if he would murder his brother Abel it should not be known unto the world." [^84] Revelation from Satan, as well as revelation from the Lord, is a reality that is plainly attested to by scripture. This system of secret combinations finally destroyed the Nephites as a people. Moroni therefore wrote of secret combinations as he abridged the history of the Jaredites, saying: "And they have caused the destruction . . . of the people of Nephi." [^85]

The Jews Reject Christ

Even before the Israelites entered the promised land, Moses declared that they would not prolong their days upon it, but would "utterly perish" as a nation, and be scattered as a people "few in number among the heathen." [^86] By the time Jesus was born, only the tribe of Judah remained in Palestine, with fragments of some other tribes. Having failed to fulfil their obligations to God, most of the tribes of Israel had been scattered throughout the earth. But the story of Israel's rejection of God does not end here. From the earliest ages of the world, Israel had been looking for the coming of Christ as the promised Redeemer and Lawgiver. When He came, however, priestcraft and spiritual darkness prevailed among the leaders of the Jews to such a degree that He was rejected by those who professed to await His coming. With sorrow for their wickedness and hardness of heart, Jesus cried out, "O Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!" [^87] The Jews had rejected their God; and shortly thereafter they would have Him crucified, as a final act of refusal to fulfil their obligations as a chosen people. Thereafter they would be broken off and scattered. Jesus thus declared: "Behold, your house is left unto you desolate." [^88]

This is the setting for Christ's prophetic statement concerning the Jews as recorded in Joseph Smith I, in the Pearl of Great Price. As Jesus viewed the Jewish people in light of the prophetic picture concerning them—that they would be scattered, but gathered again in the latter days to become in reality His chosen people—He declared: "I say unto you, that ye shall not see me henceforth and know that I am he of whom it is written by the prophets, until ye shall say: Blessed is he who cometh in the name of the Lord, in the clouds of heaven, and all the holy angels with him." [^89] Upon hearing this statement, His disciples who believed in Him then knew that the fulfilment of Israel's destiny would be postponed until the latter days, when Christ would come again to His own and this time be accepted by them.

Until then, the judgments of God would be poured out upon Jerusalem. The record states: "And Jesus went out, and departed from the temple; and his disciples came to him, for to hear him, saying: Master, show us concerning the buildings of the temple, as thou hast said—They shall be thrown down, and left unto you desolate." [^90]

Jesus then said unto them: "See ye not all these things, and do ye not understand them? Verily I say unto you, there shall not be left here, upon this temple, one stone upon another that shall not be thrown down." [^91]

Having made this explanation, Christ left His disciples and went upon the Mount of Olives. But again they followed Him; and as He sat upon the Mount, they inquired: "Tell us when shall these things be which thou hast said concerning the destruction of the temple, and the Jews." [^92] Christ then explained in greater detail the events related to the destruction of Jerusalem. In modern times, His great declaration has been restored to its original purity by revelation through Joseph Smith.

Jesus began His explanation to His disciples with a note of solemn warning:

Take heed that no man deceive you;

For many shall come in my name, saying—I am Christ—and shall deceive many;

Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you, and ye shall be hated of all nations, for may name's sake;

And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another;

And many false prophets shall arise, and shall deceive many;

And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold:

But he that remaineth steadfast and is not overcome, the same shall be saved. [^93]

These statements of warning Christ directed specifically to His disciples, for they were to be fulfilled in their lifetime. That many did come claiming to be Christ is attested to by sacred and secular history. There was, for instance, Simon Magus, who drew many people after him, [^94] Menander, Dositheus, and Theudas; the false apostles referred to by Paul; [^95] and others including Hymeneus and Philetus. [^96] Josephus, a contemporary, made record of "a body of wicked men, who deceived and deluded the people under pretense of divine inspiration, who prevailed with the multitude to act like madmen, and went before them into the wilderness, pretending that God would there show them the signals of victory." [^97]

Among the persecutions that befell the apostles and early saints, the arraignment of Peter and John before the Jewish council may be cited. [^98] Paul was brought to answer false charges before Gallio, [^99] Felix, [^100] and Agrippa. [^101] Peter and John were imprisoned. [^102] Paul and Silas were beaten. [^103] Some were put to death, including Stephen [^104] and James the brother of John. [^105] Having cited such instances of persecution, Dr. Adam Clarke wrote of the fulfilment of Christ's prediction:

But if we look beyond the book of Acts of the Apostles, to the bloody persecutions under Nero, we shall find these predictions still more amply fulfilled; in these, numberless Christians fell, besides those two champions of the faith, Peter and Paul. And it was, as says Tertullian, a war against the very name of Christ; for he who was called Christian had committed crime enough in bearing the name to be put to death. So true were our Savior's words that they should be hated of all men for His Name's sake. [^106]

This was a time when iniquity abounded, causing a withdrawal of the Spirit of the Lord from the lives of men. Without the influence of that Spirit there is no genuine love, and with its withdrawal the love of many grew cold. This was the time of the universal apostasy. Since the time of Adam, the priesthood had been on the earth in some form and degree. But after the crucifixion of Christ, the forces of iniquity developed until they eventually overwhelmed the righteous. It was an awesome time indeed, and only those who were not overcome were saved in the kingdom of the Father.

In speaking of the destruction of Jerusalem, Jesus gave His disciples a sign by which they might know the time of this great judgment. He said: "When you, therefore, shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, then you shall stand in the holy place." [^107] On another occasion, Christ was more specific. "And when ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with armies," He declared, "then know that the desolation thereof is nigh." [^108] "This was a specific sign that none could misunderstand," James E. Talmage wrote. "Daniel the prophet had foreseen the desolation and the abominations thereof, which comprised the forcible cessation of temple rites, and the desecration of Israel's shrine by pagan conquerors." [^109]

The fulfilment of Daniel's prophecy was to be heralded by the encompassing of Jerusalem by armies. Then all who would escape would have to make haste. Jesus said:

Then let them who are in Judea flee into the mountains;

Let him who is on the housetop flee, and not return to take anything out of his house;

Neither let him who is in the field return back to take his clothes;

And wo unto them that are with child, and unto them that give suck in those days;

Therefore, pray ye the Lord that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the Sabbath day;

For then, in those days, shall be great tribulation on the Jews, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, such as was not before sent upon Israel, of God, since the beginning of their kingdom until this time; no, nor ever shall be sent upon Israel. [^110]

Christ's warning to His disciples to flee was so generally heeded that according to early Christian writers, not one believer perished in the awful siege that Jesus foretold would come upon the Jews. [^111] As the army of Rome arrived at the walls of Jerusalem, all who believed the declarations of the Master fled beyond Jordan. There followed a siege which culminated in the utter destruction of Jerusalem and the temple. Josephus estimates the number slain in Jerusalem alone to be over one million (possible an exaggeration), and in surrounding areas a third as many more. Tens of thousands of Jews were taken captive and afterward sold into slavery, or slain by wild beasts or in gladiatorial combat to amuse Roman spectators. Jerusalem was "trodden down of the Gentiles," to await a future time of redemption, when the "times of the Gentiles" are fulfilled. [^112] But this was not all. "All things which have befallen them are only the beginning of the sorrows which shall come upon them," Jesus continued. "And except those days should be shortened, there should none of their flesh be saved; but for the elect's sake, according to the covenant [which God made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob], those days shall be shortened." [^113] In the troublous times of the last days, the Jewish people would be annihilated unless God would remember His promises to the ancient patriarchs.

The period following the destruction of Jerusalem would also be fraught with difficulties and apostasy. Jesus said:

Behold, these things I have spoken unto you concerning the Jews; and again, after the tribulation of those days which shall come upon Jerusalem, if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there, believe him not;

For in those days there shall also arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch, that, if possible, they shall deceive the very elect, who are the elect according to the covenant.

Behold, I speak these things unto you for the elect's sake; and you also shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars; see that ye be not troubled, for all I have told you must come to pass; but the end is not yet.

Behold, I have told you before;

Wherefore, if they shall say unto you: Behold, he is in the desert; go not forth; Behold, he is in the secret chambers; believe it not. [^114]

These declarations, foretelling conditions that would exist after the destruction of Jerusalem, were made by Jesus to avert false impressions of His Second Coming. There would be wars and rumors of wars. But these were not the national struggles that would herald the day of His coming in glory. He therefore cautioned: "See that ye be not troubled, for all I have told you must come to pass; but the end is not yet." [^115] Christ's coming would not be in that day. They were not to believe those who would seek to lead them into the desert on the pretext of finding Him. Nor were they to retire to the reclusive hovels of the hermit or to the secret chamber to find Him in a life of seclusion.

Subversive Organizations in the Last Days

The Pearl of Great Price foretells "the end of the world" in the last days, or the destruction of the wicked. [^116] It also indicates that prior to that day "iniquity shall abound," [^117] with the same challenge to men to endure in righteousness and overcome as was given to the righteous before the flood and to those who lived in the days of spiritual decline following the crucifixion of Christ. The end of the antediluvian world was precipitated by the development of subversive practices that made necessary the judgments of God. In like manner ended the Jaredite and Nephite cultures. The precedents of the past may therefore help Latter-day Saints better understand the judgments that are yet future, if man fails to heed the lessons of history and the admonitions of the Lord's servants in these days.

Of particular concern to modern man is the inspired prediction that secret combinations will prevail in this day; and, if unchecked, they will bring "to pass the destruction of all people" in the last days. [^118] Moroni therefore warned the Gentiles of modern times: "Wherefore, the Lord commandeth you, when ye shall see these things come among you that ye shall awake to a sense of your awful situation, because of this secret combination which shall be among you; or woe be unto it, because of the blood of them who have been slain; for they cry from the dust for vengeance upon it, and also upon those who built it up." [^119]

The Prophet Joseph Smith also spoke of the rise of subversive organizations in the last days, and warned against them. In speaking of such developments, John Taylor said in 1881:

I am sorry to see the murderous influence prevailing throughout the world, and perhaps this may be a fitting occasion to refer to some of these matters. The manifestations of turbulence and uneasiness which prevail among the nations of the earth are truly lamentable. . . . These feelings which tend to do away with all right, rule, and government, and correct principles are not from God, or many of them are not. This feeling of communism and nihilism, aimed at the overthrow of rulers and men in position and authority, arises from a spirit of diabolism, which is contrary to every principle of the Gospel of the Son of God. . . .

These things are beginning to spread among and permeate the nations of the earth. Do we expect them? Yes. These secret combinations were spoken of by Joseph Smith, years and years ago. I have heard him time and time again tell about them, and he stated that when these things began to take place the liberties of this nation would begin to be bartered away. We see signs of weakness which we lament, and we would to God that our rulers would be men of righteousness, and that those who aspire to position would be guided by honorable feelings—to maintain inviolate the Constitution and operate in the interest, happiness, well-being, and protection of the whole community. But we see signs of weakness and vacillation. We see a policy being introduced to listen to the clamor of mobs and of unprincipled men who know not of what they speak, nor whereof they affirm, and when men begin to tear away with impunity one plank after another from our Constitution, by and by we shall find that we are struggling with the wreck and ruin of the system which the forefathers of this nation sought to establish in the interests of humanity. [^120]

Erastus Snow also reported that Joseph Smith foretold the rise of subversive organizations in the latter days. Of their influence, eventually, in this land, Elder Snow said:

. . . the Prophet Joseph Smith told us that the time would come when the extremists of the land, who are undermining the fabric of freedom, and little by little breaking under foot the guarantees of human liberty which have been raised up by our heavenly Father, through the instrumentality of wise men whom he raised up to establish the institutions of our country; these extremists of the land are gradually undermining these safeguards of human liberty, and plotting to carry out their nefarious designs in their endeavoring to oppose the people of God, and to destroy the institutions of heaven out of the earth. The time will come when the voice of such men will be heard in the land, like the roaring of a tornado, so that the still small voice speaking from the heavens cannot be heard; and the voice of the loud-mouth, plotting destruction to human liberty and freedom will be heard all over the land, and everybody raise up and say, it is the voice of God; and they will be willing to stand and look on and see the Saints butchered and Prophets martyred, and our institutions wrested from us and wasted away. But when that time arrives, the Lord will come forth from his hiding place and "vex the nations;" he will raise his arm, and it shall not be turned back, and he will stay the hand raised against his people to destroy them and their institutions. [^121]

The destruction of subversive powers in the last days must come that the Lord may redeem the elect seed of Israel and establish among them His divine institutions. He said: "Wherefore, for this cause, that my covenants may be fulfilled which I have made unto the children of men [concerning the establishment of the divine patriarchal order again upon the earth among the modern remnants of Israel], that I will do unto them while they are in the flesh, I must needs destroy the secret works of darkness, and of murders and of abominations." [^122] Thus, while iniquity may abound for a time, in the judgments of the last days God will bring about His righteous purposes among men, and His kingdom will go forth unto victory.

Conclusion

Man has departed repeatedly from the ways of the Lord since the earliest ages of the world. The first of Adam's children rejected the Gospel and began to develop carnal, sensual, and devilish practices in their midst. [^123] From that day to the present, the only time the world has been free of carnal systems and practices was immediately after the flood. That period of innocence, however, did not last very long. Abraham was confronted with apostate forces in the society of his day; and his father was led away into idolatry. The history of ancient Israel is concerned largely with the deviations of that chosen people from the laws of God. To such depths of wickedness and spiritual darkness did they fall that they finally crucified their God; and as a result, they were cut off as the favored people of the Lord. Shortly thereafter, the forces of apostasy became universal in their influence. From Adam to John the beloved apostle of Christ, some measure of priesthood had been upon the earth. But in the universal apostasy, all divine authority was taken away from man in mortality.

Though the first of Adam's children rejected the Gospel, Cain and his associates went even further into the paths of spiritual darkness. They built up an organized system of crime and violence that developed in power and influence until it was necessary for the Lord to send the flood to cleanse the earth of iniquity. Cain's transgressions were made more serious by the fact that he held the Holy Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God; and in committing murder, he shed innocent blood and thereby became a son of perdition. Cain's act of wilful transgression, coupled with the arrangements that were made in the pre-earth councils to send spirits to earth through lineages that would reflect the justice of God, resulted in a divine edict that the posterity of Cain were to be denied the right of receiving the priesthood and its higher spiritual blessings until such time as God decrees that they should have those rights extended to them.

Since Cain was the first to develop secret combinations in the world, he became the father of subversive activities. After the flood, a similar system to that which he instituted was developed among the Jaredites. Though the Nephites suppressed the knowledge of the secret oaths and combinations that had come down to them in the records of the Jaredites, subversive activities were also developed among them. Both the Jaredites and the Nephites were finally destroyed as a result of the influence of such organizations. In relating the story of their destruction, Moroni warned the modern gentiles that such organizations would be present in their midst; and if they were not checked, subversive systems would eventually bring to pass the destruction of freedom in all lands, nations, and countries. [^124] The Pearl of Great Price helps us to understand better the significance of this warning.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Acts 3:21; D&C 27:6; 86:10.
[^2] Smith 2:5-6.
[^3] Ibid., 2:8.
[^4] Ibid., 2:10.
[^5] DHC, IV, p. 536.
[^6] Smith 2:11-12.
[^7] Ibid., 2:15-20. (Italics in the original.)
[^8] Ibid., 2:26.
[^9] Ibid., 2:20.
[^10] Ibid., 2:21-22.
[^11] Ibid., 2:24-25.
[^12] Ibid., 2:27-28.
[^13] Ibid., 2:29-33.
[^14] DHC, IV, pp. 536-537.
[^15] Ibid., p. 537.
[^16] See Hyrum L. Andrus, Joseph Smith the Man and the Seer, pp. 70-71.
[^17] Smith 2:34-35.
[^18] DHC, IV, p. 537.
[^19] Ibid., pp. 537-538.
[^20] Smith 2:42.
[^21] Ibid., 2:43.
[^22] Ibid., 2:44-47.
[^23] Ibid., 2:48-50.
[^24] Ibid., 2:51.
[^25] Ibid., 2:52-54.
[^26] Ibid., 2:59.
[^27] Ibid., 2:60.
[^28] See D&C 133:55.
[^29] So stated Oliver Cowdery in an account he wrote of the coming of John the Baptist. See MA, I, (October, 1834), p. 15; TS, II (November 1, 1840), pp. 201-202. This account is reproduced in a footnote at the end of Smith 2.
[^30] Smith 2:68-74. (Italics in the original.)
[^31] See D&C 84:26-27.
[^32] Ibid., 8:18.
[^33] Ibid., 7:24-26, 28, 32-34, 36, 41-43.
[^34] JD, XXII, pp. 301-302. See also ibid., XXI, pp. 17-18; XXIV, pp. 290-291; XXVI, pp. 90-91.
[^35] Moses 7:37-39.
[^36] Revelation 21:8. To have their part in hell where they suffer the powers of the second death does not necessarily mean that they remain there permanently. It means that they have their part under such judgments. Eventually death and hell deliver up the dead which are in them. See ibid., 20:13.
[^37] D&C 76:84.
[^38] Moses 6:29.
[^39] Ibid., 7:39.
[^40] Ibid., 7:56-57.
[^41] D&C 76:72-74.
[^42] Journal History, October 25, 1831.
[^43] D&C 68:12. Here eternal life evidently means only the glory of the celestial kingdom, not a fulness of that glory.
[^44] Journal and Memoirs of Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner, pp. 2-3; Young Woman's Journal, XVI, pp. 556-557.
[^45] From an account of early incidents of history written by Joseph Knight, Sr., Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^46] DHC, I, pp. 323-324.
[^47] Journal History, September 27, 1831.
[^48] Journal of Orson Pratt, August 26, 1833 and September 8, 1833, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^49] See DHC, II, pp. 379, 383, 386, and 391.
[^50] Ibid., p. 381. See also pp 380, 382, 383, and 392.
[^51] TPJS, p. 110.
[^52] D&C 110:11-16.
[^53] It is not incompatible with history to say that Israel was scattered throughout the nations of the earth and to hold at the same time that a significant body of the Northern Kingdom of Israel has remained intact as a people. When the Northern Kingdom of Israel was destroyed in 721 B. C., only a part of the people were carried away into Assyria and later migrated northward to become the lost tribes of Israel. These were the leading families of that kingdom. According to old cuneiform records which still exist and which the writer's colleague, Dr. Sidney B. Sperry, personally studied and translated, they numbered but 27,290 people. Those who remained intermarried with the foreign elements who were moved into the country by the Assyrian kings, and this body of people became the Samaritans who are frequently referred to in the New Testament. Subsequently, these mixed elements mingled among other peoples of the earth. The Kingdom of Judah was also destroyed and its people scattered among the nations. Thus, the tribes of Israel have been scattered, though a significant body may still remain intact as a definite people.
[^54] 3 Nephi 16:3.
[^55] 2 Nephi 29:12-13.
[^56] D&C 133:26-32.
[^57] Ibid., 110:12.
[^58] Ibid., 27:6-7.
[^59] Abraham 3:12, 14; D&C 132:30.
[^60] TPJS, p. 189; Romans 9:4.
[^61] Abraham 2:11.
[^62] Ibid., 2:9-11.
[^63] See Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, p. 203.
[^64] D&C 107:19. This statement of the powers of the Melchizedek Priesthood was made in 1835, before the coming of Elijah. It was therefore a statement of the existing powers of the Melchizedek Priesthood.
[^65] Journal History, October 25, 1831.
[^66] TPJS, p. 337.
[^67] D&C 110:15.
[^68] TPJS, p. 330. (Italics in the original.)
[^69] Ibid., p. 337.
[^70] Ibid., p. 321.
[^71] Ibid., p. 323.
[^72] Ibid., p. 330.
[^73] Ibid., pp. 337-338.
[^74] Smith 2:40.
[^75] Acts 3:21.
[^76] Ibid., 3:22-23.
[^77] DHC, IV, pp. 492-493.
[^78] MA, I (February, 1835), p. 80.
[^79] MA, I (July, 1835), p. 156.
[^80] Ibid., p. 157.
[^81] MA, I (April, 1835), pp. 109-112.
[^82] Smith 2:36.
[^83] This conclusion is expressed by Joseph Fielding Smith. See Doctrines of Salvation, III, p. 10.
[^84] Malachi 3:1-5.
[^85] See Matthew 11:10; Mark 1:2; Luke 1:17; TPJS, p. 318.
[^86] D&C 42:34-36.
[^87] According to an explanation made by Joseph Smith, the coming of the Lord to His temple is not an event associated with the restoration of the keys and powers of the priesthood upon the earth in this dispensation. His appearance in His temple during this period of time did not therefore fulfill the prediction of Malachi. Instead, the Lord's appearance, as predicted by Malachi, was said by the Prophet to be associated with the consummation of the work of the last days, in making those final preparations that are required before Christ can properly take the reins of government and of power in inaugurating His millennial rule in the earth. This fact, with Joseph Smith's explanation, will be developed more fully at a later point in this chapter.
[^88] Malachi 3:2.
[^89] DHC, VI, p. 366.
[^90] Malachi 3:4.
[^91] See verse 5.
[^92] Smith 2:40.
[^93] Isaiah 11:12-13.
[^94] 2 Nephi 30:8-18.
[^95] DHC, IV, p. 360.
[^96] 3 Nephi 20:12.
[^97] D&C 113:7-8.
[^98] Ibid., 113.
[^99] Isaiah 11:1-10.
[^100] D&C 113:1-2.
[^101] Ibid., 113:3-4.
[^102] Ibid., 113:5-6.
[^103] Isaiah 11:10.
[^104] D&C 86:8-10.
[^105] Ibid., 113:4.
[^106] Ibid., 124:58; 132:30-31.
[^107] Ibid., 113:6.
[^108] See Isaiah 55:3-5; Jeremiah 23:5-6; 33:15-16; Ezekiel 37:25; Hosea 3:4-5; Zechariah 6:11-13.
[^109] TPJS, p. 339. At the time of Joseph Smith's death, some Saints at Nauvoo apparently entertained the idea that the latter-day David spoken of above would be one of the Prophet's descendants. But whether Joseph Smith actually taught this to be a fact is open to question, and the conclusion that he did should be postponed until further information is found. However, Oliver B. Huntington, who lived in the Mansion House at Nauvoo in the fall of 1844, wrote of Joseph Smith's youngest son, David Hyrum Smith, who was born after the Prophet's death: "At the time of his birth, it was intimated by old Mrs. Durphee and others that Joseph the Prophet had said that he (David Hyrum, which name Joseph gave him before his death) was to be the David the Bible speaks of to rule over Israel forever, which David spoken of most people took to be old King David."—Diary of Oliver B. Huntington, last date mentioned being February 25, 1845. If the Prophet did look for one of his descendants to be the David who will inherit in eternity those rights that King David would otherwise have inherited except for his transgressions, then Joseph Smith must have considered himself as descending from David, for those rights are to be given to a descendant of David in the latter days.
[^110] Smith 2:38-39.
[^111] DHC, IV, p. 599.
[^112] Ibid., VI, p. 250.
[^113] Ibid., p. 254.
[^114] TPJS, p. 159.
[^115] Romans 9:4.
[^116] TPJS, p. 159.
[^117] Smith 2:37.
[^118] D&C 29:11.
[^119] Smith 2:37.
[^120] Joel 2:28-29.
[^121] 1 Nephi 13:13, 15, 19; 3 Nephi 20:27; 21:4.
[^122] See 3 Nephi 20:27.
[^123] Smith 2:41.
[^124] Joel 2:28-32.
