Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1967)

CHAPTER 13

THE RESTORATION OF ALL THINGS

The restoration of all things has been spoken of by all the holy prophets since the beginning of the world. [^1] In this great restoration, the following must take place: All gospel truths and powers must be restored, with all keys and powers of the Holy Priesthood that have been ordained for this earth; the divine patriarchal order must be restored and developed in the earth, with the lineal rights of the priesthood given to the appropriate branches of Israel who must be gathered and given their rightful place within that divine system; the earth must be restored geographically to the same general form which it possessed when it was first created; and, finally, the earth must be renewed and brought back to a state of paradisiacal glory. Only when all these things have been accomplished will Christ reign personally upon the earth and the millennial era be instituted fully on earth.

The Commencement Of The Restoration Of All Things

The First Vision

Joseph Smith's story of the first vision has been accepted as latter-day scripture and placed in the Pearl of Great Price. In his account, the Prophet wrote first of an era of religious excitement in his neighborhood that stimulated his interest in the quest for salvation:

It commenced with the Methodists, but soon became general among all the sects in that region of country. Indeed, the whole district of country seemed affected by it, and great multitudes united themselves to the different religious parties, which created no small stir and division amongst the people, some crying, "Lo, here!" and others, "Lo, there!" Some were contending for the Methodist faith, some for the Presbyterian, and some for the Baptist.

For, notwithstanding the great love which the converts to these different faiths expressed at the time of their conversion, and the great zeal manifested by the respective clergy, who were active in getting up and promoting this extraordinary scene of religious feeling, in order to have everybody converted, as they were pleased to call it, let them join what sect they pleased; yet when the converts began to file off, some to one party and some to another, it was seen that the seemingly good feelings of both the priests and the converts were more pretended than real; for a scene of great confusion and bad feeling ensued—priest contending against priest, and convert against convert; so that all their good feelings one for another, if they ever had any, were entirely lost in a strife of words and a contest about opinions. [^2]

At this time, Joseph Smith was fourteen years of age. Parts of his father's family had joined the Presbyterian church, but Joseph kept himself aloof from all parties while attending their several meetings as often as he could. Of his feelings, which at times "were deep and often poignant," [^3] he later said:

In the midst of this war of words and tumult of opinions, I often said to myself: What is to be done? Who of all these parties are right; or, are they all wrong together? If any one of them be right, which is it, and how shall I know it? [^4]

In another account, the Prophet wrote:

. . . upon inquiring [about] the plan of salvation, I found that there was a great clash in religious sentiment; if I went to one society they referred me to one plan, and another to another; each one pointing to his own particular creed as the summum bonum of perfection. Considering that all could not be right, and that God could not be the author of so much confusion, I determined to investigate the subject more fully, believing that if God had a Church it would not be split up into factions, and that if He taught one society to worship one way, and administer in one set of ordinances, He would not teach another, principles which were diametrically opposed. [^5]

While struggling with the inconsistencies he found in the positions taken by the contesting parties, Joseph read the Epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse, which states: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him." Of the impact it had upon his mind, he later wrote:

Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did; for how to act I did not know, and unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, I would never know; for the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passage of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible. [^6]

At length he came to the conclusion that he must either remain in darkness and confusion or ask of God, as James directs. Having determined to inquire of the Lord, he retired to a wooded area near his father's home on the morning of a beautiful, clear day, early in the spring of 1820. Joseph later wrote:

After I had retired to the place where I had previously designed to go, having looked around me, and finding myself alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desire of my heart to God. I had scarcely done so, when immediately I was seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me, and had such an astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction.

But, exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out of the power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction—not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world, who had such marvelous power as I had never before felt in any being—just at this moment of great alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me.

It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son, Hear Him!

My object in going to inquire of the Lord was to know which of all the sects was right, that I might know which to join. No sooner, therefore, did I get possession of myself, so as to be able to speak, than I asked the Personages who stood above me in the light, which of all the sects was right—and which I should join.

I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong; and the Personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors were all corrupt; that: "they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof."

He again forbade me to join with any of them; and many other things did he say unto me, which I cannot write at this time. When I came to myself again, I found myself lying on my back, looking up into heaven. When the light had departed, I had no strength; but soon recovering in some degree, I went home. [^7]

The Prophet's first vision influenced his life significantly. "I had now got my mind satisfied so far as the sectarian world was concerned—that it was not my duty to join with any of them, but to continue as I was until further directed," he wrote. "I had found the testimony of James to be true—that a man who lacked wisdom might ask of God, and obtain and not be upbraided." [^8] The latter point was a particularly important discovery. It was a principle that Joseph Smith had the spiritual maturity to apply with marked success, over and over again during his lifetime. But even though the Prophet's mind was then settled on the important issues that had confronted him, he was not allowed to be at ease in his new-found knowledge. "It seems as though the adversary was aware, at a very early period of my life, that I was destined to prove a disturber and an annoyer of his kingdom," Joseph commented; "else why should the powers of darkness combine against me? Why the opposition and persecution that arose against me, almost in my infancy?" [^9] Of the nature of this early opposition, he wrote:

Some few days after I had this vision, I happened to be in company with one of the Methodist preachers, who was very active in the before mentioned religious excitement [probably the Rev. George Lane]; and, conversing with him on the subject of religion, I took occasion to give him an account of the vision which I had had. I was greatly surprised at his behavior; he treated my communication not only lightly, but with great contempt, saying it was all of the devil, that there were no such things as visions or revelations in these days; that all such things had ceased with the apostles, and that there would never be any more of them.

I soon found, however, that my telling the story had excited a great deal of prejudice against me among the professors of religion, and was the cause of great persecution, which continued to increase; and though I was an obscure boy, only between fourteen and fifteen years of age, and my circumstances in life such as to make a boy of no consequence in the world, yet men of high standing would take notice sufficient to excite the public mind against me, and create a bitter persecution; and this was common among all the sects—all united to persecute me. [^10]

The difficult situation in which he found himself caused Joseph serious reflection. He observed:

However, it was nevertheless a fact that I had beheld a vision. I have thought since, that I felt much like Paul, when he made his defense before King Agrippa, and related the account of the vision he had when he saw a light, and heard a voice; but still there were but few who believed him; some said he was dishonest, others said he was mad; and he was ridiculed and reviled. But all this did not destroy the reality of his vision. He had seen a vision, he knew he had, and all the persecution under heaven could not make it otherwise; and though they should persecute him unto death, yet he knew, and would know to his latest breath, that he had both seen a light and heard a voice speaking unto him, and all the world could not make him think or believe otherwise.

So it was with me. I had actually seen a light, and in the midst of that light I saw two Personages, and they did in reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil against me falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my heart: Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision; and who am I that I can withstand God, or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen? For I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it; at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation. [^11]

The Visitations of the Angel Moroni

Between the spring of 1820 and the fall of 1823, Joseph Smith continued to assist his father on the family farm, while suffering severe persecution at the hands of all classes of men. Being sensitive by nature, he withdrew from associating with the general populace of Palmyra and mingled for a time with rougher elements of society. "I was guilty of levity, and sometimes associated with jovial company, etc., not consistent with that character which ought to be maintained by one who was called of God as I had been," he confessed. "But," he added, "this will not seem very strange to any one who recollects my youth, and is acquainted with my native cheery temperment." [^12] While pondering seriously this course in his life, he again sought the Lord in fervent prayer. He said:

In consequence of these things, I often felt condemned for my weakness and imperfections; when, on the evening of . . . the . . . twenty-first of September, [1823], after I had retired to my bed for the night, I betook myself to prayer and supplication to Almighty God for forgiveness of all my sins and follies, and also for a manifestation to me, that I might know of my state and standing before him; for I had full confidence in obtaining a divine manifestation, as I previously had one.

While I was thus in the act of calling upon God, I discovered a light appearing in my room, which continued to increase until the room was lighter than at noonday, when immediately a personage appeared at my bedside, standing in the air, for his feet did not touch the floor.

He had on a loose robe of most exquisite whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever seen; nor do I believe that any earthly thing could be made to appear so exceedingly white and brilliant. His hands were naked, and his arms also, a little above the wrist; so, also were his feet naked, as were his legs, a little above the ankles. His head and neck were also bare. I could discover that he had no other clothing on but this robe, as it was open, so that I could see into his bosom.

Not only was his robe exceedingly white, but his whole person was glorious beyond description, and his countenance truly like lightning. The room was exceedingly light, but not so very bright as immediately around his person. When I first looked upon him, I was afraid; but the fear soon left me.

He called me by name, and said unto me that he was a messenger sent from the presence of God to me, and that his name was Moroni; that God had a work for me to do; and that my name should be had for good and evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues, or that it should be both good and evil spoken of among all people. [^13]

The Angel Moroni appeared to Joseph Smith for several reasons: First, the Prophet explained:

This messenger proclaimed himself to be an angel of God, sent to bring the joyful tidings that the covenant which God made with ancient Israel was at hand to be fulfilled, that the preparatory work for the second coming of the Messiah was speedily to commence; that the time was at hand for the Gospel in all its fullness to be preached in power, unto all nations that a people might be prepared for the Millennial reign. I was informed that I was chosen to be an instrument in the hands of God to bring about some of His purposes in this glorious dispensation. [^14]

Second, Joseph Smith said: "I was also informed concerning the aboriginal inhabitants of this country and shown who they were, and from whence they came; a brief sketch of their origin, progress, civilization, laws, governments, of their righteousness and iniquity, and the blessings of God being finally withdrawn from them as a people, was made known unto me." [^15] In writing an account of Moroni's appearance, Oliver Cowdery stated that these things were shown to Joseph Smith by vision, so that he saw the ancient inhabitants of the Western hemisphere in the same way that Moses and other prophets were shown the peoples of the earth. [^16]

Third, Moroni revealed the hiding place of a sacred record. Joseph said:

He said there was a book deposited, written upon gold plates, giving an account of the former inhabitants of this continent, and the source from whence they sprang. He also said that the fulness of the everlasting Gospel was contained in it, as delivered by the Savior to the ancient inhabitants;

Also, that there were two stones in silver bows—and these stones, fastened to a breastplate, constituted that is called the Urim and Thummim—deposited with the plates; and the possession and use of these stones were what constituted "seers" in ancient or former times; and that God had prepared them for the purpose of translating the book. [^17]

In another account, Joseph Smith said of these ancient records and their accompanying articles:

These records were engraven on plates which had the appearance of gold, each plate was six inches wide and eight inches long, and not quite so thick as common tin. They were filled with engravings, in Egyptian characters, and bound together in a volume as the leaves of a book, with three rings running through the whole. The volume was something near six inches in thickness, a part of which was sealed. The characters on the unsealed part were small, and beautifully engraved. The whole book exhibited many marks of antiquity in its construction, and much skill in the art of engraving. With the records was found a curious instrument, which the ancients called "Urim and Thummim," which consisted of two transparent stones set in the rim of a bow fastened to a breast plate. [^18]

Of the contents of this ancient record, Joseph Smith wrote:

In this important and interesting book the history of ancient America is unfolded, from its first settlement by a colony that came from the Tower of Babel, at the confusion of languages to the beginning of the fifth century of the Christian Era. We are informed by these records that America in ancient times has been inhabited by two distinct races of people. The first were called Jaredites, and came directly from the Tower of Babel. The second race came directly from the city of Jerusalem, about six hundred years before Christ. They were principally Israelites, of the descendants of Joseph. The Jaredites were destroyed about the time that the Israelites came from Jerusalem, who succeeded them in the inheritance of the country. The principal nation of the second race fell in battle towards the close of the fourth century. The remnant are the Indians that now inhabit this country. This book also tells us that our Savior made His appearance upon this continent after His resurrection; that He planted the Gospel here in all its fulness, and richness, and power, and blessing; that they had Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers, and Evangelists; the same order, the same priesthood, the same ordinances, gifts, powers, and blessings, as were enjoyed on the eastern continent, that the people were cut off in consequence of their transgressions, that the last of their prophets who existed among them was commanded to write an abridgment of their prophecies, history &c, and to hide it up in the earth, and that it should come forth and be united with the Bible for the accomplishment of the purposes of God in the last days. [^19]

Finally, the angel quoted several biblical passages relating to the last days and the work to be accomplished in preparing for the second coming of Christ. These scriptures and the angel's explanations will be treated at a later point in this chapter.

Joseph Smith continued the narrative:

Again, he told me, that when I got those plates of which he had spoken—for the time that they should be obtained was not yet fulfilled—I should not show them to any person; neither the breastplate with the Urim and Thummim; only to those to whom I should be commanded to show them; if I did I should be destroyed. While he was conversing with me about the plates, the vision was opened to my mind that I could see the place where the plates were deposited, and that so clearly and distinctly that I knew the place again when I visited it. [^20]

Having completed his message, the angel withdrew from the Prophet. Of his departure, Joseph said: "I saw the light in the room begin to gather immediately around the person of him who had been speaking to me, and it continued to do so until the room was again left dark, except just around him; when, instantly I saw, as it were, a conduit open right up into heaven, and he ascended till he entirely disappeared, and the room was left as it had been before this heavenly light had made its appearance." [^21]

After the angel had departed, says the Prophet,

I lay musing on the singularity of the scene, and marveling greatly at what had been told to me by this extraordinary messenger; when, in the midst of my meditation, I suddenly discovered that my room was again beginning to get lighted, and in an instant, as it were, the same heavenly messenger was again by my bedside.

He commenced, and again related the very same things which he had done at his first visit, without the least variation; which having done, he informed me of great judgments which were coming upon the earth, with great desolations by famine, sword, and pestilence; and that these grievous judgments would come on the earth in this generation. Having related these things, he again ascended as he had done before.

By this time, so deep were the impressions made on my mind, that sleep had fled from my eyes, and I lay overwhelmed in astonishment at what I had both seen and heard. But what was my surprise when again I beheld the same messenger at my bedside, and heard him rehearse or repeat over again to me the same things as before; and added a caution to me, telling me that Satan would try to tempt me (in consequence of the indigent circumstances of my father's family), to get the plates for the purpose of getting rich. This he forbade me, saying that I must have no other object in view in getting the plates but to glorify God, and must not be influenced by any other motive than that of building his kingdom; otherwise I could not get them.

After this third visit, he again ascended into heaven as before, and I was again left to ponder on the strangeness of what I had just experienced; when almost immediately after the heavenly messenger had ascended from me for the third time, the cock crowed, and I found that day was approaching, so that our interviews must have occupied the whole of that night. [^22]

Shortly after the angel Moroni had departed for the third time, Joseph arose and went about his usual tasks for the day, laboring with his father in the field. But his strength was so exhausted that he was unable to work; and his father, noticing his weakened condition, told him to return home. Joseph wrote:

I started with the intention of going to the house; but, in attempting to cross the fence out of the field where we were, my strength entirely failed me, and I fell helpless on the ground, and for a time was quite unconscious of anything.

The first thing that I can recollect was a voice speaking unto me, calling me by name. I looked up, and beheld the same messenger standing over my head, surrounded by light as before. He then again related unto me all that he had related to me the previous night, and commanded me to go to my father and tell him of the vision and commandments which I had received.

I obeyed; I returned to my father in the field, and rehearsed the whole matter to him. He replied to me that it was of God, and told me to go and do as commanded by the messenger. I left the field, and went to the place where the messenger had told me the plates were deposited; and owing to the distinctness of the vision which I had had concerning it, I knew the place the instant that I arrived there. [^23]

The hill where the ancient record lay hidden was near the village of Manchester, Ontario county, New York. "On the west side of the hill not far from the top, under a stone of considerable size, lay the plates, deposited in a stone box," the Prophet related. "This stone was thick and rounding in the middle on the upper side, and thinner towards the edges, so that the middle part of it was visible above the ground, but the edge all around was covered with earth." [^24] Continuing, Joseph wrote:

Having removed the earth, I obtained a lever, which I got fixed under the edge of the stone, and with a little exertion raised it up. I looked in, and there indeed did I behold the plates, the Urim and Thummim, and the breastplate, as stated by the messenger. The box in which they lay was formed by laying stones together in some kind of cement. In the bottom of the box were laid two stones crossways of the box, and on these stones lay the plates and the other things with them.

I made an attempt to take them out, but was forbidden by the messenger, and was again informed that the time for bringing them forth had not yet arrived, neither would it, until four years from that time; but he told me that I should come to that place precisely in one year from that time, and that he would there meet with me, and that I should continue to do so until the time should come for obtaining the plates.

Accordingly, as I had been commanded, I went at the end of each year, and at each time I found the messenger there, and received instruction and intelligence from him at each of our interviews, respecting what the Lord was going to do, and how and in what manner his kingdom was to be conducted in the last days. [^25]

Joseph Smith was given the gold plates and their related articles on September 22, 1827. "Having gone as usual at the end of another year to the place where they were deposited," he wrote, "the same heavenly messenger delivered them up to me with this charge: that I should be responsible for them; that if I should let them go carelessly, or through any neglect of mine, I should be cut off; but that if I would use all my endeavors to preserve them, until he, the messenger, should call for them, they should be protected." [^26] Joseph soon learned why such strict instructions were given to him concerning the ancient record. "No sooner was it known that I had them," the Prophet reported, "than the most strenuous exertions were used to get them from me." "But by the wisdom of God, they remained safe in my hands, until I had accomplished by them what was required at my hand," he concluded. "When, according to arrangements, the messenger called for them, I delivered them up to him." [^27]

The Restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood

During the translation of the Book of Mormon, the Aaronic Priesthood was restored by John the Baptist, who appeared as a resurrected being [^28] to Joseph-Smith and Oliver Cowdery, his scribe, on the bank of the Susquehanna River in Pennsylvania, May 15, 1829, and committed the keys and powers of that priesthood unto them. The Prophet was then living in Harmony, Pennsylvania. By that time, he had translated the account of Christ's ministry to the Nephites and His instructions to them concerning baptism. [^29] These instructions caused Joseph and Oliver to ponder the subject as it concerned them. The Prophet wrote:

We still continued the work of translation, when, in the ensuing month (May, 1829), we on a certain day went into the woods to pray and inquire of the Lord respecting baptism for the remission of sins, that we found mentioned in the translation of the plates. While we were thus employed, praying and calling upon the Lord, a messenger from heaven descended in a cloud of light, and having laid his hands upon us, he ordained us, saying:

Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness.

He said this Aaronic Priesthood had not the power of laying on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, but that this should be conferred on us hereafter; and he commanded us to go and be baptized, and gave us directions that I should baptize Oliver Cowdery, and that afterwards he should baptize me.

Accordingly we went and were baptized. I baptized him first, and afterwards he baptized me—after which I laid my hands upon his head and ordained him to the Aaronic Priesthood, and afterwards he laid his hands on me and ordained me to the same Priesthood—for so we were commanded.

The messenger who visited us on this occasion and conferred this Priesthood upon us, said that his name was John, the same that is called John the Baptist in the New Testament, and that he acted under the direction of Peter, James and John, who held the keys of the Priesthood of Melchizedek, which Priesthood, he said, would in due time be conferred on us, and that I should be called the first Elder of the Church, and he (Oliver Cowdery) the second. It was on the fifteenth day of May, 1829, that we were ordained under the hand of this messenger, and baptized.

Immediately on our coming up out of the water after we had been baptized, we experienced great and glorious blessings from our Heavenly Father. No sooner had I baptized Oliver Cowdery, than the Holy Ghost fell upon him, and he stood up and prophesied many things which should shortly come to pass. And again, so soon as I had been baptized by him, I also had the spirit of prophecy, when, standing up, I prophesied concerning the rise of the Church, and many other things connected with the Church, and this generation of the children of men. We were filled with the Holy Ghost, and rejoiced in the God of our salvation.

Our minds being now enlightened, we began to have the scriptures laid open to our understandings, and the true meaning and intention of their more mysterious passages revealed unto us in a manner which we never could attain to previously, nor ever before had thought of. [^30]

As indicated by the words in italics, the Aaronic Priesthood holds the keys of the ministering of angels, of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins. Thus it has the right to administer the preparatory Gospel [^31] by which believers in the message of redemption become sons and daughters of Jesus Christ and are introduced into the divine patriarchal order. One who holds this priesthood ministers under the spirit of Elias (which is the spirit of the Gospel, or the spirit of the divine patriarchal order which has its basis in the Gospel and over which Noah, as Elias, has presided since the flood) to prepare repentant souls to receive the greater revelation of God, as given to those who become members of the divine family of Christ and are organized in the patriarchal order of that eternal family. In explaining that the Aaronic Priesthood functions under the spirit of Elias to prepare the people for the greater revelation of God, Joseph Smith said:

It is the spirit of Elias I wish . . . to speak of; and in order to come at the subject, I will bring some of the testimony from the Scriptures and give my own.

In the first place, suffice it to say, I went into the woods to inquire of the Lord, by prayer, His will concerning me, and I saw an angel, and he laid his hands upon my head, and ordained me to a Priest after the order of Aaron, and to hold the keys of this Priesthood, which office was to preach repentance and baptism for the remission of sins, and also to baptize. But I was informed that this office did not extend to the laying on of hands for the giving of the Holy Ghost; that that office was a greater work, and was to be given afterward; but that my ordination was a preparatory work, or a going before, which was the spirit of Elias; for the spirit of Elias was a going before to prepare the way for the greater, which was the case with John the Baptist. He came crying through the wilderness, "Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight." And they were informed, if they could receive it, it was the spirit of Elias; and John was very particular to tell the people, he was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light.

He told the people that his mission was to preach repentance and baptize with water; but it was He that should come after him that should baptize with fire and the Holy Ghost.

If he had been an imposter, he might have gone to work beyond his bounds, and undertook to have performed ordinances which did not belong to that office and calling under the spirit of Elias.

The spirit of Elias is to prepare the way for a greater revelation of God, which is the Priesthood of Elias, or the Priesthood that Aaron was ordained unto. And when God sends a man into the world to prepare for a greater work, holding the keys of the power of Elias, it was called the doctrine of Elias, even from the early ages of the world.

John's mission was limited to preaching and baptizing; but what he did was legal. . . .

In the case of Philip when he went down to Samaria, when he was under the spirit of Elias, he baptized both men and women. . . .

That person who holds the keys of Elias hath a preparatory work. . . .

This is the Elias spoken of in the last days, and here is the rock upon which many split, thinking the time was past in the days of John and Christ, and no more to be. But the spirit of Elias was revealed to Joseph Smith to sanctify and seal the Saints as individuals to celestial glory, but not to a fulness of glory. Such power seems to be inherent in the Melchizedek Priesthood restored by Peter, James and John. Joseph Smith explained in 1831, "that the order of the High Priesthood was, that they have power given them to seal up the Saints unto eternal life." [^32] The order of the High Priesthood is the program of that priesthood—that program of salvation that is administered by exercising the rights and powers that are inherent in the High Priesthood.

There were many instances in the early days of the Church when the basic sealing powers of the Melchizedek Priesthood were employed to seal the Saints as individuals to eternal life. In 1831, a revelation said: "Of as many as the Father shall bear record, to you shall be given power to seal them up unto eternal life." [^33] Earlier, in the forepart of February, 1831, Joseph Smith sealed to eternal life a group of Saints at Kirtland, Ohio. [^34] While in Missouri in the summer of 1831, he also sealed the members of the Colesville branch to eternal life. [^35] In reporting the sealing of certain brethren, in January, 1833, Joseph Smith said: "By the power of the Holy Ghost I pronounced them all clean from the blood of this generation; but if any of them should sin wilfully after they were thus cleansed, and sealed up unto eternal life, they should be given over unto the buffetings of Satan until the day of redemption." [^36]

This practice was not limited to the Prophet's personal ministry, but was carried on by some missionaries as they visited the several branches of the Church. In January, 1832, Jared Carter sealed to eternal life a group of Saints at Benson, Vermont. [^37] Lyman Johnson and Orson Pratt sealed a group at Charleston, Vermont, in August, 1833, and another group at Bath, New Hampshire, during the following month. [^38]

The basic sealing powers of the Melchizedek Priesthood were associated with the sacred ordinances performed in the Kirtland temple during the winter of 1836 and after the temple was dedicated that spring. [^39] Having been sealed as individuals to eternal life, or celestial glory, many of the brethren experienced the spiritual blessings that relate to the second Comforter. The Prophet thus observed in January, 1836: "Many of my brethren who received the ordinance with me saw glorious visions also." [^40]

Restoration of the Keys, Powers, and Promises of the Divine Patriarchal Order

In developing the program of this dispensation, Joseph Smith established first that system of principles, laws, ordinances, and organizations required to administer the Gospel and seal unto celestial glory those who complied in righteousness with its law. This he did between April 6, 1830 and March 30, 1836. Having completed this work, he reported on the latter date: "I then observed to the quorums, that I had now completed the organization of the Church, and we had passed through all the necessary ceremonies, that I had given them all the instructions they needed, and that they now were at liberty, after obtaining their licenses, to go forth and build up the Kingdom of God." [^41] By this statement the Prophet evidently meant that the Church had been organized and the ordinances of the priesthood set forth so that faithful individuals could be justified, sanctified, and sealed to celestial glory. In other words, the program for administering the Gospel had been established and the Saints had been given that which was necessary to attain eternal life as this term applies in a general way to the celestial kingdom.

This did not mean, however, that Joseph Smith had organized the Church and set forth the ordinances necessary for the Saints to attain exaltation within the celestial kingdom. This required that they be organized according to the pattern and design of the divine patriarchal order. Further keys and powers had to be restored; and the higher ordinances of the priesthood had to be received in the temple—those pertaining to exaltation within the divine family order.

Less than one week after Joseph Smith indicated he had completed the organization of the Church and set forth those priesthood ordinances that pertain to the basic program of the Gospel, he and Oliver Cowdery were given the additional keys of the Holy Priesthood to build up the divine patriarchal order. This took place April 3, 1836, shortly after the dedication of the Kirtland temple. Immediately before the restoration of these keys, powers, and promises, the glorified Christ appeared to the Prophet and his associate. Following this visitation, Joseph Smith wrote:

After this vision closed, the heavens were again opened unto us; and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north.

After this Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed.

After this vision had closed, another great and glorious vision burst upon us; for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death, stood before us, and said:

Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi—testifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come—

To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse—

Therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors. [^42]

With these keys, promises, and powers it was possible to gather the elect posterity of Abraham in the last days, give them the promises that God gave to their fathers, organize the faithful according to the divine family order, and seal them to an exaltation within that divine system.

If the divine patriarchal order is to be built up in the last days, Israel must be gathered. For this purpose, Moses committed the keys to perform two essential functions: (1) the gathering of the scattered remnants of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and (2) the leading of the ten tribes as a body from the land of the north. Though remnants of all tribes have been scattered throughout the earth, a significant portion of the ancient Northern Kingdom of Israel was led away into the north countries and was lost. [^43] After His resurrection, Jesus went and ministered to this body of Israel. [^44] Records have been kept by them. [^45] In due time they will come to Zion in a body, [^46] to receive the ordinances of the Priesthood from the servants of the Lord who are of the tribe of Ephraim. By these sacred ordinances, they will be given the higher powers and blessings of the Gospel and become part of the divine patriarchal order of the last days.

To build up the divine patriarchal order in the last days also required that the rights and promises of that eternal system be restored. This Elias, or Noah, did when he committed to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery "the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham." [^47] A previous chapter has shown that under Adam, Noah presides over the human family since the flood. Noah, as Elias, also presides over the restoration of all things to be brought about in the last days. [^48] In restoring the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, Elias gave to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery the same promises and responsibilities which God gave to Abraham. This included the promise of a great posterity that would continue both in the world and out of the world until they were as numerous as the stars in the heavens or the sands upon the sea shore; [^49] the promise that the chosen seed would be lawful heirs in the flesh to the Gospel and its blessings; [^50] the promise that the elect seed would have a legal claim in the flesh to the priesthood and its rights; [^51] and the responsibility to preach the Gospel to other families of the earth, so that they might enter the divine family order by baptism and partake of its blessings and powers. [^52] It should be noted that these promises have their basis in the New and Everlasting Covenant of Marriage, and they are derived from that covenant. In restoring the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, it therefore seems evident that Elias restored the rights, promises, and obligations that pertain to the New and Everlasting Covenant of Marriage (including plural marriage). [^53] By conferring these things upon worthy men in the last days by the authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood, the divine patriarchal order is again to be established upon the earth.

Finally, the full sealing powers of the priesthood had to be restored in order that the divine patriarchal order might be established. As was indicated earlier in this chapter, Joseph Smith taught that the power to seal the faithful to eternal life (celestial glory) is inherent in the Holy Priesthood. This sealing power seems to be a fundamental expression of the power of the Gospel. If the Melchizedek Priesthood holds the keys of the spiritual blessings by which man may be brought to commune openly with celestial beings, [^54] that priesthood must of necessity have inherent within it the power to seal the Saints to celestial glory, for, as has been indicated, this is prerequisite to the achievement of the ultimate goal of bringing them back into the presence of God. Hence Joseph Smith said, in 1831, "that the order of the High Priesthood was, that they have power given them to seal up the Saints unto eternal life." [^55]

What, then, did Elijah restore? According to Joseph Smith, "The spirit, power, and calling of Elijah is, that he have power to hold the key of the revelations, ordinances, oracles, powers and endowments of the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood and of the kingdom of God on the earth; and to receive, obtain, and perform all the ordinances belonging to the kingdom of God, even unto the turning of the hearts of the fathers unto the children, and the hearts of the children unto the fathers, even those who are in heaven." [^56] As Elijah himself declared, he came "to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers." [^57] Joseph Smith explained that the word "turn" in this statement "should be translated bind, or seal." [^58] Thus Elijah restored those higher powers that are required to build up the divine patriarchal order by sealing wives to their husbands and children to their fathers within that celestial family order. This function goes beyond the power of sealing the faithful, as individuals, to celestial glory. By the power of Elijah, the Saints may attain the full endowments of eternal life within the celestial kingdom and be exalted within the divine patriarchal order which in its perfected form constitutes celestial society. Joseph Smith therefore explained:

In the days of Noah, God destroyed the world by a flood, and He has promised to destroy it by fire in the last days: but before it should take place, Elijah should first come and turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, &c.

Now comes the point. What is this office and work of Elijah? It is one of the greatest and most important subjects that God had revealed. He should send Elijah to seal the children to the Fathers, and the fathers to the children. [^59]

The Prophet also explained:

The world is reserved unto burning in the last days. He shall send Elijah the prophet, and he shall reveal the covenants of the fathers in relation to the children, and the covenants of the children in relation to the fathers. [^60]

Again:

Elijah shall reveal the covenants to seal the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers. [^61]

The sealing powers restored by Elijah are to be manifested in behalf of the dead as well as the living. To apply them to the dead, Joseph Smith taught that the Saints must receive "all the ordinances, baptisms, confirmations, washings, anointings, ordinations and sealing powers upon their heads, in behalf of all their progenitors who are dead, and redeem them that they may come forth in the first resurrection and be exalted to thrones of glory with them." He said: "Herein is the chain that binds the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, which fulfills the mission of Elijah." [^62] It is again apparent that the sealing powers restored by Elijah go beyond the power to seal individuals to eternal life. They consist of the power to organize the divine patriarchal order and seal the faithful even among the dead to a future exaltation within that divine family order. The Prophet declared:

I wish you to understand this subject, for it is important; and if you receive it, this is the spirit of Elijah, that we redeem our dead, and connect ourselves with our fathers which are in heaven, and seal up our dead to come forth in the first resurrection; and here we want the power of Elijah to seal those who dwell on earth to those who dwell in heaven. This is the power of Elijah and the keys of the kingdom of Jehovah. [^63]

Moroni Explains The Restoration Of All Things

Moroni Quotes the Apostle Peter

When the angel Moroni ministered to Joseph Smith in 1823, he quoted and explained many biblical passages concerning the great restoration to be accomplished in the last days. Among other scriptures, he quoted "the third chapter of Acts, twenty-second and twenty-third verses, precisely as they stand in our New Testament." [^64] This passage of scripture is part of the Apostle Peter's explanation of the restoration of all things which must precede the second advent of Christ on earth. Peter declared that the heavens must receive Christ—He must be retained in heaven—"until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." [^65] He stated further that in the work of restoring all things the time will come when every soul who will not hearken to the law of Christ "shall be destroyed from among the people." [^66] As explained in chapter ten of this volume, this destruction will come at the end of the world.

That the restoration of all things must be accomplished by building up the divine patriarchal order is evident from the testimony of Joseph Smith. Having referred to the building of the Nauvoo temple—in which edifice the sacred ordinances that pertain to the divine family order were to be administered to the Saints—as "an event of the greatest importance to the Church and the world," he said:

Truly this is a day long to be remembered by the Saints of the last days,—a day in which the God of heaven has begun to restore the ancient order of His kingdom unto His servants and His people,—a day in which all things are concurring to bring about the completion of the fullness of the Gospel, a fullness of the dispensation of dispensations, even the fullness of times; a day in which God has begun to make manifest and set in order in His Church those things which have been, and those things which the ancient prophets and wise men desired to see but died without beholding them; a day in which those things begin to be made manifest, which have been hid from before the foundation of the world, and which Jehovah has promised should be made known in His own due time unto His servants, to prepare the earth for the return of His glory, even a celestial glory, and a kingdom of priests and kings to God and the Lamb, forever, on Mount Zion, and with him the hundred and forty and four thousand whom John the Revelator saw, all of which is to come to pass in the restitution of all things. [^67]

Moroni Foretells the Restoration of Israel

The angel Moroni also referred extensively to the redemption of Israel in the last days. In reporting the angel's visit to Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery stated that Moroni "gave a general account of the promises made to the fathers," [^68] explaining "the blessings, promises and covenants to Israel, and the great manifestations of favor to the world, in the ushering in of the fulness of the gospel, to prepare the way for the second advent of the Messiah, when he comes in the glory of the Father with the holy angels." [^69] In preparing Joseph Smith to bring forth the Book of Mormon, Moroni stressed that he should "remember that it was the work of the Lord, to fulfil certain promises previously made to a branch of the house of Israel, of the tribe of Joseph, and when it should be brought forth [it] must be done expressly with an eye . . . single to the glory of God, and the welfare and restoration of the house of Israel." [^70]

The above statements by Oliver Cowdery were made in a series of letters which he wrote concerning the visitations of Moroni and related incidents. Since he was an intimate associate of the Prophet during the translation and publication of the Nephite scripture, his report is most important. Of the subject of Israel's redemption as explained by Moroni, Elder Cowdery said:

This being of so much importance, and of so deep interest to the saints, I have thought best to give a farther detail of the heavenly message, and if I do not give it in the precise words, [I] shall strictly confine myself to the facts in substance.

David said, (Ps. C.) make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all ye lands, that is, all the earth. Serve the Lord with gladness: Come before his presence with singing. This he said in view of the glorious period for which he often prayed, and was anxious to behold, which he knew could not take place until the knowledge of the glory of God covered all lands, or all the earth. Again he says, (Ps. 107) O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: For his mercy endureth forever. Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he has redeemed from the hand of the enemy; and gathered out of the lands from the east, and from the west; from the north and from the south.—They wandered in the wilderness in a solitary way; they found no city to dwell in. Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them. Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them out of their distresses; and led them in the right way that they might go to the city of habitation.

Most clearly was it shown to the prophet, that the righteous should be gathered from all the earth: He knew that the children of Israel were led from Egypt, by the right hand of the Lord, and permitted to possess the land of Canaan, though they were rebellious in the desert, but he farther knew, that they were not gathered from the east, the west, the north and the south, at that time; for it was clearly manifested that the Lord himself would prepare a habitation, even as he said, when he would lead them to a city of refuge. In that, David saw a promise for the righteous, (see 144 Ps) when they should be delivered from those who oppressed them, and from the hand of strange children, or the enemies of the Lord; that their sons should be like plants grown up in their youth, and their daughters like cornerstones, polished after the similitude of a beautiful palace. It is then that the sons and daughters shall prophesy, old men dream dreams, and young men see visions. At that time the garners of the righteous will be full, affording all manner of store. It was while contemplating this time, and viewing this happy state of the righteous, that he further says: The Lord shall reign forever, even thy God, O Zion, unto all generations—Praise ye the Lord!

Isaiah who was on the earth at the time the ten tribes of Israel were led away captive from the land of Canaan was shown, not only their calamity and affliction, but the time when they were to be delivered. After reproving them for their corruption and blindness, he prophesies of their dispersion. He says, Your country is desolate, your cities are burnt with fire: Your land, strangers devour it in your presence, and it is thus made desolate, being overthrown by strangers. He further says, while speaking of the iniquity of that people, Thy princes are rebellious, and companions of thieves: every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards: They judge not the fatherless, neither does the cause of the widow come unto them. Therefore, says the Lord, the Lord of hosts, the mighty One of Israel, Ah, I will ease me of my adversaries, and avenge me of my enemies. But after this calamity has befallen Israel, and the Lord has poured upon them his afflicting judgments, as he said by the mouth of Moses—I will heap mischiefs upon them; I will spend my arrows upon them.—They shall be afflicted with hunger, and devoured with burning heat, and with bitter destruction: I will also send the teeth of beasts upon them, with the poison of serpents of the earth—he will also fulfill this further prediction uttered by the mouth of Isaiah. I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin: and I will restore thy judges as at the first, and thy counsellors as at the beginning: afterward you shall be called, the city of righteousness, the faithful city. Then will be fulfilled, also, the saying of David: And he led them forth by the right way, that they might go to a city of habitation.

Isaiah continues his prophecy concerning Israel, and tells them what would be done for them in the last days; for thus it is written: The word that Isaiah the son of Amos saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem. And it shall come to pass in the last days, that [the word here should be "when". CF. 2 Nephi 12:2] the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills;—and all nations shall flow unto it. And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.—And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people: and they shall beat their swords into plough shares, and their spears into pruning hooks: nations shall not lift up the sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of his people in Zion, and upon their assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defence, or above, shall be a covering and a defence. And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the day-time from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain. And his people shall dwell safely, they shall possess the land forever, even the land which was promised to their fathers for an everlasting inheritance: for behold, says the Lord by the mouth of the prophet: The day will come that I will sow the house of Israel with the seed of man, and with the seed of beast. And it shall come to pass, that like as I have watched over them, to pluck up, and to break down, and to throw down, and to destroy, and to afflict; so will I watch over them, to build and to plant, says the Lord.

For this happy situation and blessed state of Israel, did the prophets look, and obtained a promise, that, though the house of Israel and Judah, should violate the covenant, the Lord, in the last days would make with them a new one: not according to the one which he made with their fathers in the day that he took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt; which, said the Lord, my covenant they broke, although I was a husband and a father unto them: but this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel: After those days, says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and will write it in their hearts; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.

For thus says the Lord, I will bring again the captivity of Jacob's tents, and have mercy on his dwelling places; and the city shall be builded upon her own heap, and the palace shall remain after the manner thereof. And out of them shall proceed thanksgiving, and the voice of them that make merry:—and I will multiply them and they shall not be few; I will also glorify them and they shall not be small. Their children also shall be as aforetime, and their congregation shall be established before me, and I will punish all that oppress them. Their nobles shall be of themselves, and their governor shall proceed from the midst of them.

At the same time, says the Lord, will I be the God of all the families of Israel, and they shall be my people; I will bring them from the north country, and gather them from the coasts of the earth; I will say to the north, Give up, and to the south, keep not back:—bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth. And in those days, and at that time, says the Lord, though Israel and Judah have been driven and scattered, they shall come together, they shall even come weeping: for with supplications will I lead them: they shall go and seek the Lord their God. They shall ask the way to Zion, with their faces thitherward, and say, Come, and let us join ourselves to the Lord in a perpetual covenant that shall not be forgotten; and watchmen upon Mount Ephraim shall say, Arise, and let us go up to Zion, unto the holy Mount of the Lord our God; for he will teach us of his ways, and instruct us to walk in his paths. That the way for this to be fully accomplished, may be prepared, the Lord will utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea, and with his mighty wind shake his hand over the river and smite it in its seven streams, and make men go over dry-shod. And there shall be a high way for the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria; like as it was to Israel when they came up out of the land of Egypt.

And thus shall Israel come: not a dark corner of the earth shall remain unexplored, nor an island of the seas be left without being visited; for as the Lord has removed them into all corners of the earth, he will cause his mercy to be as abundantly manifested in their gathering as his wrath in their dispersion, until they are gathered according to the covenant. He will, as he said by the prophet, send for many fishers and they shall fish them; and after send for many hunters, who shall hunt them; not as their enemies have to afflict, but with glad tidings of great joy, with a message of peace, and a call for their return.

And it will come to pass, that though the house of Israel has forsaken the Lord, and bowed down and worshipped other gods, which were no gods, and been cast out before the face of the world, they will know the voice of the Shepherd when he calls upon them this time; for soon his day of power comes, and in it his people will be willing to hearken to his counsel; and even now are they already beginning to be stirred up in their hearts to search for these things, and are daily reading the ancient prophets, and are marking the times, and seasons of their fulfilment. Thus God is preparing the way for their return.

But it is necessary that you should understand, that what is to be fulfilled in the last days, is not only for the benefit of Israel, but the Gentiles, if they will repent and embrace the Gospel, for they are to be remembered also in the same covenant, and are to be fellow heirs with the seed of Abraham, inasmuch as they are so by faith—for God is no respecter of persons. This was shown to Moses, when he wrote—Rejoice, O ye nations, with his people!

In consequence of the transgression of the Jews at the coming of the Lord, the Gentiles were called into the kingdom, and for this obedience, are to be favored with the gospel in its fulness first, in the last days; for it is written: The first shall be last, and the last first. Therefore, when the fulness of the gospel, as was preached by the righteous, upon this land, shall come forth, it shall be declared to the Gentiles first, and whoso will repent shall be delivered, for they shall understand the plan of salvation and restoration for Israel, as the Lord manifested to the ancients.—They shall be baptized with water and with the Spirit—they shall lift up their hearts with joy and gladness, for the time of their redemption shall also roll on, and for their obedience to the faith they shall see the house of Jacob come with great glory, even with songs of everlasting joy, and with him partake of salvation.

Therefore, as the time draws near when the sun is to be darkened, the moon turn to blood, and the stars fall from heaven, the Lord will bring to the knowledge of his people his commandments and statutes, that they may be prepared to stand when the earth shall reel to and fro as a drunken man, earthquakes cause the nations to tremble, and the destroying angel goes forth to waste the inhabitants at noon-day: for so great are to be the calamities which are to come upon the inhabitants of the earth, before the coming of the Son of Man the second time, that whoso is not prepared cannot abide; but such as are found faithful, and remain, shall be gathered with his people and caught up to meet the Lord in the cloud, and so shall they inherit eternal life.

I have now given you a rehearsal of what was communicated to our brother, when he was directed to go and obtain the record of the Nephites. I may have missed in arrangement in some instances, but the principle is preserved, and you will be able to bring forward abundance of corroborating scripture upon the subject of the gospel and of the gathering. . . . [^71]

Moroni Cites Malachi 3:1-5

As Moroni ministered unto him, Joseph Smith wrote that he "quoted part of the third chapter of Malachi." [^72] The angel probably quoted the first five verses [^73] wherein Malachi states:

Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he shall come, saith the Lord of hosts.

But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? For he is like a refiner's fire, and like fuller's soap:

And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness.

Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years.

And I will come near to you to judgment; and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against false swearers, and against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow, and the fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right, and fear not me, saith the Lord of hosts. [^74]

The messenger here spoken of was said by Jesus to be John the Baptist. [^75] But because of the universal apostasy from the Gospel that followed the proclamation of the message of salvation by Christ and the Apostles, it was necessary for John to appear in the latter days and commission a modern oracle with the keys that he had held, so that there might be a new and final preparation for the coming of the Lord to His temple. In receiving these keys from John, Joseph Smith therefore shared with him the role of a special messenger to prepare the way before the Lord.

Though the latter-day messenger has fulfilled his mission, the appearance of the Lord in His temple as predicted by Malachi is still in the future. It will take place in the temple that is to be built in the New Jerusalem. This fact was stated by the Lord in a revelation to Joseph Smith. In giving instructions to the Prophet concerning the use to be made of surplus property and wealth in the storehouse under the Law of Consecration and Stewardship, God said:

Therefore, the residue shall be kept in my storehouse, to administer to the poor and the needy, as shall be appointed by the high council of the Church, and the bishop and his council;

And for the purpose of purchasing lands for the public benefit of the Church, and building houses of worship, and building up of the New Jerusalem which is hereafter to be revealed—

That my covenant people may be gathered in one on that day when I shall come to my temple. And this I do for the salvation of my people. [^76]

It is evident from this statement that before the Lord comes to His temple, the New Jerusalem will be built, and under the Law of Consecration, the Saints will be gathered into one mighty economic unit founded upon the spiritual law of God. It will be in this future day that the Lord will come to His temple as predicted by Malachi. [^77]

In referring to the coming of Christ to His temple, Malachi inquired: "But who may abide the day of his coming? And who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fuller's soap." [^78] Here the ancient oracle made reference to the divine nature of Christ. Joseph Smith said of the glory of God, that "all corruption is devoured by the fire." [^79] In manifesting His glory and power unto man, Christ is therefore like a refiner's fire and like fuller's soap. By receiving the Holy Spirit, man may be purified and cleansed—purged of the effects of sin and transgression. Malachi's statement that the Lord will sit as a refiner and purifier of the sons of Levi and purge them as gold and silver has reference to the sanctifying powers of the Gospel. Only by being purified thereby can the sons of Levi to whom Malachi refers offer an acceptable offering in righteousness, for the soul of man must be sanctified in order for his gifts to be acceptable to God. The unregenerated soul is an enemy to God; and should such a one make an offering to the Lord, the motive of that heart clouded with the effects of sin would make the offering unacceptable. Man must receive the grace of God by faith in order to please the Lord.

Having spoken of the purification of the sons of Levi, Malachi states: "Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years." [^80] To bring about this day of righteousness, however, Malachi states that the Lord will come out in judgment against the wicked. In those judgments, He will be a swift witness against false swearers and against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, and the widow, and the fatherless and the stranger. [^81]

Moroni Quotes Isaiah 11

Another biblical text Moroni explained was the eleventh chapter of Isaiah. This chapter he quoted, "saying that it was about to be fulfilled." [^82] Isaiah speaks of the redemption of Israel in the last days and indicates that when the scattered remnants are gathered, the millennial era of peace will be ushered in. That God might establish this peaceful era when the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, the suckling child play on the hole of the asp (a venomous serpent), and the earth be full of the knowledge of God as the waters cover the sea, the Lord promised to set His hand again the second time to recover the remnants of His people, Israel. Of the Lord's work in the last days, Isaiah said:

And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.

The envy also of Ephraim shall depart and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim. [^83]

Nephi quoted Isaiah's prophesies on the redemption of Israel. In a prophetic commentary on the words of Isaiah as recorded in the above chapter, Nephi said:

. . . it shall come to pass that the Lord God shall commence his work among all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, to bring about the restoration of his people upon the earth.

And with righteousness shall the Lord God judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth. And he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth; and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.

For the time speedily cometh that the Lord God shall cause a great division among the people, and the wicked will he destroy; and he will spare his people, yea, even if it so be that he must destroy the wicked by fire.

And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins.

And then shall the wolf dwell with the lamb; and the leopard shall lie down with the kid, and the calf, and the young lion, and the fatling, together; and a little child shall lead them.

And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together; and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

And the suckling child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice's den.

They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain; for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea.

Wherefore, the things of all nations shall be made known; yea, all things shall be made known unto the children of men.

There is nothing which is secret save it shall be revealed; there is no work of darkness save it shall be made manifest in the light; and there is nothing which is sealed upon the earth save it shall be loosed.

Wherefore, all things which have been revealed unto the children of men shall at that day be revealed; and Satan shall have power over the hearts of the children of men no more, for a long time. [^84]

The gathering of Israel is directly associated with the task of building up the divine patriarchal order in the last days. "The election of the promised seed still continues," Joseph Smith declared, "and in the last day, they shall have the Priesthood restored to them, and they shall be the 'Saviors on Mount Zion,' the ministers of our God." [^85] The redemption of Israel and the establishment of the modern remnants upon the rights and powers of the divine patriarchal order are the great doctrinal and prophetic themes of Isaiah. To the Nephites, Jesus said of the words of Isaiah: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, that when they shall be fulfilled then is the fulfilling of the covenant which the Father hath made unto his people, O house of Israel." [^86] Speaking of Zion in the last days, Isaiah admonished her to put on her strength. Of the meaning of this declaration and the people to whom Isaiah had reference, Joseph Smith said by revelation: "He had reference to those whom God should call in the last days, who should hold the power of priesthood to bring again Zion, and the redemption of Israel; and to put on her strength is to put on the authority of the priesthood, which she, Zion, has a right to by lineage; also to return to that power which she had lost." [^87]

In his account of Moroni's visitation, Joseph Smith said very little about the angel's explanation of Isaiah 11. But about the time the Prophet wrote the account of Moroni's ministrations now found in the Pearl of Great Price, he recorded elsewhere some vital insights into the meaning of the eleventh chapter of Isaiah. It may be that the angel's explanation in September, 1823, provided the basis of the information Joseph Smith gave in the latter statement, which is now found in the Doctrine and Covenants. [^88] In the way the Saints now use a "genealogical tree" to show the blood relationship of individuals and families who spring from a common stock, Isaiah made use of a plant as a symbol of the divine patriarchal order in ancient and modern times, with certain parts of the plant representing presiding figures within the chosen lineages in the flesh who have a right by promise to the keys and powers of the divine family order. Isaiah said:

And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse [the father of David], and a Branch shall grow out of his roots:

And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord;

And shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord: and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears:

But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth: and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.

And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins.

The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them.

And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

And the suckling child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice' den.

They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.

And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek: and his rest shall be glorious. [^89]

There are four figures depicted in Isaiah's statement, each constituting a distinct part of the plant, or a presiding person within the divine patriarchal order. These parts or figures are, first, the stem of Jesse; second, the rod that shall come forth from the stem of Jesse; third, the branch that shall grow out of the roots of the stem; and, finally, the root of Jesse which shall stand as an ensign to the people. In his inspired explanation, Joseph Smith gave information concerning three of the above figures: the stem, the rod, and the root. Regarding the fourth, the branch, he gave no explanation. Of the identity of the stem, the Prophet wrote: "Verily thus saith the Lord: It is Christ." [^90] Christ is the central figure of the divine family order, and the fact that He is referred to as the stem of Jesse indicates that He is the lawful Heir in the flesh to the political rights of the divine patriarchal order. He is King of kings and Lord of lords within that great family system of kings and priests.

Of the rod that would come forth from the stem of Jesse, Joseph Smith said, "Behold, thus saith the Lord: It is a servant in the hands of Christ, who is partly a descendant of Jesse as well as of Ephraim, or of the house of Joseph, on whom there is laid much power." [^91] Though the exact identity of this person and his place within the divine patriarchal order is not given, it is apparent that he descends through the presiding lineage of both David and Ephraim and is a lawful heir to the rights of the priesthood that have been appointed to these two branches of Israel. That is, he is a rightful heir to both political and patriarchal power within the divine family order.

Of the root of Jesse who shall stand as an ensign of the people of Israel and whom the Gentiles shall seek, Joseph Smith declared: "Behold, thus saith the Lord, it is a descendant of Jesse, as well as of Joseph, unto whom rightly belongs [by divine appointment in the flesh] the priesthood, and the keys of the kingdom, for an ensign, and for the gathering of my people in the last days." [^92] Again, the identity of the chosen figure is not given, but it seems apparent from what Isaiah says that he will come in the latter days. And in that period of time the kingdoms of this world will become the kingdom of our God and of His Christ. The root of Jesse will also stand as an ensign to whom the Gentiles will seek. And it is said of him that "his rest shall be glorious." [^93]

Though the identity of the rod and the root to which Isaiah refers is not definitely known, it is the writer's opinion that the initial figure represents the Prophet Joseph Smith. It would be inconsistent for God to appoint a modern prophet to preside over the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times—in which dispensation the ancient rights and promises pertaining to the divine patriarchal order are again to be given to the appointed branches of Israel—and not have that presiding figure the lawful heir in the flesh to the presiding keys of the major functions of the divine patriarchal order. The Lord declared to the Prophet and other presiding persons in the early days of this dispensation that to them the priesthood had continued through the lineage of their fathers. They were therefore "lawful heirs according to the flesh" to the rights and powers that pertain to the divine patriarchal order; and the revelation stated that those rights and powers to which they were lawful heirs "must needs remain through you and your lineage until the restoration of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began." [^94] This statement seems to imply that the Prophet was a lawful heir to all the rights and powers required to bring about the restoration of all things, for that to which he was a lawful heir was to continue and eventually be developed in the earth to bring about the restoration of all things. From this it would seem that Joseph Smith was a descendant of both Ephraim and Jesse, and that he was a lawful heir both to the patriarchal and political rights of the divine family order. As such, he was "a servant in the hands of Christ, who is partly a descendant of Jesse as well as of Ephraim, or of the house of Joseph, on whom there is laid much power." [^95] To him, the Lord bestowed the same rights, promises, and blessings that were given anciently to Abraham, [^96] not merely the rights and promises that were given to Ephraim.

In the writer's opinion, the root of Jesse could be a descendant of Joseph Smith, and as such he will be of the lineage of Jesse, the father of King David, and also of the ancient patriarch Joseph. To him will rightly belong "the keys of the kingdom, for an ensign, and for the gathering of my [i.e., God's] people in the last days." [^97] It may be that he will have some relationship to the latter-day David who will reign as king over Israel in the last days." [^98] "Although [the ancient] David was a king, he never did obtain the spirit and power of Elijah and the fullness of the Priesthood," Joseph Smith explained; "and the Priesthood that he received, and the throne and kingdom of David [i.e., the political rights and powers of the divine patriarchal order] is to be taken from him and given to another by the name of David in the last days, raised up out of his lineage." [^99]

Moroni's Version of Malachi 4:5-6

Before the promises and blessings of Abraham could be functional in the latter days, power had to be received by which the Saints could be organized into family units and sealed to places of exaltation within the divine patriarchal order. The system that the Saints would build up on the earth would also have to be united or sealed to the generations of the righteous of the past. This was made plain to Joseph Smith by the angel Moroni when he quoted Malachi's prophecy concerning the coming of Elijah, with some variation:

Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers. If it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming. [^100]

In Moroni's version of Malachi 4:5-6, are two points of added significance: First, the angel made it plain that Elijah would reveal certain powers of the Holy Priesthood. As was indicated earlier in this chapter, those powers consisted of the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood by which the divine patriarchal order could be built up and the faithful sealed to places of exaltation within that family system. Second, Moroni declared that Elijah would "plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers." The fathers he mentioned were the ancient patriarchs, including Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and the promises made to the fathers were the promises that pertain to the divine patriarchal order. By the priesthood which Elijah was to reveal, these promises were to be planted in the hearts of the children in the latter days—that is, in the hearts of the elect seed of Israel to whom they belong by promise.

Moroni's version of Malachi's prophecy also indicates that because the ancient promises are planted in the hearts of the children in the latter days, their hearts will turn to their fathers. Having received the promises pertaining to the divine patriarchal order, the latter-day children will realize that they cannot be saved and exalted within this eternal family order without their worthy fathers. The hearts of the children will therefore turn to their fathers, and the Saints in the latter days will administer vicariously the necessary ordinances to save their fathers in the celestial kingdom and organize them according to the family order of that kingdom. Of the ordinance of baptism for the dead and its relationship to the divine patriarchal order, Joseph Smith said:

And now as the great purposes of God are hastening to their accomplishment, and the things spoken of in the Prophets are fulfilling, as the kingdom of God is established on the earth, and the ancient order of things restored, the Lord has manifested to us this day and privilege, and we are commanded to be baptized for our dead, thus fulfilling the words of Obadiah, when speaking of the glory of the latter-day: "And saviours shall come upon Mount Zion to judge the remnant of Esau [i.e., the world], and the kingdom shall be the Lord's." [^101]

Baptism and confirmation for the dead are only the beginning. Having performed these initial ordinances—that is, having administered the articles and covenants of adoption—by which their worthy dead may become the children of Christ, the Saints are required to perform in behalf of the dead all the higher ordinances by which they may be organized into the divine patriarchal order; and the divine family must be extended back generation after generation until it is connected with the ancient patriarchal order established among the fathers in the earlier ages of the world.

Joseph Smith taught that to establish the ancient family order among the righteous on earth requires, first, that the spirit of Elias be manifested (the spirit of the divine family order—or of the Gospel—over which Elias presides); next, that the spirit and power of Elijah be expressed; and, finally, that the Messiah appear and minister in the temple which is prepared for His coming in the last days. The spirit of Elias, expressed through the ministry of the Aaronic Priesthood, is associated with the administration of the Preparatory Gospel by which true believers in Christ are prepared for "a greater revelation of God." [^102] Having been introduced by the spirit of Elias into the divine patriarchal order, the spirit and power of Elijah must then operate to organize the righteous into family units and place the sealing powers of the priesthood upon the divine family order. The divine patriarchal order having been built up, the Messiah may then come to His temple and place the capstone on the divine family order. Joseph Smith explained:

The spirit of Elias is first, Elijah second, and Messiah last. Elias is a forerunner to prepare the way, the spirit and power of Elijah is to come after, holding the keys of power, building the temple to the capstone [Here the temple is made a symbol of the divine patriarchal order that is associated with it.], placing the seals of the Melchizedek Priesthood upon the house of Israel, and making all things ready; then Messiah comes to His temple, which is last of all.

Messiah is above the spirit and power of Elijah, for He made the world, and was that spiritual rock unto Moses in the wilderness. Elijah was to come and prepare the way and build up the [patriarchal] kingdom before the coming of the great day of the Lord, although the spirit of Elias might begin it. [^103]

Christ's coming to His temple as spoken of is the appearance which Malachi foretold. From the Prophet's statement, it appears that He will perform ordinances pertaining to the office of Messiah by which the capstone will be placed upon the divine patriarchal structure that by then will have been built up among the Saints in preparation for His millennial reign. If Elijah had failed to come before the great and dreadful day of the Lord, the earth would utterly be wasted at Christ's coming. His millennial reign can be inaugurated only through the divine patriarchal order; and, to fulfill the purpose of the earth's organization, the faithful must be united under celestial law with the divine patriarchal order that exists among the glorified beings of eternity. To the end that this might finally be accomplished, Christ will come to His temple.

Joseph Smith taught that as Eliases, the great patriarchs and prophets of the past had endeavored in their days to restore the glory that was lost by Adam in the fall. Though they did not obtain it, "they prophesied of a day when this glory would be revealed," in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. [^104] The restoration of God's glory, however, is predicated on the establishment of the divine patriarchal order upon the earth. To the elect posterity who have this obligation (when they fulfill it in righteousness) is promised "the glory." [^105] To obtain the glory of God in its fulness, the divine patriarchal order that is built up on the earth must be extended back among the righteous dead until it is connected by the sealing powers of the Holy Priesthood with the patriarchs of the past. The ancient Eliases "are in heaven," Joseph Smith explained, "but their children are on the earth." He said: "We cannot be made perfect without them, nor they without us." Of the blessings that will follow the building up of the divine patriarchal order and its extension into past ages, the Prophet declared: "When these things are done, the Son of Man will descend, the Ancient of Days sit [at the great council to be held in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman]; we may [then] come to an innumerable company of angels, have communion with and receive instructions from them." [^106] The divine patriarchal order having been built up, the Saints will be able to share measurably in the glory and power of that divine system as it exists in eternity, and commune with those who reside in the presence of God. Only then will the General Assembly of the Church of the Firstborn come down out of heaven and have place upon the earth.

Moroni's Contribution to Malachi 4:1-3

In quoting the fourth chapter of Malachi, Moroni gave the first verse as follows: "For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall burn as stubble; for they that come shall burn them, saith the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch." [^107] This declaration concerns the coming of Christ in glory to consume the wicked at the end of the world. This is the great consummating event in a series of appearances that lead up to the establishment of Christ's kingdom upon the earth and the renewal of the earth to its paradisiacal glory. Before Jesus comes in glory, He will appear successively in (1) His temple in the New Jerusalem, (2) at the Council of Adam-ondi-Ahman, where the divine patriarchal order that has been built up on earth will be connected with the patriarchal systems of the past and Christ established, by the acceptance of the combined priesthood of the earth and heaven, as King of kings and Lord of lords, and (3) at Jerusalem to redeem the Jews and establish His law among them. Having established His law upon the earth by His earlier appearances, Christ will then come in glory to cleanse the earth of its wickedness and reign over the righteous for a thousand years. But He will not come alone, for He will reveal Himself "from heaven with power and great glory, with all the hosts thereof." [^108] Moroni's statement of Malachi's prophecy also clarifies this point, and here it adds a significant fact that is not found in the biblical report. Of the wicked, Moroni said: "They that come shall burn them, saith the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch." [^109] The biblical report does not indicate the means by which the wicked will be burned, but Moroni implies that they will be consumed by the glory and power of Christ and of those who accompany Him as He appears in the clouds of heaven.

Moroni Quotes Joel 2:28-32

The last passage of scripture Joseph Smith indicates Moroni quoted was Joel 2:28-32. The Israelite prophet, in recording the word of God concerning the redemption of Israel in the last days and the return of God's glory to the earth, wrote: "And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions: and also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit." [^110]

The pouring out of the Spirit of God on all flesh as foretold by Joel is yet future. This does not mean that the Lord has not poured out the Holy Ghost in some measure upon the Gentiles as foretold by the Book of Mormon, [^111] which is the primary cause of their great achievements in modern times. [^112] But this is not that to which Joel referred. Consider the following facts: First, the angel Moroni declared to Joseph Smith that Joel's prophecy "was not yet fulfilled," [^113] although the Lord had by then poured out His Spirit upon the Gentiles. Second, Joel states plainly that God will pour out His Spirit after Israel has been redeemed; and that it will be after the final signs of Christ's coming are manifested—after the sun shall be darkened and the moon turned into blood. [^114] These signs will be manifested at the time of the cataclysmic upheavals that restore the earth to the same general form and organization is possessed immediately after the creation. [^115] Third, the Lord declared in a revelation to Joseph Smith that He would pour out His Spirit upon all flesh after He had pruned His vineyard for the last time. [^116] Not until the Gospel has been preached unto the world as a witness to all nations and the righteous gathered into the fold of Christ will He pour out His Spirit on all flesh. Finally, the Apostle Peter made clear that the Spirit to be poured out in the last days will be the same that was poured out upon the people on the day of Pentecost. [^117] That Spirit was manifested as "cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them." [^118] This same Spirit will be poured out in the last days when the earth is renewed and receives again her paradisiacal glory, for the earth will then be "clothed with the glory of her God." [^119]

Conclusion

The restoration of all things will precede the millennial reign of Christ on earth. This great revolution in the affairs of men had a humble beginning. "Ye are laying the foundation of a great work," the Lord declared to the early Elders of the Church. "And out of small things proceedeth that which is great." [^120] The work of restoring all things began with Joseph Smith's first vision, in the spring of 1820. Three years later, the angel Moroni revealed the hiding place of a sacred record that was to be given to the world as a new witness of Christ, and that would be an instrument in bringing about the purposes of God in the last days.

Before the ancient order of things could be established on earth the priesthood and its powers had to be restored. In May, 1829, John the Baptist conferred upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery the keys and powers of the Aaronic Priesthood, which has the right to administer the Preparatory Gospel in the spirit of Elias. Shortly thereafter, Peter, James, and John restored the Melchizedek Priesthood, which has the right to administer the spiritual powers of the Gospel and seal the faithful to celestial glory. Between April 6, 1830, and March 30, 1836, Joseph Smith worked to set in order the ordinances of the priesthood and to organize the Church that the Saints might receive those basic gospel powers and privileges. Having completed this work, other keys and powers were then restored to him, giving him power to organize the divine patriarchal order that the Saints might obtain exaltation within the celestial kingdom. Moses restored the keys of the gathering of Israel and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north. Elias, or Noah, committed those rights, promises, and obligations which God gave anciently to Abraham. Finally, Elijah restored the higher powers of the Melchizedek Priesthood required to organize the divine patriarchal order by sealing wives to husbands and children to parents in the family of Jesus Christ.

The nature of this great work apparently was explained to Joseph Smith in 1823, by Moroni. The heavenly messenger then spoke in detail of the restoration of scattered Israel and the promises given to certain branches of the elect family. It seems evident that Joseph Smith was a rightful heir to the major keys, rights, and powers that were given by promise to Israel. Moroni also explained Malachi's prophecy concerning the coming of Elijah, stating that through the priesthood which Elijah would restore the promises which God made to the fathers in the divine patriarchal order would be planted, or sealed, in the hearts of the children in the latter days. For this reason, the hearts of the children will turn to their fathers, as they are brought to realize that there can be no final salvation in celestial society (which is a family system) without their fathers.

The divine patriarchal order must be built up before Christ can come to His temple as foretold by Malachi. To this end the spirit of Elias must be manifested to bring the obedient into the family of Christ. The spirit of Elijah must then be manifested to organize and seal them according to the pattern of the divine family system. Only then will Messiah come to His temple and place the capstone on the celestial order that has been built up on earth.

When the divine patriarchal order has been built up as a system on earth, the events that will lead up to the coming of Christ on earth can then take place. The Ancient of Days will then sit at the great council of Adam-ondi-Ahman to arrange the affairs of the priesthood—Melchizedek, Patriarchal, and Aaronic—for all dispensations of time. These arrangements having been completed, Christ will then appear at that great assembly and be given "dominion, and glory, and a kingdom." [^121] When Jesus appears among the Jews at a later date, He will establish His kingdom among that branch of Israel. Finally, having established the two great centers of His kingdom on earth, Christ will appear in glory in the clouds of heaven. The wicked will then be destroyed, the earth renewed to a paradisiacal state of glory, and the Spirit of God poured out upon all flesh.

Footnotes

It should be observed that the immediate success of the work of building the latter-day Zion according to the plan of God was made dependent upon the repentance of the Gentiles in the latter days. See 3 Nephi 21:9-29. The faithfulness of those among the elect lineages, to whom the promises of God have been made, is also a determining factor in the building of the latter-day program. The martyrdom of Joseph Smith and the expulsion of the Saints from Illinois evidenced the fact that the Gentiles would not repent so that the New Jerusalem could be built in the early days of this dispensation; and the fact that the Prophet's family did not continue to identify themselves with the Church made it apparent that the promises of God to Joseph's seed would have to wait until a future day when his posterity will be willing and worthy to receive the promised blessings that are theirs within the divine patriarchal order.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 132:19-24.
[^2] Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 398.
[^3] D&C 132:20.
[^4] Moses 7:30-31.
[^5] Ibid., 7:36.
[^6] Ibid., 7:31.
[^7] Abraham 1:31.
[^8] Jah oh eh, 5th degree.
[^9] Kolob, 1st degree.
[^10] Abraham 3:1-17.
[^11] See ibid., 3:9.
[^12] Ibid., 3:2.
[^13] Ibid., 3:3.
[^14] Figure No. 1
[^15] D&C 130:4-5.
[^16] Abraham 3:4.
[^17] Facsimile No. 2, Figure No. 1. See also Abraham 3:4.
[^18] Abraham 3:8-9.
[^19] Notice the context of Abraham's vision. The Lord was speaking unto him of Kolob and the stellar system directly related to that sphere. Having shown Abraham these many spheres, the Lord explained: "Kolob is the greatest of all the Kokaubeam that thou hast seen, because it is nearest unto me."—Ibid., 3:16. Abraham could not have beheld the works of God in their entirety without beholding all the glory of God; and this he could not have done and remained in the flesh on the earth. See Moses 1:5.
[^20] Abraham 3:12.
[^21] Ibid., 3:12-13.
[^22] For example, the Lord designates the moon by the name of "Olea," but by the Egyptians it is said to be called Floeese. See Abraham 3:13 and Facsimile No. 2, Figure No. 5.
[^23] Figure No. 2.
[^24] Ibid., No. 4.
[^25] Ibid., No. 5.
[^26] Loc. cit.
[^27] Moses 1:30.
[^28] Ibid., 1:31-39.
[^29] Ibid., 1:35.
[^30] Ibid., 1:31.
[^31] 1 Nephi 17:36.
[^32] Moses 1:39.
[^33] Ibid., 1:32-33.
[^34] For example, when Christ received a fulness of the Father's glory He thereby received all power in heaven and on earth. See D&C 93:16-17.
[^35] Moses 1:32.
[^36] I. V., John 1:1-4, 14.
[^37] Moses 1:35.
[^38] D&C 88:66-67.
[^39] TPJS, p. 351.
[^40] Lectures on Faith, No. 5.
[^41] D&C 93:35.
[^42] Pratt, Key to Theology, p. 50.
[^43] JD, III, p. 277.
[^44] D&C 88:25-26.
[^45] Moses 7:48-49.
[^46] D&C 88:36-38.
[^47] Ibid., 88:12-13.
[^48] Ibid., 88:40.
[^49] Ibid., 93:30.
[^50] See 2 Nephi 2:11-13.
[^51] John Taylor, The Government of God, p. 4.
[^52] JD, III, pp. 2-3.
[^53] D&C 93:29.
[^54] Ibid., 93:36.
[^55] Ibid., 93:29.
[^56] D&C 131:7-8; DHC, IV, p. 575.
[^57] 2 Nephi 2:14.
[^58] D&C 93:33.
[^59] Moses 7:62.
[^60] Ibid., 7:56.
[^61] Ibid., 7:45.
[^62] Ibid., 1:39.
[^63] D&C 29:43.
[^64] TS, IV (January 16, 1843), p. 73. The same statement is found in the original publication of the Pearl of Great Price, published in 1851.
[^65] Moses 1:33.
[^66] Ibid., 1:35, 38.
[^67] See below.
[^68] Moses, 7:36.
[^69] Joseph Fielding Smith, Signs of the Times (Salt Lake City, 1943), p. 12.
[^70] JD, X, p. 175.
[^71] D&C 76:42.
[^72] Ibid., 76:20-24.
[^73] See ibid., 25:1; 39:1-4; Moses 6:59-62, 66-68; 7:1.
[^74] MS, IV (August, 1843), p. 51.
[^75] Moses 1:38.
[^76] 2 Nephi 9:20-21.
[^77] D&C 38:1-3.
[^78] See verse two.
[^79] D&C 93.
[^80] See chapter two.
[^81] D&C 88:5-6.
[^82] Ibid., 93:24-26.
[^83] Ibid., 93:26.
[^84] Ibid., 93:36.
[^85] See 2 Nephi 9:20-21; D&C 38:1-3; 93:24-26.
[^86] Acts 15:18.
[^87] Isaiah 46:9-10.
[^88] Lectures on Faith 4:11.
[^89] Ibid., 4:17.
[^90] See D&C 132, in light of the view that man may eventually become as God.
[^91] Abraham 3:16.
[^92] This fact has been considered earlier in this chapter.
[^93] Abraham, 3:18-19.
[^94] TPJS, p. 373.
[^95] "If You Could Hie To Kolob," Hymns: Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (current ed.), No. 257.
[^96] TPJS, p. 373.
[^97] Revelation 1:6. In publishing Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of the Bible, the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints has altered this passage so that it does not carry the meaning that the King James version expresses and which the Prophet sanctioned. Before the Saints left Nauvoo in the great exodus west, John M. Bernhisel made a copy of the Inspired Revision from Joseph Smith's original work. The Bernhisel manuscript, in the Church Historian's Library in Salt Lake City, indicates that the King James version of this verse is correct as it stands. Joseph Smith made no alterations of this verse in his Inspired Revision of the Bible.
[^98] TPJS, p. 373.
[^99] Ibid.
[^100] Ibid., pp. 345-346.
[^101] Ibid., p. 346. For the passage which the Prophet cites, see John 5:26. Jesus also said: "The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the FAther do: for what things soever he [the Father] doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise."—John 5:19.
[^102] Moses 1:38.
[^103] Ibid., 1:5.
[^104] D&C 132:31.
[^105] Ibid., 132:63.
[^106] Ibid., 105:1-5.
[^107] See an explanation by Brigham Young in JD, IV, p. 266.
[^108] TPJS, pp. 347-348.
[^109] Moses 1:39.
[^110] Ibid., 1:5.
[^111] Abraham 3:26.
[^112] D&C 121:46.
[^113] TPJS, p. 373.
[^114] D&C 105:1-5.
[^115] Ibid., 93:28, 36.
[^116] Ibid., 88:7.
[^117] Ibid., 93:28.
[^118] Ether 3:14.
[^119] JD, VIII, p. 10.
[^120] See Deseret News, July 25, 1860; August 23, 1865; MS, XXVII, October 21, 1865, pp. 657-663. More recently this official statement has been published in James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, II (Salt Lake City, 1966), pp. 233-235.
[^121] The Seer, I (August, 1853), p. 117.
