Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1967)

CHAPTER 14

THE WORK AND GLORY OF GOD

The Pearl of Great Price contributes to a philosophy of life that has both its beginning and its end in the eternal realms of boundless space. That revealed philosophy is concerned with the vastness of God's creations and the place of man in the eternal scheme of life. It teaches that celestial man will be endowed in the resurrection with the divine attributes and powers of eternal life. He will then see as God sees, comprehend as God comprehends, move in space as God moves, and express his will and power in all and through all things as God does now.

Celestial beings will also be organized into a society that is patterned after the divine patriarchal order that exists in eternity, and those who have obeyed the New and Everlasting Covenant of Marriage will reign as kings, priests, and patriarchs over their posterity. Exalted celestial beings will have the power of eternal increase—eternal lives, or the continuation of posterity forever. [^1] In other words, they will have power to organize, by procreation, both spirit and physical bodies; [^2] and having begotten children in eternity, they may develop within them the living attributes and powers of immortal glory. Of such exalted individuals, a revelation said: "Then shall they be gods, because they have no end; therefore shall they be from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue; then shall they be above all, because all things are subject unto them." [^3] The Pearl of Great Price helps man better to understand this view of his eternal destiny.

God's Creations Revealed To Ancient Prophets

The Vision of Enoch

As Enoch was enveloped in glory and communed with God face to face, he expressed a view that was sanctioned by the Lord:

. . . were it possible that man could number the particles of the earth, yea, millions of earths like this, it would not be a beginning to the number of thy creations; and thy curtains are stretched out still; and yet thou art there, and thy bosom is there; and also thou art just; thou art merciful and kind forever;

And thou hast taken Zion to thine own bosom, from all thy creations, from all eternity to all eternity. . . . [^4]

The sands of a given sea shore are innumerable to man, to say nothing of the number of the particles that comprise the earth. But could man number the particles of the earth and of millions of other earths like this, it would not be a beginning to the number of God's creations. The figure that would constitute the number of God's creations must therefore go far beyond the thought that Enoch expressed. Yet God said to Enoch: "Wherefore, I can stretch forth mine hands and hold all the creations which I have made; and mine eye can pierce them also." [^5]

A second thought expressed by the patriarch Enoch is found in his statement to God: "And thou hast taken Zion to thine own bosom, from all thy creations, from all eternity to all eternity." [^6] As was indicated in a previous chapter, God's purpose has been to introduce the law of Zion among the inhabitants of all His creations, so that those who obey His law of spiritual and economic union and power may return to His presence and be made heirs of all that He possesses. Hence Enoch said that God had taken Zion to His own bosom from all His creations, from all eternity to all eternity.

The Knowledge of the Universe in Antediluvian Times

Except for the report of Enoch's vision, the Pearl of Great Price does not give specific information about the knowledge of the universe as possessed by the antediluvian patriarchs and prophets. It is evident, however, that they had considerable knowledge of it and of related subjects. Abraham stated that the records which he possessed, containing information about the antediluvian world, gave "a knowledge of the beginning of the creation, and also of the planets, and of the stars, as they were made known unto the fathers." [^7] Joseph Smith's Egyptian Alphabet and Grammar corroborates this statement. It indicates that the great governing spheres in the stellar system to which the earth belongs were discovered by the antediluvian patriarchs and prophets by means of the Urim and Thummim, [^8] and that Methuselah was the first to discover Kolob [^9]—the central governing sphere of this stellar system.

The Vision of Abraham

To Abraham, the Lord also revealed many things pertaining to His creations through the Urim and Thummim. Concerning the system to which this earth belongs, he wrote:

And I, Abraham, had the Urim and Thummim, which the Lord my God had given unto me, in Ur of the Chaldees;

And I saw the stars, that they were very great, and that one of them was nearest unto the throne of God; and there were many great ones which were near unto it;

And the Lord said unto me: These are the governing ones; and the name of the great one is Kolob, because it is near unto me, for I am the Lord thy God: I have set this one to govern all those which belong to the same order as that upon which thou standest.

And the Lord said unto me, by the Urim and Thummim, that Kolob was after the manner of the Lord, according to its times and seasons in the revolutions thereof; that one revolution was a day unto the Lord, after his manner of reckoning, it being one thousand years according to the time appointed unto that whereon thou standest. This is the reckoning of the Lord's time, according to the reckoning of Kolob.

And the Lord said unto me: The planet which is the lesser light, lesser than that which is to rule the day, even the night, is above or greater than that upon which thou standest in point of reckoning, for it moveth in order more slow; this is in order because it standeth above the earth upon which thou standest, therefore the reckoning of its time is not so many as to its number of days, and of months, and of years.

And the Lord said unto me: Now, Abraham, these two facts exist, behold thine eyes see it; it is given unto thee to know the times of reckoning, and the set time, yea, the set time of the earth upon which thou standest, and the set time of the greater light which is set to rule the day, and the set time of the lesser light which is set to rule the night.

Now the set time of the lesser light is a longer time as to its reckoning than the reckoning of the time of the earth upon which thou standest.

And where these two facts exist, there shall be another fact above them, that is, there shall be another planet whose reckoning of time shall be longer still;

And thus there shall be the reckoning of the time of one planet above another, until thou come nigh unto Kolob, which Kolob is after the reckoning of the Lord's time; which Kolob is set nigh unto the throne of God, to govern all those planets which belong to the same order as that upon which thou standest.

And it is given unto thee to know the set time of all the stars that are set to give light, until thou come near unto the throne of God.

Thus I, Abraham, talked with the Lord, face to face, as one man talketh with another; and he told me of the works which his hands had made;

And he said unto me: My son, my son (and his hand was stretched out) behold I will show you all these. And he put his hand upon mine eyes, and I saw those things which his hands had made, which were many; and they multiplied before mine eyes, and I could not see the end thereof.

And he said unto me: This is Shinehah, which is the sun. And he said unto me: Kokob, which is star. And he said unto me: Olea, which is the moon. And he said unto me: Kokaubeam, which signifies stars, or all the great lights, which were in the firmament of heaven.

And it was in the night time when the Lord spake these words unto me. . . .

And the Lord said unto me: Abraham, I show these things unto thee before ye go into Egypt, that ye may declare all these words.

If two things exist, and there be one above the other, there shall be greater things above them; therefore Kolob is the greatest of all the Kokaubeam that thou hast seen, because it is nearest unto me.

Now, if there be two things, one above the other, and the moon be above the earth, then it may be that a planet or a star may exist above it; and there is nothing that the Lord thy God shall take in his heart to do but what he will do it. [^10]

Several facts are evident from the Lord's statement to Abraham. First, the universe is not stationary, but is constantly moving under the governing power of many great bodies in space. The government of the stellar system to which this earth belongs [^11] is centered in a mighty sphere called Kolob. Abraham thus wrote: "I saw the stars, that they were very great, and that one of them was nearest unto the throne of God; and there were many great ones which were near unto it." [^12]

Second, Kolob is so named because it is near God. [^13] In his explanation of Facsimile No. 2 in the Book of Abraham, Joseph Smith wrote: "Kolob, signifying the first creation, nearest to the celestial, or the residence of God." [^14] Kolob is not the sphere on which God dwells, nor the central place of His habitation, but the great governing sphere of our stellar system closest in law and government to the sphere upon which God dwells.

Third, in its revolutions as a great governing sphere, Kolob's time is based upon celestial time. There is a system of celestial time; and below this there are other systems based upon the speed of rotation of the given planet or star. Joseph Smith therefore gave an affirmative reply to the question: "Is not the reckoning of God's time, angel's time, prophet's time, and man's time, according to the planet on which they reside?" [^15] God explained to Abraham "that Kolob was after the manner of the Lord, according to its times and seasons in the revolutions thereof; that one revolution was a day unto the Lord, after his manner of reckoning." [^16] In comparing the time schedule of Kolob to that of the earth, Joseph Smith wrote: "One day in Kolob is equal to a thousand years according to the measurement of this earth." [^17] The earth therefore revolves 365,250 times, counting its revolutions during leap years, while Kolob is rotating but once.

Fourth, there is a graduated system in time and government within the cosmos which extends from those spheres that have shorter periods of revolution upward to Kolob and the governing sphere on which God dwells. In explaining this principle to Abraham, the Lord cited the moon in its revolutions as compared to the earth. The moon's reckoning of time is longer than that of the earth. Having noted this fact, the Lord concluded: "Where these two facts exist [that there is one sphere whose time schedule is greater than another], there shall be another fact above them, that is, there shall be another planet whose reckoning of time shall be longer still; and thus there shall be the reckoning of the time of one planet above another, until thou come nigh unto Kolob." [^18]

Fifth, having revealed the basic facts indicated above, God showed Abraham the many spheres within the great stellar system that are associated with Kolob. [^19] In referring to these many spheres which He had created, the Lord said: "Behold I will show you all these." [^20] God then placed His hand upon Abraham's eyes, and his power of spiritual sight was quickened so that he could see the creations of God; and they multiplied before his eyes and he could not see the end thereof. As Abraham saw these things, the Lord named some of the spheres. Shinehah is the name which He gave to the sun. Olea is the moon. Kokob is star, and Kokaubeam signifies stars, or all the great lights. [^21]

Other governing spheres in the stellar system related to Kolob are also named in the Book of Abraham. In some instances, however, it appears that the names given to these spheres are those applied by man and not those given by the Lord. [^22] In explaining Facsimile No. 2, Joseph Smith wrote of a governing sphere: "Stands next to Kolob, called by the Egyptians Oliblish, which is the next grand governing creation near to the celestial or the place where God resides; holding the key of power also, pertaining to other planets; as revealed from God to Abraham, as he offered sacrifice upon an altar, which he had built unto the Lord." [^23] Oliblish "is equal with Kolob in its revolution and in its measuring of time." [^24] Of another sphere represented on this facsimile, the Prophet Joseph wrote:

Is called in Egyptian Enish-go-on-dosh; this is one of the governing planets also, and is said by the Egyptians to be the Sun, and to borrow its light from Kolob through the medium of Kae-e-vanrash, which is the grand Key, or, in other words, the governing power, which governs fifteen other fixed planets or stars, as also Floeese or the Moon, the Earth and the Sun in their annual revolutions. This planet receives its power through the medium of Kli-flos-is-es, or Hah-ko-kau-beam, the stars represented by numbers 22 and 23 [in the facsimile], receiving light from the revolutions of Kolob. [^25]

The above statement says that the sun borrows its light from Kolob through the medium of Kae-e-vanrash, a governing sphere that receives its power through the medium of Kliflos-is-es, or Hah-ko-kau-beam, which are stars that receive their "light from the revolutions of Kolob." [^26] Therefore, there is an organization of light in the cosmos; and the center of light for the stellar system to which the earth belongs is Kolob.

The Lord's Explanation to Moses

As God revealed Himself to Moses before he went into Egypt to redeem the Israelites, Moses desired to know about the many creations of God. Moses therefore called upon God saying: "Tell me, I pray thee, why these things are so, and by what thou madest them?" [^27] The Book of Moses then states:

. . . the glory of the Lord was upon Moses, so that Moses stood in the presence of God, and talked with him face to face. And the Lord God said unto Moses: For mine own purpose have I made these things. Here is wisdom and it remaineth in me.

And by the word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth.

And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten.

And the first man of all men have I called Adam, which is many.

But only an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, give I unto you. For behold, there are many worlds that have passed away by the word of my power. And there are many that now stand, and innumerable are they unto man; but all things are numbered unto me, for they are mine and I know them.

And it came to pass that Moses spake unto the Lord, saying: Be merciful unto thy servant, O God, and tell me concerning this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, and also the heavens, and then thy servant will be content.

And the Lord God spake unto Moses, saying: the heavens, they are many, and they cannot be numbered unto man; but they are numbered unto me, for they are mine.

And as one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof even so shall another come; and there is no end to my works, neither to my words.

For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. [^28]

Several significant ideas may be found in this revelation: First, God has created so many worlds that they cannot be numbered by man. In this statement, God confirmed the view that had been expressed previously by Enoch. But though the creations of God are innumerable to man, the Lord stated: "All things are numbered unto me, for they are mine and I know them." [^29]

Second, these many spheres were created to fulfill the purpose of God. "For mine own purpose have I made these things," the Lord explained. "Here is wisdom and it remaineth in me." [^30] Though God's full purpose in creating these many creations was not revealed to Moses, the Lord seems to have indicated that they were made to become the abode of man. Nephi said of this sphere: "Behold, the Lord hath created the earth that it should be inhabited; and he hath created his children that they should possess it." [^31] So it is with God's works in eternity. After explaining that as one earth and its atmospheric heavens pass away another is formed, God said: "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." [^32] The word "for" in the last sentence is a transitional one linking the statement with which it is associated to the preceding idea as an explanation of why a new earth is created as an earlier one passes away. God is continually creating one earth after another to be the abode of man, a being who occupies myriads of spheres in space, many of which were created and inhabited long before this earth was organized. Man is on this earth as a part of an eternal plan that has been applied to other spheres, each in its turn, to the end that the inhabitants may be exalted to glory and power, and that God Himself may continually increase in His glory.

Third, it seems evident that these numerous worlds were created through the instrumentality of the Only Begotten Son of the Father, who is Jesus Christ. "By the word of my power, have I created them, which is my Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth," God declared to Moses. "And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten." [^33] Since God's glory is His power, [^34] it follows that the "word of His power" is the divine expression (or word) by which His glory (the Holy Spirit) is directed in the several actions by which worlds are created. That word, along with the glory and power of the Father, is centered in Christ as the Executive of the Father. For this reason the Father made the word of His power synonymous with His Only Begotten when He said in the above statement, "By the word of my power have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son." [^35] In Christ is centered the word of the Father's power by which worlds without number have been created.

Similarly, the word of the Father's power in redemption consists of the divine word or expression of truth by which man in mortality may receive the mercy and power of God unto salvation. That word, with the glory and power related to it, is also centered in Christ. Here again He is referred to as the Word. Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of John's testimony states:

In the beginning was the gospel preached through the Son. And the gospel was the word, and the word was with the Son, and the Son was with God, and the Son was of God.

The same was in the beginning with God.

All things were made by him; and without him was not anything made which was made.

In him was the gospel, and the gospel was the life, and the life was the light of men. . . .

And the same word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth. [^36]

Thus the word of the Father's power in creating, redeeming, and glorifying life is centered in the Only Begotten Son, who is Jesus Christ. Jesus was not merely the Babe of Bethlehem and the master Teacher of man on this earth, but the great Executive of the Father by whom worlds without number have been created.

Fourth, God's revelation to man is limited mainly to His works concerning this earth. To Moses, the Lord declared: "But only an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, give I unto you." [^37] This leaves unanswered many questions that may arise. But there is wisdom and purpose in thus limiting the revelation of God. Man is on earth to be tested and proven in the physical endowments of life, and to learn by obedience to develop the powers of the Holy Spirit in his life. Only when he does this is it wise to open the vision of eternity beyond that which pertains to his mortal probation and its intended purposes. Having explained that His Spirit is truth and that truth abides and has no end so that if the Spirit is in man it will "abound," God said: "And if your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things." [^38] Here is the real objective of life, to which intellectual curiosity, however valid, is a secondary matter. Only when man has come into a mature spiritual union with God and been made a partaker of His glory will he be privileged to know all that he would like to know about universal space and the many worlds that God has created.

Clarifications On The Nature Of The Universe

The Living Universe

Modern revelation indicates that there is a boundless infinitude of space, and that the Spirit of God—the divine nature of God—permeates and quickens the life within all things. Joseph Smith spoke of "matter, which is element, and in which dwells all the glory." [^39] He declared that the Father and the Son "fill all in all." [^40] A revelation stated: "The elements are the tabernacle of God; yea, man is the tabernacle of God, even temples." [^41] This statement has no reference to the basic fact that God has a tangible, corporeal body composed of elements. It declares, instead, that the elements of the universe are the tabernacle of God's divine nature—of His divine intelligence, or glory, that dwells in all things. In this way, the orderly cosmos is the extended body, or tabernacle, of the divine intelligence and power that center in Him as a tangible, corporeal being.

In addition to the fact that divine properties and powers of life from God dwell in the elements of the universe, Parley P. Pratt explained that all varieties of element "possess in themselves certain inherent properties or attributes, in a greater or less degree." [^42] For life to be inherent in matter it must be there innately. Consequently, as has been shown in a previous chapter, there is some form of life within all matter, first, as an inherent or innate property and, second, because the divine nature of God fills the immensity of space and permeates and quickens all things therein. Man therefore resides in a living universe. Brigham Young explained:

Life in various proportions, combinations, conditions, etc., fills all matter. . . . There is life in all matter, throughout the vast extent of all eternities; it is in the rock, the sand, the dust, in water, air, the gases, and in short in every description and organization of matter, whether it be solid, liquid, or gaseous, particle operating with particle. [^43]

Because there is an organized spirit world associated with the physical earth, the earth is (in its sphere and realm of existence) a living entity. The Lord explained:

. . . the earth abideth the law of a celestial kingdom, for it filleth the measure of its creation, and transgresseth not the law—

Wherefore, it shall be sanctified; yea, notwithstanding it shall die, it shall be quickened again, and shall abide the power by which it is quickened. . . . [^44]

The earth could not die without being alive; and it could not be quickened again if it were not now quickened with life. That the earth is a living entity cognizant in some measure of its existence is evident from the report of Enoch's experience. While he was enveloped in glory and thereby brought into a spiritual union with the divine powers that quicken all things throughout the universe,

. . . it came to pass that Enoch looked upon the earth; and he heard a voice from the bowels thereof, saying: Wo, wo is me, the mother of men; I am pained, I am weary, because of the wickedness of my children. When shall I rest, and be cleansed from the filthiness which is gone forth out of me? When will my Creator sanctify me, that I may rest, and righteousness for a season abide upon my face?

And when Enoch heard the earth mourn, he wept, and cried unto the Lord, saying: O Lord, wilt thou not have compassion upon the earth? Wilt thou not bless the children of Noah? [^45]

It should not be concluded that Enoch heard the earth speak in an audible voice. Enoch was enveloped in glory, and the earth's reaction to man's wickedness was communicated to him through this divine intelligence.

Just as the earth is a living sphere, there are also other organized spheres of life throughout universal space. And in a similar way, but on a microscopic scale, there is life within all the many spheres that have been organized throughout God's domain. The Lord said:

All kingdoms have a law given;

And there are many kingdoms; for there is no space in the which there is no kingdom; and there is no kingdom in which there is no space, either a greater or a lesser kingdom.

And unto every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there are certain bounds also and conditions. [^46]

The Unity Within The Universe

The cohesive power that unites all the various forms and spheres of life in the living universe is the natural affinity that light has to light and that truth has to truth. This uniting force is produced by the influence of the Light of Christ which proceeds "forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space." This, said a revelation, is "the light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed." [^47] Of the cohesive, uniting, and governing influence of the Light of Christ in the universe, the Lord said: "For intelligence cleaveth unto intelligence; wisdom receiveth wisdom; truth embraceth truth; virtue loveth virtue; light cleaveth unto light; mercy hath compassion on mercy and claimeth her own; justice continueth its course and claimeth its own; judgment goeth before the face of him who sitteth upon the throne and governeth and executeth all things." [^48]

For life to exist in its many varieties throughout space, it must fulfill certain basic prerequisites. A revelation explained: "All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence." [^49] Since truth and intelligence are identified with all forms of life, it is apparent that life in its various forms and degrees can exist only if it is independent in the sphere in which it is placed by the Lord. Such a condition of independence requires, first, that law be ordained defining the bounds and conditions of the sphere in which a given form or element of life is placed. Second, the life in that sphere must understand the law under which it is placed, with its penalties and rewards. Third, the agency to obey or disobey that law must be established and held inviolate. Fourth, alternatives must exist in order for choices to be made and in order that there might be an opposition in all things. [^50] Finally, the given form or element of life must choose freely and maturely to obey the law governing it in its sphere of existence. Only then can it be independent therein. Upon this foundation of independence the cosmic universe, with its myriad forms of organized life, has been developed.

Just as there are noble and great spirits whom God appoints to be His rulers, there are also governing spheres in the universe which govern and control the many worlds He has created. These orbs exist, as Abraham's vision indicates, on a graduated scale, upward in glory and power until they arrive at Kolob. John Taylor explained:

. . . while our planetary system rolls in perfect order round the sun, there are other systems which perform their revolutions around their suns; and the whole of these, our system with its centre, and other systems with their centres, roll round another grand centre: and the whole of those, and innumerable others, equally as great, stupendous, and magnificent, roll round another more great, glorious, and resplendent, till numbers, magnificence, and glory, drown the thought. . . . [^51]

This view of the cosmos was set forth by Joseph Smith in the era of Newtonian thought when many people still accepted the theory of a fixed universe with no stellar movements.

God's Purposes in Organizing Life

Brigham Young stressed a basic principle when he declared that "matter is capacitated to receive intelligence." Matter can therefore "be organized and brought forth into intelligence, and to possess more intelligence, and to continue to increase in that intelligence." [^52] As stated in an earlier chapter, the scriptures refer to two types of intelligence. The primal intelligence within man is designated as "intelligence, or the light of truth," [^53] and the intelligence by which that primal life may be glorified is said to be "intelligence, or . . . light and truth." [^54] In the divine plan and program of life, God takes the primal, or innate, elements of life within matter and organizes them in union with a central, primal intelligence to produce a given form of life. He does this to develop more intelligence within that creation and to give it added means of increasing in intelligence. Intelligence is not created, neither indeed can it be created. [^55] But life can be organized to acquire and possess greater intelligence; and having been organized, it can be refined and expanded in its capacity so that it can increase in intelligence.

The pure and fine form of matter designated as "spirit" [^56] has a greater capacity to receive intelligence than does gross matter. God therefore begins His work of organizing life in the realm of spirit. Having organized various forms of spirit life, God then clothes these spirit bodies with tabernacles composed of gross matter. Some things have the required intelligence to act. While others have only that kind and degree of intelligence which enables them to be acted upon. [^57] Organized spirit comes under the first classification, and the gross elements of the universe may be classified in the second. Both the spirit and the gross organization are important, and only when spirit and gross matter are "inseparably connected" can man attain a fulness of joy. [^58]

God's ultimate purpose is to glorify life in a resurrected state. To this final objective the Pearl of Great Price bears witness. Enoch beheld that in the latter days righteousness would be sent down from heaven and truth would come forth out of the earth to bear testimony of Christ's resurrection and of the resurrection of all men. [^59] In vision, Enoch also saw the resurrection of Christ, after which "the saints arose, and were crowned at the right hand of the Son of Man, with crowns of glory." [^60] Because the ancient patriarch understood the final object of God's work concerning man, he expressed a hope in that final purpose as he inquired concerning Christ's atonement: "When shall the blood of the Righteous be shed, that all they that mourn may be sanctified and have eternal life?" [^61]

God's work is not limited to the creation of worlds and the organization of life to dwell upon them. He made it plain to Moses that his final purpose is to glorify all that He creates. One of the greatest, if not the greatest, declarations found in sacred literature stating the purposes of God in relation to man was expressed when the Lord said to Moses: "Behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." [^62] It is God's work—the central purpose of all His designs and of all His creative activities—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. His ultimate purpose is not merely to create and then redeem man in the resurrection, so that man is made an immortal being, but to endow man with the glory and power that is required to give him eternal life. The meaning of immortality is to be resurrected and thereafter live forever. But the greater purpose of God, as expressed in behalf of the faithful, is to raise man "in immortality unto eternal life." [^63]

The work of creating, redeeming, and glorifying man is also designed to fulfill a major purpose as it concerns God and the benefits that accrue to Him as a result of His work. It is not only God's work but also His glory to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. By His work, God attains glory; and as He continues to work, He continues to increase in glory. To make this fact more apparent, the above declaration of God to Moses is given as it appeared when it was initially published in this dispensation. It then read: "Behold this is my work to my glory, to the immortality and eternal life of man." [^64] God works to increase and enhance His glory, which He then shares with those who become heirs within His kingdom.

The Scope of Christ's Redemption

To Moses, God stated that He had created "worlds without number" and that they had been created by the Son, who is the Only Begotten of the Father. [^65] Speaking several hundred years before Christ performed His atoning mission, the Lord explained:

There are many worlds that have passed away [i.e., been created, passed through a mortal stage, then died] by the word of my power. And there are many that now stand, and innumerable are they to man, . . . and as one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof even so shall another come; and there is no end to my works, neither to my words. [^66]

According to the scriptures, [^67] these worlds, having been created by Christ, may also be redeemed by the power of the infinite atonement which He made on this earth. It may be for this reason that God stated to Moses that many earths had only been created by the Only Begotten and thereafter "passed away." The Lord did not indicate that they had been redeemed at that time, for Christ had not then inaugurated the resurrection. Hence God said only that they had been created and that they later passed away.

A full explanation of Christ's purpose in coming to this earth to make His infinite atonement is not found in the scriptures. One reason may be the state of corruption that has at times prevailed upon this earth. To Enoch, the Lord declared: "Wherefore, I can stretch forth mine hands and hold all the creations which I have made; and mine eye can pierce them also, and among all the workmanship of mine hands there has not been so great wickedness as among thy brethren." [^68] Concerning this statement, Joseph Fielding Smith said:

This is a terrible arraignment against the inhabitants of this earth. Perhaps this is the reason Jesus Christ was sent here instead of to some other world, for in some other world they would not have crucified Him, and His presence was needed here because of the extreme wickedness of the inhabitants of this earth. [^69]

If Christ has created other worlds and if, by His sacrifice, He redeems and glorifies that which He creates, it seems logical to conclude that the resurrection on other spheres must have been delayed until Christ made His infinite atonement. And, as President Smith suggests, there may be some purpose for Christ coming to make His Atonement on this earth. Of the spiritual darkness of men on this earth, Brigham Young said:

I suppose that God never organized an earth and peopled it that was ever reduced to a lower state of darkness, sin and ignorance than this. I suppose this is one of the lowest kingdoms that ever the Lord Almighty created, and on that account is capable of becoming exalted to be one of the highest kingdoms that has ever had an exaltation in all the eternities. In proportion as it has been reduced so it will be exalted, with that portion of its inhabitants who in their humiliation have cleaved to righteousness and acknowledged God in all things. In proportion to our fall through sin, so shall we be exalted in the presence of our Father and God, through Jesus Christ and by living the righteousness of his Gospel. [^70]

That Christ's atonement covers worlds in addition to this earth seems apparent from the fact that Jesus made His great sacrifice so that "through him all might be saved whom the Father had put into his power and made by him." [^71] Christ evidently redeems all that He creates. This is attested to in latter-day revelation. Of the word of God to them concerning Christ while they were wrapped in heavenly vision, Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon said: "We heard the voice bearing record that He is the Only Begotten of the Father—that by him [i.e., Christ], and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof [that is, the inhabitants of these many worlds] are begotten sons and daughters unto God." [^72] To become a son or a daughter of God through Christ is to be born into the kingdom of heaven through the power of His atonement. [^73] For the inhabitants of the worlds that have been created by Christ to be begotten sons and daughters of God through Him, therefore, implies that His atonement extends to other worlds to give them the benefit of His redeeming power. That this is the meaning of the above scripture seems apparent from the views expressed in Joseph Smith's poetic arrangement of these verses:

And I heard a great voice bearing record from heav'n.

He's the Saviour and Only Begotten of God;

By Him, of Him, and through Him, the worlds were all made,

Even all that career in the heavens so broad.

Whose inhabitants, too, from the first to the last,

Are sav'd by the very same Saviour as ours;

And of course, are begotten God's daughters and sons

By the very same truths and the very same powers. [^74]

The Eternal Progression Of God

Christ Knows All Things

The scriptures testify that God is a progressive being. To Moses, the Lord declared: "There is no end to my works, neither to my words." [^75] In order to comprehend the nature of God's progression, some basic facts need to be established. Among these essential points of doctrine is the fact that Christ knows all things. The Nephite prophet Jacob said of Christ:

O how great the holiness of our God! For he knoweth all things, and there is not anything save he knows it.

And he cometh into the world that he may save all men if they will hearken unto his voice. . . . [^76]

In a revelation given through Joseph Smith to the Church in this dispensation, Jesus also said:

Thus saith the Lord your God, even Jesus Christ, the Great I AM, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the same which looked upon the wide expanse of eternity, and all the seraphic hosts of heaven, before the world was made;

The same which knoweth all things, for all things are present before mine eyes;

I am the same which spake, and the world was made, and all things came by me. [^77]

The full details of how Christ knows all things have not been revealed. However, there are some important insights that have been revealed on the subject. It is said that Jesus knows all things by means of the Holy Spirit. For instance Christ declared in the above revelation that He knows all things because "all things" are present before His eyes. [^78] In other words, He knows all things because His glory, or divine intelligence, dwells in all things, giving Him visual contact with, and knowledge of, all things.

The most meaningful statement that has been given indicating the way by which Christ knows all things is found in a revelation given to Joseph Smith in May, 1833. [^79] As was indicated in an earlier chapter, [^80] this revelation states that Christ continued receiving the glory of the Father, grace for grace, until He received a fulness of the divine intelligence and power of the Father and was made perfectly one with the Man of Holiness in the possession of His divine nature. Having received the fulness of the Father's glory, Jesus was then in a position to develop the full glory of the Man of Holiness within man in his resurrected state. In the ultimate sense of celestial union, Christ could then "be in all and through all things, the light of truth." [^81]

Because Jesus is in perfect intelligent union with all things throughout the vast domain of the Father, by means of spiritual powers of truth, He knows all things. He is the center of the Spirit of truth that emanates from the Father. The revelation mentioned above explains:

. . . truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come;

And whatsoever is more or less than this is the spirit of that wicked one who was a liar from the beginning.

The Spirit of truth is of God. I am the Spirit of truth, and John bore record of me, saying: He received a fulness of truth, yea, even of all truth. [^82]

Having defined truth as knowledge of things present, past, and future, this revelation indicates that such knowledge is centered in Christ by means of the Spirit of truth. "The Spirit of truth is of God," it declares. Since for us Jesus is the center of this divine and intelligent substance or essence as it is extended to Him from the Father, Christ declared: "I am the Spirit of truth, and John bore record of me, saying: He received a fulness of truth, yea, even of all truth." [^83]

Christ received a fulness of truth—knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come—when He received a fulness of the Father's glory. "The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth." [^84] To receive a fulness of the Father's glory was therefore to receive a fulness of truth; and to receive the Spirit of truth in its fulness was to be brought intuitively in tune with all things within the Father's kingdom—to be in and through all things within that vast domain. It is on this basis that Christ knows all things.

It is important to understand that all scriptures which declare that God knows all things are speaking specifically of Christ as the God of this earth. [^85] They also indicate that His fulness of truth consists of the fulness of the Father's glory. In this divine framework all such statements should be considered. Christ knows all things within His Father's kingdom. He has all knowledge to save and exalt man within that kingdom. There is no deficiency in His power to elevate man to celestial truth and power within the domain of the Man of Holiness.

In his Lectures on Faith, the Prophet stressed this point as he treated the attribute of knowledge within God. He cited the book of Acts, which states: "Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world." [^86] He also quoted Isaiah: "Remember the former things of old: for I am God, and there is none else; I am God, and there is none like me, declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure." [^87] Commenting on these statements, Joseph Smith wrote:

. . . without the knowledge of all things, God would not be able to save any portion of his creatures; for it is by reason of the knowledge which he has of all things, from the beginning to the end, that enables him to give that understanding to his creatures by which they are made partakers of eternal life; and if it were not for the idea existing in the minds of men that God had all knowledge it would be impossible for them to exercise faith in him. [^88]

When the Prophet's statement is studied in the light of the above scriptures, it is apparent that he meant that so far as this world is concerned, God has a knowledge of all things from the beginning to the end. No doubt this is true of all other spheres within His vast domain. He declares the end from the beginning, because He knows the future as well as the present and the past. Nothing can disrupt His plans. Consequently, there is no deficiency in His power to save and exalt mankind. Joseph Smith concluded: "For inasmuch as God possesses the attribute of knowledge, he can make all things known to his Saints necessary for their salvation." [^89] Upon this fact the faith of the Saints should rest.

The Divine Patriarchal Order of Eternity

When exalted man attains the power of eternal lives—the continuation of posterity forever and ever—in the resurrection, he will have power within the realm of spirit to organize, through procreation, spirit children over whom he will preside as a father and a god. [^90] His spirit children will then have the same relationship to him that man had to Elohim in the pre-earth existence. Those who attain an exaltation in the celestial kingdom will also have the responsibility of guiding and directing their spirit offspring through the further experiences of life that are necessary in acquiring physical bodies and rising to exaltation in the midst of celestial glory.

Herein is portrayed the eternal cycle of organized life that has been continuing from all eternity, and that will continue to all eternity. There is therefore a patriarchal line of deities, one generation above another, without end. In stating a basic fact which has important variations, God said to Abraham: "If two things exist, and there be one above the other, there shall be greater things above them." [^91] One variation of this basic truth in our area of the orderly cosmos is that there is a continual ascendancy in time schedule and in government, one sphere above another, upward to Kolob, whose measurement of time is the same as the sphere upon which God resides. [^92] The Lord informed Abraham that another expression of this basic truth is that where there are two spirits organized by the Father, one more intelligent than the other, "there shall be another more intelligent than they." Jehovah then said: "I am the Lord, I am more intelligent than they all." [^93] Of a third variation of this basic truth, Joseph Smith said:

I learned a testimony concerning Abraham, and he reasoned concerning the God of heaven. "In order to do that," said he, "suppose we have two facts: that supposes another fact may exist—two men on the earth, one wiser than the other, would logically show that another who is wiser than the wisest may exist. Intelligences exist one above another, so that there is no end to them."

If Abraham reasoned thus—If Jesus Christ was the Son of God, and John discovered that God the Father of Jesus Christ had a Father, you may suppose that He had a Father also. Where was there ever a son without a father? And where was there ever a father without first being a son? Whenever did a tree or anything spring into existence without a progenitor? And everything comes in this way. Paul says that which is earthly is in the likeness of that which is heavenly. Hence if Jesus had a Father, can we not believe that He had a Father also? I despise the idea of being scared to death at such a doctrine, for the Bible is full of it.

I want you to pay particular attention to what I am saying. Jesus said that the Father wrought precisely in the same way as His Father had done before Him. As the Father had done before? He laid down His life, and took it up the same as His Father had done before. He did as He was sent, to lay down His life and take it up again; and then was committed unto Him the keys. I know it is good reasoning. [^94]

From the Prophet's explanation, several ideas are apparent: First, in eternity, "intelligences exist one above another, so that there is no end to them." That is, there is one God above another without end in the divine patriarchal order of eternity. William W. Phelps, who was closely associated with the Prophet in the translation of the Book of Abraham, wrote, and Latter-day Saints now sing:

If you could hie to Kolob in the twinkling of an eye,

And then continue onward with that same speed to fly,

D'ye think that you could ever, through all eternity,

Find out the generation where Gods began to be?

Or see the grand beginning, where space did not extend?

Or view the last creation, where Gods and matter end?

Me-thinks the Spirit whispers, "No man has found 'pure space,'"

Nor seen the outside curtains, where nothing has a place. [^95]

Second, Joseph Smith pointed out that the Apostle John, while on the Isle of Patmos, was informed "that God the Father of Jesus Christ had a Father." [^96] Concerning Christ, John wrote: "And [He] hath made us kings and priests unto God and his Father." [^97] The Prophet reasoned: "Where was there ever a father without first being a son?" [^98] This is the eternal order of things; and according to our present understanding, there was no beginning.

Third, from Joseph Smith's line of reasoning it is apparent that sometime in the distant past the Father, the Man of Holiness, went through the necessary experiences to obtain a physical body and to raise it to exaltation amid celestial glory. "Jesus said that the Father wrought precisely in the same way as His Father had done before Him." Continuing, the latter-day seer said of Jesus: "He laid down His life, and took it up the same as His Father had done before." [^99] On another occasion, Joseph Smith declared:

God himself was once as we are now, and is an exalted man, and sits enthroned in yonder heavens! . . .

These are incomprehensible ideas to some, but they are simple. It is the first principle of the Gospel to know for a certainty the Character of God, and to know that we may converse with him as one man converses with another, and that he was once a man like us; yea, that God himself, the Father of us all, dwelt on an earth, the same as Jesus Christ himself did; and I will show it from the Bible. [^100]

Continuing, the Prophet declared:

The Scriptures inform us that Jesus said, As the Father hath power in Himself, even so hath the Son power—to do what? Why, what the Father did. The answer is obvious—in a manner to lay down His body and take it up again. Jesus, what are you going to do? To lay down my life as my Father did, and take it up again. Do we believe it? If you do not believe it, you do not believe the Bible. The scriptures say it, and I defy all the learning and wisdom and all the combined powers of earth and hell together to refute it. [^101]

The Ways and Means of Eternal Progression

God's divine nature (or glory) permeates His vast domain so that He knows all things therein. But this does not prevent Him from progressing, because His work and His words continue. [^102] The scriptures teach that God is progressing, or increasing, in at least three ways: (1) in posterity, (2) in dominion or worlds, and (3) in glory. The Man of Holiness continues to beget spirit children, and He will do so for ever and ever. Having begotten spirit beings, God also gives them the further attributes and endowments of life that lead ultimately to eternal life. Here, too, He is a Father; and in these ways, God is progressing continually in posterity. He also continues to create spirit worlds and physical worlds as places where His children may dwell. Thus His dominion continues to increase. Finally, it is God's purpose to glorify that which He creates. As His works increase, His glory must therefore increase. [^103]

To understand the ways and means of God's progression, it is necessary to have some insight into three basic areas of doctrine concerning Him and His law. First, man must understand in some degree the divine nature of God, for it is by His divine nature that God is in and through all things, and thereby knows all things. Man must also know something about God's divine nature in order to comprehend that He is progressing in glory. Second, man must understand the underlying principles of the divine patriarchal order and its foundation in the Law of Eternal Increase—the Law of Eternal Marriage. "By this law is the continuation of the works of my Father," Jesus declared in a revelation to Joseph Smith, "wherein he glorifieth himself." [^104] Again, Christ declared: "Herein is the work of my Father continued, that he may be glorified." [^105] In accordance with the Law of Eternal Increase, God progresses both in posterity and in glory. Finally, man must understand the principles of the Law of Consecration and Stewardship, which is also a basic celestial law. [^106]

In begetting sons and daughters in spirit birth and directing them through all the various experiences required to obtain exaltation in celestial glory, God administers to them the law of celestial union—the Law of Consecration and Stewardship. This law requires that they consecrate themselves and all they possess to Christ. Jesus, in turn, consecrates Himself and all He possesses to His Father, the Man of Holiness. This is the law of eternal justice and reciprocation by which one person repays another in some measure for that which he has received from him. By consecration, however, the grateful recipient becomes an heir in the celestial kingdom of God. As an heir, he has the right to receive a stewardship within the celestial system equivalent to his needs and his ability to manage. He also has a right, equal with other stewards, to draw upon the truth, glory, power, and wealth of God, to operate and expand his stewardship. In this way, exalted man may establish and continue to expand his own patriarchal kingdom in eternity.

God organizes and instructs His offspring so that His divine nature may be centered in them. In this way, He is in them and they are in Him; and there is an extension of His ever-continuing kingdom. The fact that God's children receive glory and power from Him does not diminish the glory and power which He possesses. [^107] But when those who subordinate themselves in truth to God and His law consecrate back to Him themselves and all that they possess, or all that God has developed within them in the organizations and endowments He has given them, God's dominion and power are extended and His glory is increased. Joseph Smith explained this point when he spoke of the meaning of becoming an heir of God and a joint heir with Jesus Christ. He stated:

What is it? To inherit the same power, the same glory and the same exaltation, until you arrive at the station of a God, and ascend the throne of eternal power, the same as those who have gone before. What did Jesus do? Why; I do the things I saw my Father do when worlds came rolling into existence. My Father worked out his kingdom with fear and trembling, and I must do the same; and when I get my kingdom, I shall present it to my Father [i.e., Christ will consecrate it to His Father], so that he may obtain kingdom upon kingdom, [i.e., progress in dominion] and it will exalt him in glory. He will then take a higher exaltation [in glory], and I will take his place, and thereby become exalted myself. So that Jesus treads in the tracks of his Father, and inherits what God did before; and God is thus glorified and exalted in the salvation and exaltation of his children. [^108]

In the doctrine of eternal progression may be seen the correlation that exists between God's work, which is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man, and His glory. To Moses, God explained: "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." [^109] God's glory increases commensurate with His work. For this reason the Lord also said to Moses: "No man can behold all my works, except he behold all my glory." [^110]

That which is true of God will also be true of exalted man, when he is crowned in the resurrection with glory and eternal lives. Of those who keep the law of God in their mortal probation, the Lord said: "They who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever." [^111] There will be no end to the increase of their glory. Their dominion will be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it will flow unto them forever and ever. [^112]

The fact that exalted beings have power to acquire glory by the work they perform can better be understood in light of the divine patriarchal order that exists in eternity, and in light of the rights and privileges of those who make up that heavenly system. As was indicated earlier in this chapter, Joseph Smith taught that in eternity "intelligences exist one above another, so that there is no end to them." [^113] Within the divine patriarchal order of eternity, there are Fathers above Fathers, or Gods above Gods, without end; and each great personage of Deity possesses glory according to the extent of the work He has performed. The Scriptures teach that the Law of Consecration and Stewardship is a basic law within this great celestial order. [^114] Our Father in Heaven—the Man of Holiness—therefore is a steward over His own patriarchal kingdom under the authority of His Father, or Fathers, before Him. To the knowledge which the Man of Holiness has of all things within His own patriarchal kingdom is added the right to draw upon the truth and power of the greater patriarchal kingdoms above Him. Since the Father is an heir within that greater celestial order, there is no truth or power in the patriarchal systems that exist above Him that the Man of Holiness does not have a legal claim upon in the event of a legitimate need. When this fact is added to the fact that Christ, as the Heir of the Father, is in all and through all things within His Father's vast domain, man may better appreciate the scriptural declarations which state that Jesus knows all things. Not only are Christ and His Father progressing in glory by the work they perform, but the glory of the patriarchal systems above them (in which they are heirs) is also increasing continually. Exalted man will also become a part of this eternal system.

God is Progressing in Truth

Although God knows all things by means of His glory, as has been discussed in this chapter, He is still continually progressing in truth. There is no question that He is progressing in glory; of this the scriptures bear adequate testimony. The constituents of glory (which is intelligence) are truth and light. [^115] To be more specific, a revelation to Joseph Smith stated that the light associated with Christ's glory consists of the radiance of truth; [^116] and another revelation declared that the faithful saints are to be "glorified in truth." [^117] Truth is therefore made equivalent with glory, or it is an essential part of glory. If God is progressing in glory, it follows that He must in some way be progressing in truth.

Exalted man will also continue to progress in truth forever and ever. With particular reference to those who are born into the kingdom of God and become His sons and daughters in eternal life, Jesus said: "In me shall all mankind have light, and that eternally, even they who shall believe on my name." [^118] To receive light through Christ eternally means that there will be no end to the divine truth, or light, which faithful saints will receive through Him in eternity.

Not only will man progress in truth after the resurrection, but he will do so more rapidly. Brigham Young explained: "I shall not cease learning while I live, nor when I arrive in the spirit-world; but shall there learn with greater facility; and when I again receive my body, I shall learn a thousand times more in a thousand times less time; and then I do not mean to cease learning, but shall still continue my researches." [^119]

Orson Pratt once taught the erroneous doctrine that neither exalted man nor God progresses in knowledge or truth. Because of his false teachings, Elder Pratt was publicly reprimanded in an official declaration issued by the First Presidency, which was also signed by members of the Quorum of the Twelve. [^120] Elder Pratt had written:

. . . when they [the Saints] become one with the Father and the Son and receive a fulness of their glory, that will be the end of all progression in knowledge, because there will be nothing more to be learned. The Father and the Son do not progress in knowledge and wisdom, because they already know all things, past, present, and to come. [^121]

Again from the false teachings of Elder Pratt:

There are none among them [the Gods] that are in advance of the others in knowledge; though some may have been Gods as many millions of years as there are particles of dust in all the universe, yet there is not one truth that such are in possession of but what every God knows. None of these Gods are progressing in knowledge; neither can they progress in the acquirement of any truth. [^122]

Of these and other erroneous views Elder Pratt had advanced, the First Presidency said:

The foregoing quoted ideas, and similar ones omitted to be quoted, with the comments thereon, as advanced by Br. Pratt in an article in the Seer, entitled "Pre-existence of Man," and in his treatise entitled "Great First Cause," are plausibly presented. But to the whole subject we will answer in the words of the Apostle Joseph Smith, on a similar occasion. One of the Elders of Israel had written a long communication which he deemed to be very important, and requested Br. Joseph to hear him read it. The Prophet commended his style in glowing terms, remarked that the ideas were ingeniously advanced, etc., etc., and that he had but one objection to it. "What is that?" inquired the writer, greatly elated that his production was considered so near perfect. The Prophet Joseph replied, "It is not true." [^123]

In addition to the official declaration by the First Presidency condemning the above views and other similar expressions by Orson Pratt, there are statements by Brigham Young and other presidents of the Church since his day (as well as other leading figures in the Church) declaring that God is progressing in knowledge and in truth. Brigham Young said:

All organized existence is in progress to an endless advancement in eternal perfections, or back to dissolution. . . . All things that have come within the bounds of man's knowledge—the things he naturally understands—teach him that there is no period, in all the eternities, where organized existence will become stationary, that it cannot advance in knowledge, wisdom, power and glory. [^124]

Wilford Woodruff stated:

If there was a point where man in his progression could not proceed any further, the very idea would through a gloom over every intelligent and reflecting mind. God Himself is increasing and progressing in knowledge, power and dominion, and will do so, worlds without end. It is just so with us. [^125]

Lorenzo Snow declared:

. . . we will continue on improving, advancing and increasing in wisdom, intelligence, power and dominion, worlds without end. [^126]

Finally, George Q. Cannon, one of the great doctrinal thinkers of this dispensation and a member of the First Presidency for many years, observed:

There is progress for our Father and for our Lord Jesus. There is no such thing as standing still in the eternal work of our God. It is endless progress, progressing from one degree of knowledge to another degree. [^127]

Though God knows all things within His vast domain and has access to the truth and power of higher realms within the divine patriarchal order of eternity, He is continually progressing in truth as He advances from one level of celestial glory and power to a higher one. Those within that celestial system are continually moving upward into greater and greater degrees of refinement and power, and to higher and higher realms of celestial life. This fact is apparent when certain basic points are considered: First, as was previously indicated, God's glory is intelligence, [^128] and it consists of truth and light with all their related attributes and powers of life. Second, the apostle John wrote that God is love; [^129] and in speaking to Moses, the Lord equated His glory with His "goodness." [^130] Third, to acquire glory is to receive the attributes and powers of life—of eternal life. [^131] Jesus taught that for the righteous there is a "resurrection of life" as contrasted to the "resurrection of damnation" which the wicked receive. [^132] To progress in the acquisition of glory is therefore to progress in truth, light, love, goodness, and life. The previously quoted poem by William W. Phelps states:

The works of God continue, and worlds and lives abound;

Improvement and progression have one eternal round,

There is no end to matter; there is no end to space;

There is no end to spirit; there is no end to race.

There is no end to virtue; there is no end to might;

There is no end to wisdom; there is no end to light.

There is no end to union; there is no end to youth;

There is no end to priesthood; there is no end to truth. [^133]

Conclusion

As the offspring of God, man is a creature of the universe, inhabiting many spheres in eternity. In perpetuating His offspring, God has created worlds without number. To some of the ancient patriarchs and prophets, God revealed the magnitude of His creations. Consequently, they knew much about the universe. Like Methuselah, Abraham saw Kolob and the great stellar system that is under the government of that central orb. Moses was also informed of the vastness of God's creations, and that God is continually organizing worlds as a part of His work of bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. God's ultimate purpose is to glorify that which He creates. To this end, he organizes life that it might acquire greater intelligence, and continue to increase in intelligence. In this way, God develops His glory and power within all things.

By the power that is centered in the Only Begotten, the Man of Holiness has organized worlds without number. By means of the divine union which Jesus has with His Father in glory, He knows all things within the Father's vast domain. Thereby all things within the Father's kingdom are present before His eyes. Because Christ possesses a fulness of the Father's glory, He also has all power in heaven and on earth.

There are patriarchal kingdoms one above another in eternity, and intelligences exist one above another so that there is no end to them so far as present knowledge indicates. As the over-all patriarchal system moves upward, Elohim, the Man of Holiness, progresses in posterity, in dominion, and in glory. He is continually begetting children in eternity; and His creative works continue, that He may provide spheres on which they may dwell. But His final purpose is to glorify that which He creates. When those who subordinate themselves to Him in truth consecrate themselves and all they possess to Him, His dominion and power are extended and His glory is increased. "God is thus glorified and exalted in the salvation and exaltation of his children." [^134] The Lord therefore said: "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." [^135]

Since God is continually progressing upward in glory (which is intelligence, or light and truth) it follows that in some way He is continually progressing in truth. But He is not like a super scientist experimenting with the universe, with the possibility of accidentally destroying that which He has organized. Instead, He is in celestial union with those great patriarchal systems above His own kingdom. As an heir in His Father's patriarchal kingdom, the Man of Holiness has the right to draw upon the truth, light, and power of that greater system and develop them within His own kingdom. On this same principle, man will continue to progress in truth and light, through christ, eternally. [^136]

There will be no end to man's attainment of truth and refinement in eternity. Glory consists of intelligence and its several attributes and powers—truth, love, virtue, goodness, etc. If God is progressing in glory, He must of necessity be progressing in all the attributes and powers of celestial intelligence. The same will be true of those who attain an exaltation in celestial glory in the resurrection. Here again it is evident that an understanding of the divine nature of God is an important key by which man may know how to worship and what he worships. [^137] To this end, the Pearl of Great Price makes many vital and important contributions.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 132:19-24.
[^2] Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 398.
[^3] D&C 132:20.
[^4] Moses 7:30-31.
[^5] Ibid., 7:36.
[^6] Ibid., 7:31.
[^7] Abraham 1:31.
[^8] Jah oh eh, 5th degree.
[^9] Kolob, 1st degree.
[^10] Abraham 3:1-17.
[^11] See ibid., 3:9.
[^12] Ibid., 3:2.
[^13] Ibid., 3:3.
[^14] Figure No. 1
[^15] D&C 130:4-5.
[^16] Abraham 3:4.
[^17] Facsimile No. 2, Figure No. 1. See also Abraham 3:4.
[^18] Abraham 3:8-9.
[^19] Notice the context of Abraham's vision. The Lord was speaking unto him of Kolob and the stellar system directly related to that sphere. Having shown Abraham these many spheres, the Lord explained: "Kolob is the greatest of all the Kokaubeam that thou hast seen, because it is nearest unto me."—Ibid., 3:16. Abraham could not have beheld the works of God in their entirety without beholding all the glory of God; and this he could not have done and remained in the flesh on the earth. See Moses 1:5.
[^20] Abraham 3:12.
[^21] Ibid., 3:12-13.
[^22] For example, the Lord designates the moon by the name of "Olea," but by the Egyptians it is said to be called Floeese. See Abraham 3:13 and Facsimile No. 2, Figure No. 5.
[^23] Figure No. 2.
[^24] Ibid., No. 4.
[^25] Ibid., No. 5.
[^26] Loc. cit.
[^27] Moses 1:30.
[^28] Ibid., 1:31-39.
[^29] Ibid., 1:35.
[^30] Ibid., 1:31.
[^31] 1 Nephi 17:36.
[^32] Moses 1:39.
[^33] Ibid., 1:32-33.
[^34] For example, when Christ received a fulness of the Father's glory He thereby received all power in heaven and on earth. See D&C 93:16-17.
[^35] Moses 1:32.
[^36] I. V., John 1:1-4, 14.
[^37] Moses 1:35.
[^38] D&C 88:66-67.
[^39] TPJS, p. 351.
[^40] Lectures on Faith, No. 5.
[^41] D&C 93:35.
[^42] Pratt, Key to Theology, p. 50.
[^43] JD, III, p. 277.
[^44] D&C 88:25-26.
[^45] Moses 7:48-49.
[^46] D&C 88:36-38.
[^47] Ibid., 88:12-13.
[^48] Ibid., 88:40.
[^49] Ibid., 93:30.
[^50] See 2 Nephi 2:11-13.
[^51] John Taylor, The Government of God, p. 4.
[^52] JD, III, pp. 2-3.
[^53] D&C 93:29.
[^54] Ibid., 93:36.
[^55] Ibid., 93:29.
[^56] D&C 131:7-8; DHC, IV, p. 575.
[^57] 2 Nephi 2:14.
[^58] D&C 93:33.
[^59] Moses 7:62.
[^60] Ibid., 7:56.
[^61] Ibid., 7:45.
[^62] Ibid., 1:39.
[^63] D&C 29:43.
[^64] TS, IV (January 16, 1843), p. 73. The same statement is found in the original publication of the Pearl of Great Price, published in 1851.
[^65] Moses 1:33.
[^66] Ibid., 1:35, 38.
[^67] See below.
[^68] Moses, 7:36.
[^69] Joseph Fielding Smith, Signs of the Times (Salt Lake City, 1943), p. 12.
[^70] JD, X, p. 175.
[^71] D&C 76:42.
[^72] Ibid., 76:20-24.
[^73] See ibid., 25:1; 39:1-4; Moses 6:59-62, 66-68; 7:1.
[^74] MS, IV (August, 1843), p. 51.
[^75] Moses 1:38.
[^76] 2 Nephi 9:20-21.
[^77] D&C 38:1-3.
[^78] See verse two.
[^79] D&C 93.
[^80] See chapter two.
[^81] D&C 88:5-6.
[^82] Ibid., 93:24-26.
[^83] Ibid., 93:26.
[^84] Ibid., 93:36.
[^85] See 2 Nephi 9:20-21; D&C 38:1-3; 93:24-26.
[^86] Acts 15:18.
[^87] Isaiah 46:9-10.
[^88] Lectures on Faith 4:11.
[^89] Ibid., 4:17.
[^90] See D&C 132, in light of the view that man may eventually become as God.
[^91] Abraham 3:16.
[^92] This fact has been considered earlier in this chapter.
[^93] Abraham, 3:18-19.
[^94] TPJS, p. 373.
[^95] "If You Could Hie To Kolob," Hymns: Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (current ed.), No. 257.
[^96] TPJS, p. 373.
[^97] Revelation 1:6. In publishing Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of the Bible, the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints has altered this passage so that it does not carry the meaning that the King James version expresses and which the Prophet sanctioned. Before the Saints left Nauvoo in the great exodus west, John M. Bernhisel made a copy of the Inspired Revision from Joseph Smith's original work. The Bernhisel manuscript, in the Church Historian's Library in Salt Lake City, indicates that the King James version of this verse is correct as it stands. Joseph Smith made no alterations of this verse in his Inspired Revision of the Bible.
[^98] TPJS, p. 373.
[^99] Ibid.
[^100] Ibid., pp. 345-346.
[^101] Ibid., p. 346. For the passage which the Prophet cites, see John 5:26. Jesus also said: "The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the FAther do: for what things soever he [the Father] doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise."—John 5:19.
[^102] Moses 1:38.
[^103] Ibid., 1:5.
[^104] D&C 132:31.
[^105] Ibid., 132:63.
[^106] Ibid., 105:1-5.
[^107] See an explanation by Brigham Young in JD, IV, p. 266.
[^108] TPJS, pp. 347-348.
[^109] Moses 1:39.
[^110] Ibid., 1:5.
[^111] Abraham 3:26.
[^112] D&C 121:46.
[^113] TPJS, p. 373.
[^114] D&C 105:1-5.
[^115] Ibid., 93:28, 36.
[^116] Ibid., 88:7.
[^117] Ibid., 93:28.
[^118] Ether 3:14.
[^119] JD, VIII, p. 10.
[^120] See Deseret News, July 25, 1860; August 23, 1865; MS, XXVII, October 21, 1865, pp. 657-663. More recently this official statement has been published in James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, II (Salt Lake City, 1966), pp. 233-235.
[^121] The Seer, I (August, 1853), p. 117.
[^122] Ibid., pp. 117-118.
[^123] See Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, p. 235.
[^124] JD, I, p. 349.
[^125] Ibid., VI, p. 120.
[^126] Conference Report, April 1901, p. 2.
[^127] MS, LXI, p. 117.
[^128] D&C 93:36.
[^129] 1 John 4:7-10.
[^130] Exodus 33:18-19.
[^131] D&C 88:4; Moses 6:59.
[^132] John 5:29.
[^133] Hymns, op. cit. This in no way indicates that there is progression from one degree of glory to a higher degree, such as from the telestial kingdom to the terrestrial, etc. Though there may be progression within a given kingdom, the scriptures indicate that there is no progression from one kingdom to a higher one. Of those in the telestial kingdom, a revelation said: "And they shall be servants of the Most High; but where God and Christ dwell they cannot come, worlds without end."—D&C 76:112. This means that those in the telestial kingdom cannot progress either to the terrestrial or to the celestial kingdom, for Christ can dwell in the terrestrial kingdom. Of those who do not obey the Law of Eternal Marriage, another revelation says: "They . . . remain separately and singly, without exaltation, in their saved condition, to all eternity; and from henceforth are not gods, but are angels of God forever and ever."—Ibid., 132:17. Here again it is evident that man cannot progress from one condition in the resurrection to a higher kingdom.
[^134] TPJS, p. 348.
[^135] Moses 1:39.
[^136] Ether 3:14.
[^137] D&C 93:19-20.
