IN THE CELL—A VISIT FROM RICHARD'S FATHER AND MY MOTHER—THE TRIAL—THE DECISION OF THE COURT—A FEW WORDS OF EXPLANATION.

We were soon escorted to a cell, which was much larger and colder than the one we occupied the night previous. The handcuffs taken off, the door closed upon us, and with sad hearts we sat down upon a bed of straw.

We had been in the cell but a few minutes when Richard's father came with some supper for his son. How sad he looked as he entered the cell —a father's love for his boy was clearly manifest. He did not say much, but looked hard at me, as though he blamed me for leading him from home. Of course I was a few months older than Richard, but he was taller and stouter than I, and to look at us it would hardly appear reasonable that I should have power to lead him away. Mr. Sedgwick only stayed a few moments.

The supper was soon spread. Richard, poor fellow, could not eat, but I did justice to my share. We then laid down and tried to sleep, but what with the mice and other small visitors, and thinking of our peculiar situation, we had little sleep that night, and were not sorry when daylight came.

About 8 o'clock the next morning my mother entered the cell with some breakfast for me. She did not say much but evidently felt for me. It was principally through her we had been brought back. Though one of the prime movers in our capture, she was hardly to blame, for she believed it was her duty to do what she had done. So many tales had been told her concerning Utah and the "Mormons" that she felt positive there must be a great deal of truth in them.

About half-past 10 o'clock we were escorted into a room where an officer took a description of us—color of our hair, eyes, complexion, our height, etc. Shortly afterwards we were taken into the court room and had our trial before Judge Fallows. Besides the judge and several policemen, our employers, Richard's father and my mother were there.

The judge asked a few questions and then inquired what we had to say for ourselves. I immediately arose and said:

"What I have to say for myself is this: The room I work in is not a fit place, as it is a cold, damp cellar."

Mr. Gould denied this statement.

The judge then asked Richard what he had to say for himself. He replied that his reason for absconding was because we were such close companions, and when I ran away he followed me. One of the police said to me:

"You're the leader, then, are you?"

We were then asked by the judge whether we would serve the remainder of our apprenticeship in jail, or go back and work for our employers. We chose the latter alternative.

He then inquired of Mr. Carter what our expenses were and the amount of our passage money. On being informed, he decided that if our employers could obtain the money for our ship tickets it would clear the incurred expenses; but if not, the expenses were to be deducted out of our wages, and the case was dismissed. At this we were not sorry. I went home; but as my parents were not there I went to see Wm. H. Scott.

Before proceeding further, it may be proper to offer a few words concerning our capture. When we did not return to our homes at the time appointed, suspicion was immediately aroused and Mr. Carter told Mr. Gould and our parents he believed we were connected with the "Mormons," and had run away with the intention of going by a vessel that was to sail for America. They at once telegraphed to London to see if the ship had started and were informed it had not.

Our parents were anxious we should be brought back, and my mother begged they would send for us. She said she would do anything rather than have us go to Utah with the "Mormons." Mr. Gould was not much in favor of taking any steps; but Mr. Carter felt quite interested in the matter. He telegraphed to London and had a detective put on our track, and started himself for London that evening and arrived there early next morning, when, accompanied by a detective, he took us off the ship as already narrated.

To again continue the story. I spent the Saturday afternoon after our trial with Wm. H. Scott, who had not yet gone on his mission. He informed us that while we were absent he had had an unpleasant time. Both our parents and employers had suspected him of being the cause of our absconding, and not seeing him in Middlesbrough, they thought he had gone with us; but in this they were mistaken, as William, thinking they would suspect him, went to Stockton and stayed there a few days. After this interview I went home and was treated very kindly by my parents that evening.
