ARRIVAL IN THE "CITY OF THE SAINTS"—KEEPING "BACH"—MY PARENTS JOIN THE CHURCH—THEY EMIGRATE TO UTAH.

After a long, weary and tedious journey of about seven thousand miles, Salt Lake City was at length reached on September 30, 1866—a little over three months' travel from Liverpool to Salt Lake City. It was Sunday when we arrived. That morning I arose early, and getting something to eat, left the camp (a few miles up Parley's Canyon), and wended my way to the "City of the Saints," to find the residence of Brother T. B. H. Stenhouse. It was a fine, sunny morning; everything around me looked charming and lovely.

Onward to the heart of the city I went. After many inquiries the residence of Brother Stenhouse was at length reached. He was pleased to see me and invited me to take dinner with himself and family. In the afternoon his son, Lorenzo, took me to his father's printing office, which was my sleeping place that night.

Next morning I went to the Tithing Office yard, where our train was camped (it having arrived there that morning). President Young came into the yard to see us. He shook hands with many of the brethren and sisters, and they felt quite honored. I was informed that a number of the Saints who sailed on the American Congress had only arrived in the city a day or two previous. Although it was over five weeks after the departure of the American Congress before my leaving England. I did not lose much time after all.

I removed what little luggage I had to the Daily Telegraph office, thinking it best to "keep bach" for the present, as I had no relatives or any particular friend to board me. This I did for nearly eleven weeks, when, December 19, 1866, James McKnight, an employe in the Daily Telegraph office, told me that if it suited me I could live with him. His offer was gladly accepted and I stayed with him for several months.

During this time letters regularly reached me from my parents and I was prompt in answering them; giving full particulars about Salt Lake City and our religion, and often bore my testimony to them. I was here in Utah without a relative and was very desirous they should receive the gospel, although the prospects were not encouraging at that time.

In August, 1868, Wm. H. Scott arrived from New York (the Scott family having emigrated to New York in 1867). I was greatly pleased to meet my friend. He was the first intimate acquaintance from Middlesbrough I had seen since coming to Utah.

It is painful, however, to relate that he apostatized in the Summer of 1869. It was about the time when the "Godbeite" movement took place. From the time Brother Scott embraced the gospel he was one of the most zealous workers in the cause of truth ever seen by me. He labored faithfully to assist in establishing the latter-day kingdom; but his expectations in regard to Utah and her people were not realized. I had been very fond of him —had loved him as a brother. He had been a friend and counselor to me in past days, and when I saw that he was as much in opposition to the kingdom of God as he had been formerly in favor of building it up, it grieved me very much. I talked and reasoned with him and tried to show him the error of his way, but it was all in vain. He became more and more bitterly opposed to the gospel and in the Summer of 1870 went back to the States.

Correspondence with my parents and also my relatives was regularly kept up from the time of my arrival in Utah. I was very anxious to induce them to join the Church, and did all in my power to induce them to do so.

In the Spring of 1879, I procured the address of the president of the Middlesbrough Branch—William Garbett—and wrote to him, requesting that he should see my parents and use his best endeavors to induce them to embrace the gospel. Brother Garbett and other Saints visited with that object in view.

On the 20th of September, 1879, I was happily surprised and astonished to receive a letter from my mother with the following glad tidings:

"I, your mother, was baptized a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter day Saints, on the 23rd of August, and your father on the 30th of the same month."

This was very gratifying news, both to myself and wife. After waiting patiently and anxiously for over thirteen years, my prayers, which were so often offered up, were answered.

My reply to this letter from my parents informed them how my heart rejoiced to hear the good news, and stated that we would assist them to emigrate to Utah the following year.

The time drew nigh for my parents to arrive in Zion. After such a lengthy absence from them, and knowing how opposed to the work they had been, but now their eyes were opened and they could see as I saw, I looked forward with pleasure to the day of their arrival.

They took passage with the first company, April 10th, 1880. I almost counted the days for their arrival. At last it was announced by telegram that the company would arrive at 6:30, p.m., April 30, 1880. Every preparation was made by us for their comfort.
