INDIANS' STRATAGEM TO GET ONE OF OUR HORSES— PROCEED ON OUR WAY—HOW INSPIRATION IS RECEIVED—AN ILLUSTRATIVE INCIDENT.

We will now leave these few Indians and seventeen white men, all in peaceful, friendly chat, and go back to the 15th of September, 1854— three days before we left Salt Lake City.

On the corner of East Temple Street, just two blocks south of the Temple site was a cottonwood log, on which two young men were sitting in earnest conversation. One was about twenty-four years old, a very tall, muscular man, not less than six feet, two inches in height, with black eyes, set wide apart under a heavy forehead and over high cheek bones. The whole countenance indicated a cruel and heartless disposition. The other young man was just twenty years old, medium height, with a well formed body, small, sharp, twinkling blue eyes, regular features and a rather large head.

They had been quarreling; and when they arose from the log it was agreed that the one who crossed the other's path should die!

The older man was to start for his lone log house on the Humboldt, about sixty miles from Ruby Valley, in a week or two, by way of Goose Creek Mountains; and the young man was to start just three days from that time for Carson Valley, as Indian interpreter for a U. S. exploring company, traveling west from Salt Lake City. When we told "Bloody Chief," for such was the name of the chief who visited our camp, that we were special friends to the bad young man we thought not of the terrible consequences that might result from that deceitful stratagem to save our lives then. We told the Indians frankly that we were coming back in a little more than one moon, but did not tell them there would be but three of us.

On the morning of September 30th, the same seven Indians came into our camp without a gun, pistol, bow or arrow. All were merry and jolly, and traded everything they could, and ran foot-races. They wanted to run horses, but ours had too long a journey before them to admit of racing. The main object and effort of the Indians was to get that race-horse, but they did not succeed. They escorted us about eight miles on our way and told us all they could of the country ahead in the direction we wanted to go. They showed us a great deal of gold and silver coin, jewelry and pocket-knives, which they doubtless obtained by killing people on the Humboldt.

We left the valley at the south end, passing over a low divide and through a narrow, rocky canyon, full of scattering cedar trees, making as nice a place for ambush as an Indian could ask for the massacre of whites.

Many incidents occurred worthy of note in a mere narrative; but as I design to show the inspiration of the Lord in our preservation, I shall only give so much of our journey as is necessary to bring you to the circumstances in an easy and natural way. All of God's works are done in a natural way; and He applies a law in one instance which would not do in another. The inspiration of God to different men and to the same man in different ways is a matter upon which I desire to enlarge some little. Sometimes an idea is received in the mind that is foreign to anything that ever existed there before. The person follows that idea, which is so new and to him unusual, and develops a wonderful piece of machinery or a principle in philosophy, manufacturing or something otherwise useful to man. That idea came as other ideas, he will say; but I am of the opinion that it is the inspiration of God that brings out of chaos the very useful inventions and discoveries—this is the simplest form of inspiration.

Another man is perhaps laboring, as usual, in the field and is suddenly inclined in his feelings to go to his house. Perhaps he tries to smother the feeling, but finally yields and reaches home just in time to extinguish a fire that would certainly have consumed his house if he had not gone just as he did.

The inspiration of the Holy Ghost which is given to all who obey the gospel by baptism and the laying on of hands of the Elders, was promised by the Lord to every one that earnestly and sincerely repents of his sins and obeys the gospel, and "it shall guide him into all truth."

I will tell you, my young friends, how that Holy Ghost will guide you. If, when you are made clean from sin by baptism, you do not willingly enter again into sin, pray often, keep the Sabbath day holy, always try as earnestly as you can to be a peacemaker, help every institution of Zion, cheerfully obey every call of the Lord through those who have the authority from God to call, and live lives of purity in every way, that Holy Ghost will be in you all the time and influence you in all your thoughts, words and actions, bring to your mind things forgotten when you need them, and suggest to your mind principle and doctrine, when really necessary, that has never been taught you in this life, but which you knew before you came to this world.

I will mention another incident of inspiration in my own experience, different from the one already related concerning the secret sign among the Indians.

In 1867, I had a friend who was going to San Bernardino, California, and was to start on the second day after the following conversation between us:

"Oliver, come and go to California with me."

"I cannot."

"Yes you can; you can go as well as not."

"I have nothing to leave for the support of my family during the Winter;" (I having been sick for five or six months, and unable to earn anything.)

"I'll lend you what money you want," said he.

"Well, I cannot go, and there is no use thinking or taking about it," I finally replied.

That evening I was going home and thinking of my family affairs, but nothing about going with my friend. A voice, sounding as though it was about a foot from my left ear, whispered:

"Go with Hyrum to California."

The voice was as distinct as any I ever heard, and I half turned to see if anyone was there, but saw no one; and after debating a short time in my mind decided that I must not refuse, and I said mentally, "Well, I will."

The next day I saw Hyrum and told him I would go with him and I wanted fifty dollars to leave with my wife. He handed me the money and I started with him on the following morning.

My health improved all the way there. I worked at carpenter work all Winter and returned in the Spring, a sound, healthy man.

Other advantages and information gained while gone, prove to me that I was inspired or told to go and do the very thing that was necessary for my present salvation. It was a very important mission to me; and how important no mortal but myself knows.
