Joseph Smith, Kent P. Jackson, Joseph Smith's Commentary on the Bible ( 1994)

Introduction

This book is a compilation of excerpts from Joseph Smith's discourses and writings in which he gave commentary on passages from the Bible. It collects the statements in which he discussed, analyzed, or drew significant application from biblical verses, thus shedding light on the words of earlier prophets.

History will show that the Prophet Joseph Smith was the greatest doctrinal teacher since Jesus Christ. He had a clearer understanding of truth than any other man of modern times has had, the result of much experience, over many years, with the divine source of all truth and understanding. Not only was it his mission to know but it was also his mission to teach what he knew. "It is my duty to teach the doctrine," he stated, [^1] and "it is my meditation all the day, and more than my meat and drink, to know how I shall make the Saints of God to comprehend the visions that roll like an overflowing surge before my mind." [^2] Accordingly, the record of his life shows that he dedicated himself to preaching, writing, and explaining, in informal and formal settings, what had been revealed to him from the heavens.

Much of the Prophet's teaching focused on passages from the Bible, which was frequently his tool for explaining doctrine. A typical doctrinal sermon or newspaper editorial would deal with about a dozen passages, some only cited to demonstrate a point, but others discussed and analyzed in enlightening detail.

But the Bible was not the source for Joseph Smith's theology. Revelation from God was. It is clear from his own words that he knew that what had been revealed to him was a superior source of knowledge than what he found printed on the pages of the Bible. This assertion may seem strange to those who do not know the history of the transmission of the biblical text or who do not share the testimony of the divinity of Joseph Smith's calling. But those who recognize him as God's prophet, sent to restore truth in its purity for the last days, understand that the light and knowledge that he restored is the standard against which all other religious ideas, traditions, or texts are to be judged.

From Joseph Smith we learn that the Bible did not arrive in the modern world without omissions and inaccuracies. He stated in his history that "many important points touching the salvation of man had been taken from the Bible, or lost before it was compiled." [^3] He said he believed the Bible "as it ought to be, as it came from the pen of the original writers," [^4] or "as far as it is translated correctly" (Articles of Faith 1:8), with "translated" seemingly referring to the entire process of transmission from original manuscripts to modern-language translations. But "ignorant translators, careless transcribers, or designing and corrupt priests have committed many errors." [^5]

The Prophet's commission included the restoration of religious truth that had been lost through those and other processes. Much of that restoration was accomplished through the revelation of new scripture. Joseph Smith added more to the canon than any other individual known to history. The Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price, and the Joseph Smith Translation draw back the windows of heaven and flood the world with gospel light as never before.

Joseph Smith's sermons and writings are also a source of revelation to the world, particularly those that open to our minds the meaning of the scriptures by correcting, explaining, and expounding on the Bible. "God may correct the scripture by me if he choose," the Prophet taught. [^6] He said of the Bible, "I have the oldest book in the world and the Holy Ghost. I thank God for the old book, but more for the Holy Ghost." [^7] Through the Prophet's inspired commentary on the Bible, we can see the ancient scriptures in a new light and understand them in ways that would be impossible without divine tutoring. Joseph Smith, the great seer, had the capacity to see on Bible pages things that were not visible to the natural eye. That was possible because the Spirit that animated his interpretive powers was the same Spirit that had revealed the words originally through his ancient prophetic colleagues.

By the power of the Holy Ghost, the Prophet "understood the fulness of the gospel from beginning to end, and could teach it." [^8] And because he had that power, we can indeed trust his teachings to lead us in the way of salvation. "When did I ever teach anything wrong from this stand?" he asked. "I never told you I was perfect, but there is no error in the revelations which I have taught." [^9] "The doctrine I teach is true." [^10]
