Joseph Smith, Kent P. Jackson, Joseph Smith's Commentary on the Bible ( 1994)

Concerning the Texts

The recorded words of Joseph Smith are preserved in a variety of sources. Most of his scriptural teaching is found in handwritten transcripts of sermons made by official and unofficial scribes. Newspaper editorials, journal entries, histories, and letters make up other important categories. Many of those early documents were compiled during and after the Prophet's lifetime and are now in edited form in the seven-volume History of the Church, edited by Elder B. H. Roberts. [^1] Elder Joseph Fielding Smith's compilation, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, [^2] contains most of the major doctrinal teachings from the History of the Church. The present work draws on the original documents from which those books were compiled and includes other original documents published unedited in Ehat and Cook, The Words of Joseph Smith, [^3] and in Jessee, The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith [^4] and The Papers of Joseph Smith. [^5] Permission to reproduce selected texts from these sources is gratefully acknowledged.

Where multiple scribal transcripts exist for a given sermon, I have included the relevant passages from all of the reports, without attempting to amalgamate the sources or select one as superior. From works printed during the Prophet's lifetime, mainly newspaper editorials, I have included everything published in his name, including messages from the First Presidency. It is not certain where or to what extent the Prophet may have used the assistance of other writers when preparing items for publication. It seems safe to assume that he considered as his own, as I do in this collection, anything written or published both under his direction and over his signature. [^6]

In this volume I have collected the available Bible commentary in these divers primary sources. The editing has been done to preserve the original words of the Prophet while presenting them, for the benefit of modern readers, with modern spelling and punctuation. It should be recalled that most of the material that has survived from Joseph Smith exists in "rough draft" form, unless it was published during his lifetime. Thus the editing in this collection presents the Prophet's words in a final, polished form. Because I realize that to change spelling or punctuation is to overlay a modern shading onto the original documents, I have provided references in the footnotes for those who desire to study the texts in their original form in the primary sources.

The editing of texts has been done according to the following guidelines:

Punctuation, spelling, capitalization, and grammar [^7] have been modernized to conform with current usage.

Obvious scribal errors, such as inadvertent double negatives, have been deleted without ellipses.

Brackets have been used to mark the insertion of words not in the originals.

Unless grammatically or contextually necessary, scripture quoted within passages of commentary has been omitted without ellipses. Where necessary, words have been added to complete the passages of scripture that were abbreviated by scribes.

In a few places, words of the Prophet preserved by scribes in indirect discourse have been changed to direct discourse.

In a series, and has been replaced by a comma or and has been added when appropriate. The ampersand (&) has been replaced, usually, by and or by a comma in a series or by a period after a complete thought. The ampersand has been deleted, without ellipses, when it refers to additional discussion not reported.

It is important that readers understand the inherent limitations of this Bible commentary as well as of any collection of Joseph Smith's teachings. The material collected here is only as accurate as the scribes who recorded the Prophet's words. The passages from sermons have unavoidably been filtered to some degree through the mind, the doctrinal understanding, and the vocabulary of those who kept the records. It is likely that the reliability of the records was not always consistent; the scribes may have done their work with varying degrees of precision. Thus, although I am confident that the recorders preserved the Prophet's message with remarkable skill, I am sure they would join with me in expressing caution about the infallibility of individual words or phrases. Moreover, my selecting and editing, however cautiously done, also involve some interpretation. It has been my constant effort to compile this book so as to be true to the Prophet Joseph Smith and his message.

The Prophet's statements in this volume are arranged in biblical order, that is, beginning with Genesis and ending with Revelation. Some of the passages can be read and understood without reference to the biblical texts, but most respond directly to verses of the Bible and cannot be understood fully unless the corresponding scriptural passage is read first.

I express my sincere appreciation to able assistants who have helped me prepare this book, to kind colleagues whose wisdom has improved it, and to the staff of Deseret Book Company for their fine work in its production. But I am especially thankful for and to the Prophet Joseph Smith for teaching us how to read and understand the Bible and for the noble individuals who recorded his words to bless the lives of later generations.
