Joseph Smith, Kent P. Jackson, Joseph Smith's Commentary on the Bible ( 1994)

Isaiah

Isaiah 2:2-3

SCIsa 2 2Isa 2 3The Book of Mormon is a record of the forefathers of our western tribes of Indians. . . . By it we learn that our western tribes of Indians are descendants from that Joseph that was sold into Egypt, and that the land of America is a promised land unto them. And unto it all the tribes of Israel will come, with as many of the Gentiles as shall comply with the requisitions of the new covenant. But the tribe of Judah will return to old Jerusalem. [^1]

SCIsa 2 2Isa 2 3The land of Zion consists of all North and South America. But any place where the Saints gather is Zion, which every righteous man will build up for a place of safety for his children. [^2]

SCIsa 2 2Isa 2 3The Lord will begin by revealing the house of Israel among the Gentiles. And those who have gone from the ordinances of God shall return unto the keeping of all the law and observing his judgments and statutes to do them. Then shall the law of the Lord go forth from Zion and the word of the Lord to the priests, and through them from Jerusalem. [^3]

SCIsa 2 2Isa 2 3I have another revelation, a great, grand, and glorious revelation. This is what I am going to declare. You know there has been great discussion where Zion is. . . . The whole America is [Zion] itself, North and South, and is described by the prophets that it should be in the center of the land. The declaration is that as soon as the temple and baptismal font are prepared, so we can wash and anoint the elders of Israel, . . . the elders of Israel shall build churches unto the Lord. And [wherever] they build churches unto the Lord, there shall be a stake of Zion. It is a glorious proclamation, and I reserved it to the last and design it to be understood, that it shall be after the washing and anointing here. [^4]

SCIsa 2 2Isa 2 3[There] has been great discourse in relation to Zion. . . . [I] make a proclamation that will cover a broad ground. The whole America is Zion itself, from North to South. That is the Zion where the mountain of the Lord should be. [As] soon as [the] temple [is] finished—washing, anointing, etc.—when those last and most important ordinances can be done, . . . from henceforth I have received instruction from [the] Lord that [the] elders shall build churches wherever they raise branches through the States. Then build stakes. In the great cities—Boston, etc.—there shall be stakes. [I] reserved the proclamation to the last. All this [is] to be understood, that this work shall commence after the washing, anointing, and endowment here. [^5]

SCIsa 2 2Isa 2 3I have another great and grand revelation, [a] great discussion where Zion is. The whole America is Zion. That is the Zion where the mountain of the Lord's house shall be, about the central part of North and South America. [As] soon as the temple is finished, . . . from henceforth the elders shall build churches wherever the people receive the gospel sufficiently. Then build stakes to this place. [^6]

SCIsa 2 2Isa 2 3I have now a great proclamation for the elders to teach the Church hereafter, which is in relation to Zion. The whole of North and South America is Zion. The mountain of the Lord's house is in the center of North and South America. When the house is done, [the] baptismal font erected and finished, and the worthy are washed, anointed, endowed, and ordained kings and priests, . . . then the elders are to go through all America and build up churches, until all Zion is built up. But [they are] not to commence to do this until the temple is built up here and the elders endowed. Then go forth and accomplish the work and build up stakes in all North and South America. [^7]

Isaiah 2:4

Isa 2 4The government of the Almighty has always been very dissimilar to the government of men, whether we refer to his religious government or to the government of nations. The government of God has always tended to promote peace, unity, harmony, strength, and happiness, while that of man has been productive of confusion, disorder, weakness, and misery. The greatest acts of the mighty men have been to depopulate nations and to overthrow kingdoms. And whilst they have exalted themselves and become glorious, it has been at the expense of the lives of the innocent, the blood of the oppressed, the moans of the widow, and the tears of the orphan. Egypt, Babylon, Greece, Persia, Carthage, and Rome—each was raised to dignity amid the clash of arms and the din of war. And whilst their triumphant leaders led forth their victorious armies to glory and victory, their ears were saluted with the groans of the dying and the misery and distress of the human family. "Before them the earth was a paradise, and behind them a desolate wilderness" [Joel 2:3]. Their kingdoms were founded in carnage and bloodshed and sustained by oppression, tyranny, and despotism.

Isa 2 4The designs of God have been to promote the universal good of the universal world, to establish peace and good will among men, to promote the principles of eternal truth, to bring about a state of things that shall unite man to his fellow man, cause the world to "beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks," make the nations of the earth dwell in peace, and to bring about the millennial glory when the earth shall yield its increase, resume its paradisean glory, and become as the garden of the Lord. . . .

Isa 2 4Monarchial, aristocratic, and republican forms of government, of their various kinds and grades, have, in their turn, been raised to dignity and prostrated in the dust. The plans of the greatest politicians, the wisest senators, and [the] most profound statesmen have been exploded. And the proceedings of the greatest chieftains, the bravest generals, and the wisest kings have fallen to the ground. Nation has succeeded nation, and we have inherited nothing but their folly. History records their puerile plans, their short-lived glory, their feeble intellect, and their ignoble deeds. . . . All speak with a voice of thunder that man is not able to govern himself, to legislate for himself, to protect himself, [nor] to promote his own good nor the good of the world.

Isa 2 4It has been the design of Jehovah from the commencement of the world, and is his purpose now, to regulate the affairs of the world in his own time, to stand as head of the universe and take the reigns of government into his own hand. When that is done, judgment will be administered in righteousness, anarchy and confusion will be destroyed, and "nations will learn war no more." . . .

Isa 2 4Other attempts to promote universal peace and happiness in the human family have proven abortive. Every effort has failed; every plan and design has fallen to the ground. It needs the wisdom of God, the intelligence of God, and the power of God to accomplish this.

Isa 2 4The world has had a fair trial for six thousand years. The Lord will try the seventh thousand himself. He whose right it is will possess the kingdom and "reign, until he has put all things under his feet" [1 Cor. 15:25]. [^8]

Isaiah 11:4

Isa 11 4I mourn for the depravity of the world. . . . I long for a day of righteousness when he whose right it is to reign shall "judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth." And I pray God, who hath given our fathers a promise of a perfect government in the last days, to purify the hearts of the people and hasten the welcome day. [^9]

Isaiah 11:11

Isa 11 11The time has at last arrived when the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob has set his hand again the second time to recover the remnants of his people which have been left from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from the islands of the sea, and with them to bring in the fulness of the Gentiles and establish that covenant with them which was promised when their sins should be taken away. [^10]

Isaiah 24:5

Isa 24 5Who can look at [the world] and not exclaim in the language of Isaiah, "The earth is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinances, and broken the everlasting covenant"?

Isa 24 5The plain fact is this: the power of God begins to fall upon the nations, and the light of the latter-day glory begins to break forth through the dark atmosphere of sectarian wickedness, and their iniquity rolls up into view. And the nations of the Gentiles are like the waves of the sea, casting up mire and dirt, or all in commotion. And they hastily are preparing to act the part allotted them when the Lord rebukes the nations, when he shall rule them with a rod of iron and break them in pieces like a potters vessel. The Lord has declared to his servants some eighteen months since that he was then withdrawing his Spirit from the earth, and we can see that such is the fact. For not only the churches are dwindling away, but there are no conversions, or but very few. And this is not all. The governments of the earth are thrown into confusion and division, and destruction to the eye of the spiritual beholder seems to be written by the finger of an invisible hand in large capitals upon almost everything we behold.

Isa 24 5And now what remains to be done under circumstances like these? I will proceed to tell you what the Lord requires of all people—high and low, rich and poor, male and female, ministers and people, professors of religion and nonprofessors—in order that they may enjoy the Holy Spirit of God to a fulness and escape the judgments of God which are almost ready to burst upon the nations of the earth: Repent of all your sins and be baptized in water for the remission of them, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And receive the ordinance of the laying on of the hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto this power, that ye may receive the Holy Spirit of God. [^11]

Isaiah 24:21-22

SCIsa 24 21Isa 24 22Thus we find that God will deal with all the human family equally, and that as the antediluvians had their day of visitation [1 Pet. 3:19-20], so will those characters referred to by Isaiah have their time of visitation and deliverance, after having been many days in prison. . . . [They] will be visited by this priesthood and come out of their prison, upon the same principle as those who were disobedient in the days of Noah were visited by our Savior. [^12]

SCIsa 24 21Isa 24 22See also under 1 Peter 3:18-19; 4:6.

Isaiah 29:11-12; Isaiah 29:20-22, JST

(2 Nephi 27:15-20)

2 Ne 27 152 Ne 27 162 Ne 27 172 Ne 27 182 Ne 27 192 Ne 27 20Isa 29 20Isa 29 21Isa 29 22SCIsa 29 11Isa 29 12The Lord had shown [Martin Harris] that he must go to New York City with some of the characters, so we proceeded to copy some of them. And he took his journey to the eastern cities and to the learned, saying, "Read this, I pray thee." And the learned said, "I cannot," but if he would bring the plates they would read it. But the Lord had forbidden it. And he returned to me and gave them to me to translate, and I said, "[I] cannot, for I am not learned." But the Lord had prepared spectacles for to read the book, therefore I commenced translating the characters, and thus the prophecy of Isaiah was fulfilled. [^13]

Isaiah 29:21

Isa 29 21We believe the old prophet verily told the truth. [^14]

Isaiah 33:14

Isa 33 14God Almighty himself dwells in eternal fire. Flesh and blood cannot go there, for all corruption is devoured by the fire. Our God is a consuming fire. When our flesh is quickened by the Spirit, there will be no blood in the tabernacles. Some dwell in higher glory than others. Those who have done wrong always have that wrong gnawing them. Immortality dwells in everlasting burnings. . . . All men who are immortal dwell in everlasting burnings. [^15]

Isa 33 14God dwells in flaming flames, and he is a consuming fire. He will consume all that is unclean and unholy, and we could not abide his presence unless pure spirit is in us. [^16]

All resurrected bodies dwell in flaming fire, for our God is a consuming fire. [^17]

Isaiah 42:7

Isa 42 7See under 1 Peter 3:18-19; 4:6.

Isaiah 51:3

Isa 51 3We must wait patiently until the Lord comes and restores unto us all things and builds the waste places again. For he will do it in his time. [^18]

Isa 51 3O God, I ask thee in the name of Jesus of Nazareth to save all things concerning Zion and build up her waste places and restore all things. O God, send forth judgment unto victory. Oh come down and cause the mountains to flow down at thy presence! [^19]

Isa 51 3I feel to cry mightily unto the Lord, . . . yea I feel to say, "O Lord, let Zion be comforted, let her waste places be built up and established an hundred fold. Let thy Saints come unto Zion out of every nation, let her be exalted to the third heaven, and let thy judgments be sent forth unto victory. And after this great tribulation, let thy blessings fall upon thy people." [^20]

Isaiah 51:11

Isa 51 11See under Psalm 102:13-21.

Isaiah 52:1-2

SCIsa 52 1Isa 52 2Notwithstanding her present affliction, [Zion] shall yet arise and put on her beautiful garments, and be the joy and glory of the whole earth. [^21]

SCIsa 52 1Isa 52 2I know that Zion, in the own due time of the Lord, will be redeemed. But how many will be the days of her purification, tribulation, and affliction, the Lord has kept hid from my eyes. And when I inquire concerning this subject, the voice of the Lord is, "Be still, and know that I am God! All those who suffer for my name shall reign with me, and he that layeth down his life for my sake shall find it again." Now there are two things of which I am ignorant and the Lord will not show me, perhaps for a wise purpose in himself. . . : Why God hath suffered so great [a] calamity to come upon Zion, or what the great moving cause of this great affliction is; and again, by what means he will return her back to her inheritance with songs of everlasting joy upon her head. These two things, brethren, are in part kept back that they are not plainly shown unto me. [^22]

Isaiah 52:8

Isa 52 8I arrived in Jackson County, Missouri, and after viewing the country, seeking diligently at the hand of God, he manifested himself unto me and designated to me and others the very spot upon which he designed to commence the work of the gathering and the upbuilding of a holy city which should be called Zion—Zion, because it is to be a place of righteousness, and all who build thereon are to worship the true and living God and all believe in one doctrine, even the doctrine of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. [^23]

Isa 52 8If all the world should embrace this gospel, they would then see eye to eye, and the blessings of God would be poured out upon the people. [^24]

Isaiah 60:2

Isa 60 2Consider for a moment, brethren, the fulfillment of the words of the prophet. For we behold that darkness covers the earth and gross darkness the minds of the inhabitants thereof, that crimes of every description are increasing among men, vices of every enormity are practiced, the rising generation growing up in the fulness of pride and arrogance, the aged losing every sense of conviction and seemingly banishing every thought of a day of retribution; intemperance, immorality, extravagance, pride, blindness of heart, idolatry, the loss of natural affection, the love of this world and indifference toward the things of eternity increasing among those who profess a belief in the religion of heaven, and infidelity spreading itself in consequence of the same, men giving themselves up to commit acts of the foulest kind and deeds of the blackest dye, lying, blaspheming, stealing, robbing, murdering, defaming, defrauding, blasting the reputation of neighbors, advocating error and opposing the truth, forsaking the covenant of heaven, and denying the faith of Jesus. [^25]

Isaiah 60:13-17

SCIsa 60 13Isa 60 14Isa 60 15Isa 60 16Isa 60 17The prophets have said concerning Zion in the last days [that] the glory of Lebanon is to come upon her, the fir tree, the pine tree, and the box together, to beautify the place of [God's] sanctuary that he may make the place of his feet glorious, where for brass he will bring gold, and for iron he will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron, and where the feast of fat things will be given to the just. Yea, when the splendor of the Lord is brought to our consideration for the good of his people, the calculations of men and the vain glory of the world vanishes, and we exclaim, "God will shine the perfection of beauty out of Zion" [Ps. 50:2]. [^26]

Isaiah 64:1

Isa 64 1See under Isaiah 51:3.
