Joseph Smith, Kent P. Jackson, Joseph Smith's Commentary on the Bible ( 1994)

Ephesians

Ephesians 1:9-10

SCEph 1 9Eph 1 10The work of the Lord in these last days is one of vast magnitude and almost beyond the comprehension of mortals. Its glories are past description and its grandeur unsurpassable. It has been the theme which has animated the bosom of prophets and righteous men from the creation of this world down through every succeeding generation to the present time. And it is truly the dispensation of the fulness of times, when all things which are in Christ Jesus, whether in heaven or on the earth, shall be gathered together in him, and when all things shall be restored, as spoken of by all the holy prophets since the world began. For in it will take place the glorious fulfillment of the promises made to the fathers, while the displays of the power of the Most High will be great, glorious, and sublime. . . .

SCEph 1 9Eph 1 10Here, then, beloved brethren, is a work to engage in worthy of archangels—a work which will cast into the shade the things which have heretofore been accomplished, a work which kings and prophets and righteous men in former ages have sought, expected, and earnestly desired to see, but died without the sight. And well will it be for those who shall aid in carrying into effect the mighty operations of Jehovah. [^1]

SCEph 1 9Eph 1 10Now the "purpose in himself" in the winding up scene of the last dispensation is that all things pertaining to that dispensation should be conducted precisely in accordance with the preceding dispensations. And again, God purposed in himself that there should not be an eternal fulness until every dispensation should be fulfilled and gathered together in one, and that all things whatsoever that should be gathered together in one in those dispensations, unto the same fulness and eternal glory, should be in Christ Jesus. Therefore, he set the ordinances to be the same for ever and ever and set Adam to watch over them, to reveal them from heaven to man or to send angels to reveal them. . . .

SCEph 1 9Eph 1 10Paul perfectly understood the purpose of God in relation to his connection with man, and that glorious and perfect order which he established in himself whereby he sent forth power, revelations, and glory. [^2]

SCEph 1 9Eph 1 10The dispensation of the fulness of times will bring to light the things that have been revealed in all former dispensations, also other things that have not been before revealed. [^3]

SCEph 1 9Eph 1 10Truly, this is a day long to be remembered by the Saints of the last days, a day in which the God of heaven has begun to restore the ancient order of his kingdom unto his servants and his people, a day in which all things are concurring together to bring about the completion of the fulness of the gospel, a fulness of the dispensation of dispensations, even the fulness of times, a day in which God has begun to make manifest and set in order in his Church those things which have been, and those things which the ancient prophets and wise men desired to see but died without beholding it, a day in which those things begin to be made manifest which have been hid from before the foundations of the world, and which Jehovah has promised should be made known in his own due time unto his servants, to prepare the earth for the return of his glory, even a celestial glory, and a kingdom of priests and kings to God and the Lamb forever, on Mount Zion, or the hundred and forty and four thousand whom John the Revelator saw, which should come to pass in the restitution of all things. [^4]

SCEph 1 9Eph 1 10The building up of Zion is a cause that has interested the people of God in every age. It is a theme upon which prophets, priests, and kings have dwelt with peculiar delight. They have looked forward with joyful anticipation to the day in which we live, and fired with heavenly and joyful anticipations they have sung, and written, and prophesied of this our day. But they died without the sight. We are the favored people that God has made choice of to bring about the latter-day glory. It is left for us to see, participate in, and help to roll forward the latter-day glory, "the dispensation of the fulness of times," when God will "gather together all things that are in heaven, and all things that are upon the earth, even in one," when the Saints of God will be gathered in, one from every nation, and kindred, and people, and tongue, when the Jews will be gathered together into one, and the wicked will also be gathered together to be destroyed, as spoken of by the prophets. The Spirit of God will also dwell with his people and be withdrawn from the rest of the nations. And all things, whether in heaven or on earth, will be in one, even in Christ.

SCEph 1 9Eph 1 10The heavenly priesthood will unite with the earthly to bring about those great purposes. And whilst we are thus united in the one common cause to roll forth the kingdom of God, the heavenly priesthood are not idle spectators. The Spirit of God will be showered down from above; it will dwell in our midst. The blessings of the Most High will rest upon our tabernacles, and our name will be handed down to future ages. Our children will rise up and call us blessed, and generations yet unborn will dwell with peculiar delight upon the scenes that we have passed through, the privations that we have endured, the untiring zeal that we have manifested, the insurmountable difficulties that we have overcome in laying the foundation of a work that brought about the glory and blessings which they will realize, a work that God and angels have contemplated with delight for generations past, that fired the souls of the ancient patriarchs and prophets, a work that is destined to bring about the destruction of the powers of darkness, the renovation of the earth, the glory of God, and the salvation of the human family. [^5]

SCEph 1 9Eph 1 10It is necessary in the ushering in of the dispensation of the fulness of times, which dispensation is now beginning to usher in, that a whole and complete and perfect union, and welding together of dispensations, and keys, and powers, and glories should take place, and be revealed from the days of Adam even to the present time. And not only this, but those things which never have been revealed from the foundation of the world, but have been kept hid from the wise and prudent, shall be revealed unto babes and sucklings in this, the dispensation of the fulness of times.

SCEph 1 9Eph 1 10Now, what do we hear in the gospel which we have received? A voice of gladness! A voice of mercy from heaven; and a voice of truth out of the earth. . . . The voice of Peter, James, and John in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county, and Colesville, Broome county, on the Susquehanna river, declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom, and of the dispensation of the fulness of times! . . . And the voice of Michael, the archangel; the voice of Gabriel, and of Raphael, and of divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, and there a little; giving us consolation by holding forth that which is to come, confirming our hope! [^6]

Ephesians 2:20

Eph 2 20The only difference between [sectarian] religion and mine is that I firmly believe in the prophets and apostles, Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone, and speak as one having authority among them, and not as the scribes. [^7]

Ephesians 4:4-6

SCEph 4 4Eph 4 5Eph 4 6The cause of God is one common cause, in which all the Saints are alike interested. We are all members of the one common body, and all partake of the same spirit, and are baptized into one baptism, and possess alike the same glorious hope. [^8]

Ephesians 4:11

Eph 4 11And how were apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, and evangelists chosen? By prophecy (revelation) and by laying on of hands. By a divine communication and a divinely appointed ordinance, through the medium of the priesthood, organized according to the order of God by divine appointment. [^9]

Ephesians 5:22-33

SCEph 5 22Eph 5 23Eph 5 24Eph 5 25Eph 5 26Eph 5 27Eph 5 28Eph 5 29Eph 5 30Eph 5 31Eph 5 32Eph 5 33See under 1 Peter 3:1, 5-7.

Ephesians 6:5-9

SCEph 6 5Eph 6 6Eph 6 7Eph 6 8Eph 6 9The servant . . . is commanded to be in obedience, as unto the Lord. The master in turn is required to treat them with kindness before God, understanding at the same time that he is to give an account. [^10]

Ephesians 6:11-13

SCEph 6 11Eph 6 12Eph 6 13Let us be wise in all things and keep all the commandments of God, that our salvation may be sure. Having our armor ready and prepared against the time appointed, and having on the whole armor of righteousness, we may be able to stand in that trying day. [^11]
