Joseph Smith, Kent P. Jackson, Joseph Smith's Commentary on the Bible ( 1994)

2 Timothy

2 Timothy 3:1

2 Tim 3 1We see that perilous times have truly come, and the things which we have so long expected have at last begun to usher in. [^1]

2 Timothy 4:6-8

SC2 Tim 4 62 Tim 4 72 Tim 4 8No one who believes the account will doubt for a moment this assertion of Paul which was made, as he knew, just before he was to take his leave of this world. Though he once, according to his own word, persecuted the Church of God and wasted it, yet after embracing the faith his labors were unceasing to spread the glorious news. And like a faithful soldier, when called to give his life in the cause which he had espoused, he laid it down, as he says, with an assurance of an eternal crown.

SC2 Tim 4 62 Tim 4 72 Tim 4 8Follow the labors of this apostle from the time of his conversion to the time of his death, and you will have a fair sample of industry and patience in promulgating the gospel of Christ. Whipped, stoned, and derided, the moment he escaped the hands of his persecutors he as zealously as ever proclaimed the doctrine of the Savior. And all may know that he did not embrace the faith for the honor of this life, nor for the gain of earthly goods. What, then, could have induced him to undergo all this toil? It was, as he said, that he might obtain that crown of righteousness from the hand of God. No one, we presume, will doubt the faithfulness of Paul to the end. None will say that he did not keep the faith, that he did not fight the good fight, that he did not preach and persuade to the last. And what was he to receive? A crown of righteousness. And what shall others receive who do not labor faithfully and continue to the end? We leave such to search out their own promises, if any they have. And if they have any they are welcome to them, on our part, for the Lord says that every man is to receive according to his works. Reflect for a moment, brethren, and enquire whether you would consider yourselves worthy [for] a seat at the marriage feast with Paul and others like him if you had been unfaithful. Had you not fought the good fight and kept the faith, could you expect to receive? Have you a promise of receiving a crown of righteousness from the hand of the Lord with the Church of the Firstborn? Here, then, we understand that Paul rested his hope in Christ, because he had kept the faith and loved his appearing; and from his hand he had a promise of receiving a crown of righteousness. [^2]
