Joseph Smith, Kent P. Jackson, Joseph Smith's Commentary on the Bible ( 1994)

1 Peter

1 Peter 1:23

1 Pet 1 23Being born again comes by the Spirit of God through ordinances. [^1]

1 Peter 3:1, 5-7

SC1 Pet 3 51 Pet 3 61 Pet 3 71 Pet 3 1It is the duty of a husband to love, cherish, and nourish his wife, and cleave unto her and none else. He ought to honor her as himself, and he ought to regard her feelings with tenderness, for she is his flesh and his bone, designed to be an help unto him, both in temporal and spiritual things, one into whose bosom he can pour all his complaints without reserve, who is willing (being designed) to take part of his burden, to soothe and encourage his feelings by her gentle voice.

1 Pet 3 1SC1 Pet 3 51 Pet 3 61 Pet 3 7It is the place of the man to stand at the head of his family and be lord of his own house, not to rule over his wife as a tyrant, neither as one who is fearful or jealous that his wife will get out of her place and prevent him from exercising his authority. It is his duty to be a man of God—for a man of God is a man of wisdom—ready at all times to obtain from the scriptures, the revelations, and from on high, such instructions as are necessary for the edification and salvation of his household.

1 Pet 3 1SC1 Pet 3 51 Pet 3 61 Pet 3 7And on the other hand, it is the duty of the wife to be in subjection to her husband at all times, not as a servant, neither as one who fears a tyrant or a master, but as one who in meekness and the love of God regards the laws and institutions of heaven [and] looks up to her husband for instruction, edification, and comfort. [^2]

1 Peter 3:18-19; 4:6

1 Pet 4 6SC1 Pet 3 181 Pet 3 19Question: If the Mormon doctrine is true, what has become of all those who have died since the days of the apostles?

1 Pet 4 6SC1 Pet 3 181 Pet 3 19Answer: All those who have not had an opportunity of hearing the gospel, and being administered to by an inspired man in the flesh, must have it hereafter, before they can be finally judged. [^3]

1 Pet 4 6SC1 Pet 3 181 Pet 3 19[There is] a difference between an angel and a ministering spirit. The one [has] a resurrected or translated body with its spirit, ministering to embodied spirits. The other [is] a disembodied spirit, visiting and ministering to disembodied spirits. Jesus Christ became a ministering spirit, while his body lay in the sepulchre, to the spirits in prison, to fulfill an important part of his mission without which he could not have perfected his work or entered into his rest. . . .

1 Pet 4 6SC1 Pet 3 181 Pet 3 19There is a way to release the spirit of the dead. That is, by the power and authority of the priesthood, by binding and loosing on earth. This doctrine appears glorious, inasmuch as it exhibits the greatness of divine compassion and benevolence in the extent of the plan of human salvation. This glorious truth is well calculated to enlarge the understanding and to sustain the soul under troubles, difficulties, and distresses. [Suppose] the case of two men, brothers, equally intelligent, learned, virtuous, and lovely, walking in uprightness and in all good conscience so far as they had been able to discern duty from the muddy stream of tradition or from the blotted page of the book of nature. One dies and is buried, having never heard the gospel of reconciliation. To the other the message of salvation is sent. He hears and embraces it and is made the heir of eternal life. Shall the one become a partaker of glory and the other be consigned to hopeless perdition? Is there no chance for his escape? Sectarianism answers, "None! None! None!" Such an idea is worse than atheism. . . .

1 Pet 4 6SC1 Pet 3 181 Pet 3 19This doctrine presents in a clear light the wisdom and mercy of God in preparing an ordinance for the salvation of the dead, being baptized by proxy, their names recorded in heaven, and judged according to the deeds done in the body. This doctrine is the burden of the scriptures. Those Saints who neglect it in behalf of their deceased relatives do it at the peril of their own salvation. [^4]

1 Pet 4 6SC1 Pet 3 181 Pet 3 19Here then we have an account of our Savior preaching to the spirits in prison, to spirits that had been imprisoned from the days of Noah. And what did he preach to them? That they were to stay there? Certainly not. Let his own declaration testify: "He hath sent me to heal the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised" [Luke 4:18]. Isaiah has it, "to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness from the prison house" [Isa. 42:7]. It is very evident from this that he not only went to preach to them but to deliver, or bring them out of the prison house. . . . Those who were disobedient in the days of Noah were visited by our Savior, who possessed the everlasting Melchizedek Priesthood, and had the gospel preached to them by him in prison. And in order that they might fulfill all the requisitions of God, their living friends were baptized for their dead friends and thus fulfilled the requirements of God. [^5]

1 Pet 4 6SC1 Pet 3 181 Pet 3 19He knows the situation of both the living and the dead and has made ample provision for their redemption, according to their several circumstances and the laws of the kingdom of God, whether in this world or in the world to come. . . .

1 Pet 4 6SC1 Pet 3 181 Pet 3 19When speaking about the blessing pertaining to the gospel and the consequences connected with disobedience to its requirements, we are frequently asked the question, "What has become of our fathers?" Will they all be damned for not obeying the gospel when they never heard it? Certainly not. But they will possess the same privilege that we here enjoy, through the medium of the everlasting priesthood—which not only administers on earth but in heaven—and the wise dispensations of the great Jehovah. [^6]

1 Pet 4 6SC1 Pet 3 181 Pet 3 19Let the dead speak forth anthems of eternal praise to the King Immanuel, who hath ordained, before the world was, that which would enable us to redeem them out of their prison; for the prisoners shall go free. [^7]

1 Pet 4 6SC1 Pet 3 181 Pet 3 19Peter says [Jesus] went and preached to the world of spirits so that they would receive it [and] could have it answered by proxy by those who live on the earth. [^8]

1 Pet 4 6SC1 Pet 3 181 Pet 3 19All the spirits must either obey the gospel or be damned. [^9]

1 Pet 4 6SC1 Pet 3 181 Pet 3 19All spirits who have not obeyed the gospel in the flesh must obey the gospel or be damned. [^10]

1 Pet 4 6SC1 Pet 3 181 Pet 3 19These who will not obey the gospel will go to the world of spirits, there to stay till they have paid the utmost farthing, or till some person pays their debts they owe. Now all those [who] die in the faith go to the prison of spirits to preach to the dead in body, but they are alive in the spirit. And those spirits preach to the spirits, that they may "live according to God in the spirit." And men do minister for them in the flesh. And angels bear the glad tidings to the spirits, and they are made happy by these means. Therefore, those who are baptized for their dead are the saviors on Mt. Zion, and they must receive their washings and their anointings for their dead the same as for themselves, until they are connected to the ones in the dispensation before us and trace their lineage to connect the priesthood again. [^11]

1 Pet 4 6SC1 Pet 3 181 Pet 3 19The sectarians have no charity for me, but I have for them. I intend to send men to prison to preach to them, and this is all on the principle of entering in by water and spirit [John 3:5]. Then you must not only be baptized for them, but they must receive the Holy Ghost by proxy and be sealed by it unto the day of their redemption, as all the other ordinances by proxy. All persons who have been baptized and who have received the Holy Ghost may be baptized for their ancestors or near relatives. God has administrators in the eternal world to release those spirits from prison. The ordinances being administered by proxy upon them, the law is fulfilled. [^12]

1 Pet 4 6SC1 Pet 3 181 Pet 3 19See also under Isaiah 24:21-22; 1 Corinthians 15:29.

1 Peter 5:5-6

SC1 Pet 5 51 Pet 5 6When pride shall fall and every aspiring mind be clothed with humility as with a garment, and selfishness give place to benevolence and charity, and a united determination to live by every word which proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord is observable, then and not till then can peace, order, and love prevail. [^13]
