Joseph Smith, Kent P. Jackson, Joseph Smith's Commentary on the Bible ( 1994)

1 John

1 John 3:2

1 Jn 3 2How is it that these old apostles should say so much on the subject of the coming of Christ? . . . Can we mistake such language as this? Do we not offer violence to our own good judgment when we deny the Second Coming of the Messiah? [^1]

1 Jn 3 2When the Savior appears we shall see that he is a man like unto ourselves. And that same sociality which exists among us here will exist among us there, only it will be coupled with eternal glory, which we do not enjoy now. [^2]

1 Jn 3 2When he shall appear we shall see him as he is. We shall see that he is a man like ourselves. And that same sociality which exists among us here will exist among us there, only it will be coupled with eternal glory, which glory we do not now enjoy. [^3]

1 John 4:1

1 Jn 4 1It is evident from the apostles' writings that many false spirits existed in their day and had "gone forth into the world," and that it needed intelligence which God alone could impart to detect false spirits and to prove what spirits were of God. The world in general has been grossly ignorant in regard to this one thing, and why should they be otherwise? For "no man knows the things of God, but by the spirit of God" [1 Cor. 2:11]. . . .

1 Jn 4 1"Try the spirits," says John. But who is to do it? The learned, the eloquent, the philosopher, the sage, the divine all are ignorant. . . ."Try the spirits." But what by? Are we to try them by the creeds of men? What preposterous folly, what sheer ignorance, what madness. Try the motions and actions of an eternal being (for I contend that all spirits are such) by a thing that was conceived in ignorance and brought forth in folly—a cobweb of yesterday. Angels would hide their faces, and devils would be ashamed and insulted and would say, "Paul we know, and Jesus we know, but who are ye?" [Acts 19:15]. Let each man or society make a creed and try evil spirits by it, and the Devil would shake his sides. It is all that he would ask, all that he would desire. Yet many of them do this, and hence "many spirits are abroad in the world." One great evil is that men are ignorant of the nature of spirits—their power, laws, government, intelligence, and so forth—and imagine that when there is anything like power, revelation, or vision manifested that it must be of God. . . .

1 Jn 4 1No man can [discern the spirits] without the priesthood and having a knowledge of the laws by which spirits are governed. For as "no man knows the things of God, but by the spirit of God," so no man knows the spirit of the Devil and his power and influence but by possessing intelligence which is more than human and having unfolded through the medium of the priesthood the mysterious operations of his devices—without knowing the "angelic" form, the "sanctified" look and gesture, and the "zeal" that is frequently manifested by him "for the glory of God," together with the "prophetic" spirit, the "gracious" influence, the "godly" appearance, and the "holy" garb which is so characteristic of his proceedings and his mysterious windings. A man must have the discerning of spirits before he can drag into daylight this hellish influence and unfold it unto the world in all its soul-destroying, diabolical, and horrid colors. For nothing is a greater injury to the children of men than to be under the influence of a false spirit when they think they have the spirit of God. Thousands have felt the influence of its terrible power and baneful effects: long pilgrimages have been undertaken, penances endured, and pain, misery, and ruin have followed in their train. Nations have been convulsed, kingdoms overthrown, provinces laid waste, and blood, carnage, and desolation are the habiliments in which it has been clothed. The Turks, the Hindus, the Jews, the Christians, the Indians, in fact all nations have been deceived, imposed upon, and injured through the mischievous effects of false spirits.

1 Jn 4 1As we have noticed before, the great difficulty lies in the ignorance of the nature of spirits, of the laws by which they are governed and the signs by which they may be known. If it requires the spirit of God to know the things of God, and the spirit of the Devil can only be unmasked through that medium, then it follows as a natural consequence that unless some person or persons have a communication or revelation from God, unfolding to them the operation of spirit, they must eternally remain ignorant of these principles. For I contend that if one man cannot understand these things but by the spirit of God, ten thousand men cannot. It is alike out of the reach of the wisdom of the learned, the tongue of the eloquent, and the power of the mighty. And we shall at last have to come to this conclusion, whatever we may think of revelation, that without it we can neither know nor understand anything of God or the Devil. And however unwilling the world may be to acknowledge this principle, it is evident from the multifarious creeds and notions concerning this matter that they understand nothing of this principle. And it is equally as plain that without a divine communication they must remain in ignorance. The world always mistook false prophets for true ones, and those that were sent of God they considered to be false prophets. And hence they killed, stoned, punished and imprisoned the true prophets, and they had to hide themselves "in deserts, and dens, and caves of the earth" [Heb. 11:38]. And although the most honorable men of the earth, they banished them from their society as vagabonds, whilst they cherished, honored, and supported knaves, vagabonds, hypocrites, impostors, and the basest of men.

1 Jn 4 1A man must have the discerning of spirits, as we before stated, to understand these things. And how is he to obtain this gift if there are no gifts of the Spirit? And how can these gifts be obtained without revelation? . . .

1 Jn 4 1No man nor set of men without the regular constituted authorities, the priesthood, and discerning of spirits can tell true from false spirits. This power they possessed in the apostles' day, but it has departed from the world for ages. [^4]

1 John 5:7

1 Jn 5 7See under John 17:9-11.
