John Bytheway, What I Wish I'd Known in High School: A Crash Course in Teenage Survival ( 1994)

Orientation

or, About the Guy Who Wrote This

Hi. Welcome to the orientation for this course, "What I Wish I'd Known in High School." My name is John, and I wrote what you're reading. If you were sitting next to me, hearing me say these words instead of reading them yourself, you'd hear a slight lisp because of my retainer. So feel free to imagine the lisp whenever you read a word with the letter "s." The people at the orthodontist's office tell me the lisp will go away as I get used to the retainer, so stop imagining the lisp in about, um, Fourth Period.

First off, I suppose I should introduce myself. As I mentioned, my first name is John, and my last name is a prepositional phrase that you've probably said a million times: Bytheway. Take a wild guess about how to pronounce that. Yup, just like it sounds. By the way. That's really it. (My cousin Miriam is mentioned in the Bible—see Deuteronomy 24:9.)

Of course, that name has been a lot of fun. Once I took a date to a restaurant. (I did, I got a date—my parents held a special fast, and I got a date.) The waitress said, "There's going to be a wait until a table opens up; can I take your name?" I thought to myself, Oh, brother, here we go again, then I said, "Yes, it's Bytheway."

She looked at me in silence, as if she were waiting for me to finish my sentence. "By the way . . . what?" she said.

"No, Bytheway is my name," I replied.

She paused, put her hands on her hips, and said, "Nu-uh."

"Yup, yup, that's it," I promised.

"I'll bet you get teased about that."

"No, actually, this is the first time." I grinned at her.

"Where does that name come from?" she asked.

I tried to keep a straight face and answered, "It's Japanese." (It isn't really.)

One time I was playing Pictionary with some friends, and after the game was over, someone suggested we each "draw" our own name. I thought about it a minute and drew this:

See that? A forest-service restroom, you say? Right, but it's also a John by the way! Get it? A sanitary self-portrait! (You're probably thinking, "Oh great. I buy this book to learn something, I'm four paragraphs into it, and the author's drawing Pictionary bathrooms.") Yes, friends, we're gonna break the fun meter today. So next time you go camping, and you have to "use the facilities," you'll think of me. What a lovely thought. Now, let's see if there's any useful information in here.

Perhaps you're wondering why I wrote this book. Good question. To be honest, I've been writing this book since I was a sophomore in high school. I didn't actually sit down and start typing until 1992, but I've been trying to find the right words to explain certain things for a long time. I remember one high-school day when I felt a little frustrated. (Does that ever happen to you?) I ended up at the school library looking for a book that hadn't been written. The book I wanted wasn't about math or history or social studies, or any subject I had in school. I wanted answers about things teachers don't normally talk about, for example: What does it mean to be popular? Why do some people treat me differently when we're alone than they do when their other friends are around? Why do I feel good some days and rotten other days? Am I moody? Is there life after high school? And on and on and on.

What I've tried to do here is write the book I was looking for all those years ago, the book explaining all the things I wish I had known when I was in high school. But before we go any further, there's just one thing I'd like to say:

Congratulations! You're reading a book!

Your parents are probably in the kitchen doing high fives. I know you read school books, but this one is different. Books from school you have to read; this one's just for fun. So I'll try to write it that way.

Seriously, though, what have you ever learned from playing Nintendo? Or watching reruns on TV? Admit it! Not much! A mental diet of TV and video games will give you indigestion of the brain. Well, all of that is about to change. Yes, fellow travelers, the Starship o' Knowledge is about to leave Spacedock.

So here's the deal. You read this instead of watching TV, and I'll try to make it every bit as exciting as the shows you're missing (if not more exciting). There will be some class periods that may not be totally fun or funny, but they will be something better: Interesting or Fascinating or Intriguing or even TESTIMONY BUILDING. When was the last time prime-time did that?

Now I'd like to introduce something you'll be seeing a lot of in this book. You see, I don't know very much, but I love to read the words of people who do. So I'll be repeating what others with fine minds (like yours) have said throughout history. Yes indeed, I think it's time to dip into the well of "Great Quotage" for a "GQ" (Great Quote). We'll use GQs throughout the book, and I think you'll like them. In fact, I highly recommend that you start a GQ collection of your own. Okay, here's the first one:

The more you read, the more you know. The more you know, the smarter you grow. The smarter you grow, the stronger your voice, In expressing your view, or making your choice.

Knowledge is power! And that's what reading is all about. There is an unbelievably large universe of information out there, and you can explore it because you can read. I hope you will read many books after you finish this one—I'll even recommend a few from time to time as we go along together.

As you may have noticed, this course is called "What I Wish I'd Known in High School." I thought about calling it other things, like "There Is Life after High School," or "This Too Shall Pass." But the main point is that you are going to make it—and make it big. Your high-school experience is not a forecast for your life. If things are not so hot now, don't worry! Things get better. People grow up! (Well, most of them do.) They feel less of a need to cut others down, make judgments, and gossip about friends. I survived—in fact, my life really began after I was out of high school. Right now, though, you're in the middle of it, so let's talk about how to make it through.

This book was written with three goals in mind. First of all, as with any book, you should expect to learn things you didn't know before. Second, as you travel through the pages, you ought to enjoy the ride! Third, and most important, a book should make you want to be better than you were when you picked it up. So those are the goals—in short: learn things, have fun, and make changes.

One more thing. This is your book. I hope you will use a highlighter when you read, and mark it up! (Have your scriptures handy too, so you can mark the ones we talk about.) Highlight what you like or what you have questions about. Underline, write notes in the margin, or whatever. That way, when you thumb through this book at another time, you'll remember what stood out to you before. If you'll do that much, I'll try to make the book as interesting, informative, and relevant as possible. Deal? Deal.

Oh, and by the way, enjoy the course!
