John Bytheway, What I Wish I'd Known in High School: A Crash Course in Teenage Survival ( 1994)

Self-Esteem 101

Real Estate and Real Esteem: Finding a Foundation for Your Self-Worth

The least, the most inferior spirit now upon the earth . . . is worth worlds. —Brigham Young

Your local bookstore has thousands of books on self-esteem. Listen to the words they use: self-esteem, self-confidence, self-image, self-worth . . . all these "self" words. What do they all mean? Sounds kind of self-ish,

doesn't it? (At the North Pole, among Santa's crew, they use the words "elf-worth," "elf-confidence," and "elf-esteem." Ho, ho.)

Writers through the years have used such words to mean different things. So before we go on, we need to decide what we mean by "self-esteem." Should we say that having good self-esteem means that we'll always feel good about ourselves? Yes. I mean, no. Well, maybe. Wait a sec . . . I mean, we'd better not. Because, if we always feel good about ourselves, there's probably something wrong. Sometimes we feel bad for important reasons. Listen to Nephi: "O, wretched man that I am! Yea, my heart sorroweth because of my flesh; my soul grieveth because of mine iniquities" (2 Nephi 4:17).

Would we say that Nephi had "low self-esteem"? Of course not. Each of us ought to feel like Nephi did when confronted with our weaknesses—and we ought to respond the way he did, too: "I know in whom I have trusted. . . . My God hath been my support. . . . He hath filled me with his love" (2 Nephi 4:19-21).

Real, appropriate self-esteem, the kind everyone ought to have, has so little to do with self, and so much to do with God, that perhaps self-esteem isn't the best word to describe it. Self-esteem, the way many in the world define it, stresses too much reliance on self, and not enough on God.

Have you ever been confused about this? I have. First we're told to be meek, humble, and submissive. Then we're told to have self-confidence—a positive attitude—and to believe in ourselves. Which one is it? Or is it a little of each? Fortunately, we can use our knowledge of the gospel as we struggle to figure this out. Elder James E. Faust gave a marvelous definition of appropriate self-esteem specially tailored for Latter-day Saints:

The self-esteem to which I refer is something different. It is not blind, arrogant, vain love of self, but is self-respecting, unconceited, honest esteem of ourselves. It is born of inner peace and strength. [^1]

There's the definition we want! And for the rest of this book, we're going to use the term self-esteem the way Elder Faust defined it: an honest, self-respecting, unconceited opinion of ourselves. So, should we always feel good about ourselves? Perhaps not. But we can enjoy the inner peace that comes from knowing that we are important to the Lord! He loved us enough to send his Son (see John 3:16), and he rejoices when we repent (see D&C 18:13). We may not always feel like it, but we are worthwhile. You, and I, and everyone else on earth is of great worth. (Hey, there's a cute little rhyme—If you're on earth, you have great worth!) That's a fact we know from the scriptures!

Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God. (D&C 18:10)

You may be asking, "Well, if I'm of such great worth, why do I feel like I'm riding an emotional roller coaster? Why do I have so many ups and downs?" Good question. Some of those things are just a part of growing up. However, one problem may be that you're building your foundation in the wrong place. Young or old, we must build on solid ground or we'll never feel stable.

Let's say you're going to build a house, and you're looking for a nice piece of land. Your real-estate agent fumbles through his listings and says,

"Say, I know a great area, and it's really cheap!"

"What's it called?" you ask.

"Landslide Hills."

"Why is it called that?"

"Well, because, uh, one day you'll be living on the north side of the street, and you'll hear a loud rumbling noise, a few pictures will fall off the walls, and then you'll be on the south side of the street."

"Uh, no, I don't think so."

"Well, let's see, I have some property next to a big river. The Petersons used to live there. Yup, 1016 Backstroke Drive."

"Are they still there?"

"No, they floated downstream last spring. Now they're at 1216 Backstroke Drive."

"Wow. What else have you got?"

"I believe two homes are up for sale on the fault line—let's see, yes! One home at 907 Achy Quaky Heart Circle, and one at 486 D. Fault Drive."

"Hmmm. Do you have anything with a better foundation?"

"How firm a foundation?" (Ha, ha.)

"I want something that will remain standing through rainstorms and floods and winds . . . you know, something rock solid."

"Oh—you want to build on a rock."

"Yes, of course; I thought you would take that for granite." (I know, dumb joke.)

When you're looking to build something important, something that you hope will remain standing, you want to build on solid ground. But it's especially tempting to build self-esteem on not-so-solid ground. The world tells us that worth comes from fame, wealth, the honors of society, appearance, status, and so on. That is risky real estate! If you build there, you're taking your chances. Hop in the truck, buckle up, let's check out a few of those spots, and you'll see what I mean.

Landslide Hills—The Way Others Treat Us

Hmmm, this looks nice. We could build our self-worth around our friends, or around the way others treat us. Aren't friends great? Choose your friends wisely, they say, because friends can make such a difference in your life. It's the best feeling in the world to have good friends who make you feel like you belong.

Some of my favorite high-school memories are of things that didn't happen at school, but just when I was driving around with my friends. I can't even remember what we did half the time, but we always kept our standards high. We would laugh, go places, eat, visit girls . . . it was so much fun—good, clean fun. I believe we could outparty any sorority or fraternity on this earth; we could have more fun, more laughs, stay up later—then wake up the next morning, remember everything we did, and not feel the least bit guilty (because we kept our standards).

So maybe that's it: Happiness and self-worth come from friends. That's where we'll build. Can we stop reading the book now because we've figured it out? Well, no. Friendship is a good temporary foundation, but it's not the best for permanent self-esteem. Friendships are great, but they can slip and slide and avalanche away too. Some friendships can be more like rivalries. One friend of mine had a landslide in her friendship neighborhood. She expressed it like this:

One day they're your friend, and the next day they're your enemy. It's like they're saying, "Okay, today I'll be your friend, but tomorrow, I'm going to tell everyone what you told me about so and so, and you'll wonder why I'm trying to ruin your life. Then on another day, I'll be your friend again, and act like nothing happened. Your job, of course, is to forgive me every time, because no matter what, it's your fault.

Yuck! Thus the familiar saying, "With friends like that, who needs enemies?" I suppose those problems are ordinary in young friendships, but you, my friend, are not ordinary. And someone as extraordinary as you must be an extraordinary friend. We'll keep our good friendships, but we'd better not build on Landslide Hills, or we'll be comin' down the mountain. Let's pack up and move out—fasten your seat belt and pass the Twinkies. Okay, where else should we look? Let's check out the river!

Backstroke Drive—Our Appearance

Hey, this is nice! Backstroke Drive looks really attractive. Why don't we try building our self-esteem on our appearance? You know, our clothes, our looks, our "image." Kind of tempting, huh.

I have a seminary-teacher friend named Kim Peterson. He gave a wonderful talk once where he passed out score cards and had all the youth "rate" certain people on a scale of 1 to 10. He held up a picture of a supermodel and all the boys gave her a 10. (Of course all the girls scored her in the 1 to 2 range.) Then he held up a picture of Charlie Sheen. This time the girls gave the 10's and the guys the 1's and 2's. He showed many more pictures, and everyone was having a good time. Then came the teaching moment; amidst all the fun, Brother Peterson showed a portrait of Jesus. Confusion fell over the room. No one knew what to do! Some held up a 10; others tried to combine cards to make bigger numbers. The room became quiet because the game didn't seem to make sense anymore. Then Brother Peterson made a profound statement: "There is something wrong with a system where Jesus Christ and Charlie Sheen get the same score." What a great insight! There is something wrong with that system! (I think even Charlie Sheen would agree.) And yet we use it every day to judge ourselves and to judge others. We are daily taught by the media to appreciate very few body types, and we often seem to value people only if they are "good lookin'." I think Leo Tolstoy said it very well:

It is amazing how complete is the delusion that beauty is goodness. [^2]

We should value people for what's inside, not for the package they come in (see 1 Samuel 16:7 . . . hey, I'm not joking! Go look it up). Besides, with time the package will change. We don't love our grandmas because they are supermodels; we love them because of the quality of their hearts. Someday, everyone's "package" will be resurrected, and their status will be based on the beauty in their hearts and the purity of their lives.

Yup, better not build on Backstroke Drive. If we do, our self-esteem will float away like the other homes built on the riverbank. Back in the truck, Chuck. Now, what was the other place the agent mentioned?

Achy Quaky Heart Circle or D. Fault Drive—Our Accomplishments

Why don't we base our self-esteem on our accomplishments? Because it's earthquake city, that's why. Please don't misunderstand. We believe in setting and achieving goals and everything else, and we know these things can make us feel happy. But we're looking for the best place to build, not just a good place. Keep setting your goals and working to achieve them, and never let up! Be a goal setter and achiever, but don't build your self-worth there. If you judge yourself solely by your accomplishments, you will always be able to find someone who can do more or better, and you may be tempted to make comparisons. President Thomas S. Monson once said, "When we compare ourselves to others, we become either vain or bitter." We don't want vainness or bitterness, we want happiness! Besides, the real, worthwhile accomplishments are not flashy trophies, awards or degrees, cars, CDs, stereos, or other possessions. They're more often quiet acts of service and lives of devotion.

Many things make us happy for a while, but only a few things can help us be happy for a long time. We're not talking about the perma-grin-on-your-face happiness that makes you want to hug the bus driver and the grocery clerk, but a quieter kind of happiness: a content feeling. Maybe the best word to describe that feeling is peace, or inner peace, as Elder Faust said. Where can we turn for peace? Not on D. Fault Drive, or Achy Quaky Heart Circle. If you build on Achy Quaky, all you'll have is shake and bakey. (I love fine poetry.)

So far we've checked out three places, and none of them worked out. There are hundreds of other places where we could find a foundation for our self-worth, but we're about to run out of gas! Where is the best place? We want a strong, durable foundation that will last for a lifetime.

Get a Place on the Rock

It's been said that wise people learn from experience, and superwise people learn from others' experience. Well, we know of an experienced "ancient realtor" who can tell us where to build! He recommends a place for building not only self-esteem, but a whole life! His name is Helaman, and here's what he said to his sons, and to all of us:

And now, my sons, remember, remember that it is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that ye must build your foundation; that when the devil shall send forth his mighty winds, yea, his shafts in the whirlwind, yea, when all his hail and his mighty storm shall beat upon you, it shall have no power over you to drag you down to the gulf of misery and endless wo, because of the rock upon which ye are built, which is a sure foundation, a foundation whereon if men build they cannot fall. (Helaman 5:12; see also Luke 6:48)

Here's another great real-estate tip:

Wherefore, if you shall build up my church, upon the foundation of my gospel and my rock, the gates of hell shall not prevail against you. (D&C 18:5)

Now we're getting somewhere! Like we said before: Real, appropriate self-esteem has much more to do with God than it has to do with self. The rock-solid foundation on which to build our self-esteem is the Savior! The gospel! Our true identity as children of God! That's the foundation that won't slip or slide, quake or flood. Let's examine this real estate for real esteem in a little more detail.

Your Identity as a Child of God

Sometimes people describe teenagers as having an "identity crisis." When people said that to me, I thought they meant I lost my wallet. I'd pull it out and look at my driver's license. "My I.D. looks fine," I'd say. "I don't think it's having a crisis."

Sometimes we say "you're a child of God" and expect that to clear everything up. Sometimes we forget to explain what being a child of God means. I'm not sure any of us will understand completely what it means until after this life, but we'll do the best we can with what we know now. What does being a child of God mean?

A child of God: It means God is your Father.

Our Father in Heaven is the very best father you can possibly imagine. He is perfect. He is the father of your spirit. Have you ever thought about what that means? Let's take a closer look. If you've ever worked on your genealogy, you've seen a pedigree chart. (Once at a youth conference I held up a pedigree chart, and one of the deacons said, "Hey, it's the NCAA tournament!")

Your name is written on a single line, and that line splits into double lines. On those lines, you write the names of your father and your mother. Those lines also each split into two more, where grandparents' names are listed, and so on, and so on, back thousands of years. With enough information, you would eventually get back to our first parents, Adam and Eve. That would be a huge chart; that would fill a large room! But, and this is important, that chart is the genealogy of your body, not your spirit. It shows only your mortal past, not your spiritual past. What would a pedigree chart for your spirit look like? Elder Boyd K. Packer once said:

You are a child of God. He is the father of your spirit. Spiritually you are of noble birth, the offspring of the King of Heaven. Fix that truth in your mind and hold to it. However many generations in your mortal ancestry, no matter what race or people you represent, the pedigree of your spirit can be written on a single line. You are a child of God! [^3]

You ——————————— Heavenly Parents

Who is the real you, anyway? Is it your body or your spirit? Your spirit, of course! It's been around a lot longer than your body. And what is earth life for? In a nutshell, to get your spirit to take charge of your body! (Why do you think we have fast Sunday? Hmmm?)

Do you remember in third grade when your teacher would say, "Put on your thinking cap?" Well, go find your old thinking cap, and put it on for this next question. Does it fit? I'll wait. Ready? Okay, let's review. Read this slowly and engage the thinking cap. If your spirit is the real you, then who is your real father? Right, my friend, your Father in Heaven is more your father than your earthly father, because your spirit is more "you" than your body is. You've heard it hundreds of times before, but hopefully it means a little more this time: God is your Father. That means he knows you better than you know yourself. And that means you must come to know him too.

In fact, why not take a minute and think of all the things that might startle you when you see heaven for the first time: your new body, the streets, the trees, the animals, seeing all the ancient prophets you've read about! Think of all that might startle you, then read this next quote (it's my number-one favorite). It was spoken by a prophet of God, Ezra Taft Benson:

Nothing is going to startle us more when we pass through the veil to the other side than to realize how well we know our Father and how familiar his face is to us. [^4]

Brigham Young was a prophet too, and he said this:

I want to tell you, each and every one of you, that you are well acquainted with God our Heavenly Father. . . . You are all well acquainted with him, for there is not a soul of you but what has lived in his house and dwelt with him year after year; and yet you are seeking to become acquainted with him, when the fact is, you have merely forgotten what you did know. [^5]

If we could see our Father who dwells in the heavens, we should learn that we are as well acquainted with him as we are with our earthly father; and he would be as familiar to us in the expression of his countenance, and we should be ready to embrace him and fall upon his neck and kiss him, if we had the privilege. . . . And there is no other one item that will so much astound you, when your eyes are opened in eternity, as to think that you were so stupid in the body. [^6]

Convinced? He is real. And he knows you. I'll repeat: Being a child of God means that God is your Father. All the might and power and glory and majesty you can possibly imagine is possessed by your Father. What else does "I am a child of God" mean?

A child of God: It means he listens.

Maybe you have a best friend. Chances are, one of the things that makes this friend so wonderful is that he or she listens to you and understands you. Think of the person on this earth who listens to you and cares for you the very, very best. I have a friend like this. If I want to talk to him about something, he stops whatever he is doing. He closes the door, comes out from behind his desk, sits down in front of me, and listens; he listens to every word. He listens with his eyes and with his heart as well as with his ears. He listens to me as if I were the most important person in the world. My friend is a wonderful man, but he is imperfect. Think about this—if an imperfect man can listen that well, imagine how your perfect Father in Heaven can listen! Imagine how much he can care! Elder H. Burke Peterson said:

I want you to know that I know that whenever one of Heavenly Father's children kneels and talks to him, he listens. I know this as well as I know anything in this world—that Heavenly Father listens to every prayer from his children. I know our prayers ascend to heaven. No matter what we may have done wrong, he listens to us. [^7]

Heavenly Father is much more than a friend. And Heavenly Father is interested in his children. He is totally selfless. His work and his glory is to bring to pass our success! (See Moses 1:39.) Throughout the scriptures he is constantly inviting us to pray and talk to him. You have never read a scripture that said, "Behold, only pray between 8:00 and 5:00, because, hey, we're busy up here." The invitations to pray are constant and varied: "Seek me diligently and ye shall find me; ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you" (D&C 88:63). "Pray always, and I will pour out my Spirit upon you, and great shall be your blessing" (D&C 19:38). He wouldn't make the invitation if he

didn't intend to listen. Being a child of God means that you have a Father who is intensely interested in you—he listens.

A child of God: It means help in overcoming temptation.

In the Pearl of Great Price, there is a wonderful story. It's only twenty-two verses long, but it gives us a great example of how to fight temptation. It shows us how Moses overcame the adversary by remembering who he was. Sit up in your chair and get ready—this is good. It starts in the book of Moses, chapter one, verse three:

And God spake unto Moses, saying: Behold, I am the Lord God Almighty, and Endless is my name; for I am without beginning of days or end of years; and is not this endless?

And, behold, thou art my son;

Okay, I have to stop you: Did you hear that? Moses just learned from a very good source who he was. God said, "Thou art my son." When Joseph Smith saw the Father and the Son he said their "brightness and glory defied all description"! Imagine this beautiful and glorious being looking at you and saying, "Thou art my son." How would that make you feel? Wow! Okay, keep going.

Wherefore look, and I will show thee the workmanship of mine hands; but not all, for my works are without end, and also my words, for they never cease. . . .

And I have a work for thee, Moses, my son; [there, it happened again—Moses is still learning about his identity] and thou art in the similitude of mine Only Begotten;

Wow. What a wonderful thing to say—in other words, "Moses, you're my son, and you look like Jesus," or, "You are like Jesus," or, "Your mission is to be like Jesus."

And mine Only Begotten is and shall be the Savior, for he is full of grace and truth. . . .

And now, behold, this one thing I show unto thee, Moses, my son, for thou art in the world, and now I show it unto thee.

There's the third time Moses was called a son of God. In fact, every time the Lord says "Moses," he adds "my son." Why do you suppose the Lord would do that? Do you think it's important? Do you think it made an impression? We'll find out very soon.

Next, Moses saw a wonderful vision. He saw the world and all of its inhabitants. (He saw you.) When the vision was over, Moses was exhausted and fell unconscious for "the space of many hours." When Moses awoke, he made a wonderfully humble statement:

Now, for this cause I know that man is nothing, which thing I never had supposed.

What happens next is fascinating. But first, a question: Who would really like to mess up your understanding of who you are? Right. Satan. Well, take a wild guess who shows up next. Listen:

And it came to pass that when Moses had said these words, behold, Satan came tempting him, saying: Moses, son of man, worship me. (Moses 1:12; emphasis added)

Did you catch that? What do you suppose Satan is trying to do? Now remember, three times God called Moses "my son." As soon as God leaves, Satan comes along and tries to undo everything. The first thing he attacks is Moses' understanding of who he is. He calls Moses a "son of man." I imagine Moses thinking to himself, "Wait a minute. God said I was his son, and this being says I am a son of man. Hmmm . . . one of these things is not like the other." Moses responds beautifully.

And it came to pass that Moses looked upon Satan and said: Who art thou? For behold, I am a son of God, in the similitude of his Only Begotten; and where is thy glory, that I should worship thee?

Did Moses believe all he had heard? Yes! Moses heard and believed everything he was told by God. And when temptation stared him in the face, he said, "Who are you? I am a son of God." As you know, everything in the scriptures is there for a reason. Now, why do you suppose this event is recorded for you to read? Could it be that you have just been given a tool for how to respond to temptation? Could it be that if we truly understand who we are, sinning will be the farthest thing from our minds?

Perhaps Satan doesn't appear to you directly, but the world sure does: Hey, you wanna watch this video? Hey, have you seen this magazine? Hey, try this, everyone does. Or in more subtle ways the world says you have to be

popular, you have to dress like this, you have to talk like this, you have to listen to this kind of music, or you won't fit in. How can you respond? By answering to yourself (if not out loud), "Who are you? I am a son of God."

For the young women, understanding your identity is so important that every Sunday you're asked to stand up and recite your values. Why? So that when temptation comes along you will already know how to respond: "Who are you? We are daughters of our Heavenly Father who loves us, and we love him. We will stand as witnesses of God at all times, in all things, and in all places . . . " Well, you know the rest.

Moses asked, "Who art thou? and where is thy glory that I should worship thee?" You can do the same by identifying temptations for what they really are. What? Watch that video? Where's the glory in doing that? What? Spread gossip about someone else? Where's the glory in that? What? Relax my standards on a date? I don't do that kind of stuff. Where's the glory in that? I am a daughter of God.

Three times Moses heard it, and I'll bet you've heard it more times than that. Modern apostles and prophets communicate with the Lord too. Over and over again they try to help you by reminding you who you are. (Good to review, when you're feeling blue.) Elder Vaughn J. Featherstone said:

It is not difficult to understand why the great God in heaven has reserved these special spirits for the final work of the kingdom prior to his millennial reign. . . . This generation will face trials and troubles that will exceed those of their pioneer forebears. Our generation has had some periods of respite from the foe. The future generation will have little or none. . . . This is a chosen generation. . . . I believe today's [LDS youth] will lead the youth of the world through the most trying time in history. [^8]

Wow. Did you hear that? Our trials and troubles will exceed those of the pioneers? No doubt you've heard inspiring stories from Church history about pioneers and handcarts, about unbelievable difficulties and trials. Perhaps our trials won't be the same kind as the ones the pioneers had, but in some ways they will be even more difficult. Father in Heaven sent you here because of his faith that you can do it. Okay, here's my favorite, from President Ezra Taft Benson:

For nearly six thousand years, God has held you in reserve to make your appearance in the final days before the Second Coming. Every previous gospel dispensation has drifted into apostasy, but ours will not. . . . God has saved for the final inning some of his strongest children, who will help bear off the kingdom triumphantly. And that is where you come in, for you are the generation that must be prepared to meet your God. . . . Make no mistake about it—you are a marked generation. [^9]

Identity is important. No matter what others say about you, or what you think they say (sometimes we imagine things worse than they are), now you know what prophets think. Others may say you're overweight or different or dumb, but God has shared with prophets who you really are. Who are you going to believe? I suggest believing God and his prophets. Being a child of God means help in overcoming temptation.

A child of God: It means he wants your success and he will be your ally.

An ally is a friend who supports you, who will fight for you and help you when the chips are down. Your Father is a powerful ally. What father would not want his children to succeed? What father would not help his children fight their battles? There will be battles—spiritual battles—and the weapon you need is a testimony. President Ezra Taft Benson said:

You have been born at this time for a sacred and glorious purpose. It is not by chance that you have been reserved to come to earth in this last dispensation of the fulness of times. Your birth at this particular time was foreordained in the eternities. You are the royal army of the Lord in the last days. You are "youth of the noble birthright." (Hymns, 1985, no. 225.) In the spiritual battles you are waging, I see you as today's sons of Helaman. [^10]

Sometimes people ask, "Why are there so many wars in the Book of Mormon?" Well, take a look around. We're at war right now. It's not a war with swords and spears, it's a war of values; it's a war for your soul and mine. The war in heaven is continuing here on earth, and the Book of Mormon tells us how we can prevail. (We'll talk more about the Book of Mormon in Fourth Period.) Listen to the feelings of Elder Boyd K. Packer about your generation:

It is my conviction that your generation is better and stronger than was mine. Better in many ways. I have the faith that you young men and young women can meet the world on its own terms and conquer it. [^11]

"Meet the world on its own terms and conquer it." That's quite a statement, but it's true, because "If God be for us, who can be against us?" (Romans 8:31). The world cannot win because "they that be with us are more than they that be with them" (2 Kings 6:16). Even when you feel alone, remember that God and one other person makes a majority. Being a child of God means that God wants you to succeed and he is your ally.

All of this may be a little bit hard to understand. I know it was difficult for me to understand when I was young because, well, I was young. I thought other things brought self-esteem. When I got new clothes and put them on I felt an immediate lift. When I won a trophy or did well on a test, there was an immediate difference in how I felt about myself that day. Perhaps you don't feel the same kind of instant lift when you say to yourself, "I am a child of God," but be patient. As you come to know your Father in Heaven better, as you learn more about the gospel, and as your

testimony grows, you will come to realize that you are built on the only foundation that really lasts—a foundation that can withstand anything the world throws at you.

Have we talked about this enough? I hope so. Yes, you are a child of God, but this isn't the end of self-esteem, it's only the beginning. Now you have to act like a child of God. ("We believe that as we come to accept and act upon these values . . . ") If you know who you are, but ignore the commandments, of course you won't feel good.

I'd like to quote from a letter you received from the First Presidency. What's that? you say. What letter? You know, the letter you got from the First Presidency.

Okay, it wasn't addressed to you personally (you'll get one of those when you go on a mission), but to all the youth of the Church. It's in the pamphlet For the Strength of Youth. There's a wonderful statement in your letter that relates to self-esteem. It says, "You can't do wrong and feel right" (p. 4). The same idea has been expressed in many other ways too, but none better than this one: "Wickedness never was happiness" (Alma 41:10; see also Helaman 13:38).

The way to be happy is to be righteous. Isn't it amazing that something so incredibly obvious is ignored, denied, and even ridiculed by most people most of the time? You can't build lasting happiness on wealth, fame, appearance, or selfish pleasure, because the secret to happiness is righteousness. Gee, maybe that's why the Plan of Salvation is also called "The Plan of Happiness"! Listen to President Benson:

One of Satan's most frequently used deceptions is the notion that the commandments of God are meant to restrict freedom and limit happiness. Young people especially sometimes feel that the standards of the Lord are like fences and chains, blocking them from those activities that seem most enjoyable in life. But exactly the opposite is true. The gospel plan is the plan by which men are brought to a fulness of joy. [^12]

You mean, living the commandments makes us happy? Yes! You mean, standards help us maintain self-esteem? YES! You mean, wickedness never was happiness? YES, YES, YES! "Joy and happiness come from living the way the Lord wants you to live and from service to God and others" (For the Strength of Youth, p. 19). That's it. Search all you want, but that's it. To feel good, be good. To feel loved, love and serve others.

Something wonderful happens to people who build on the proper foundation: Their language changes! For ex-ample, they no longer say, "I can't date till I'm sixteen, I can't drink, I can't see that movie, I can't do anything!" Instead, they say, "I don't want to date till I'm sixteen, I don't want to drink, I don't want to see that movie, I don't want to do anything against my standards." What's the change? Simple. Obedience has become a quest, instead of an irritation. [^13] Think about that one for a while—it's profound.

Well, friends, it's been a long day. We've covered a lot of ground, but we finally found a place to begin building our self-esteem. Good thing Helaman was there to help us. Now that you've found your foundation, does that mean you'll never have another bad day, or never feel down again? Nope. Sorry. No guarantees. Helaman didn't say it would never rain or flood again; he just said you'll be safe when the rains and floods come. And that's because you're built on a rock—a sure foundation—a foundation whereon if teenagers build they cannot fall. Your foundation is Christ, and he knows exactly what it's like to feel lonely, rejected, and misunderstood. He can help you make it through. Yes, there will be rain and floods and hail, but you'll have inner peace. You'll hear the thunder boom and the hail beat upon the house, but you'll be warm and cozy, sitting by the fire of your testimony, wrapped in a robe of righteousness, safely inside your home, built on a rock.

Your homework assignment for this class is to read For the Strength of Youth. (If you don't have a copy of the pamphlet, call your Young Men's or Young Women's leader and they'll give you one.) Read it! Please! Read every word of it! Its high standards are the building code for your life. We've found our foundation, and now we need floors, walls, and a roof. The foundation is the Lord; your life, built to the highest standards, is the rest. Congratulations on your new home, my friend—a home that will last. You did it! You got a place on the Rock.

Extra Credit

"To Young Women and Men," Boyd K. Packer, Ensign, May 1989, pp. 53-59.

"To the Young Women of the Church," Ezra Taft Benson, Ensign, November 1986, pp. 81-85.

"To the 'Youth of the Noble Birthright,'" Ezra Taft Benson, Ensign, May 1986, pp. 43-46.

Second Period Endnotes

Division page quotation: Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, 9:124.

p. 357.

---
Notas:
[^1] Boyd K. Packer, Our Father's Plan (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1994), p. 27; emphasis added.
[^2] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, compiled by Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 255-56.
[^3] Ezra Taft Benson, A Witness and a Warning (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988), p. 74. See also Journal of Discourses, 8:55.
[^4] Sheila Cronen, as cited in Rush Limbaugh, The Way Things Ought to Be (New York: Pocket Books, 1992), p. 188.
[^5] James E. Faust, quoting the First Presidency, in Ensign, November 1987, p. 34.
[^6] Marvin J. Ashton, Ensign, May 1982, p. 9.
[^7] See "The Dating Years, Charting a Safe Course," by Randal A. Wright, in Feeling Great, Doing Right, Hanging Tough (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1991), p. 105.
[^8] Thomas S. Monson, Ensign, November 1990, p. 47.
[^9] The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, Edward L. Kimball, ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), p. 281.
[^10] Bruce R. McConkie, New Era, January 1975, p. 38. Note: Elder McConkie was not implying that there is only one right person for each of us. Find this article at your ward library and read it! See also McConkie, "Celestial Marriage," in Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), p. 117.
[^11] Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, p. 281.
[^12] Journal of Discourses, 11:347.
[^13] Russell M. Nelson, Ensign, November 1986, p. 68.
