John Bytheway, What I Wish I'd Known in High School: A Crash Course in Teenage Survival ( 1994)

Chastity 101

The Plan of Happiness: The "Why" behind the Law of Chastity

Humanity will rise or fall through its attitude toward the law of chastity. —Mark E. Petersen

Good evening, folks, I'm Steve Goodguy, and welcome to 'Answer the Obvious!' Are the contestants ready?" (Look left and smile for the camera.) "Alrighty, away we go! And here's today's first brain stumper! Question 1: Why can't you shift from 'D' into 'P' while doing 65 miles per hour on the freeway?"

BZZZZZZT!

"Yes, Jack, your answer, please."

"Two words: Transmission explosion. 'P' means 'Park,' not 'Pass.' Also, shifting into Park on the freeway causes Dad great physical and emotional discomfort."

"Okay, next question: Why can't you put caramel sauce on a hot dog?"

BZZZZZZT!

"Yes, Diane."

"You can, but it really confuses your taste buds."

"Very good, and now Question 3: Why don't people use a large cactus as a Christmas tree?"

BZZZZZZT!

"Go ahead, Marlin."

"Hanging ornaments would be an adventure in pain."

"Wonderful, contestants! and now we'll move ahead to the double-obvious round. . . . BZZZZZZT! CLUNK, CLUNK, click.

We interrupt this ridiculous introduction to continue with this chapter. (In case you're wondering what happened in the game show, Jack won the double-obvious round and the bus trip to Flagstaff.)

Hi! . . . Am I on? Hi, it's me. It's your author again. Welcome back to the book. Let's see, what class are we in? Oh yes. Chastity 101. Okay, here we go. The questions above were relatively easy to answer, and perfect for a game show. Some questions, however, require a little more thought (you'll never see these on a TV quiz show):

Question: Why can't I date until I'm sixteen?

Question: Why am I told to date only those with high standards?

Question: Why do we have to obey the law of chastity?

Question: Why can't I see R-rated movies?

Question: Why can't I drink?

Question: Why do we have all these rules!?

Good questions, huh? And as we observe the behavior of those on television, in movies, in magazines, and even among our friends at school, questions like those are bound to come up. The idea of getting up in the morning and asking, "Gee, how many restrictions should I place on myself today?" seems strange to most of the world. They may not realize (yet) that real freedom comes from living by the rules. Being "free" means being the master of our passions, not their slave.

Okay, our thirty seconds are up, and it's time for our answer. BZZZZZZZZZZT! Mr. Goodguy, we can answer not only the six questions above, but every question about the standards we choose to live by; and we can answer in only four words: The Plan of Salvation.

Simple. The Plan of Salvation is the "big picture" that gives us all the answers. It's the map for our journey through time. Studying the Plan of Salvation is the best way to understand the commandments! In the light of "The Plan," the "whys" behind our standards—especially the law of chastity—are easy to see. Elder Boyd K. Packer explained:

Without a knowledge of the gospel plan, transgression seems natural, innocent, even justified. There is no greater protection from the adversary than for us to know the truth—to know the plan! [^1]

The Plan of Salvation has many names. Among them are the plan of redemption (see Alma 12:32) and the plan of happiness (see Alma 42:8, 16). Let's use the last one, because we all want to be happy. And believe it or not, that's exactly what life is for. The Prophet Joseph Smith said:

Happiness is the object and design of our existence; and will be the end thereof, if we pursue the path that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments of God. [^2]

And who can forget these four oft-quoted words (especially since we've already used them in the book—but that's okay; scriptures never wear out): "Wickedness never was happiness" (Alma 41:10).

By now you may be thinking, "This all sounds really nice, John, but happiness was not what I felt when I had to tell this totally gorgeous guy that I couldn't go out with him because I wasn't old enough," or, "Happiness is not what I experience when everyone at school makes fun of me because they know I'm saving myself for marriage."

You've got a point. But are you talking about short-term happiness or long-term happiness? Are you talking about feeling good now, or feeling great later? The Plan of Salvation is definitely a long-term thing (it's about as long-term as you can get), and there is a far greater happiness ahead if we can endure a few short-term trials on the way. Sometimes standards may seem like a pain—and maybe they are. It may cause a little bit of pain to stick to your standards, but doing so will mean much less pain, and therefore much more happiness, later on. As the old saying goes, "There are two kinds of pain in life: the pain of discipline, and the pain of regret. Discipline weighs ounces, while regret weighs tons." Which kind of pain do you prefer: a little now, or a lot later? Obviously, what we want in the eternities is much more important than what we want short-term. In fact, as someone once said, "The chief cause of failure and unhappiness in life is in trading what we want most for what we want at the moment."

Well, what do we want most? Happiness. And we're in luck, because The Plan is designed to give us maximum happiness! There are blessings beyond imagination waiting for us if we love our Father in Heaven and stick to his Plan. You may have quite an imagination, but the best you can imagine doesn't come close to what God has prepared for his faithful children.

Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. (1 Corinthians 2:9)

Wow, what a promise! Once again, what's the ultimate objective for each of us? To dwell with God in a state of "never-ending happiness" (Mosiah 2:41; Alma 28:12). As you know, in order to get there, we must take certain steps:

Come to earth and receive a body. (Done that.)

Be baptized. (Done that. If you're reading this and you haven't done that, I have a couple of friends I'd like you to meet.)

Develop faith. (Working on that.)

Obey the commandments. (Working on that.)

Have a celestial marriage. (This means not only being married in the temple, but working with your partner to make the marriage "celestial." Working on that.)

Endure to the end. (Working on that too.)

Now, if Heavenly Father's objective is to get us to heaven, or, in other words, to "bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39), what would Satan's objective be? BZZZZZZT! Right! To keep us from getting there! "For [Satan] seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself" (2 Nephi 2:27).

So let's be like Mr. Spock and get really logical about this. What will Satan try to do? What is his agenda? Simple. Stop the Plan of Salvation. Can he do that? No. The Plan will happen—it is happening. But he can try to slow it down, or to cause difficulties along the way (remember the Garden of Eden?). A perceptive teen (like yourself) once asked, "If Satan knows he's going to lose, why does he keep fighting against God?" Good question. Even if Satan does know he will eventually lose, some things are still up for grabs—the individual souls of you and me! He is trying to take captive as many souls as he can (see Moses 4:4). Earth life, then, is a battle for our souls. And how do we protect ourselves in this battle? We live our standards. (Hint: talking about our standards is nice too, but living them is what protects us.)

Let's get specific. Knowing that Satan wants to frustrate The Plan, what do you suppose he will do first? Exactly. Prevent spirits from coming to earth. How will he do this? He'll do all in his power to promote abortion. He'll convince people to have no children. He will raise fears about overpopulation and encourage governments to make laws that limit the number of children couples can have. He'll do whatever he can to keep those spirits from coming!

What if the spirits get here anyway? (I mean, you and I and everyone else on the planet did.) Well, one of the steps of The Plan listed above was to have a celestial marriage. In order to enter the temple and receive the ordinance that makes possible a celestial marriage, we must obey what? BZZZZZZT! Right! The law of chastity!

The law of chastity is the number-one commandment Satan will try to get us to break! The most powerful weapon in his arsenal of misery is immorality. Prophets have warned us about it throughout time. President Ezra Taft Benson said:

The plaguing sin of this generation is sexual immorality. This, the Prophet Joseph said, would be the source of more temptations, more buffetings, and more difficulties for the elders of Israel than any other. [^3]

The power to bring children into this world is the most sacred power God has given us, and he has told us that it is to be used only by those who are lawfully married. But Satan tries to make the sacred seem cheap, common, low, and only for selfish pleasure. He wants people to tell dirty stories and jokes, taking sacred things and making them sound vulgar and dirty. He promotes sex without responsibility, without the commitment of marriage (or any commitment at all). "Do what you want, live it up! It doesn't matter—just protect yourself and use birth control." (Sounds like a commercial for 90102, or 91202, or 911, or whatever that show is. If you don't know what show I'm referring to, that's good. Maybe it's been cancelled.)

Satan also attacks marriage and families. He does everything he can to make marriage look old-fashioned, outdated, like too much of a commitment, too much responsibility. He persuades people to decide, "Why don't we just live together?"

Is his strategy working? Well, take a look around. Anyone who is awake can see that traditional homes and families are under attack, and the attacks will continue. I read the most chilling quote the other day, and it comes from a leader in a movement that claims to be trying to help women:

Since marriage constitutes slavery for women, it is clear that the women's movement must concentrate on attacking marriage. Freedom for women cannot be without the abolition of marriage. [^4]

How do you like that! A direct attack on one of the steps to heaven! Apparently, Satan will do everything he can to fuel the war between the sexes. Tune in on a daytime talk show, and watch the men yell at the women and the women yell at the men. Hatred, bitterness, and distrust are other weapons the adversary uses to discourage understanding and mutual respect and, of course, marriage.

Satan fights this battle on many fronts—he finds many ways to disrupt The Plan. For example, besides being addictive and destructive, pornography exploits and demeans people (mostly women and children). It sends the message that people are to be valued only as objects—not as spirit individuals, each with a mind and a heart. It also sends the false message that "looks" are more important than anything else, and that we don't have to control our thoughts. (See For the Strength of Youth, p. 11.)

How does the Word of Wisdom fit into all this? The Word of Wisdom is about the health of our bodies, but it's also about our spirits! What did we, as spirits, fight to keep in the premortal existence? BZZZZZZT! Right: our agency—an essential part of The Plan. What does drinking, or smoking, or drug abuse, or pornography, or any other addictive behavior do? Right again—little by little, such behaviors cause us to give away our agency, the very thing we fought to keep! See how it all fits? Isn't the gospel great?

Observe the world! Use your brain and your perceptivity, and you'll notice things every day that can be traced back to Satan's basic goal of undermining The Plan of Happiness. Look closely, because Satan is in disguise. Elder James E. Faust shared this description of him, given by the First Presidency:

He is working under such perfect disguise that many do not recognize either him or his methods. There is no crime he would not commit, no debauchery he would not set up, no plague he would not send, no heart he would not break, no life he would not take, no soul he would not destroy. He comes as a thief in the night; he is a wolf in sheep's clothing. [^5]

We must remain alert and recognize what Satan is trying to do. What does Satan want teenagers and young adults to think? Simple. He wants them to think they are a bunch of misfit weirdos if they're not out being immoral every weekend. Get them to think they're pitiful nobodies if they've never been kissed! Get them to feel discouraged and lonely because they're eighteen and they don't date much! And get them to blame that discouragement not on Satan, where it belongs, but on their standards! Don't you fall for it! Your tough standards are protections, not punishments! Their purpose is to save your life, not to make it hard. Yes, they make you different from the world, but who wants to be like the world? It's gross!

If I were speaking to you from a lectern or a pulpit instead of a word processor, I would clench my fist and pound the pulpit to give emphasis to these words. My friend, you don't need to compromise! You don't need to descend to the standards of the world! Your spirit has so much to offer! You live a higher standard; you live on a higher plane; you set your sights on the stars, not in the gutter. High standards are made to match the high quality of your spirit. May I repeat? High standards match the high quality of your spirit!

It's easy to get really hyper about this topic because too many teenagers think they're in some kind of race: a race to date, a race to have a boyfriend or girlfriend, a race to kiss or be kissed. May I say to you in the spirit of friendship, if you're eighteen and you've never been kissed, big deal! If you're eighteen and you've never been on a date, big whoop! This is not a race! And even if it were a race, those who cross the finish line first are usually losing—losing virtue and self-respect, and seriously jeopardizing their chances of obtaining the "never-ending happiness" promised in the celestial kingdom.

Satan is the enemy of The Plan of Happiness. His plan is the plan of misery. His plan is to ruin our chances for exaltation. So, if we're going to make it to heaven, we'd better come up with a battle plan of our own. Basically, it comes down to your right to choose how you're going to live your life. You can either float along with the popular drift of the world, do what everyone else does, "go with the flow"—or you can set your sights on higher ground, and choose a higher course consistent with the quality of your spirit.

You don't have to apologize to the world about your

standards! They'll do what they choose to do, and you'll do what you choose to do. They'll be accountable for their choices, and you'll be accountable for yours. Hmmm, sounds like Choice and Accountability . . . why does that sound so familiar?

One of the few things you can really control in life is your standards. You can't change your eye color, your height, the shape of your nose—but you can absolutely choose your standards. You can stand up and say to the world, "This is who I am! This is what I believe! This is what I'll do, and this is what I won't do!"

At this point, you may be thinking, "This is kind of a stretch. Just because I go out with a guy when I'm fifteen, that doesn't mean I'll mess up the whole Plan of Salvation!" That's true, but you have to understand how clever Satan is. He'll encourage you to make little compromises at first. Just little things at the beginning. He just wants you to take some small steps along one of his paths: a path of saying, "Oh, it's not that bad"; a path of minor compromises here and there. But little steps lead to medium steps, and then giant

steps. Before you know it, you've traveled farther than you realize—and the farther you go, the harder it is to turn around. One of Satan's more clever lies is this one: "You can do what you want now, and repent later." He neglects to point out how hard that repenting might be.

So what's the solution? Don't start on the path; not even a step.

Besides, what about the simple question of obedience? Hmmm? What about following the Lord's counsel whether you understand it or not, simply because you love him?

Anyway, Satan is patient, and he's very experienced. If you start dating when you're fourteen, or fifteen, then he's got even more time to work on getting you to violate the law of chastity. In order to stay on the path of happiness, you need to choose right now how you're going to behave regarding physical affection.

What Do Kisses Mean?

One of the fun things about working with teenagers is interpreting their body language. If you're giving a talk that bores them, teenagers don't have any problem letting you know. They'll yawn, fall asleep, rest their heads on their hands, sigh loudly, and set their alarm watches to go off. Some will even rest their heads on the bench in front of them and fall asleep. That's why you see a red stripe on the foreheads of many deacons as they walk out of meetings. (Of course, you and I never fall asleep in meetings.)

All of us can communicate loud and clear without using words. In fact, as the old saying goes, "Actions speak louder than words." With that idea in mind, let's ask some questions. If you put your arm around someone on a date, what are you saying (without using words)? How about, "I like you." Fair enough? Okay. What if you hold hands with your date? That's a notch or two higher, isn't it? Maybe that's like saying, "I really like you." What if you kiss your date? What are you saying? What do kisses mean, anyway?

My seminary teacher tried to explain that to a bunch of us sixteen-year-olds one day. He said, "Class, guys and girls are different." Wow. We were shocked! Jaws around the room dropped to the floor. Several people passed out on the spot, and someone cried out, "Why didn't someone tell us!?" Okay, I'm not being fair, because that's not all he said. What he really said was, "Guys and girls are different, and sometimes expressions of affection mean different things to

different people. Generally speaking, when a girl is being kissed, she may be thinking, 'Oh . . . this means he likes me; he cares for me, oh, how sweet.'" We sat motionless, all of us intensely interested but trying not to act like it. He continued, "When a boy is kissing a girl, he may be thinking, 'Wow, this feels good. I'd like to do this again very soon.'" You may laugh at first, but think about that for a minute. Can you see the potential for problems?

Different people interpret kisses differently. Can you see how easily a miscommunication or a misunderstanding can happen? We communicate loud and clear with our actions, and if we're not careful, we could be telling lies! Listen to Elder Marvin J. Ashton:

A lie is any communication given to another with the intent to deceive. . . . A lie can be effectively communicated without words ever being spoken. [^6]

You mean, you can be dishonest by kissing someone? Yes. If putting your arm around someone means "I like you," and holding hands means "I really like you," than maybe kisses mean "I love you." What do you think? Some will say, "I don't know about that; I don't think kisses mean I love you." Perfect. That makes the point even better. Maybe kisses mean something different to you than they do to me, or to him, or her. And that's exactly why we have to be careful—because we could be telling lies with our actions. This is a major reason why people get hurt, and why there's heartache. Kisses are wonderful, but they are powerful and should be handled with great care.

I read about a young man who bragged that he had kissed more girls in one day than anyone else in his stake. [^7] He felt he had set a "record." To him, kissing was some kind of contest! I wonder how the girls felt about this. At the time they may have thought, "Wow. This boy really cares for me." Did they know he was just going for a record? Did they realize that each girl he kissed was only a notch on the way to his "goal"? Do you think it would have hurt their feelings to know that? President Thomas S. Monson said, "Men, take care not to make women weep, for God counts their tears." [^8]

What has happened to kissing? Doesn't it mean anything anymore? Listen to President Spencer W. Kimball:

Kissing has been prostituted and has degenerated to develop and express lust instead of affection, honor, and admiration. To kiss in casual dating is asking for trouble. What do kisses mean when given out like pretzels, and robbed of sacredness? [^9]

Finally, the answer from a prophet: Kisses are sacred, and are meant to express affection, honor, and admiration. In contrast, if you give out your kisses like free samples at the grocery store, what are they worth? About the same as free samples at the grocery store!

I met a wonderful eighteen-year-old (now a wonderful nineteen-year-old on a mission) who wrote his feelings about kisses in the following poem:

Kisses The more the dollar is printed, the less each one is worth. And so it is with kisses you've given since your birth. The value of your kisses, a sample cannot measure, Nor is your kiss more worthy if it's said to give one pleasure. The more and more you give away, the better your kiss is known. And to all the world, your kiss is cheap, and your affection shown. But if you save your kisses, no matter what the cost, You'll find as time moves forward, a chance you've saved, not lost! Then when you find the one you love, with whom you'll live life through, Think of the worth of a perfect kiss, if saved for only you . . . (Alvin W. Jones III. Used by permission.)

What an interesting poem, and what a great kid! Imagine a poem like that being written by a teenage boy in the '90s! All that chosen generation stuff must be true. Alvin reminds us that kissing isn't a contest! You can save your kisses, and "you'll find as time moves forward, a chance you've saved, not lost."

One of my friends had an interesting experience at a wedding reception. The bride pulled her aside and said, "Do you know what I regret?"

My friend said, "What?"

"I regret that I have kissed so many guys."

"Really?"

"Yes. I asked my husband, 'How many girls have you kissed?" and he said, 'Um . . . I think three.'"

This bride was embarrassed, because she had given out kisses like pretzels. When you go to your wedding, you don't want regrets to go with you. You just want bridesmaids and flowers and cake and a clean, worthy young man or young woman who stuck to his or her standards, as you did.

In short: Save your kisses; you may need them one day. Look forward to that wedding day, and plan for it. How do you want to feel as you kneel at the altar? How do you want to feel about your past when you're looking into the eyes of your new husband or wife? Well, you can make it happen just the way you want if you plan it now!

A Battle Plan of Our Own

I attended a standards night where someone asked, "How far can we go before we have to see the bishop?" What an awful question! Imagine a sky diver asking, "How close can I get to the ground before I have to open the parachute?" In order to save us from thinking that we can fall at eighty miles an hour and pull the ripcord "just in time," our prophets and leaders have given us some help. Much of that help is found in—you guessed it—For the Strength of Youth. Here's part of what it says: "In cultures where dating is appropriate, do not date until you are sixteen years old." It also says, "Since dating is preparation for marriage, date only those with high standards, who respect your standards, and in whose company you can maintain the standards of the gospel of Jesus Christ" (p. 7).

Okay, down to brass tacks. What about expressions of affection? What will you decide? Of course, this is a very personal subject. Your parents, your bishop, and your Young Men and Young Women leaders can help you. In addition to accepting the counsel from the Church, some teenagers (sharp teenagers like you, who read books and make their own decisions) set several standards for themselves. Here's an example:

Ultimate goal: To gain eternal life. In order to do this, I must marry "the right person, in the right place, by the right authority." [^10]

Dating goal: To have fun, to meet many different people, to begin to identify qualities I'd like in my future spouse.

Church standards:

I will not begin dating until I'm sixteen.

I will date only those with high standards, who respect my standards, and in whose company I can maintain the standards of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Personal standards:

I will save my kisses; I will realize that I will be much more respected for what I withhold than for what I allow.

I will realize that late at night I don't think as clearly, and I am more vulnerable. Therefore, I will set a reasonable curfew for myself.

A teenager who lives by these high standards will avoid a lot of problems. Unfortunately, some "spiritual sky divers" feel they can fall much farther than others before pulling the ripcord. They place themselves in danger of not being able to stop before they hit the ground. They are flirting with disaster. President Kimball counseled against French kissing, or the "soul kiss," because it places one in that kind of danger:

What is miscalled the "soul kiss" is an abomination and stirs passions to the eventual loss of virtue. Even if timely courtship justifies the kiss it should be a clean, decent, sexless one like the kiss between mother and son, or father and daughter. [^11]

Are those high standards? Yes. Can you live them? Yes. And it's better to have high standards and postpone a few things than to have low standards and lose everything.

Around Christmastime we place all the beautiful gifts under the tree, and we "postpone" opening them until Christmas morning. If we wanted to, we could sneak in and open all our presents before Christmas, but it would ruin the fun and the anticipation. Experimenting too early with expressions of affection is like opening all your presents before Christmas. It's not nearly as nice as waiting for the appropriate time. You see, you are working on a wonderful gift. You've been working on it since you were born, and only you can give it! You don't want to share it until the time is just right. On some exciting future day, you'll be able to give this gift to someone else. The gift you've been working on all your life is: you.

Many in the world would laugh at our standards. Let them laugh if they want to. Paul said, "I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ" (Romans 1:16), and neither are we. We just want to be clean. Being clean feels better than being ashamed. John Taylor said, "When men say unto us, 'you are not like us' we reply, 'we know it; we do not want to be. We want to be like the Lord.'" [^12]

Who wants to trade a few moments of pleasure for weeks and months of guilt and pain? It's just not worth it. When you return home from your dates, you want to be able to sleep peacefully. When the morning comes, and much of your spiritual and mental alertness returns, you want to be able to look yourself in the mirror and smile with joy. Listen to Elder Russell M. Nelson:

Above all, courtesy to companions cannot be defiled by disobedience to the law of chastity. That sin is joy's deadly poison. The first morning's glance in the mirror cannot reflect joy if there is any recollection of misdeeds the night before. The surest step toward joy in the morning is virtue in the evening. [^13]

We could go on for pages and pages. There are so many reasons to keep the law of chastity! But it all goes back to the Plan of Happiness. And even if we don't fully understand all the "whys," we can understand that God loves his children, and gives us commandments because of that love. Sometimes we have to obey even if we don't know why.

And after many days an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying: Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me. (Moses 5:6)

If you still don't understand, follow the example of Adam, like my friend Amber did:

And after many days, the bishop of the ward interviewed Amber, saying, Why dost thou not date until thou art sixteen? And Amber said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me. (Amber's journal, page 5, line 6)

Good for you, Amber! (or whatever your name may be). Elder Boyd K. Packer praised young people like you and Amber and promised them blessings:

Oh, youth . . . the requirements of the Church are the highway to love, with guardrails securely in place . . . with help along the way. How foolish is the youth who feels that the Church is a fence around love to keep him out. . . . How fortunate is the young person who follows the standards of the Church, even if just from sheer obedience or habit, for he will find rapture and a joy fulfilled. [^14]

Class Review

Now, let's see if we can summarize Third Period in a few words: The Plan of Salvation is the Plan of Happiness. Study it! Learn it! Understand it! Satan will tempt you in the areas that will frustrate your goal of exaltation. One of the main areas is the law of chastity. Your personal standards are protections, not punishments. They will help you in the battle for your soul. If, after all you've read, you still don't understand, obey anyway because you love the Lord and want to follow his commandments. Happiness is why you're here, and the Plan of Salvation is the highway to happiness.

Okay, that's it! See you next hour, and don't be tardy!

BZZZZZZT, Clunk, Clunk, BZZZZZZT, click.

Thank you for being with us on "Answer the Obvious!" That's all the time we have tonight, folks, but join us again next time for another brain-stumper extravaganza. I'm Steve Goodguy, reminding you that when skydiving, remember your parachute, and for best results, pull the ripcord! Goodnight, everybody!

Extra Credit

Why Say No When the World Says Yes (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1993).

"Bridle All Your Passions," Bruce and Marie Hafen, Ensign, February 1994, pp. 14-18.

"The Gospel and Romantic Love," Bruce C. Hafen, Ensign, October 1982, pp. 64-69.

"Breaking Up Without Going to Pieces," M. Gawain Wells, Ensign, June 1982, pp. 58-61.

Third Period Endnotes

Division page quotation: Mark E. Petersen, Conference Report, April 1969, p. 62.

---
Notas:
[^1] "Mormon Forum," Church News, May 6, 1989, p. 15.
[^2] Bruce C. Hafen, The Broken Heart (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1989), p. 1.
[^3] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, compiled by Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 241.
[^4] David B. Haight, Ensign, May 1988, p. 23.
[^5] Boyd K. Packer, Ensign, May 1988, p. 69.
[^6] Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), pp. xiii-xiv.
[^7] See "The Dating Years, Charting a Safe Course," by Randal A. Wright, in Feeling Great, Doing Right, Hanging Tough (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1991), p. 105.
[^8] Thomas S. Monson, Ensign, November 1990, p. 47.
[^9] The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, Edward L. Kimball, ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), p. 281.
[^10] Bruce R. McConkie, New Era, January 1975, p. 38. Note: Elder McConkie was not implying that there is only one right person for each of us. Find this article at your ward library and read it! See also McConkie, "Celestial Marriage," in Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), p. 117.
[^11] Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, p. 281.
[^12] Journal of Discourses, 11:347.
[^13] Russell M. Nelson, Ensign, November 1986, p. 68.
[^14] 13. See C. Terry Warner, Repenting of Unrighteous Feelings, Ricks College Devotional Address, March 1, 1983.
