John Bytheway, What I Wish I'd Known in High School: A Crash Course in Teenage Survival ( 1994)

Assembly

"The Way, the Truth, and the Life"

We must know Christ better than we know him; we must remember him more often than we remember him; we must serve him more valiantly than we serve him. . . . What manner of men and women ought we to be? Even as he is. —Howard W. Hunter

Are you having fun reading this book? I hope so. I've had fun writing it, too. This chapter will be a little different. As you recall, in the Orientation I mentioned that some chapters in this book might not be as fun or as funny as others, but they would be something better, like interesting or testimony building. This is one of those chapters. In the book of Ecclesiastes it says:

To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven:

A time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted;

A time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to break down, and a time to build up;

A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance. (Ecclesiastes 3:1-4)

One sign of maturity is the ability to understand the proper time and place for things. Some people say that teenagers have a hard time being serious. That's not true. Some people also say that teenagers don't read books. Wrong again. Obviously, they have never met you. I have learned over and over again never to underestimate teenagers. Let 'em know you're serious and give it to 'em straight, and they'll listen. So, what time is it now? It's time to talk about what's most important. This is the most serious chapter in the book. But it's also the best, because of what we get to discuss.

On the Brigham Young University campus, there is a building called the Testing Center. Hundreds of different exams from hundreds of different classes are administered in this building designed especially for giving people tests. At the front counter the attendant gives you the test you need, along with a computer answer sheet and a #2 pencil. Then you find a chair and sit down and take your test.

If you visited the Testing Center, especially during final exams, you would notice a few things. People look tired and drained. They are usually on edge and they keep to themselves. Nobody likes taking a test. I have never seen anyone in the Testing Center look like they're about to burst with joy. Why should they? It's a place where you go to take tests.

You've decided—and it was the right decision—to take this massive exam called earth life. It is difficult and dangerous. Don't be too surprised if at times it feels like you're taking a test. You are. That's why you're here.

Once, at a youth conference in a faraway state, I noticed a young man who hung around the sidelines. He was dressed in black, and had a kind of scowl on his face. Later, a kind bishop asked me if I wouldn't mind paying some attention to this boy. (I'll call him Brett.) As inconspicuously as I could, I maneuvered my way next to Brett and began to talk. At length he began to respond, still looking down at the floor with the same scowl on his face. I asked him about his family and he told me that his dad had been killed by a drunk driver when he was five. I began to understand why he was angry. Throughout the conference I tried to notice him. When I'd grab him around the shoulder, he'd make a gun out of his hand and shoot me. Every time I grabbed him he'd make a gun and shoot—my head, my arm, my stomach. What do you think that meant?

At the service project I was glad to see him involved and working. When I walked by to say "hi," I noticed that he had a terrible broken blister on his hand. He had—purposely, I'm sure—raked and raked while holding the handle in the same spot until the skin next to his thumb was completely gone and the area was bloody and raw. I said to him, "That's gotta hurt." And without lifting his eyes he said, "I'm really used to pain." This world is a big Testing Center. Sometimes the tests are brutal. Brett was taking a difficult test. He was full of anger—anger at God, at the world, at everyone.

At another youth conference I met a young lady who had been repeatedly abused by her father. She too was taking a test, a terribly difficult one. Among those who are reading this book there is pain and there is hurt. There are grudges and jealousies and feelings of betrayal.

Please read this next part as closely as you know how to. Pay attention not so much to what is written, but to the Spirit that verifies what you are reading. If you are one who has those dark and bitter feelings inside, listen. God did not want those things to happen. They are not your fault. God gave people agency and asked them to choose him, their Father. But some are without affection and hate their own family (see Moses 7:33). We knew in the pre-earth life that agency could be a dangerous thing for some who could not handle it. God has made it very clear how he feels about those who offend his little ones (see Luke 17:2). Again, if you have suffered such pain, please listen: It is not your fault. Your wounds can be healed, and your pain can be relieved.

I read once in the Church News this explanation from a therapist:

Some families have many bad sins and habits passed on from one generation to another. The Lord wants to help families like these. He chooses brave and valiant spirits who will . . . refuse to pass [the abuse] on. [^1]

A few weeks later I found myself in Alabama at a youth conference. Toward the end of my talk on a different subject, I felt prompted to share that idea on abuse. I resisted until I felt prompted again. This time I shared the idea—God sends people into families to break the cycle—and I closed my talk.

After picking up my things and speaking to a few of the youth gathered around the podium, I walked up the aisle of the auditorium. I saw a young couple, both in tears. They explained to me that they both came from homes where they had been abused, and that on this night, for the first time, they understood that they may have been sent to break the horrible cycle. I felt deep joy—not so much that I was inspired, but that I had just learned for myself, firsthand, how much God loves and wants to reach out to those who have been abused. Yes, there is pain and unspeakable hardship. You are not alone. Friends, bishops, and professionals lend necessary support and counsel. And there is one who willingly died so that He could take all the pain away. This earth is a difficult place—it is a place to take tests.

I wish there were more time to adequately cover this sad subject, but there is not. Bad things happen to good people. Bad things happened to Nephi, bad things happened to Abraham, bad things happened to Job, bad things happened to Abinadi, bad things happened to Joseph Smith, and bad things happened to Jesus. And perhaps bad things will happen to all of us. But bad things, if we strive to be agents instead of victims, can push us closer to God. He can heal our wounds and help us in our pain.

And he shall go forth, suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people. (Alma 7:11)

The Atonement is not just for sinners. [^2] Alma didn't even mention sin in that scripture. Jesus died to save us not only from our sins, but also from our pains and our sicknesses—the dark, lonely, helpless feelings from the things that happen to us. He experienced those feelings so that we can know that he knows exactly how we feel. The Atonement is infinite and eternal (see 2 Nephi 9:7; Alma 34:10, 12). Jesus can heal our wounds and help us in our pain.

Therefore, fear not, little flock; do good; let earth and hell combine against you, for if ye are built upon my rock, they cannot prevail. (D&C 6:34; see also Helaman 5:12)

If I could be your big brother for a minute, I would tell you that my greatest learning has come from my greatest pain. The hardships you endure will fill you with love and compassion for your fellow beings. They'll give you patience and understanding and a deep respect for those around you who also suffer.

Imagine how absurd it would be to ask God to save us from all pain, hardship, and disappointment. "Save me, Father, from all the things that will help me to become kind and loving and wonderful and more like thee."

The cry of a newborn baby is a signal that a new life has begun. As we grow older, through childhood and into the teenage years, we are told such things as, "Big boys and big girls don't cry." We learn not to "wear our heart on our sleeve." We keep our hard times and problems to ourselves, maybe sharing them with only a few. Things that would have made us cry years ago, we simply endure as we grow older. But we still cry inside. If we are willing to "listen between the lines," we can hear the cries of those around us. In a world full of pains of all kinds, certainly this is not a time to ignore each other. Jesus said, "If ye are not one ye are not mine" (D&C 38:27). As you progress on your journey closer to God, you will notice that the way you see other people will change. The Prophet Joseph Smith said:

The nearer we get to our heavenly Father, the more we are disposed to look with compassion on perishing souls; we feel that we want to take them upon our shoulders, and cast their sins behind our backs. [^3]

There was a young man in my high school who was close to God. I watched him one day do something that broke all the rules of how "popular" people are supposed to act. We were all socializing in a part of the building we called "jock hall." This was where all the cool, popular people hung out. Rodney, a tough kid and an all-star hockey player, walked down the stairs leading to "jock hall." But instead of joining the social people in the hall, Rodney heard one of those silent cries. He walked to the doorway of the Special Education room. A teacher was wheeling a severely mentally and physically handicapped boy into the hall. I watched out of the corner of my eye as Rodney, who later went on to play hockey at Cornell University, knelt on the hard floor and talked to that handicapped boy. "Hi, how are you doing today?" he began. The boy couldn't even respond—but you could see a brightness in his eyes because he knew someone was being nice to him. Rodney finished his mostly one-way conversation and continued down the hall. I knew that there was something really right about what I had just seen. To be like Jesus, we must listen for the cries of those around us. High school can be a cruel place, and you can lighten the load for many if you're in tune.

If Jesus had been born here and now, how would we treat him? When we think back to such things as the scourging and the crucifixion, it's hard to imagine how people could be so cruel. Nobody crucifies anyone in our time. What if Jesus came here today? A poet tried to imagine it:

When Jesus came to Golgotha, they hanged him on a tree. They drove great nails through hands and feet, they made a calvary, They crowned him with a crown of thorns, red were his wounds and deep, For those were crude and cruel days, and human flesh was cheap. When Jesus came to our town, they simply passed him by. They never hurt a hair of him! They merely let him die. For men had grown more tender; they would not give him pain! They only passed on down the street, and left him standing in the rain. (G. A. Studdert-Kennedy)

Could it be that even we, as members of the Church, leave Jesus standing in the rain? None of us would think of torturing anyone the way Jesus was tortured—but maybe the temptation we face is to take Jesus and his sacrifice for granted. "Oh, it doesn't matter if I do this; I can repent later, Jesus will suffer for it." Jesus said, "Behold, I stand at the door, and knock" (Revelation 3:20). "Oh well, I can answer it later—this is a good show."

Did you know that if you were to pick up your Bible and read all the words that Jesus spoke, it would take you less than an hour? But we have shows to watch, and practices to attend, and music to listen to—and Jesus is left standing in the rain. Perhaps it's time we make the study of Jesus Christ and his gospel a major priority in our lives. Jesus said: "Learn of me, and listen to my words" (D&C 19:23). King Benjamin said, "For how knoweth a man the master whom he has not served, and who is a stranger unto him, and is far from the thoughts and intents of his heart?" (Mosiah 5:13).

How far is Jesus from the thoughts and the intents of our hearts? "Yeah, Jesus is there, but it's just something I'm not into right now. I'll do what I want now, and when the time for a mission or marriage comes around, I'll repent." People with that attitude obviously believe in Jesus, but it's hard to imagine that they really love him.

How do we come to love Jesus? We "learn of [him], and listen to [his] words" (D&C 19:23). Eventually, we may begin to understand how much he loves us. Elder David B. Haight said:

If we could feel or were sensitive even in the slightest to the matchless love of our Savior and his willingness to suffer for our individual sins, we would cease procrastination and "clean the slate," and repent of all our transgressions. [^4]

One way to get to know people is to see them in many different situations. People's true colors come shining through when times are hard. Perhaps, then, if we want to get to know Jesus, we can learn about what he did and what he said when things were the very hardest, when he was tired, discouraged, and alone.

Did Jesus try to get out of things that were difficult? No. Even when he knew what horrible events were soon to come to pass, he said, "Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt" (Matthew 26:39). Jesus suffered for us in Gethsemane. Elder Boyd K. Packer described it like this:

He, by choice, accepted the penalty for all mankind for the sum total of all wickedness and depravity; for brutality, immorality, perversion, and corruption; for addiction; for the killings and torture and terror—for all of it that ever had been or all that ever would be enacted upon this earth.

In choosing, He faced the awesome power of the evil one who was not confined to flesh nor subject to mortal pain. That was Gethsemane! [^5]

What would make Jesus willing to do that? It was his love for us. In the Doctrine and Covenants we read: "For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent" (D&C 19:16). What made him able to endure it? Maybe he was thinking of how much he loved you.

Did Jesus have courage? A band of men carrying lanterns, torches, and weapons came to take Jesus. Jesus "went forth" and asked, "Whom seek ye?"

And they said, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus answered . . . I am he: if therefore ye seek me, let these go their way. (John 18:7-8)

Even in the midst of his peril, he was thinking of his disciples, asking his captors to let them go. Did Jesus have dignity?

And when he had scourged Jesus, he delivered him to be crucified.

Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the common hall, and gathered unto him the whole band of soldiers.

And they stripped him, and put on him a scarlet robe.

And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it upon his head, and a reed in his right hand: and they bowed the knee before him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews!

And they spit upon him, and took the reed, and smote him on the head.

And after that they had mocked him, they took the robe off from him, and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him. (Matthew 27:26-31)

Jesus didn't cry out. He didn't say anything. He stood silent in godly dignity. What made him able to endure it? Maybe he was thinking of how much he loved you. We must not leave him "standing in the rain."

Did Jesus have self-restraint?

And when they had blindfolded him, they struck him on the face, and asked him, saying, Prophesy, who is it that smote thee? (Luke 22:64)

Jesus didn't answer. He didn't say, "Hey, I don't deserve this," as we sometimes do. He just let these things happen. Jesus endured all kinds of indignities from the very people that he came to save. In the words of Bruce R. McConkie:

They took him to Annas, to Caiaphas, to Pilate, to Herod, and back to Pilate. He was accused, cursed, and smitten. Their foul saliva ran down his face as vicious blows further weakened his pain-engulfed body. With reeds of wrath they rained blows upon his back. Blood ran down his face as a crown of thorns pierced his trembling brow. But above it all he was scourged, scourged with forty stripes save one, scourged with a multithonged whip into whose leather strands sharp bones and cutting metals were woven. [^6]

What made him able to endure it? Maybe he was thinking of how much he loved you.

Did Jesus know how to forgive?

Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do. (Luke 23:34)

And the world, because of their iniquity, shall judge him to be a thing of naught; wherefore they scourge him, and he suffereth it; and they smite him, and he suffereth it. Yea, they spit upon him, and he suffereth it, because of his loving kindness and his long-suffering towards the children of men. (1 Nephi 19:9)

Did Jesus love us? "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends" (John 15:13). We can stand here and say, this is the way, but Jesus is the only one who could say, "I am the way." We can talk about Jesus and say, this is the truth; Jesus can say, "I am the truth." We can point and say, this is the light. Jesus can say, "I am the light." If ever in your life you don't know which way to go, ask yourself, "What would Jesus do?" because he is the way.

The kind of peace and love and support that you will need to get through this Testing Center of life are available. They are not found in rock groups or soap operas or movies. They are not found in clubs or cars or credit cards. The world has done so little for you. The world is not the place to find peace. Jesus Christ is the Prince of Peace. He is your friend, but he is much more than a friend. He is the Son of God. He is kind and loving and he knows exactly how to help you through life. He has proven his love for you by what he did and how he suffered, and he has left you the scriptures so that you can read about his love. He is the way, the truth, and the life. He stands at the door and knocks. Don't leave him standing in the rain.

Assembly Endnotes

Division page quotation: Howard W. Hunter, Ensign, May 1994, p. 64.

---
Notas:
[^1] Ezra Taft Benson, A Witness and a Warning (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988), p. 13.
[^2] Ibid., p. 75.
[^3] Ibid., p. 79.
[^4] Benson, A Witness and a Warning, p. 9.
[^5] Ibid., pp. 21-22, 71.
[^6] History of the Church, 4:461.
