John Bytheway, What I Wish I'd Known in High School: A Crash Course in Teenage Survival ( 1994)

Scriptures 101

The Book of Mormon and High School

No member of this Church can stand approved in the presence of God who has not seriously and carefully read the Book of Mormon. —Joseph Fielding Smith

When I began work on this book, I knew I wanted to use a lot of scriptures from the Book of Mormon. I wanted to follow President Benson's counsel to read and—

NEWS FLASH! We interrupt this chapter to bring you a UBS Special Report. Here's Dan Lather in New York.

Good evening. An archeological discovery of profound significance was unearthed today in upstate New York. Reporter Connie Chum is on the scene. Connie?

Connie: Thanks, Dan. Mel Johnson had no idea what lay ahead as he began to clear land this morning near his farm. About fifty feet from where I'm standing, Johnson's shovel hit what seemed to be a large stone. The stone was actually the lid of a large stone box buried perhaps a thousand years ago by an ancient American.

With some difficulty, Johnson opened the box and stared in amazement at the greatest archeological find of the twentieth century: a six-inch-thick book, written on six-by-eight-inch plates of gold alloy, weighing approximately fifty pounds. Ecstatic archaeologists from seventeen major universities are en route to New York to study the characters on the plates, which appear to be an ancient hieroglyphic language.

Translating the plates could take years, but archeologists, scientists, and anthropologists are hoping the strange characters hold the key to unlocking age-old mysteries concerning the origin, history, and culture of the ancient inhabitants of the Americas. Certainly a productive day for Mel Johnson.

This is Connie Chum reporting from Palmyra, New York. Watch for more details tonight on the UBS World News.

We now return to your regularly scheduled programming.

Wow. What if the Book of Mormon had been discovered like that? Can you imagine the excitement? Scientists would go bananas! Perhaps the world would pay more attention to the Book of Mormon if it had been the lead story on prime-time news, but the Lord doesn't work that way. He requires faith. When Jesus was born in Bethlehem, who knew about it first? Leaders of government? Roman emperors? Scholars and philosophers? Ancient news reporters? No. Humble shepherds watching their flocks (and a whole bunch of Nephites on the other side of the planet—see 3 Nephi 1:13).

Similarly, there were no scholars and scientists called by the Lord to bring forth the Book of Mormon. It all started with a fourteen-year-old boy and a prayer. In order for people to believe in the Book of Mormon today, they must begin with faith. Faith will often ask us to believe things when "common sense" tells us not to. But—and this is the great part—we have more than faith: we have evidence. We may start with faith, but we have more. We have the book! No one can deny that we have a book! It exists! It is here! It's right there, sitting on your nightstand. (You didn't leave it at seminary again, did you?) And doubters and skeptics and honest seekers of truth alike can read it and find out for themselves if it's true. President Ezra Taft Benson said:

We do not have to prove the Book of Mormon is true. The book is its own proof. All we need to do is read it and declare it. The Book of Mormon is not on trial—the people of the world, including the members of the Church, are on trial as to what they will do with this second witness for Christ. [^1]

You heard it from the prophet. We're the ones on trial! Will we use the Book of Mormon? You bet we will. We must! And if we're not using it, we must repent and start using it. Here's President Benson again:

The Book of Mormon has not been, nor is it yet, the center of our personal study, family teaching, preaching, and missionary work. Of this we must repent. [^2]

As I was trying to say before I was interrupted by the UBS News, I wanted to use a lot of Book of Mormon scriptures in this book. Who was the Book of Mormon written for, anyway? The people in the 1400s? No. What about the people in the 1500s? No. The 1600s? No. 1700s? NO! The Book of Mormon was written for us! Right now! You and me! Ancient prophets saw our day and wrote to us. They didn't always sugarcoat their message, either!

I speak unto you as if ye were present, and yet ye are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing. And I know that ye do walk in the pride of your hearts; and there are none save a few only who do not lift themselves up in the pride of their hearts. (Mormon 8:35-36)

Wow. Moroni saw us, and he really let us have it. Because these "voices from the dust" (2 Nephi 33:13) saw our day with all its challenges and problems, the Book of Mormon becomes a book of solutions to help us make it through high school and through life in general.

I've shared with you quotes from many different sources so far, but the book we can't do without is the Book of Mormon. If it were the only reference available, this book could still be written. I'll show you. Let's go through everything we've covered so far, and we'll see how it all came from the Book of Mormon.

First Period: Popularity

In First Period we talked about putting people in compartments, the same way food is divided in TV dinner trays. Hmmm, where did that idea come from? The Book of Mormon!

There were no robbers, nor murderers, neither were there Lamanites, nor any manner of -ites; but they were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of God. (4 Nephi 1:17)

Sound like high school? "These are the Jock-ites, these are the Loner-ites, these are the Popular-ites . . . " I guess human nature hasn't changed much in 1500 years. (Fortunately, you have Divine Nature.)

President Ezra Taft Benson said that the people in the Book of Mormon who seemed to have the greatest difficulty with pride were the learned and the rich. [^3] And whenever that combination came together, the people would be divided:

And they began to be divided into classes. (4 Nephi 1:26)

And the people began to be distinguished by ranks, according to their riches and their chances for learning; yea, some were ignorant because of their poverty, and others did receive great learning because of their riches. (3 Nephi 6:12)

So what's the solution from the book of solutions? Some strong words from Jacob. Here it comes!

Because some of you have obtained more abundantly than that of your brethren ye are lifted up in the pride of your hearts . . . let not this pride of your hearts destroy your souls! Think of your brethren like unto yourselves . . . the one being is as precious in his [God's] sight as the other. (Jacob 2:13, 16-17, 21)

And another great statement from Alma: "Ye shall not esteem one flesh above another, or one man shall not think himself above another" (Mosiah 23:7).

Second Period: Self-Esteem

In Second Period we talked about real estate and real esteem. Do you know where those ideas come from? The Book of Mormon!

Nephi showed us that sometimes we feel not-so-good for a reason (see 2 Nephi 4:17). Nephi turned to God for comfort, as we should. We received great counsel from Helaman about building our foundation on the rock, which is Christ (see Helaman 5:12). We learned from Alma that you can't do wrong and feel right: "Wickedness never was happiness" (Alma 41:10). Helaman taught the same principle in different words:

Ye have sought for happiness in doing iniquity, which thing is contrary to the nature of that righteousness which is in our great and Eternal Head. (Helaman 13:38)

Lehi is short, sweet, and to the point in this verse: "And if there be no righteousness there be no happiness" (2 Nephi 2:13).

We also receive a great promise from King Benjamin (this is a favorite of mine):

I would desire that ye should consider on the blessed and happy state of those that keep the commandments of God. For behold, they are blessed in all things, both temporal and spiritual; and if they hold out faithful to the end they are received into heaven, that thereby they may dwell with God in a state of never-ending happiness. O remember, remember that these things are true; for the Lord God hath spoken it. (Mosiah 2:41)

And we will remember, remember. Deal? Deal.

Third Period: The Law of Chastity

Oh, boy, where do we start? There is so much in the Book of Mormon about the law of chastity that we couldn't fit it all in here, so let's just choose a few. Here's one of my favorites. Alma talked to each of his sons, Helaman, Shiblon, and Corianton. This is one of the things he said to Shiblon:

Use boldness, but not overbearance; and also see that ye bridle all your passions. (Alma 38:12)

Notice Alma's careful choice of words. What is a bridle? What do we use it for? Horses. Why? Because horses are evil, wicked, mean, bad, and nasty, right? Of course not! Horses are powerful and very useful when they are controlled. The scripture does not say "kill your passions." Have you ever tried to ride a dead horse? They won't cooperate.

Some of you who still have your thinking caps on from Third Period are thinking, "Hmmm, there are some religions that would say 'kill your passions.' Some believe that the way to be closest to God is never to marry, to be celibate." You're right. Thanks to the Restoration, we have Alma's counsel to "bridle all your passions." But we haven't finished the scripture. He says more. And this is the best part: " . . . bridle all your passions, that ye may be filled with love" (Alma 38:12; emphasis added).

What does this say to those of us who are single? It says (excuse the pun), if we can just hold our horses, life will be so much nicer for us. We can be "filled with love."

After Alma speaks to Shiblon, he speaks to Corianton, and lets us know just how serious the law of chastity is.

Thou didst do that which was grievous unto me; for thou didst forsake the ministry, and did go over into the land of Siron among the borders of the Lamanites, after the harlot Isabel. . . .

Know ye not, my son, that these things are an abomination in the sight of the Lord; yea, most abominable above all sins save it be the shedding of innocent blood or denying the Holy Ghost?

Now my son, I would that ye should repent and forsake your sins, and go no more after the lusts of your eyes, but cross yourself in all these things; for except ye do this ye can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God. (Alma 39:3, 5, 9)

Did you notice how Alma tied the law of chastity to the Plan of Salvation in that last line? Just like we did in Third Period! Isn't this fun?

Assembly: The Way, the Truth, and the Life

In the Assembly chapter we talked about the Savior, and the Book of Mormon talks about the Savior too! Its whole purpose is to testify of Christ. In fact, some form of the Savior's name is used an average of every 1.7 verses. The Book of Mormon is, in reality, Another Testament of Jesus Christ.

As you remember from Second Period, the Book of Mormon prophet Helaman told us to build our lives "upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ" (Helaman 5:12). Helaman's advice is priceless. Look around you! You'll notice that too many people build their foundation on music groups, sports heroes, celebrities, popularity, wealth, or some other soft foundation. The Book of Mormon tells us that we must build our lives on Christ, and nowhere else! (Not even on youth speakers or authors!)

Prophets in the Book of Mormon teach and testify of Christ. We learned from Alma that Jesus suffered to save us not only from our sins, but also from our pain caused by the difficult things that happen to us. King Benjamin reminded us that we will be like strangers to Jesus if he is "far from the thoughts and intents of [our] heart" (Mosiah 5:13). And we learned from Nephi that Jesus died for us not because he was forced to, or even because he was "supposed to," but because of "his loving kindness and his long-suffering towards the children of men" (1 Nephi 19:9).

So far, we've reviewed everything up to Fourth Period, which is this chapter! And the things in Fifth Period and beyond are a surprise. So let's stop the chapter-by-chapter review, and talk about some other interesting things in the Book of Mormon. There is so much to learn, and so many things yet to be discovered!

Sometimes, It's Just Hard

A year or so ago I received a nice letter from a young woman who told me that she didn't need a "spiritual overhaul" or anything like that. She explained that she kept the law of chastity and the Word of Wisdom. She said she loved her parents, and had a growing testimony. "But sometimes," she said, "it's just hard."

At times it may seem like the lessons you hear are prepared for those who need a "spiritual overhaul." And there are times when teachers and leaders do have to leave the "ninety and nine" and try to reach the "one." But, of course, some people don't need a complete overhaul. Maybe they need only a quick battery charge because, well, "it's just hard."

A Book of Mormon prophet named Jacob had this challenge. He knew that many in his audience were pure in heart, and needed only a battery charge. He also knew that some had great sins and needed the spiritual overhaul of deep repentance. Jacob's words to the pure in heart are some of the most comforting I've ever read. See if you agree.

But behold, I, Jacob, would speak unto you that are pure in heart. Look unto God with firmness of mind, and pray unto him with exceeding faith, and he will console you in your afflictions, and he will plead your cause, and send down justice upon those who seek your destruction.

O all ye that are pure in heart, lift up your heads and receive the pleasing word of God, and feast upon his love; for ye may, if your minds are firm, forever.

But, wo, wo, unto you that are not pure in heart, that are filthy this day before God. (Jacob 3:1-3)

Jacob goes on for another eleven verses talking to the second group. (Look it up, he doesn't hold back—prophets rarely do.) When I wrote back to this young woman, I told her about this scripture. And what does it say to the pure in heart? The same thing prophets and teachers always say: pray and read your scriptures (the way Jacob says "read your scriptures" is "receive the pleasing word of God"). Whether you need a spiritual overhaul or just a daily battery charge, the Book of Mormon is for you.

You Will Meet Nephi

There are a lot of things in heaven to look forward to. One of them is that you're going to meet all the prophets whose words you've read. Yes, you'll meet Nephi. And you'll meet Jacob and Moroni too. Guaranteed. It's in the Book!

Nephi testifies to the whole world as he closes the book of Second Nephi. His last words are powerful:

And now, my beloved brethren, and also Jew, and all ye ends of the earth, hearken unto these words and believe in Christ; and if ye believe not in these words believe in Christ. And if ye shall believe in Christ ye will believe in these words, for they are the words of Christ, and he hath given them unto me; and they teach all men that they should do good.

And if they are not the words of Christ, judge ye—for Christ will show unto you, with power and great glory, that they are his words, at the last day; and you and I shall stand face to face before his bar; and ye shall know that I have been commanded of him to write these things, notwithstanding my weakness. (2 Nephi 33:10-11; emphasis added)

Nephi's younger brother Jacob will be there too.

O be wise; what can I say more?

Finally, I bid you farewell, until I shall meet you before the pleasing bar of God, which bar striketh the wicked with awful dread and fear. Amen. (Jacob 6:12-13; emphasis added)

Moroni will be there as well, but he won't be doing the talking.

And I exhort you to remember these things; for the time speedily cometh that ye shall know that I lie not, for ye shall see me at the bar of God; and the Lord God will say unto you: Did I not declare my words unto you, which were written by this man, like as one crying from the dead, yea, even as one speaking out of the dust? (Moroni 10:27; emphasis added)

When we're at the judgment bar, looking the authors of the Book of Mormon in the face, that would not be a good time to say, "But it was boring." You probably ought to keep that one inside. Anyone who believes that hasn't read it. The Book of Mormon is the most exciting book in the world! And it's true! Yes, we'll meet Moroni, and I believe that President Ezra Taft Benson will be there too. What else does he have to say about the Book of Mormon?

For some years now I have been deeply concerned that we are not using the Book of Mormon as God intends. As I participated in the Mexico City Temple dedication, I received the distinct impression that God is not pleased with our neglect of the Book of Mormon. [^4]

Well, my friends, what are we going to do about it? Why don't you and I, right now, decide that we are going to read the Book of Mormon (drum roll, please) once through every year, for the rest of our lives (cymbal crash)! What do you think? The Book of Mormon is 531 pages, and that comes out to a page and a half per day. Piece of cake, right? Let's do it! Now, maybe you have another idea. Maybe you want to read for a certain amount of time each day. That's great! That way, if you want to study a certain verse, you can spend as much time on it as you need. Whatever you decide, write it down right here, and right down the date, too. (You see, if you

perform a physical action, such as signing this book, your commitment will be higher.) The point is, read the book!

My commitment _____________________________________________________________ Date _____________

Now, here's some more motivation from President Ezra Taft Benson. He makes some powerful promises to those who commit to read and study.

There is a power in the book which will begin to flow into your lives the moment you begin a serious study of the book. You will find greater power to resist temptation. You will find the power to avoid deception. You will find the power to stay on the strait and narrow path. . . .

Our youth ought not to wait until the mission field to get a grasp of the scriptures and a closeness to the Lord. Lehi said that his son Jacob beheld the glory of the Lord in his youth. (See 2 Nephi 2:4.) Imagine what would happen to missionary work if we sent out that kind of young men. [^5]

Well, Fourth Period is almost over. If you don't get anything else out of this book, make a commitment to read the Book of Mormon. In the eternal scheme of things, this book doesn't mean much at all. But the Book of Mormon contains the everlasting gospel! Joseph Smith said,

I told the brethren that the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book. [^6]

We may never see the Book of Mormon on the evening news, but the day will come when everyone will know that it is true. Joseph Smith declared:

The standard of truth has been erected. No unhallowed hand can stop the work from progressing; persecutions may rage, mobs may combine, armies may assemble, calumny may defame, but the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly, and independent, till it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall be accomplished, and the Great Jehovah shall say the work is done. [^7]

I can think of no better way to end this chapter than with the words of President Ezra Taft Benson:

With Moroni, I testify that "the eternal purposes of the Lord shall roll on, until all his promises shall be fulfilled." (Mormon 8:22)

Not many years hence Christ will come again. He will come in power and might as King of Kings and Lord of Lords. And ultimately every knee shall bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ.

But I testify now that Jesus is the Christ, that Joseph Smith is His prophet, that the Book of Mormon is the word of God, and that His church, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, is true, and that Christ is at its helm. [^8]

Thanks for reading! See you in Fifth Period, and don't forget to read your scriptures!

Extra Credit

A Witness and a Warning, Ezra Taft Benson (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988).

Fourth Period Endnotes

Division page quotation: Joseph Fielding Smith, Conference Report, October 1961, p. 18.

---
Notas:
[^1] Associated Press story appearing in Daily Universe, April 17, 1990.
[^2] As cited in Deseret News, February 28, 1993, p. A2.
[^3] Michael Morris, Utah County Journal, February 16, 1993, pp. A1, A3.
[^4] Cited by N. Eldon Tanner, Ensign, January 1974, p. 8.
[^5] Kenneth L. Woodward, "The Elite and How to Avoid It," Newsweek, July 20, 1992, p. 55.
[^6] James A. Herrick, Deseret News Opinion/Editorial page, March 16, 1994.
[^7] H. Burke Peterson, Ensign, November 1993, p. 43; emphasis added.
[^8] Ibid.
