John Bytheway, What I Wish I'd Known in High School: A Crash Course in Teenage Survival ( 1994)

Media Influence 101

TV or Not TV? That Is the Challenge

If the television craze continues with the present level of programs, we are destined to have a nation of morons. —Daniel Marsh, President of Boston University

Oooh, good quote on the last page! (If we add one letter to the last word we get, " . . . we are destined to have a nation of Mormons." That would be nice. Oh well.) Daniel Marsh made that comment in 1950, and the "level of programs" has changed dramatically since then. They're much worse than they used to be. There's more trash than ever before, and there's more to come! Have you ever filled a pot with hot water, then tried to drop a frog in it? Or have you ever put a frog in cold water and heated it up? Me neither. Sounds kind of rude. But it makes a great analogy. If you did drop a frog in a pot of hot water, what would happen? He would jump out! What if you put a frog in cool water, and heated it up slowly? The frog wouldn't notice the gradual change, he would get comfortable, and before he knew it, he'd be cooked! Gross.

We, like that frog, are all in "hot water." Television has changed over the years, but the changes have been so gradual that they've gone largely unnoticed. Meanwhile, we're getting cooked. When I was younger, one of my favorite shows was about a small-town sheriff, his deputy, his little boy, and his aunt who made great apple pies. They led a simple life, ate lunch at the diner, sang in the church choir, and went fishing. They also taught a good lesson in every show, while at the same time making us laugh. But times have changed, and television has changed too. It's getting hot in this pot, and people are beginning to notice. It's in all the papers. Let's read all about it, shall we?

Pediatric group suggests cutting TV viewing in half. Long-term television viewing is one cause

of violent or aggressive behavior in children and contributes substantially to childhood obesity, the American Academy of Pediatrics said Monday. [^1]

Turn on the TV and bingo: You're brain dead. Watching television is like doing nothing at all, only more so. That's essentially the conclusion Memphis psychologists came to after they wired up 31 kids, stuck them in front of a television set, turned on "The Wonder Years" and watched their vital signs plunge. "The metabolic rate during television viewing was even lower than it was during rest," the psychologists reported. [^2]

TV taking its bite out of academics. More than 40 percent of Utah County's school children spend more time watching TV than studying, according to their parents. Many experts say this has an adverse effect on the kids' mental ability and performance. [^3]

Television has become a part of our everyday lives. Chances are, the most worn-out furniture in the house is facing the television. Unfortunately, the TV has replaced the library as the center of learning. We watch it, we plan our evenings around it, and we talk about it at school. How many times a day does someone say, "Hey, did you see ________________ last night?" And we hope we saw _______________ last night, because we want to fit in.

The question is this: Is there any nutrition in this mental diet that we call television? And who's in charge of the menu? What's cooking in Hollywood for us to swallow tonight? Suppose you walked into your favorite restaurant and saw the cook putting floor sweepings in your spaghetti. Would you eat it? Yuck! If you did, you'd throw up! What about the stuff you put in your brain? Your brain can't throw up. If you see something gross on TV, it's yours forever. Dallin H. Oaks said:

The body has defenses to rid itself of unwholesome food, but the brain won't vomit back filth. Once recorded it will always remain subject to recall, flashing its perverted images across your mind, and drawing you away from the wholesome things in life. [^4]

Yes indeed, if television is food for our brains, we'd better talk to the cooks, and see what's happening in the kitchen! Newsweek magazine talked to the cooks back in July of 1992, and here's what they found out:

Hollywood really is different from the rest of the country. A survey of 104 top television writers and executives found that their attitudes toward moral and religious questions aren't shared by their audience.

Believe adultery is wrong: Hollywood 49% Everyone else 85%

Have no religious affiliation: Hollywood 45% Everyone else 4%

Believe homosexual acts are wrong: Hollywood 20% Everyone else 76%

Believe in a woman's right to an abortion: Hollywood 97% Everyone else 59% [^5]

The problem with the restaurant of television—or rather, the problem with us—is that we'll eat whatever they give us, whether we ordered it or not. Most of us don't plan what we're going to watch. We just plop down on the couch to "watch TV" and let it feed us whatever's on the menu.

What would the cooks, the television writers, say about this? They would argue, "Hey, we're only giving you what you want! Don't blame us. We only serve the public what they order." Oh, really? We're going to read an interview with one of the cooks. As you read, ask yourself—is he really concerned with what people want, or does he have his own plans for the menu? This interview with television producer Steven Bochco appeared in American Film magazine in the July/August 1988 issue.

Question: With "Hill Street" and "L.A. Law," you have really pushed the line as far as what you can do on network television.

Bochco: We're going to go further.

Question: You don't think that you've already gone further than any other shows?

Bochco: Yeah, but not enough. I want more.

Question: A lot of the dialogue is stuff that you would never have heard five years ago.

Bochco: That's true. It's actually beginning to sound like how grown-ups really talk. If you give me five more years [laughs], I think we'll get the rest of the way. I'll tell you what I'd love to be able to do on television: I'd love to have characters speak the way you and I do. And use language that you and I use. You know, your vast array of four-letter words that are common usage in virtually every venue of life, whether you're checking your groceries or in a college classroom. And I'd like us to be able to be sexier, legitimately sexier. I think you're going to see all kinds of things in the next half-dozen years that you can't even imagine today.

Did you catch all that? "I want more . . . I'll tell you what I'd love to be able to do on television." We didn't hear a lot of concern about what the public wants in that interview, did we? There's more:

Question: Do you take audience demographics into consideration when deciding what story to tell, and how?

Bochco: Quite frankly, I've always tried to avoid figuring out an audience, and I've never tried to structure a story to accommodate an audience.

So much for getting what we want. But there's something else even more interesting in that 1988 interview. Bochco said, "If you give me about five more years, I think we'll get the rest of the way." Hmmm, five years. Let's pick up another newspaper, this one from exactly five years later: Deseret News, July 28, 1993, page C6:

Despite Flinching just a bit, ABC chief will air 'NYPD Blue'

UNIVERSAL CITY, Calif.—The President of ABC Entertainment admits he's not entirely comfortable with the contents of his networks upcoming "NYPD Blue," but he still plans to let producer Steven Bochco do what he wants with the series.

See that? "Do what he wants." He wanted it, he set a goal, and he got it. Gee, they're just falling all over themselves to give the public what they want, aren't they!

Prove It to Yourself

All of this is really beside the point, isn't it. We're probably not going to change things in Hollywood. The point is, "we are what we eat," and perhaps we ought to pay more attention to our spiritual diet. Sometimes we're like the frog that is slowly being cooked; in the comfort of the warm water, we go a little crazy. We think the thirteenth Article of Faith says, "If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy, we seek after these things, unless our favorite show is on." Or we think Moroni said, "Deny yourselves of all ungodliness; and fast forward the bad parts" (see Moroni 10:32).

We must not allow Hollywood to make us hypocrites! We say "We believe" when we repeat the Articles of Faith. Well, do we? Do we really believe what they say? Moroni gives hard counsel when he says "deny yourselves of all ungodliness." Is "all" a pretty high percentage? When Hollywood is criticized for its programming, the usual response is, "If you don't like it, turn it off." Hmmm, that's a new thought: Turn it off. What would happen to your life if you did? Here's another headline:

Turning off the tube may be 1st step toward turning on life

People sometimes ask why I, a professor of communication, do not have a television in my home.

. . . Television presents a dilemma: Many of us find that it does not represent a productive or enriching use of time, but we nevertheless find it attractive as a source of entertainment and information. . . . Television seeks audiences for only one reason—to sell those audiences to advertisers. When I watch television, I am investing uncompensated time as a "commercials viewer" and my time is being sold to an advertiser by a network. No, thanks. I've got better things to do. . . . Television robs relationships of time. Relationships among friends and family members take time to develop—quantity time. . . . Television steals the time it takes to build and enjoy relationships, which are to my mind a lot more satisfying than sitcoms. [^6]

I agree, we've got better things to do. We have our own goals and dreams to pursue! What do you think, my friend? Do you think you could turn the TV off for a week? Two weeks? A month? Elder H. Burke Peterson counseled:

Stay away from any movie, video, publication, or music—regardless of its rating —where illicit behavior and expressions are a part of the action. Have the courage to turn it off in your living room. Throw the tapes and the publications in the garbage can, for that is where we keep garbage. . . . Again I say, leave it alone. Turn it off, walk away from it, burn it, erase it, destroy it. I know it is hard counsel we give when we say movies that are R-rated, and many with PG-13 ratings, are produced by satanic influences. Our standards should not be dictated by the rating system. [^7]

TV or not TV; that is the challenge. We could look at more headlines, but maybe we ought to bag all that and prove to ourselves what effect TV has on us. When Moroni wrote his last words in the Book of Mormon, he didn't try to prove it was true. He simply said, in effect, "read it for yourself, and ask God." Maybe that's the best way to come to a conclusion on this media-influence issue.

Would you like to try a little experiment? Do you have the courage? I'm going to make a challenge here—are you sure you want to keep reading? Here it comes. Ladies and gentlemen (please imagine a drum roll somewhere in the distance), I challenge you . . . wait . . . I challenge thee (it sounds more, you know, like a commandment), I challenge thee to fast from TV for a month! No TV, no movies, no videos! (Okay, end the drum roll and imagine a cymbal crash.)

Well, what do you think? Are you saying, "You've got to be kidding." If so, I'll answer you. No, I'm not kidding. I did it myself—I fasted from TV for a whole month. It wasn't that bad. In fact, it was great. I had no idea it would affect me the way it did. If you feel you can't do it, I'll understand. I won't judge you unrighteously or anything. I'll still think you're great. Just write your pathetic, miserable excuse in the space below, you big party pooper.

Lame excuse ____________________________________________

One excuse you can't use is, "I don't have time," because television takes time. As for those of you who didn't write an excuse, who have decided to accept the challenge, verbal high-fives! And may I take a moment to express a few thoughts? I think you're wonderful, heroic, courageous, stupendous, marvelous, intelligent, terrific, outrageous, sensational, superb, splendid, fabulous, remarkable, fantastic, phenomenal, incredible, amazing, magnificent, miraculous, glorious, and downright nifty.

I'd like to make a few predictions. I did this little experiment myself back in February (okay, I picked the shortest month, but it's still a month), and I think I know what will happen to you.

Day One. You won't know what to do with yourself. You'll think, "Is Nintendo allowed?" (It isn't.) You'll say, "Mom, there's nothing to do," and she'll give you a list, starting with "Clean up your room." You'll never complain to her again.

Day Four. You'll begin to notice how much time you have, and it will be exciting. You'll compile a list of things to do during your TV fast: books to read, places to go, projects to complete, and so on.

Day Ten. You'll notice you're having a much easier time controlling your thoughts. You'll realize that the main place where "the truth and values we embrace are mocked on every hand" is on television. You won't be hearing the crass jokes and witnessing the illicit situations on prime-time. You'll remember a scripture you once read: "For our words will condemn us, yea, all our works will condemn us; we shall not be found spotless; and our thoughts will also condemn us; and in this awful state we shall not dare to look up to our God" (Alma 12:14).

Day Fourteen. You'll find it's hard not to judge other TV watchers around you. It will seem like that's all everyone else ever does. You'll say to yourself, "Everyone seems so lazy all of a sudden—did I used to waste time like that?"

Day Sixteen. You'll find it much easier to concentrate when you read your scriptures or pray. You'll notice you don't have to take a minute and clean out your brain before such activities. You'll realize that the bad stuff in your head blocks out the good stuff. Listen to Elder H. Burke Peterson:

When we see or hear anything filthy or vulgar, whatever the source, our mind records it, and as it makes the filthy record, beauty and clean thoughts are pushed into the background. Hope and faith in Christ begin to fade, and more and more, turmoil and discontent become our companions. [^8]

Day Twenty. You'll say, "Why didn't I try this before?" You'll be getting your homework done, you'll read good books, you'll exercise, you'll even have a cleaner room! (Mom will love that.)

Day Thirty. You'll think a lot on this day. You'll ask yourself, "Do I really want to start watching again?" You'll think about how we try to protect ourselves from things: We put dead-bolt locks on the doors, motion-sensor lights in the yard, and burglar alarms in the entrances to the house. To keep things warm inside, we buy double-paned glass, insulation, and weather stripping. Then we kneel down as a family and say "protect us from harm or accident."

But Satan is clever. He can find a way into our house. He can come right through the antenna (or the cable). Or we can actually pay money to rent his influence at the video store.

A month has passed, and now your experiment is over. If you start watching again, you'll notice that your vacation from television has increased your sensitivity. You'll realize that you used to be accustomed to the language of television, but now it will bug you. You'll hear the Lord's name taken in vain, and other crude language, and your mental taste buds will say, "Yuck, this is sick." Listen to Elder Boyd K. Packer:

Profanity is more than just untidy language, for when we profane we relate to low and vulgar words, the most sacred of all names. I wince when I hear the name of the Lord so used, called upon in anger, in frustration, in hatred. [^9]

Now it's time for some intense honesty. Elder Robert D. Hales said:

Do you know how to recognize a true friend? A real friend loves us and protects us.

In recognizing a true friend we must look for two important elements in that friendship:

A true friend makes it easier for us to live the gospel by being around him.

Similarly, a true friend does not make us choose between his way and the Lord's way. [^10]

Elder Hales has given us an excellent tool to test our friendships. Let's take the words true friend and replace them with some other phrases to see if they work.

"____________ makes it easier to live the gospel."

How about "the Book of Mormon"? (Put that in the blank and try it.) Yes, that works. How about your best friend? Put his or her name there. Hopefully that works too. Now take the word television and put it in there.

"Television makes it easier to live the gospel."

How did that feel? I don't know about you, but I could not say that television is a true friend. There is no way I could honestly say that television has made it easier for me to live the gospel.

I hope you will take the TV or not TV challenge. I know you can do it because I did it. Try it! Prove it to yourself and see what happens. Keep a journal and take note of what abstaining from television does for your spirit. I have some friends who took the TV challenge, and wrote me about it. Listen to Lindsay from Clayton, California:

Dear John [story of my life],

I liked what you had to say about TV and I decided to take the challenge not to watch TV for one whole month . . . and well, to make a short story shorter, my whole family decided to go without TV. I think it was the hardest on my mother because she doesn't have a job and is home all the time, but she took up canning. So now we have every kind of jam and jelly you can think of. Name it and we've got it in our freezer. My dad has suddenly found time to figure out our new computer system and all of us have been able to work on and develop our own talents. It's incredible to think back and realize how much we were letting television monopolize our lives. Our home is much quieter and peaceful now.

. . . But I think the neatest thing is that the Spirit can be in our home all the time. . . . I'd like to thank you for giving us that challenge. My family and I have really benefited from it and we've liked it so much that we're going to try to go for a whole year.

Here's another—meet Laura from Delta, Utah!

Dear John [see what I mean?],

I don't know how I can thank you for this wonderful experience of the "TV Blackout." It has changed my life greatly for the better. I have gained a stronger testimony by using time to read the scriptures. . . . I found that I had uplifting thoughts and it was easy for me because the garbage that is on TV didn't come into my mind. I earned a 3.994 this term because I found I had more time in the evening to study instead of watching TV. . . . I have lost 15 pounds because I have been going to the Recreation Center instead of watching TV. . . . I have decided that I should only watch the three shows that I really like. TV can be such a time waster. Because I have seen how much I can accomplish, and what a great effect this has had on me, I simply refuse to sit in front of the TV and do nothing.

Now, I don't know if you'll lose fifteen pounds, but I think I can promise you four things: First, you'll have much more time. (They say the average daily television viewing per household is seven hours four minutes per day!). Second, you'll have an easier time controlling your thoughts. (You know what they say in the computer-programming business: "Garbage in, garbage out!"). Third, your spiritual sensitivity will increase. As you "deny yourself of all ungodliness" (see Moroni 10:32), you'll feel closer to the Lord. Fourth, you'll be more selective in the future. You won't just sit down to "watch TV." You'll choose carefully what you watch instead of punching the remote from a slouched position for three hours.

Any powerful tool can be used as an awful weapon. Of course, there are excellent programs on TV, programs that can lift and inspire. Watch that kind of program when you choose to watch. But remember that Satan has found a way to use the media as a weapon as well. So, fellow frogs, maybe now would be a good time to jump out of the pot, because something's cooking, and I think it's us! Good luck with your experiment, thanks for reading, and I'll see you in Sixth Period!

Extra Credit

Protecting Your Family in an X-rated World, Randal A. Wright (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988).

"The Effects of Television," M. Russell Ballard, Ensign, May 1989, pp. 78-81.

"TV Free: Giving Up the Daytime Habit," Kelly Strong Thacker, Ensign, July 1991, pp. 29-31.

Fifth Period Endnotes

Division page quotation: Lois Gordon and Alan Gordon, American Chronicle: Six Decades in American Life, 1920-1980 (New York: Collier MacMillan, 1987), p. 289.

---
Notas:
[^1] See also Isaiah 24:1-6; 1 Timothy 4:1-3; Matthew 24:9-12; Acts 20:29-30; 2 Timothy 3:1-5; 2 Peter 2:1-3; 1 Nephi 13:24-29. See also scriptures listed in Topical Guide, "Apostasy of the Early Christian Church."
[^2] John Foxe, Book of Martyrs, Book I, pp. 27-32, as cited in Eldin Ricks, Combination Reference (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1961), p. 46.
[^3] Mark E. Petersen, Which Church Is Right? (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1974), p. 12.
[^4] Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History, Book III, chapter 32; emphasis added. (Eusebius is quoting Hegesippus.) As cited in B.H. Roberts, The Falling Away (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1931), p. 29.
[^5] Dr. Phillip Smith, Students Ecclesiastical History, vol. I, p. 62; emphasis added. As cited in Roberts, The Falling Away, p. 83.
[^6] Eusebius, History of the Church from Christ to Constantine, Book VI, chapter 43, tr. G.A. Williamson (New York: Dorset Press, 1984), pp. 282-83.
[^7] James E. Talmage, The Great Apostasy (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1968), pp. 118-19. See also B.H. Roberts, Outlines of Ecclesiastical History (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1950), p. 141; Eusebius, History . . . from Christ to Constantine, Book VI, chapter 43, pp. 282-83.
[^8] For more information, see Bruce R. McConkie, "Nicene Creed," in Mormon Doctrine, 2d. ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1979), pp. 535-37.
[^9] Petersen, Which Church Is Right? p. 12.
[^10] John William Draper, Intellectual Development of Europe, vol. I, pp. 378-82; as cited in Roberts, The Falling Away, p. 125. See also Sir Nicolas Cheetham, A History of the Popes (New York: Dorset Press, 1982), p. 84.
