John Bytheway, What I Wish I'd Known in High School: A Crash Course in Teenage Survival ( 1994)

Gratitude 101

We've Got It Good

I believe that one of the greatest sins of which the inhabitants of the earth are guilty today is the sin of ingratitude. —Joseph F. Smith

If you asked students at your school, "What are the greatest challenges facing young people today?" what would they say? Probably things like drugs, crime, gangs, alcohol abuse, and so on. Do you think anyone would say "wealth" or "high standard of living"? Probably not. But, believe it or not, our comfortable lifestyle is a major problem facing us today.

If we were to ask Brigham Young a similar question, what would he say? Let's find out. Hop in the time machine, and we'll ask him: "President Young, what is your worst fear about the members of the Church? Mobs? Persecutions? Trials? Cold winters? Anti-Mormons?" Here's his answer:

The worst fear I have about this people is that they will get rich in this country, forget God and His people, wax fat, and kick themselves out of the Church and go to hell. This people will stand mobbing, robbing, poverty, and all manner of persecution and be true. But my greatest fear is that they cannot stand wealth. [^1]

What? Cannot stand wealth? Have you ever heard anyone say, "I can't stand this wealth any longer!" We'd probably respond, "Oh, you poor thing! Well, I know it's rough, I wish I could help. Say, I know! Why don't you share it with me? It's a sacrifice, but it's the least I can do to help your suffering. Tens and twenties would be fine."

The truth is, we are rich. Our standard of living is very high—it's a fact, we have a lot! Perhaps you're thinking, "I don't know who he's talking to, but it's not me. Maybe some readers of this book are rich, but not me."

If you could spend some time traveling the world, and see how most people on this planet live, you would come home, look in the mirror, and say to yourself, "Wow. I'm rich." Is being rich a problem? President Spencer W. Kimball pointed out, "The possession of riches does not necessarily constitute sin. But sin may arise in the acquisition and use of wealth." He continued:

Book of Mormon history eloquently reveals the corrosive effect of the passion for wealth. Each time the people became righteous, they prospered. Then followed the transition from prosperity to wealth, wealth to the love of wealth, then to the love of ease and luxury. They moved then into spiritual inactivity, then to gross sin and wickedness, then on to near destruction by their enemies. [^2]

Many great dangers accompany the pursuit of wealth, but the one we're going to focus on is ingratitude. Since we got rather excited about the scriptures in Fourth Period, and since we're still excited about the scriptures, we'll begin with a few verses:

Ye are cursed because of your riches, and also are your riches cursed because ye have set your hearts upon them, and have not hearkened unto the words of him who gave them unto you.

Ye do not remember the Lord your God in the things with which he hath blessed you, but ye do always remember your riches, not to thank the Lord your God for them; yea, your hearts are not drawn out unto the Lord, but they do swell with great pride, unto boasting, and unto great swelling, envyings, strifes, malice, persecutions, and murders, and all manner of iniquities. (Helaman 13:21-22)

And in nothing doth man offend God, or against none is his wrath kindled, save those who confess not his hand in all things, and obey not his commandments. (D&C 59:21)

Thou shalt thank the Lord thy God in all things. (D&C 59:7)

We, the younger generation (I'll include myself in there if that's okay), have only recently arrived on the scene; but our parents and grandparents have seen enormous changes. Many in our generation have had it rather easy. Think about it for a minute: We haven't lived through a depression or a major war. Most of us are hip-deep in toys and gadgets like video games, stereos, computers, TVs, and VCRs. We have spare time to do things like play Little League, take music lessons, go skiing, or hang out at the mall. In many countries around the world, people do nothing but work all day long just to be able to feed their families. Meanwhile, we're getting soft! Are we ready for what's ahead? Here's a quote we heard before, in Second Period:

This generation will face trials and troubles that will exceed those of their pioneer forebears. Our generation has had some periods of respite from the foe. The future generation will have none. [^3]

We learned earlier that wise people learn from experience, and superwise people learn from others' experience—or in other words, from history. Recently, after giving a little presentation at an elementary school, I had one of the kids ask me what my favorite subject was. I replied "history." As if on cue, the entire group said "Eeeew!" You'd think I had force-fed them creamed spinach. Why do I like history? Because it increases my testimony, and it also increases my gratitude.

When an older person begins retelling one of those "when I was a boy" stories, we often roll our eyes, tune out, or leave the room. We're missing out on some great stuff. Sit down with your grandparents or someone else who's "been around," and listen to their history. I interviewed my grandma once for a school project. It was amazing! I had no idea all the things she'd done! And what she'd been through!

My grandpa told me some interesting things too. One Christmas morning early in this century, he peeked into the front room and saw his mother filling the children's stockings. She wept as she put an orange in his stocking—his one and only Christmas present. Maybe that's why whenever someone would say "I don't like this" at the dinner table, Grandpa would always say, "Eat whatsoever is placed before you, asking no questions."

I don't remember a lot of trauma in my life as a four-year-old. But I know someone who was four years old during the Depression. Here's an excerpt from his journal:

I was born in January, 1926. When I was four years old the Depression began to deepen. I remember my father was out of work and we were very, very poor. He went looking for work day after day and worried himself into the hospital. After a brief stay he resumed looking and took a part time job at Hogle Zoo cleaning out animal cages. I remember eating cornmeal mush for breakfast, lunch and dinner day after day. Many days I went to bed hungry. I had two older brothers and two older sisters. Our school clothes were well worn but clean. Most of the time I wore bib overalls and went barefoot to save my one pair of shoes. Mother worried along with my father as money was so scarce. If ever there was any to spare I might get a dime for myself. My mother took a job in the early thirties serving in the school cafeteria at South High School. We lived in a rented house at 352 Westminster Ave. My dad was several months behind in rent but the landlord let us stay. I shared a bed with my two brothers and often one of us would end up on the floor. Most of the time the one on the floor was me. Even with both incomes it was a struggle to pay the rent, other household expenses, and clothe and feed five children. Whatever money now came in was very frugally spent. Ten cents worth of hamburger and a loaf of bread was a good supper. Through the years 1928 to about 1934 we lived in severe poverty. We didn't own a car until the late thirties.

That journal entry really touches me, because it was written by my dad.

I remember standing on the USS Arizona Memorial in Pearl Harbor, and looking at the names of the 1100 men who were entombed beneath my feet. I had no idea it would affect me the way it did! It was one of the most sobering, humbling experiences of my life. These 1100 sailors were young men, like me, who had their whole lives ahead of them. But they chose to serve their country, and because of a surprise attack, they are now entombed in a sunken battleship. "They are still serving," a Navy veteran told me. And he was right. They served me by filling me with gratitude. Dick Cheney, a former U.S. Secretary of Defense, said, "It is easy to take liberty for granted when you have never had it taken from you." I was inspired and humbled as I heard of the inscription over an American World War II cemetery in the Philippines which states, "We gave our todays, in order that you might have your tomorrows." What sacrifice! What commitment!

Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. (John 15:13)

In the early history of this country, Patrick Henry said, "Give me liberty or give me death." We get all bent out of shape if Mom asks us to fetch a can of beans from the basement. (Well, maybe you don't get bent out of shape, but I'm embarrassed to say I used to.) What a slap in the face to all who have gone before us, if all we do is complain, protest, and gripe rather than serve, sacrifice, and thank the Lord for our blessings! One day, on the other side of the veil, we will meet those men and women who served when their country called. For now, we can remember them and be grateful to them.

If I make it to heaven, I will be looking for three guys who didn't live much past your age. I hope I'll be there, 'cause I know they will. I can't wait to meet them and shake their hands. When I do, I will be in the presence of true heroes. Not the kind of heroes who play sports on national television, make millions advertising light beer and shoes, and get fined for slugging each other on the court. But the real kind of heroes, who have honor, courage, and faith in God. Can you guess who the three teenagers are? I'll can't wait to tell you!

Captain Edward Martin was leading a handcart company of Saints across the plains. They were stuck in Wyoming in a place called Devil's Gate. So many of their group were sick and dying that they stopped for a while to regain some strength. When the handcarts started to move again with the help of a rescue party in early November, they reached a river filled with floating ice.

To cross would require more courage and fortitude, it seemed, than human nature could muster. Women shrank back and men wept. Some pushed through, but others were unequal to the ordeal.

Three eighteen-year-old boys belonging to the relief party, came to the rescue; and to the astonishment of all who saw, carried nearly every member of the ill-fated handcart company across the snow-bound stream. The strain was so terrible, and the exposure so great, that in later years all the boys died from the effects of it. When President Brigham Young heard of this heroic act, he wept like a child, and later declared publicly, "That act alone will ensure C. Allen Huntington, George W. Grant, and David P. Kimball an everlasting salvation in the Celestial Kingdom of God, worlds without end." [^4]

Wow. And sometimes we moan when we have to go to a service project.

Why don't we try a little exercise in gratitude and see how lucky we are? If you ever need to do an activity for a young men's or young women's group, this one would be fun. First, look over the following list of blessings:

___ Electricity

___ Telephone

___ Microwave Oven

___ Furnace

___ Refrigerator

___ Car

___ Stereo

___ Water Heater

If you had to give up one of these, which would it be? Put a number 1 next to the thing you'd do without. Which one did you pick?

Electricity. Good thing you didn't pick this one, huh. Without it, you couldn't use the fridge, the microwave, or the stereo. And how would you get ready in the morning? Curling irons and blow dryers are out, and so are electric shavers. No television, no dishwasher, no trash compactor, vacuum cleaner, computer, washer, dryer, etc. You couldn't listen to music in the morning unless you bought a lot of batteries. Hey, how would you wake up in the first place? You'd have to get one of those old-fashioned winding clocks whose alarms could wake up half of Detroit.

Refrigerator. Good thing you didn't pick this one either. What would you do? If you like cold cereal, you'd have to mix powdered milk each day, or else use canned milk. Maybe you could get a cow of your own. Of course, you'd have to feed it every day, and shovel manure on occasion. Better get a pair of shoes just for that, and don't wear them to prom. What about the freezer? What about ice! No more of that in your Kool-aid. I guess you'd have to buy fresh food every day, because everything would spoil.

Telephone. Good thing you didn't pick this one. How would you communicate with the outside world? Instead of calling your friend and saying, "Can I come over?" you'd have to go all the way over to find out if you could come over. How would you get a date? Ask someone face to face? Oh my blushing festival! How would you let someone know you needed a ride? How would you know when a store was going to close? And what about emergencies? No more 911 when something went wrong. You'd have to learn first aid, and CPR, and the Heimlich maneuver, and more importantly, how would you order pizza?

Car. Oh, sure, like anyone would pick this one. Every fifteen-year-old I've ever met says, "I'm almost sixteen" when asked their age. Why? 'Cause sixteen-year-olds can date and drive. I guess you'd have to walk to school, and home, and to the mall, and to church, and to your dates. Have you ever ridden the bus to prom? It's so romantic. And all the passengers compliment you on your corsage.

Microwave oven. Good thing you didn't pick this one. Who wants to wait for thirty minutes to cook a bean-and-cheese burrito! I mean, we have things to do, you know? No more sixty-second hot dogs, and . . . hey, no more microwave popcorn! How do you make popcorn without a microwave? Don't you have to pour a bunch of hot oil into some contraption? And then you have to clean the stupid thing afterwards! Oh well, at least we wouldn't have to worry about that "don't put aluminum foil in here" rule anymore.

Stereo. Whoa, good thing you didn't pick this one! Seriously, go count up all the cassette tapes or CDs you own! What would you do with them, recycle? What would life be like without your music? (Try going without it for a day.) What would you listen to when you woke up? What would you listen to as you: Got dressed? Drove to school? Drove home from school? Went inside after school? Went jogging? Got ready for bed?

Furnace. Oh, brilliant. Who would pick the furnace? Only those who live in a place where they don't need one. (If that's you, replace "furnace" with "air conditioner." And why aren't you at the pool or the beach?) I guess you might do without the furnace if you love chopping firewood, or if you have an electric blanket, electric couch, electric carpet, etc. (My brother served his mission in northern Japan where they had no central heating. They had to chip the ice off the shower walls. Brrrr.) Oh well. I suppose Christmas would be more festive. You know, "Jack Frost nipping at your nose" and all.

Water heater. Another brilliant choice. Try a totally cold shower just once if you picked this one. Actually, icicle earrings could be very attractive—part of the "Ice-age Fashion Collection." Wear your own Christmas decorations! I guess you could heat water by the fireplace if you wanted, or heat a quart at a time in the microwave.

Okay, stop, pencils down, exercise over. Why did we use those eight items? Because I served a mission to the Philippines, and I worked with people who didn't have any of them. And some of my friends in the Philippines are happier without any of them than we are with all of them. So what's the point? The point is, none of those things are necessities. We could live without them. They are all blessings. And what do we do with blessings? We thank our Father in Heaven for them. If we don't, we're guilty of the sin of ingratitude.

The danger is that we often end up complaining about

the very things we should be thankful for! If my Filipino friends had heard the way I complained in high school, they wouldn't have believed their ears!

Me: "C'mon, Dad, do I have to take the land-barge to school? Can't I take the other car?"

My friends: No way, you have two cars?

Me: "I don't like this casserole, Mom."

My friends: "You mean, you're not going to eat it? You're going to throw it in the garbage?"

Me: "Mom, I need a check for Little League—it's fifty bucks plus a uniform."

My friends: "Little League? You have time for that?"

Me: "Dad, can I get a phone in my room so I can have some privacy?"

My friends: "Wow, you have a phone in your house?"

Please don't misunderstand. Is there anything wrong with having two cars, Little League, and phones? Yes, if we're not grateful and haven't learned to share! We ought to be filled with gratitude every day! Instead, it seems that the wealthiest people in the world (us) do most of the whining. And what is more annoying than a wealthy whiner?

We should be thankful for our temporal blessings, and perhaps even more thankful for our spiritual blessings. We have the scriptures, the prophets, the general conference issues of the Ensign! Think how many church leaders have been quoted just in this book! We should be grateful for them, and never take them for granted. President Harold B. Lee told this story:

A man came in to see me and said that he had heard that some man appeared mysteriously to a group of temple workers and told them, "You had better hurry up and store for a year or two, or three, because there will come a season when there won't be any production." He asked me what I thought about it and I said, "Well, were you in the April Conference of 1936?" He replied, "No, I couldn't be there." And I said, "Well, you surely read the report of what was said by the Brethren in that Conference?" No, he hadn't. "Well," I said, "at that Conference the Lord did give revelation about the storage of food. How in the world is the Lord going to get over to you what he wants you to do if you are not there when he says it, and you do not take the time to read it after it has been said?

Well, that is it. It is a changing situation. The Lord is going to keep his people informed, if they will listen. As President Clark said in a classic talk that he gave, "What we need today is not more prophets. We have prophets. But what we need is more people with listening ears." [^5]

Perhaps the classic story of ingratitude involves the Savior, and how some people received his remarkable gifts. Let's read from the book of Luke:

And as he entered into a certain village, there met him ten men that were lepers, which stood afar off:

And they lifted up their voices, and said, Jesus, Master, have mercy on us.

And when he saw them, he said unto them, Go shew yourselves unto the priests. And it came to pass, that, as they went, they were cleansed.

And one of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back, and with a loud voice glorified God,

And fell down on his face at his feet, giving him thanks: and he was a Samaritan.

And Jesus answering said, Were there not ten cleansed? but where are the nine?

There are not found that returned to give glory to God, save this stranger.

And he said unto him, Arise, go thy way: thy faith hath made thee whole. (Luke 17:12-19)

Unfortunately, those numbers seem about right. Only around 10 percent of us remember to say thank you. You and I need to be in that 10 percent. Remembering to express our thanks isn't just polite, it's required; when we aren't grateful, it's a sin. In closing, let's get back in the time machine and ask President Young another question: "President Young, where does ingratitude rank among the more serious sins?"

I do not know of [any], excepting the unpardonable sin, that is greater than the sin of ingratitude. [^6]

Wow. Thank you for being here! And be thankful that you can read. See you at Graduation!

Extra Credit

"Gratitude," Lloyd P. George, Ensign, May 1994, pp. 27-28.

Seventh Period Endnotes

Division page quotation: Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975), p. 270.

---
Notas:
[^1] Get up early for seminary Ezra Taft Benson, New Era, May 1975, p. 20.
[^2] Wait until you're sixteen years old to date Spencer W. Kimball, The Miracle of Forgiveness (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969), p. 236.
[^3] Refrain from drinking, smoking, and drugs History of the Church, 6:364.
[^4] Use clean language Ezra Taft Benson, Ensign, November 1986, p. 84.
[^5] Choose not to see movies that pollute your mind The Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), p. 384.
[^6] Plan to leave home for a year and a half or two years, to show others how to leave the river Joseph B. Wirthlin, Ensign, November 1989, p. 73.
