John Bytheway, What I Wish I'd Known in High School: A Crash Course in Teenage Survival ( 1994)

Goals 101

There Is Life after High School

Nephi said, "I will go and do," not "I will sit and stew."

Provo, Utah, is surrounded by gorgeous mountains that are constantly changing color with the seasons. Occasionally during my lunch break I enjoy the scenery by cruising up Provo Canyon in my car with the sunroof open, the window down, and some tunes on the stereo. It's a nice break, and it gives me an opportunity to think.

During one of my lunch-break excursions, I noticed a bunch of people floating down the Provo River in inner tubes. What a nice way to see the scenery! Jump in, enjoy the ride, and let the river take you wherever it's going. Sounds like a perfect way to spend a summer afternoon. Of course, you wouldn't want to spend too much time in there. It's cold, and you could go numb. Eventually, you'd need to get your feet back on the ground. Hmmm, I feel an analogy coming on.

Imagine a wide, slow-running river with millions of

people floating along it in inner tubes. None of them seem to be concerned about where the river takes them; they're just along for the ride. Rivers always go to lower ground. They never climb, blaze trails, or explore. Rivers follow the course of least resistance until they get to the ocean, or flow into a lake.

Let's call the river something poetic, like the "River O' Life." How beautiful. Everyone's in there (everyone who's alive, that is), and they're all calmly floating to an unknown destination. All except about 10 percent—a really annoying group of people who are continually "making waves." They refuse to relax and "go with the flow." They're always looking around and asking questions.

"Wow, look at that mountain! What do you think's up there? Wow, look at that grove of quaking aspens! I wonder what it would be like to be there. Say, look at that waterfall!"

Boy. Those people are so noisy! Some of them actually leave the river! Seriously! They paddle to the side and walk right onto the riverbank! Can you imagine such a thing? Too bad they can't just relax and take life as it comes.

It happens every once in a while: After floating down the river for months or even years, a few hyper people begin to ask, "Does anyone know where we're going? Hey, what's the purpose of this river? Why are we all floating in here? Is there anything more? What are we doing?"

"Hey, keep it down up there," others shout. "Just take things as they come! Stop trying to figure things out, and go with the flow. Everyone else is."

But they can't go with the flow. They lie awake at night and stare at the stars, wondering and dreaming. Then one night, one of those restless floaters says to himself, "I'm leaving."

The next day he announces his plans. "Can't you see?" he cries. "Look up there, look at those mountains, look at those peaks covered in white! Don't you want to know what's up there? I do. I don't want to drift all my life. I'm outta here. I'm going to higher ground!"

"It's too hard!" the others shout. "Don't you know you'll have to walk? You'll get blisters! You'll stub your toes! Boy," they mutter to themselves, "kids these days." But he paddles against the current in his little inner tube and finally makes it to the shore. He stumbles out onto the sand and looks back at the millions of people floating aimlessly down the river. Some are laughing. Others are watching in silence—as if maybe, for the first time, they're wondering about the purpose of the river.

"I will no longer let the river chart my course," our hero says to himself. "I will follow the stars, I will climb the mountains, I will chart my own course!" He turns, takes a few steps, and gasps, startled by what he sees on the ground. Footprints! What could this be? A trail left by others who have also left the river for higher ground! Who are these trailblazers? And where did they go?

Some people still floating in the river are now entertaining brand-new thoughts: "You mean, I can decide where I want to go? You mean, I don't have to go where everyone else is going, and do what everyone else is doing?" They've also noticed that as the river flows to lower ground, it gets muddier. They notice sticks, logs, debris, and sometimes even garbage here and there. But that's the way rivers are: they carry away whatever's floating in them. Rivers are simply the lowest point in the landscape, and leaving them can be difficult. Some try to step out onto the shore, but they leave one foot in the water. It won't work: If they don't get both feet on the ground, the current might pull them back in.

Our friend is now following the footprints into the mountains. Every step he takes up the mountainside allows him to see more of the river. What a view! What perspective! The thrill of new sights, new sounds, and new discoveries makes all the cuts and bruises from the climb worth it. One day, while hiking along, he discovers a small group of people who are also scaling the mountain. They welcome him with smiles, handshakes, and hugs. They share with him maps, compasses, and climbing gear. At the end of each day the little group looks out over the canyon. Such a beautiful sight! Jagged mountains, towering evergreens, quiet meadows, and cool waterfalls. And down below, way below, a slow-moving river, carrying millions of people to nowhere. How sad!

"They'll never see what we see, never know the beauty of the mountains," the leader of the hikers says. "Not unless we tell them. Maybe we should go down to the river, and see if we can persuade some people to come out onto the shore." The leader selects a few willing people to go down to the river and try to help the swimmers understand the joy of climbing.

Does this parable make any sense? Do you know what everything means?

The river: the world—the lowest point on the landscape of life.

The current: peer pressure, "current" trends, what everyone else is doing.

The debris and mud: the world's decaying values.

The stars: the constancy of God and the gospel.

The mountains: goals, dreams, plans; the "higher" plain of life.

Swimming upstream: gospel standards that appear to others like work.

Mocking floaters: those who don't understand our desire to be better than we are.

Footprints: a trail left by those who have gone before—the prophets and the scriptures!

Who are the hikers in our parable? Those who have chosen to act instead of being acted upon; to navigate instead of float (see 2 Nephi 2:14, 25). They're not satisfied with the "current" trends, and they don't want to do what everyone else is doing. They want more! You, my friend, are one of the rare individuals. You go against the current in so many ways! Here's a list:

There's a whole future ahead of you, waiting for your arrival. Do you ever wonder what will happen? Do you ever try to imagine what your life will be like? Well, the best way to know what will happen to you is to plan what will happen to you. We call that setting goals.

Who are the goal setters in our parable? The 10 percent that leave the river. I read somewhere that only about 10 percent of the people in this country have written goals. The other 90 percent just float along as the scenery of life passes them by.

Whenever we talk about setting goals, we're just going in circles unless we make the Lord and his gospel part of the process. You wouldn't want to spend your whole life hiking, only to realize you were on the wrong mountain! President Ezra Taft Benson promised:

Men and women who turn their lives to God will find out that He can make a lot more out of their lives than they can. He will deepen their joys, expand their vision, quicken their minds, strengthen their muscles, lift their spirits, multiply their blessings, increase their opportunities, comfort their souls, raise up friends, and pour out peace. Whoever will lose his life to God will find he has eternal life. [^1]

We use the term "setting goals" because it's a concrete thing that you can do as an individual. But maybe you don't really "set" the most important goals. Maybe you just remember them. No doubt, before you came to this earth, you knew what you wanted in the end. You—and I—wanted to be with God! How do we get there? (Remember what we talked about in Third Period?) We receive all the proper ordinances, obey the commandments, and endure to the end. Fortunately for us, our prophets, the scriptures, and our patriarchal blessings refresh our eternal memories about our highest aspirations. President Spencer W. Kimball said:

Very early, youth should have been living by a plan. They are the wise young man and the wise young woman who will profit by the experience of others, and who early set a course in their education, a mission, the finding of a pure, clean sweetheart to be a life's companion, their temple marriage and their Church service. When such a course is charted and the goal is set, it is easier to resist the many temptations and to say "no" to the first cigarette, "no" to the first drink, "no" to the car ride which will take one into the dark, lonely and hazardous places, "no" to the first improper advances which lead eventually to immoral practices. [^2]

President Kimball mentioned serving a mission. Every young man should serve a mission, and many young women will choose to serve as well. Do you get a mission call or do you remember it? The Prophet Joseph Smith said, "Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was." [^3] You've already been called. And you'll love your mission because it's a short-cut to maturity; it's tithing on your life, and a perfect time to form habits of work and sacrifice that will set a pattern for the rest of your life.

Young women who remember their highest goals will perform miracles! President Ezra Taft Benson said:

Give me a young woman who loves home and family, who reads and ponders the scriptures daily, who has a burning testimony of the Book of Mormon. Give me a young woman who faithfully attends her Church meetings, who is a seminary graduate, who has earned her Young Womanhood Recognition Award and wears it with pride! Give me a young woman who is virtuous and who has maintained her personal purity, who will not settle for less than a temple marriage, and I will give you a young woman who will perform miracles for the Lord now and throughout eternity. [^4]

When the goals of mission and marriage are firmly in place, you can set all kinds of other goals. When you do, be sure to take the advice of those who have hiked the trails before you. In the business world, large companies have a "board of directors." When the executives in the company want to make a big decision, they bring it before the board. My mission president suggested that I form a personal board of directors. What a great idea! Now, when I have major decisions to make in my life, I consult the board. Members of my board include my parents, my bishop, and some personal friends whom I've grown to respect and admire. Don't get stuck in the rut of trying to do everything by yourself. As you set your goals, take them to your personal board and get some advice.

A chapter about goals ought to have a goal. The purpose of Graduation: Goals 101 is to get you thinking about some of the goals you can set for your life. President Spencer W. Kimball said, "Goals are good. Laboring with a distant aim sets the mind in a higher key and puts us at our best."

Some people travel without a map. They have no plan for their journey. It's pathetic, but most people spend more time planning a surprise party than they do planning their whole life! What they get is one surprise after another because they have no plan, no charted course, no goals. If you're just floating along in the river of life, who is steering? Who is at the helm? If all you're doing is going with the flow, where will you end up? Doing what everyone else is doing will take you only where everyone else is going. Decide that you will no longer drift with the current. Yes, my friend, you can be the captain of your inner tube! Take command, row for the shore, then get out and head for the hills! Listen to President Ezra Taft Benson:

When we set goals we are in command. . . . Clearly understood goals bring our lives into focus just as a magnifying glass focuses a beam of light into one burning point. Without goals our efforts may be scattered and unproductive. [^5]

How do we set goals, anyway? Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin advised:

You should look ahead now and decide what you want to do with your lives. Fix clearly in your mind what you want to be one year from now, five years, ten years, and beyond. Receive your patriarchal blessing and strive to live worthy of its promises. A patriarchal blessing is one of the most important guides in life that members of the Church enjoy. Write your goals and review them regularly. Keep them before you constantly, record your progress, and revise them as circumstances dictate. Your ultimate goal should be eternal life—the kind of life God lives, the greatest of all the gifts of God. [^6]

Get a paper and pencil and let's set some goals! Elder Wirthlin said, "Look ahead now," and that's the best way to start. Look ahead! It may sound strange, but look all the way to your funeral! If you were asked to summarize your life at your own funeral, what would you say? What will you feel good about at the end of your life?

One of my heroes is a former First Lady of the United States named Barbara Bush. She spoke to graduates at the all-women Wellesley College in Massachusetts, and asked them to "look ahead now" when planning their lives. An Associated Press story reported:

But while urging the graduates to pursue professional careers, if they so choose, Mrs. Bush warned, "At the end of your life, you will never regret not having passed one more test, winning one more verdict, or not closing one more deal. You will regret time not spent with a husband, a child, a friend, or a parent." [^7]

Mrs. Bush is right! No one is going to look back on his or her life and say, "Oh, I wish I had spent more time at the office!" Instead, they'll be thinking of life's most important things: family, church, and service. What will you look back on?

Once I participated in a goal-setting workshop in Idaho. I was extremely impressed with the group of teenage peer counselors. I asked them to write what they would like to have said about them at their funerals. After some rather serious thought, they wrote their feelings. When they were finished, a few of them were brave enough to read their personal "epitaphs" to the group (an epitaph is a brief statement commemorating a deceased person). What they said was interesting, but what they didn't say was even more interesting. All of them mentioned being parents: "She was a wonderful wife and mother," or, "He was a father who spent time with his children." All of them mentioned service, too: "He was always there to help anyone who needed him," or, "She was always helping others." After the reading, we had a group discussion. We observed that no one mentioned how much money they had made, or even what kind of career they had. No one mentioned cars or boats or possessions of any kind. Instead, these top-notch teenagers wrote about the things that really matter. (Once again, I learned to never underestimate teenagers.)

As you set your long-range goals, think about what you want to have said about you at your funeral. When you've decided that, and written it down, write the words "Mission Statement" at the top of your paper, and you've now made a motto for your life. You may want to go back and change a few things from past tense to future tense, of course. For example, change "He was a good dad" to "He will be a good dad," and so on. Your mission statement gives you something to live for; it gives you a purpose. It says, "This is what I want my life to mean." Someone once said, "Your life is God's gift to you; what you do with your life is your gift to God." Make your life a gift to God.

A mission statement is a long-range tool, and you need to set short-range goals too. I'm afraid I'm going to have to use another personal experience to illustrate. (I have to use personal experiences about me because I don't know any personal experiences about you.) You see, the book that you're reading right now was a goal of mine. For months I worked on it "every once in a while." I made very little progress. It wasn't until I set a deadline that things began to happen. All of a sudden I felt a sense of urgency. I also realized that writing took a lot more time and was a lot harder than I thought it would be. One day I realized, "If I'm ever going to get this book done, I'd better set aside an hour or so every day until it's finished." So that's what I did. Most of this book was written between the hours of 5:30 and 8:00 a.m. Am I trying to impress you? No. You probably get up earlier than that to go to seminary. I'm just trying to illustrate something that Elder Richard G. Scott once said: "To reach a goal you have never before attained, you must do things you have never before done." [^8] Acheiving goals takes work, and work takes time! You might have to give up something, like, uh, perhaps, television! Aaaah!

A short-range goal should be divided into smaller short-range goals. I had a goal to write a book, but I divided it into a goal of writing ten chapters, one chapter every two weeks. Did everything come out exactly as planned? Not at all. But at least there was a goal to shoot for! It's okay to write your goals in pencil, because sometimes you'll need to make adjustments.

We've talked about the major goals for your life, the goals that you don't set as much as you "remember"—like mission, marriage, and eternal life. It wouldn't be right for me to tell you any other goals to set. You have to set them by yourself, with advice from your personal board of directors. You can set your goals about a million different things: school, family, sports, scripture reading, writing, music, foreign languages, hobbies, sewing, exercise, journal, computers, cooking, and on and on and on! Life is a great adventure! So get off the couch, put down the remote, and go live it! In other words, get off your inner tube and head for the hills!

And Now: The Corny Part Near the End

Well, I guess it's time to say good-bye. You're a pretty amazing teenager, you know that? You've read all the way to the last chapter! (Is there anyone out there reading this? What's that? You're the only one? Oh well. That's about right. Ninety percent of Americans don't read past the first chapter of the books they buy.) You are a rare individual. There are many more books out there, books much better than this one. Go check them out!

Thanks for reading! I respect you so much! I tried to write all the things I wish I'd known when I was in high school, but it seems I've left so much out. The more I learn, the more I realize how little I know. But I know where all the answers are, and so do you. I'm so glad we have a Father in Heaven, the prophets, and the scriptures. They teach us not to get bogged down by the little things in life. They may seem like big things now, but many of them are so little, and they won't mean much further down the road. Yes, there is life after high school. Your high school experience will be easier when you realize that.

This book had three goals; do you remember? (1) Learn things, (2) have fun, and (3) make changes. Well, did you learn things? (write answer here) _________________. Did you have fun? ____________________. Did you, or will you make changes? What changes? you ask. Well, let's review: Second Period asked you to read For the Strength of Youth; Third Period asked you to set your own dating standards; the Assembly asked you to learn about the Savior and listen to his words; Fourth Period asked you to make a commitment to read the Book of Mormon; Fifth Period challenged you to turn off the TV for a month; Sixth Period asked you to get into the "best books"; Seventh Period asked you to be full of gratitude every day; and Graduation said, set some goals. Phew! So, did you, or will you, make changes? When? (Remember, I will go and do, not I will sit and stew!) ______________________.

Good! Well, I'm outta here. I've got more goals to work on. Good-bye, my friend; leave your inner tube behind and make tracks! I'll see you on the mountain!

Extra Credit

"Running Your Marathon," Joseph B. Wirthlin, Ensign, November 1989, pp. 73-75.

Seven Habits of Highly Effective People, Stephen R. Covey (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1989).

Graduation Endnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Get up early for seminary Ezra Taft Benson, New Era, May 1975, p. 20.
[^2] Wait until you're sixteen years old to date Spencer W. Kimball, The Miracle of Forgiveness (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969), p. 236.
[^3] Refrain from drinking, smoking, and drugs History of the Church, 6:364.
[^4] Use clean language Ezra Taft Benson, Ensign, November 1986, p. 84.
[^5] Choose not to see movies that pollute your mind The Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), p. 384.
[^6] Plan to leave home for a year and a half or two years, to show others how to leave the river Joseph B. Wirthlin, Ensign, November 1989, p. 73.
[^7] Remain morally clean so you can have a celestial marriage Provo Daily Herald, June 2, 1990, pp. A1-A2.
[^8] Richard G. Scott, Ensign, May 1990, p. 76.
