This issue contains articles and activities that could be used for family home evening. The following are a few examples.

“Being Worthy to Enter the Temple,” page 12: As part of the lesson, you could discuss the temple recommend topics listed in the article. Invite family members to ponder those topics as you read them. Encourage everyone to be worthy of worshipping in the temple.

“Finding Ourselves in Lehi’s Dream,” page 26: Review the article with your family. At the conclusion, President Boyd K. Packer, President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, asks us to reread 1 Nephi 8 and other verses in the Book of Mormon that teach the plan of salvation. Consider reading these scriptures and reflecting on the promise given by President Packer.

“The Lord Placed Him in Our Path,” page 48: As you read this story, invite your family to listen for and then discuss the reason the man in the car decided to listen to the missionary lessons. Consider role-playing or discussing ways to act as the Savior would act in various situations.

“A 10-Year-Old Teacher,” page 58: After sharing the story, consider inviting family members to think of opportunities when they could be a teacher and what gospel topics they would like to teach. To give them an opportunity to practice teaching, you may want to create a schedule that allows family members to teach in family home evening or other settings.

After hearing Church leaders encourage youth to save money for full-time missions, we held a special family home evening with our two children, 10-year-old Allana and 7-year-old Ulric. We discussed the importance of saving for a full-time mission, then presented them with piggy banks to help them begin saving.

After that evening it was incredible how the money has accumulated. Ulric collects and saves every coin he can find; both children save any money they receive from relatives. In three months Ulric has saved enough to pay for the first month of his mission, and Allana is almost there. The children also make sure to pay tithing on the money they receive, and our family has seen great blessings as their testimonies of serving and sacrificing have taken root and grown.

Luiz and Andreia Pereira, São Paulo, Brazil

Send a description of your favorite family home evening to liahona@ldschurch.org.
