Many artists use their knowledge and faith in Jesus Christ and their skills and imaginations to create drawings of Him. Their drawings can help our faith and understanding of Jesus grow. When we read the scriptures, we can use our imaginations, as artists do, to help us understand what Jesus was teaching.

In the New Testament you will find stories about the miracles Jesus performed when He lived on the earth. One of them is in Mark 4:35–39. Read the story; then imagine you were in the boat with Jesus and His disciples on the Sea of Galilee. Imagine a great storm. The ship rocks to and fro, the wind howls, and the water splashes around you. Imagine what you would be thinking and feeling. Now imagine seeing the disciples as they wake Jesus. Think about how the Lord’s voice sounded when He rose and said, “Peace, be still.” Imagine how the sea looked when the wind stopped blowing and how amazed the disciples were when the wind and the sea obeyed Jesus.

How does reading and thinking about this story help you have more faith in Jesus Christ?

We too can be artists and show our faith and understanding of Jesus by drawing pictures of the miracles He performed and by using our pictures to teach others what we have learned.

Read 2 Nephi 27:23.

Pray to Heavenly Father to know that Jesus Christ is “a God of miracles.”

Memorize 2 Nephi 27:23.

Choose one of these activities, or create your own:

- Help someone else memorize 2 Nephi 27:23.

- Think of a scripture story about another of Christ’s miracles. Imagine what it might have looked liked; then draw pictures of what happened. Share the story and your pictures in family home evening.

- Share your testimony of Jesus Christ by memorizing this month’s scripture and repeating it to someone.

- The illustrations on page 63 show how one artist imagined the miracle of Jesus calming the storm. Cut out the pictures, and mount them on heavier paper. Use the pictures to tell the story in family home evening or to a friend.

How does what you have done help you understand 2 Nephi 27:23?

Write in your journal about what you have done.
