In the story “A 10-Year-Old Teacher,” Chance taught about the plan of salvation. Look at the pictures on this page, and then draw your own on a separate piece of paper. Cut out your drawings, look up the scriptures, and then talk about the plan of salvation with a family member or friend. Or ask your parents if you can talk about it in family home evening.

Before we were born, we lived with Heavenly Father as His spirit children. We accepted His plan so we could be born on earth, have a body, and be tested. Heavenly Father would send His Son, our Savior, Jesus Christ, to overcome death and to atone for our sins. By faithfully following Heavenly Father’s plan, we can return to Him. (See Abraham 3:23–28.)

We lived with our heavenly parents in our premortal life. Sadly, one-third of Heavenly Father’s spirit children did not accept His plan. They chose to follow Satan, then known as Lucifer. Lucifer didn’t want us to be able to make our own choices. A war of ideas was fought in heaven, and Lucifer and his followers were cast out. You are on earth because you chose Heavenly Father’s plan. (See Revelation 12:7–9.)

When we come to earth, we gain bodies, live in families, and experience joy as we follow Heavenly Father’s plan for us. While we are here, we need to receive the ordinances that will help us return to Heavenly Father: baptism, confirmation, priesthood ordinations for young men, and temple ordinances, including celestial marriage. The Holy Ghost helps guide us to do what is right while we are away from our heavenly home. (See 2 Nephi 32:5.)

When your body dies, your spirit will continue to live, and it will go to the spirit world. The spirit world is a wonderful place where you will be reunited with your family members who have also passed away. The prophet Alma described the spirit world as a “state of rest, a state of peace” for the righteous (Alma 40:12).

Through the Atonement of Jesus Christ, all people will be resurrected. Resurrection is when your body and spirit are reunited. After a period of peace called the Millennium, the Lord will judge all people, and most people will enter one of three kingdoms of glory: the telestial, terrestrial, or celestial kingdom. Wicked people who fought against Jesus Christ and denied the Holy Ghost will be sent to a place called outer darkness. (See 2 Nephi 9:15; Alma 40:11–12.)
