When I was a missionary in 2020–21, I often felt discouraged because it seemed no one noticed or appreciated my hard work. Although receiving recognition wasn’t the point of serving a mission, it would’ve helped on hard days. Maybe you’ve felt the same in a Church calling, in a family responsibility, or at work.

One day, I was reading the Sermon on the Mount and found solace in Matthew 6. The Savior advised the people to do their alms, pray, and fast in secret. He told them three times, “Thy Father which seeth in secret himself shall reward thee openly” (Matthew 6:4; see also verses 6 and 18).

I realized my efforts weren’t going unnoticed at all. God was aware of every sacrifice I made.

President Howard W. Hunter (1907–95) taught: “If you feel that much of what you do does not make you very famous, take heart. Most of the best people who ever lived weren’t very famous, either. Serve and grow, faithfully and quietly.”

Jesus Christ’s earthly ministry was an example of quiet service.

Many times after performing a miracle, He commanded those who had witnessed it not to tell anyone (see Matthew 8:2–4; 9:27–30; Mark 5:41–43).

The Savior didn’t seek praise or honor. He was motivated by charity.

Similarly, Elder David A. Bednar of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles spoke of Church members who “consistently strive to ‘comfort those that stand in need of comfort’ [Mosiah 18:9], without expectations of acknowledgment or praise.”

When our greatest motivation is “a love of God and of all men” (2 Nephi 31:20), service becomes a blessing, regardless of who notices our efforts.

President Russell M. Nelson taught: “It really doesn’t matter where one serves. What the Lord cares about is how one serves.”

Your service is never lost to the Lord. He knows your heart (see 1 Samuel 16:7), and He loves your efforts.

You may be a light in someone’s life without even realizing. Has anyone quietly made a difference in your life? Consider reaching out to them and letting them know how they impacted you!
