Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

Foreword

During the past five years President Joseph Fielding Smith, at the solicitation of The Improvement Era, has maintained a department in that valuable magazine called Your Question. Requests that these answers be placed in book form were so numerous that this was done with the sanction of the Era. There have been many other requests that questions of like character be published in another volume. At the solicitation of the Deseret Book Company, I prevailed upon my father to permit me to search through his files covering many years to see if there were not other answers to questions which might be available and prove of value to the reading public. The suggestion was approved, and out of the number submitted, the answers appearing in this volume were selected, with the addition of some other questions of current production, some of which have also appeared in the Era. In choosing these subjects for publication all personal letters were considered confidential and were respected as such.

President Smith, of course, made the final selection out of the number submitted. Each week numerous letters reach his desk. Some of them deal with trivial subjects, and others with matters worthy of consideration. Some are from people of other faiths who are earnestly seeking knowledge in relation to the restored gospel; some from others whose hearts are filled with criticism and bitterness. However, in the far greater number there is a sincerity and a desire to know the truth.

All personal correspondence appearing in the three volumes of Doctrines of Salvation, or other books by President Smith, was carefully screened to prevent repetition.

The admonition from President Smith's Introduction to his first volume of Answers to Gospel Questions is repeated:

The reason for these answers to questions is to endeavor to settle once and for all time the problems discussed, which occur and re-occur so frequently, yet are answered in the revelations in the Standard Works; moreover with the thought in mind to stimulate members of the Church to spend a little more of their spare time in personal research. Of far more profit is a fact discovered by research than by information received. The impression on the mind lasts longer.

—Joseph Fielding Smith, Jr.
