Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

Introduction

We frequently hear someone quote the Prophet Joseph Smith as having said, "It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance." In fact this has been placed in the Doctrine and Covenants. However, this expression raises the question, in ignorance of what? Did the Prophet mean in ignorance of every principle of truth? Certainly not, for such a thing could not be accomplished in the length of the mortal span of life. At another time he said:

It is not wisdom that we should have all knowledge at once presented before us; but that we should have a little at a time; then we can comprehend it. . . . Add to your faith knowledge. The principle of knowledge is the principle of salvation. This principle can be comprehended by the faithful and diligent; and every one that does not obtain knowledge sufficient to be saved will be condemned. The principle of salvation is given us through the knowledge of Jesus Christ. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 297.)

Again we quote from the Prophet:

. . . As far as we degenerate from God, we descend to the devil and lose knowledge, and without knowledge we cannot be saved, and while our hearts are filled with evil, and we are studying evil, there is no room in our hearts for good, or studying good. Is not God good? Then you be good; if he is faithful, then you be faithful. Add to your faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, and seek for every good thing. . . .

A man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge, for if he does not get knowledge, he will be brought into captivity by some evil power in the other world, as evil spirits will have more knowledge, and consequently more power than many men who are on the earth. Hence it needs revelation to assist us, and give us knowledge of the things of God. (Ibid., p. 217.)

. . .When God offers a blessing or knowledge to a man, and he refuses to receive it, he will be damned. (Ibid., p. 322.)

The purpose of this mortal life is to prepare us to become gods; even the sons and daughters of God. In the minds of many misguided people, this thought appears as blasphemy. For an elder of the Church to speak of the just becoming gods through obedience to the words and laws of the gospel stirs their souls to bitterness and anger. Yet this is one of the plainest of all the teachings in the Bible. The real intent of mortality is that we might, through the trials, tribulations and blessings of the mortal life, come back into the presence of our Eternal Father and his Son Jesus Christ, to share all the blessings of a glorious exaltation. In the wonderful sermon on the mount the Lord said to his disciples, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." Surely he meant this in its literal sense, not as an empty figure of speech. We are instructed that if we gain the victory over the world and are entitled to a place in the kingdom of God, then we will be perfect. The Lord never intended to convey the thought that mortal man could be perfect in mortality as is our Father in heaven; but by adhering to the commandments, we lay the foundation on which to build so that eventually in the eternities that fullness of perfection will come.

One of the greatest truths ever revealed to man which should build him up and strengthen him in the desire to keep faithful and true to every covenant is this:

And that which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness.

That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day. (D. & C. 50:23-24.)

Here is a promise to all who will seek the truth and be loyal to it, of the assurance that they shall become like unto God. Such assurance should stimulate the members of the Church to search diligently for the Page xi ] truth truth and cherish it above all else on the earth.

John, the beloved apostle, wrote to those who had taken upon them the covenants of the gospel, the following beautiful instruction:

Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God: therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not.

Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is.

And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure. (1 John 3:1-3.)

Paul, in his address to the Roman members of the Church, gave this counsel:

For to be carnally minded is death; but to be spiritually minded is life and peace.

Because the carnal mind is enmity against God: for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.

So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God.

But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. . . .

For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.

For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God.

For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.

The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God:

And if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together. (Romans 8:6-9, 13-17.)

Again the Lord said to John:

. . . It is done. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. I will give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life freely.

He that overcometh shall inherit all things; and I will be his God, and he shall be my son. (Revelation 21:6-7.)

These are a few of the wonderful passages which give us hope and assurance that if we will be obedient to the light and keep the commandments, we shall be crowned with sonship and daughterhood, and become joint-heirs with Christ, receiving the fullness of the Father's kingdom.

What a blessing it would be if we had the power to make all the members of the Church realize just what their membership means to them and the regulations and requirements by which this great goal is obtained? If such a thing were possible, there would be great rejoicing in heaven. Unfortunately we can hardly hope for such a happy result, at least under present world conditions. There are too many members of the Church who will not separate themselves from the figurative "flesh-pots of Egypt"; too many who will not heed the counsels that are given in the revelations of the Lord, notwithstanding the magnitude of the promised blessings. There have been some who feel, as President John Taylor expressed it, "who think that they can slide into the kingdom of God," without complying with the commandments. By this he meant that they expect to receive the blessings of the exaltation because their names are still on the records of the Church: but they have not prepared themselves by active participation in faithful performance of duty. Some, there are, who have never been convinced that the Lord means all that he has said. The words of Nephi given by inspiration concerning our day are literally true, for there are many who have made covenant with the Lord to keep his commandments who have not been true to those covenants. Yet, perchance, they expect to reap the fullness of the blessings.

The purpose of this second volume of answers, like that of the first, is to help the members of the Church to know and walk in the light of truth. What a wonderful thing it would be if everyone would heed the words of eternal life all the days of mortality. There have been hundreds of books published by various brethren with the intent of stimulating members of the Church to seek for knowledge. It is a regret to be under the necessity of saying that too many of the members of the Church are mentally lazy so far as seeking the words of life. We have been commanded to search the commandments in the Doctrine and Covenants; we have been commanded to study the Book of Mormon and the Lord has blessed us with the Pearl of Great Price, all in addition to what the world for nearly two thousand years and more has had. The Lord has restored many of the precious truths that were taken away because of unbelief; yet it is a difficult thing to get a large part of the membership to read them. We should be grateful, beyond expression, for the information regarding our salvation which has been revealed. Moreover, we have so many wonderful truths that have been revealed which the world does not have and apparently does not want, and also many members of the Church ignore. Our loyalty to the Church and interest in our own salvation should stimulate our minds and give us the desire to become familiar with all that the Lord has revealed.

If we were deeply interested in our salvation, there would be no need for such a volume as this; how long it will be before that day prophesied of by Isaiah will come, no mortal knows, but it must come and likely after the earth is cleansed of all its wickedness:

They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the LORD, as the waters cover the sea. (Isaiah 11:9.)

The law of the LORD is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the LORD is sure, making wise the simple.

The statutes of the LORD are right, rejoicing the heart: the commandment of the LORD is pure, enlightening the eyes.

The fear of the LORD is clean, enduring for ever: the judgments of the LORD are true and righteous altogether.

More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold: sweeter also than honey and the honeycomb.

Moreover by them is thy servant warned: and in keeping of them there is great reward.

Who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults.

Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins; let them not have dominion over me; then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the great transgression.

Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O LORD, my strength, and my redeemer. (Psalm 19:7-14.)
