Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

1

The Meaning of "Fear"

Question: "Will you kindly explain the meaning of the word 'fear' as used in the following passages of scripture, Psalms 111:10, 112:1, and Proverbs 1:7? The members of our class do not understand why the Lord would ask those who believe in him to fear him."

Answer: These biblical verses frequently are misunderstood. The scriptures in question are as follows:

The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: a good understanding have all they that do his commandments: his praise endureth for ever.

Praise ye the Lord. Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, that delighteth greatly in his commandments.

The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge: but fools despise wisdom and instruction.

There are many passages of scripture, both ancient and modern, in which similar expressions are used; for instance, in the revelation known as the Vision, Section 76:5:

For thus saith the Lord—I, the Lord, am merciful and gracious unto those who fear me, and delight to honor those who serve me in righteousness and in truth unto the end.

Peter, likewise, in his astonishment that the Lord had offered the gospel to the Gentiles at the time of the conversion of Cornelius said:

Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons: But in every nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted with him. (Acts 10:34-35.)

We know that the Lord is merciful and kind and that he does not rejoice in causing fear in the hearts of the righteous; nor does he command them to approach him in the spirit of fear in the sense in which this term is usually interpreted. It is true that the wicked will fear and tremble before him in that great day of judgment and that he is angry with the wicked, and dreadful fear and trembling will fill their hearts at his coming. The fear spoken of in these passages is in connection with the spirit of obedience, and the seeking of knowledge is quite a different thing.

REVERENCE WITH HUMILITY

Such passages have no reference to fright or terror wherein they are coupled with the principle of faith and obedience. The dictionary reveals several interpretations of the use of the word fear. The interpretation of its use in the passages enumerated is "to have reverential awe." In Young's Analytical Concordance to the Bible, under the word fear, we find several meanings, such as terror, from the Hebrew word emah; dread from the Hebrew word pachdah, and reverence from the Hebrew yirah. So we see that the word fear, as it is given in the English translations of the Bible in the passages under consideration, means reverence with humility. In the original tongue there were words having these shades of meaning, but in the English translations, the one word fear must be understood according to the meaning gathered from the text under consideration.

Love and reverence are both essential in the worship of our Heavenly Father and his Son Jesus Christ, but those who keep his commandments and are worthy to stand before them need not fear, but in humility they may and shall bow the knee in great joy and reverence in the spirit of perfect worship.
