Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

2

Immortality and Eternal Life

Question: "Do all who enter any of the three kingdoms, telestial, terrestrial, and celestial, receive the gift of eternal life? Some of the members of our priesthood class argue that they do. I said that only those who are faithful and live in accordance with all of the commandments will be worthy to obtain eternal life. Others would receive the gift of immortality and live forever after the resurrection, but not celestial glory, which is eternal life. They say that a person who gets immortality also has eternal life because he lives forever. I quoted the scripture, 'For behold, this is my work and my glory—same I don't think the Lord would speak of them as separate things. Is this conclusion right?"

Answer: Immortality as defined in the scriptures is the gift of God, through the atonement of Jesus Christ, to every creature. There must come the universal resurrection. Should one soul fail to receive the resurrection, the Savior's victory over death would not be complete. It was through the fall of Adam that death came into the world, and since Adam's posterity were not responsible for death, both the justice of our Father, and his mercy, demanded that the broken law which brought death into the world must be repaired and life be given, through the atonement, to every soul. This restoration is called immortality. It is true that immortality and the power to live eternally are synonymous, but the Lord has placed his interpretation upon this great gift which restores all and has called it immortality. There are numerous passages in our scriptures making this interpretation very clear; for instance, Paul, in writing to the Corinthian members of the Church, said:

For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.

For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.

But every man in his own order: Christ the first fruits; afterward they that are Christ's at his coming.

Then cometh the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father; when he shall have put down all rule and all authority and power.

For he must reign, till he hath put all enemies under his feet.

The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. (1 Corinthians 15:21-26.)

AMULEK'S EXPLANATION OF IMMORTALITY

The spirit and the body shall be reunited again in its perfect form; both limb and joint shall be restored to its proper frame, even as we now are at this time; and we shall be brought to stand before God, knowing even as we know now, and have a bright recollection of all our guilt.

Now, this restoration shall come to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, both the wicked and the righteous; and even there shall not so much as a hair of their heads be lost; but everything shall be restored to its perfect frame, as it is now, or in the body, and shall be brought and be arraigned before the bar of Christ the Son, and God the Father, and the Holy Spirit, which is one Eternal God, to be judged according to their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil. (Alma 11:43-44.)

This declaration is concerning immortality.

The expression you have quoted from Moses 1:39 is very significant and indicates that in the language of the Lord immortality and eternal life have reference to different kinds of resurrection. This is strengthened by the word of the Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith:

And thus did I, the Lord God, appoint unto man the days of his probation—that by his natural death he might be raised in immortality unto eternal life, even as many as would believe;

And they that believe not unto eternal damnation; for they cannot be redeemed from their spiritual fall, because they repent not. (D. & C. 29:43-44.)

ETERNAL LIFE IS THE GREATEST GIFT OF GOD

Eternal life, therefore, is the greatest gift of God, far beyond the gift of immortality. (Ibid., 6:13 and 14:7.) Therefore he that is blessed with eternal life will be blessed with the fulness of the Father's kingdom. It is written of them:

They are they who received the testimony of Jesus, and believed on his name and were baptized after the manner of his burial, being buried in the water in his name, and this according to the commandment which he has given—

That by keeping the commandments they might be washed and cleansed from all their sins, and receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of the hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto this power;

And who overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true.

They are they who are the church of the Firstborn.

They are they into whose hands the Father has given all things—

They are they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory;

And are priests of the Most High, after the order of Melchizedek, which was after the order of Enoch, which was after the order of the Only Begotten Son—

Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God—

Wherefore, all things are theirs, whether life or death, or things present, or things to come, all are theirs and they are Christ's, and Christ is God's.

And they shall overcome all things. (Ibid., 76:51-60.)

Those who obtain eternal life will dwell with the Father and the Son. They become joint heirs with Jesus Christ in receiving the fulness of the Father's Kingdom. (Romans 8:14-17.) The Savior when reproving the Jews drew this distinction between eternal life and immortality, when he said:

For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself;

And hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man.

Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in their graves shall hear his voice,

And shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. (John 5:26-29.)
