Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

3

Boys and the Aaronic Priesthood

Question: "I have been unable to find anything in Church literature as to when and under what circumstances there began the bestowal of the Aaronic Priesthood upon boys. In the earliest days of the Church, it appears to have been restricted to men. As nearly as I have been able to ascertain, this priesthood, as well as the Melchizedek Priesthood, was considered men's work in New Testament times, although there seem to have been some exceptions.

"Will you enlighten us as to when and why present Church practice came into being?"

From the records of the Church, there seems to be no definite time when the Aaronic Priesthood was first given to boys. Some ordinations were given to very young men who showed aptitude as far back as the days of Kirtland; for instance, Don Carlos Smith, youngest brother of the Prophet Joseph Smith, was ordained and labored as a missionary when only fifteen years of age. (D.H.C., Vol. 4, p. 393.) George A. Smith, father of John Henry Smith, was active in the ministry when about fifteen years of age, and also was a member of Zion's Camp in 1834. He was ordained a seventy when the first seventies were chosen in 1835 and was called into the Council of the Twelve when twenty-one years of age. Other young men who were worthy were ordained in those early days and sent out to preach the gospel. President Joseph F. Smith was ordained an elder and sent on a mission when he was fifteen. So we see the conferring of the priesthood was not completely confined to men in the days of Kirtland, Nauvoo, or in the Salt Lake Valley.

There is ample evidence that boys were called and ordained in ancient times. In antediluvian times, when the lives of men were greatly prolonged, some were called to act at comparatively tender years. Enoch was but twenty-five when he was ordained by Adam; Lamech was but thirty-two; and Noah received the priesthood when he was but ten years of age. (D. & C. 107:48, 51, 52.) How old Joseph, son of Israel, was when he received the priesthood is not recorded; but it must have been when he was very young. He was sold by his brethren when he was only seventeen, and he must have had the priesthood before that time, for he exercised it in the land of Egypt. (Genesis 37:2; 40:8-19; 41:14-36.) We do not know the age of Nephi when he left Jerusalem but he must have been in his "teens." We gather this from his remark that he ". . . being exceeding young, . . ." nevertheless "large in stature." (1 Nephi 2:16.) He held the priesthood, otherwise he could not have had the authority to rebuke his brethren and have the wonderful manifestations which were given to him. We may also conclude that Mormon received the priesthood at a very tender age. He was only ten years old when Ammaron counseled him and placed in him the wonderful trust as guardian of the sacred plates. Moreover, when he was fifteen years of age he had a visitation by the Lord and ". . . tasted and knew of the goodness of Jesus." (Mormon 1:2-4, 15.)

THE MOSAIC LAW

It is true that the Lord revealed to Moses that the priests of Aaron and Levi were to be men thirty years of age. (Numbers 4:3, 47.) This custom was followed in Israel down to the days of Paul. Therefore, it was in keeping with the law that Paul instructed Timothy that a deacon should have a wife, for a man thirty years of age holding the priesthood should be married. It was in harmony with this law given to Moses, that John the Baptist waited until he was thirty years of age before entering the ministry, and the same is true of the ministry of our Savior. What was practiced in the days of Paul and the ancient apostles, however, does not necessarily apply always and under all conditions in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times any more than it did with those living before the days of Moses. Therefore, it is due to ignorance of the facts that some maintain that only mature men should hold the priesthood.

THE REMARKS OF PRESIDENT BRIGHAM YOUNG

We see that boys were ordained from the time of the organization of the Church, when the priesthood was restored; but our records are not quite clear as to the extent of such ordinations, although we do have some light revealed on this question. At the general conference in October 1854, President Brigham Young made the following remarks:

When you have got your Bishop, he needs assistance, and he ordains counselors, priests, teachers and deacons, and calls them to help him; and he wishes men of his own heart and hand to do this. He says, 'I dare not even call a man to be a deacon, to assist me in my calling, unless he has a family.' It is not the business of an ignorant young man, of no experience in family matters, to inquire into the circumstances of families, and know the wants of every person. Some may want medicine and nourishment, and to be looked after, and it is not the business of boys to do this; but select a man who has got a family to be a deacon, whose wife can go with him, and assist him in administering to the needy in the ward. (Journal of Discoures, Vol. 2, p. 89.)

The remarks of President Brigham Young in 1854 can hardly be interpreted to the extent that boys should not receive the priesthood at any time. The duties he mentioned are not the duties of a deacon, and even then some boys had been ordained. However, it required men of experience to carry on the work of taking care of the sick and the needy and administering to those who were in difficulty. This is true today as much as in 1854. In July 1877, the First Presidency, who were President Brigham Young, John W. Young, and Daniel H. Wells, issued a circular in which we find the following:

. . . When priests and teachers visit the Saints, according to the instruction in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, the experienced priests or teachers should have as a companion a young man, so that the latter may have the opportunity of learning the duties of his calling, and becoming thoroughly wise and efficient in the discharge thereof.

It would be excellent training for the young men if they had the opportunity of acting in the offices of the lesser priesthood. They would thereby obtain very valuable experience, and when they obtain the Melchizedek Priesthood they would be likely to place a higher value upon it. (Ref. Pamphlets #080.8, Historian's Office.)

A GENERAL REORGANIZATION AND SETTING IN ORDER

This same year (1877), there was a general reorganization and setting in order of the wards of the Church, and counsel was given regarding the activities of the quorums of the priesthood. President John Taylor, in the First Ward, Salt Lake Stake, said that the First Presidency and apostles had been organizing stakes of Zion in various parts of the Church. "The servants of God being moved upon to place every man in his place, that all may work in their proper order." Quorums of the lesser priesthood were set in order. In the Twelfth Ward, Elder George Q. Cannon said:

We have found the priesthood alive in their duties and a good spirit generally prevailing among them. We have felt especially blessed in ordaining the young men to positions in the priesthood and the results, so far, have proved satisfactory not only to those ordained, for their example gave others a great regard for the priesthood.

At this same time a correspondent of the Juvenile Instructor asked why boys were ordained to the priesthood, when in the days of Paul, only married men were chosen. President Cannon answered:

With our elders even in these days it is a very common thing to ordain, while in the world, very young men to any office. Mature men are frequently ordained as deacons and to act as such. But the circumstances which surround us here in Zion are entirely different from those which surrounded the Saints in the days of Paul, and of which he wrote. There is no impropriety whatever in young men, even early as at the age of twelve or fourteen years, acting as deacons. They receive a training that is very valuable to them, and we know of many who have been and are greatly benefited to act in this position, meeting with the deacons' quorum and receiving such instructions as are proper to be imparted to them in this capacity. (Juvenile Instructor, Vol. 34, p. 48.)

Addressing the deacons in the Council House, June 23, 1877, Bishop Alexander McRae said:

I am pleased to meet with you; owing to the position I hold, I feel I am associated with the lesser priesthood. I feel your quorum will be better attended than it has been, this reorganization will be good. I was a middle-aged man before I obeyed the Gospel and then took it to my parents, and these little boys can't be expected to have the knowledge of an older person, but if they use the office of a deacon well, they will by and by be raised to the office of a teacher. . . . You have a better opportunity than I had. The first office I held in the Priesthood being that of a Seventy, and I was very poorly prepared to fill it, but Joseph [Smith] called me and I was pleased to do as I was told. (Salt Lake Stake Deacons Quorum Minutes, #1809, p. 241.)

UNIVERSAL MOVEMENT IN 1877

In a meeting held in the Nineteenth Ward, Salt Lake Stake, June 1, 1877, President Alfred Solomon admonished the young men of the lesser priesthood and counseled them in their duties. He was followed by Elder William Asper, who said, "I am glad that the time has arrived when the young men of the Latter-day Saints are being called to the priesthood" and he demonstrated in a "lucid manner the benefits to be derived by magnifying and living faithful to the requirements of the priesthood." (Nineteenth Ward Records of Minutes, #2498, p. 8.)

Other meetings were held in other wards throughout the Church in the summer of 1877, where brethren of the Council of the Twelve and others admonished the boys holding the priesthood to be faithful in the discharge of their duties. These minutes indicate that there had been a universal movement throughout the Church to have the boys twelve years of age and upward organized in quorums of deacons, teachers, and priests. Previous to this time the ordination of boys of twelve was not the universal practice, although such had been the practice in certain places.
