Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

4

Hallowed Language

Question: "In our Sunday School class we have come to the question in our lesson on prayer on which we need further instruction. The question is this: Is it important that we use the words, thy, thine, thee, and thou, in addressing Deity; or is it proper when directing our thoughts in prayer to use the more common and modern words, you and yours? Our bishop and our stake president have told us that the older words should always be used, but we seek further information on the question."

Answer: Your bishop and stake president have given you proper advice which should be followed strictly.

Our Eternal Father and his Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ, should never be approached in prayer in the familiar expressions so commonly used in addressing human beings. The Father and the Son should always be honored in our prayers in the utmost humility and reverence. These common pronouns, you, yours, may with perfect propriety be used in addressing our equals. In the days when the Bible was translated into English it was common for men and women to greet each other using the pronouns thy and thine, thee and thou. As time went on and men and women became more worldly minded, such a custom was discontinued, and these more formal pronouns were confined to their manner of speech in addressing royalty or persons of great distinction and in poetical expressions. Prayer and poetry certainly would miss much of their value if this were changed.

In countries with republican forms of government, where every man feels himself equal to his neighbor, the use of the more formal pronouns was discontinued. Moreover the farther man gets away from the true worship of God, and his mind pictures Deity as a force, or an invisible shapeless spirit, a something intangible and incomprehensible, the tendency is natural for respect and reverence to diminish.

Today the scientific world and the religious world have forsaken God as a Personal Being, and absolutely as an anthropomorphic Exalted Man. Therefore their tendency is a natural one to look upon such a being as unworthy of divine worship. Many of the modern scholars have gone so far as to teach and maintain that God is the imaginary creation of the mind of man, and that he has become "progressive," from age to age since the days of the "cave-man," to the present enlightened age. Therefore he is worshipped as a God of love and mercy, yet, after all, the creation of the active mind of man who seeks some superior power on which to bestow his worship.

LANGUAGE OF NATIONS IS A MIRROR

Dr. Martin B. Anderson has said:

A volume might be filled with illustrations of the truth that the language of nations is a mirror in which may be seen reflected with unerring accuracy all the elements of their intellectual as well as of their moral character. (Words, Their Use and Abuse, p. 66.)

This certainly is true. Therefore as mankind gets farther and farther away from the worship of the True and Living God, the less respect and reverence man will give to God. Therefore, this reverence being weakened or missing, the less inclined are men to look upon the Supreme Being with awe, humility, and reverence.

Members of the Church should be very grateful that the Lord inspired the Prophet Joseph Smith, in the translation of the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price to give us these sacred records in the sacred form in which the Bible has come down to us. The changing of the wording of the Bible to meet the popular language of our day, has, in the opinion of the writer and his brethren, been a great loss in the building of faith and spirituality in the minds and hearts of the people.
