Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

5

The Kingdom of God and the Kingdom of Heaven

Question: "I am somewhat confused in regard to what has been written concerning the kingdom of God. The Lord said in the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 29, Verse 11, 'For I will reveal myself from heaven with power and great glory, with all the hosts thereof, and dwell in righteousness with men on earth a thousand years, and the wicked shall not stand.' Then the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, pages 147-148, intimates that the Church of Jesus Christ is not the kingdom of God. Is there a difference between the kingdom of God and the kingdom of heaven? Or does the kingdom of God circumscribe all the good people of the earth, while the kingdom of heaven must have the doors opened for baptism?"

Answer: The passage in the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary is taken from a discourse by President Brigham Young which is recorded in the Journal of Discourses, Vol. 11, page 275, and is as follows:

It may be asked what I mean by the kingdom of God. The Church of Jesus Christ has been established now for many years, and the kingdom of God has got to be established, even the kingdom which will circumscribe all the kingdoms of this world. It will yet give laws to every nation that exists upon the earth. This is the kingdom that Daniel, the prophet, saw should be set up in the last days. . . . If the Latter-day Saints think, when the kingdom of God is established on the earth, that all the inhabitants of the earth will join the Church called Latter-day Saints, they are egregiously mistaken. I presume there will be as many sects and parties then as now. Still, when the kingdom of God triumphs, every knee shall bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ, to the glory of the Father. Even the Jews will do it then: but will the Jews and Gentiles be obliged to belong to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints? No; not by any means. Jesus said to his disciples, in my Father's house are many mansions; were it not so I would have told you; I go to prepare a place for you, that where I am, there ye may be also. There are mansions in sufficient numbers to suit the different classes of mankind, and a variety will always exist to all eternity, requiring a classification and an arrangement into societies and communities in the many mansions which are in the Lord's house, and this will be for ever and ever. (The Prophet Joseph Smith said, "'There are many mansions in my Father's house, and I will go and prepare a place for you.' House here named should have been translated kingdom; and any person who is exalted to the highest mansion has to abide a celestial law, and the whole law too."—Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 331.)

The expressions "kingdom of God," and "kingdom of heaven" are used in the scriptures with different meanings which have to be determined by the nature of the thought expressed. Ofttimes they are used to convey the same meaning; that is to say, the expression "kingdom of God" may refer to the Church on earth, or the kingdom in heaven, and then again to the universal political kingdom as referred to by President Brigham Young. This kingdom will embrace all the people on the earth who remain after the coming of Christ and the cleansing of the earth from its wickedness. "Kingdom of heaven" may also have reference to the Church or to the kingdom in heaven. A view of some of these passages with their scriptural meaning may well be considered. First as to the universal kingdom which will embrace all peoples upon the earth during the millennium.

CHRIST'S KINGDOM WILL INCLUDE ALL PEOPLE

When Christ comes, he will set up a political kingdom which will include all the inhabitants of the earth, no matter what nation they may belong to or what may be their religious faith. The Lord gave to man his free agency in the pre-existence. This great gift of agency, that is the privilege given to man to make his own choice, has never been revoked, and it never will be. It is an eternal principle giving freedom of thought and action to every soul. No person, by any decree of the Father, has ever been compelled to do good; no person has ever been forced to do evil. Each may act for himself. It was Satan's plan to destroy this agency and force men to do his will. There could be no satisfactory existence without this great gift. Men must have the privilege to choose even to the extent that they may rebel against the divine decrees. Of course salvation and exaltation must come through the free will without coercion and by individual merit in order that righteous rewards may be given and proper punishment be meted out to the transgressor. Therefore, when the great day of the Lord shall come, the wicked who have merited banishment from a righteous government will be consumed, or the privilege of continuance on the earth will be denied. (D. & C. 101:23-25.)

MANY WILL NOT BE CHURCH MEMBERS

Therefore, according to the justice of the Lord, all who have not violated the right to remain will not be consumed. We are informed that these, although they may not be members of the Church, who are entitled to the blessings of the terrestrial kingdom, will be spared. Therefore, there will be millions of people on the earth during the millennium who have not received the gospel. Missionary work will continue with greater vigor and power than at any other time. This work must go on until all who are on the earth are either converted or are taken away by death.

Isaiah has, through the spirit of prophecy, made this matter very clear in the following words:

For, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth: and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind.

But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create: for, behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy.

And I will rejoice in Jerusalem and joy in my people: and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying.

There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days; for the child shall die an hundred years old; but the sinner being an hundred years old, shall be accursed. (Isaiah 65:17-20. Compare D. & C. 101:23-31.)

CHRIST AND RESURRECTED SAINTS TO REIGN ON EARTH

The Prophet Joseph Smith in a conversation with Judge James Adams said:

Christ and the resurrected Saints will reign over the earth during the thousand years. They will not probably dwell upon the earth, but will visit it when they please, or when it is necessary to govern it. There will be wicked men on the earth during the thousand years. The heathen nations who will not come up to worship will be visited with the judgments of God, and must eventually be destroyed from the earth. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 268-269.)

By wicked men we should not think that there will be men on the earth filled with corruption and vice. The Lord has explained what he means by a wicked man in Section 84 of the Doctrine and Covenants, verses 51-53.

For whoso cometh not unto me is under the bondage of sin.

And whoso receiveth not my voice is not acquainted with my voice, and is not of me.

And by this you may know the righteous from the wicked, and that the whole world groaneth under sin and darkness even now.

Zechariah also calls attention to punishments that shall be meted out to those who fail to heed the edicts of the Lord. (Zechariah 14:16-19.) This work of conversion through the proclaiming of the gospel must continue until all of the inhabitants of the earth are converted, for Isaiah said:

They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. (Isaiah 11:9. Compare Jeremiah 31:34.)

THE KINGDOM OF RIGHTEOUSNESS

In the Savior's prayer: "Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven," he evidently had reference to the kingdom of righteousness which both he and John proclaimed as being at hand, the Church of Jesus Christ. (Matthew 3:2; 4:17; and 6:33.) Likewise the Savior's remark, "But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you," (Matthew 6:33. Compare statement of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 198.) has reference to the Church. This appears true also of the parable of the virgins. (Matthew 25:1-12.) It is the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints which is meant in this parable. These virgins represent the Church, and the parable points to the fact that when the bridegroom comes the five foolish virgins will be unprepared. In that day the members of the Church who have not kept the commandments and thus have no oil in their lamps are in danger of being shut out of the kingdom when the door is shut.

THE KINGDOM OF GOD AS THE CHURCH

The Prophet Joseph Smith speaks of the kingdom of God as the Church, and its ordained ministers carry its message to the world:

Some say the kingdom of God was not set up on the earth until the day of Pentecost, and that John did not preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins; but I say, in the name of the Lord, that the kingdom of God was set up on the earth from the days of Adam to the present time. Whenever there has been a righteous man on earth unto whom God revealed his word and gave power and authority to administer in his name, and where there is a priest of God—a minister who has power and authority from God to administer in the ordinances of the gospel and officiate in the priesthood of God, there is the kingdom of God; and, in consequence of rejecting the gospel of Jesus Christ and the Prophets whom God hath sent, the judgments of God have rested upon the people, cities, and nations, in various ages of the world, which was the case with the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, that were destroyed for rejecting the Prophets.

Now I will give my testimony. I care not for man. I speak boldly and faithfully and with authority. How is it with the kingdom of God? Where did the kingdom of God begin? Where there is no kingdom of God there is no salvation. What constitutes the kingdom of God? Where there is a prophet, a priest, or a righteous man unto whom God gives his oracles, there is the kingdom of God; and where the oracles of God are not, there the kingdom of God is not. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 271-272.)

The parables of the Lord as recorded in Matthew, Chapter 13, have to do with the kingdom of God, or the Church of Jesus Christ. There is one passage in Luke that is generally misunderstood in the world. It is as follows:

And when he was demanded of the Pharisees, when the kingdom of God should come, he answered them and said, the Kingdom of God cometh not with observation:

Neither shall they say, Lo here! or, lo there! for, behold, the kingdom of God is within you. (Luke 17:20-21.)

This should be "the kingdom of God is among you." This is the marginal reading in most copies of the Bible and this is the interpretation the Prophet Joseph Smith has placed upon it. The kingdom of God was among them from the time John went forth proclaiming the coming of Jesus Christ and baptizing for the remission of sins.

MAN MUST BE BORN OF THE WATER AND THE SPIRIT

The Lord made it clear to Nicodemus that the kingdom of God, his church, did not come by observation, but by revelation through the Holy Ghost. A man must be born of the water and also of the Spirit before he can enter that kingdom. That means that he must be baptized and receive the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, for this is the door by which we enter that kingdom. Without the guidance and inspiration given of the Spirit, men fail even to see that kingdom. It seems a strange thing, when the principles of the gospel are so plain, that so many cannot see the truth and remain with the false teachings and traditions of the world.

Call upon the Lord, that his kingdom may go forth upon the earth, that the inhabitants thereof may receive it, and be prepared for the days to come, in the which the Son of Man shall come down in heaven, clothed in the brightness of his glory, to meet the kingdom of God which is set up on the earth.

Wherefore, may the kingdom of God go forth, that the kingdom of heaven may come, that thou, O God, mayest be glorified in heaven so on earth, that thine enemies may be subdued; for thine is the honor, power and glory, forever and ever. Amen. (D. & C. 65:5-6.)
