Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

6

The Gift of Tongues

Question: "The seventh article of faith is as follows: 'We believe in the gift of tongues, prophecy, revelation, visions, healing, interpretation of tongues, etc.' All of these gifts have been in the Church since the organization, except the gift of tongues. In the early period of the Church the gift of tongues was practiced, but for many years we have heard nothing of this gift. Has it ceased to be in the Church, and if so, why?"

Answer: There has been no cessation of the gift of tongues. Perhaps the idea of some members of the Church is that this gift belongs to the testimony meetings of the fast day. It is true that messages have been given in such meetings, and when this was so, it was evidently for the benefit of a portion of the congregation who may have had the gift of interpretation. Manifestations of this character are, and should be, rare, for this is not the real purpose of this great gift. The gift of tongues is not something for the entertainment of members, nor is it for the purpose of creating awe or to increase faith in those who are weak. The gift of tongues and the interpretation of tongues are given for the purpose of helping to build up and strengthen the kingdom of God.

COUNSEL FROM THE LORD

The Lord gave the Church important counsel when he said:

But ye are commanded in all things to ask of God, who giveth liberally; and that which the Spirit testifies unto you even so I would that ye should do in all holiness of heart, walking uprightly before me, considering the end of your salvation, doing all things with prayer and thanksgiving, that ye may not be seduced by evil spirits, or doctrines of devils, or the commandments of men; for some are of men, and others of devils.

Wherefore, beware lest ye are deceived; and that ye may not be deceived seek ye earnestly the best gifts, always remembering for what they are given;

For verily I say unto you, they are given for the benefit of those who love me and keep all my commandments, and him that seeketh so to do; that all may be benefited that seek or that ask of me, that ask and not for a sign that they may consume it upon their lusts.

And again, verily I say unto you, I would that ye should always remember, and always retain in your minds what those gifts are, that are given unto the church. (D. & C. 46:7-10.)

After revealing this warning counsel, the Lord enumerated the various gifts which are given to the members of the Church, among them the gift of tongues, and then he says:

A GIFT FOR EXCEPTIONAL OCCASIONS

"And all these gifts come from God, for the benefit of the children of God." This being true, then the gift of speaking in and interpreting tongues in the meetings by members of the Church should be on exceptional occasions, when there is real need for such things. Paul has written as follows:

Follow after charity, and desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophesy.

For he that speaketh in an unknown tongue speaketh not unto men, but unto God: for no man understandeth him; howbeit in the spirit he speaketh mysteries.

But he that prophesieth speaketh unto men to edification, and exhortation, and comfort.

He that speaketh in an unknown tongue edifieth himself; but he that prophesieth edifieth the church.

I would that ye all spake with tongues, but rather that ye prophesied: for greater is he that prophesieth than he that speaketh with tongues, except he interpret, that the church may receive edifying.

Now, brethren, if I come unto you speaking with tongues, what shall I profit you, except I shall speak to you either by revelation, or by knowledge, or by prophesying, or by doctrine?

And even things without life giving sound, whether pipe or harp, except they give a distinction in the sounds, how shall it be known what is piped or harped?

For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle?

So likewise ye, except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is spoken? for ye shall speak into the air.

There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the world, and none of them is without signification.

Therefore if I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto him that speaketh a barbarian, and he that speaketh shall be a barbarian unto me. . . .

Yet in the church I had rather speak five words with my understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue.

Brethren, be not children in understanding: howbeit in malice be ye children, but in understanding be men.

In the law it is written, With men of other tongues and other lips will I speak unto this people; and yet for all that will they not hear me, saith the Lord.

Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to them that believe not: but prophesying serveth not for them that believe not, but for them which believe. (1 Corinthians 14:1-11, 19-22.)

MISSIONARIES RECEIVE GIFT OF TONGUES

The true gift of tongues is made manifest in the Church more abundantly, perhaps, than any other spiritual gift. Every missionary who goes forth to teach the gospel in a foreign language, if he is prayerful and faithful, receives this gift. This is the idea in Paul's remarks, "Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to them that believe not." This was the nature of the gift on the day of Pentecost when Peter and the apostles spoke to the assembled Jews who had come to Jerusalem from foreign lands to attend the feast. Each understood in his own tongue. There are hundreds of testimonies by elders who have carried the gospel to foreign lands, similar to the day of Pentecost.

The Prophet Joseph Smith has stated the true meaning of the gift of tongues in the following words:

I read the 13th chapter of First Corinthians, also a part of the 14th chapter, and remarked that the gift of tongues was necessary in the Church; but that if Satan could not speak in tongues, he could not tempt a Dutchman, or any other nation, but the English, for he can tempt the Englishman, for he has tempted me, and I am an Englishman; but the gift of tongues by the power of the Holy Ghost in the Church, is for the benefit of the servants of God to preach to unbelievers, as on the day of Pentecost. When devout men from every nation shall assemble to hear the things of God, let the Elders preach to them in their own mother tongue, whether it is German, French, Spanish or Irish, or any other, and let those interpret who understand the language spoken, in their own mother tongue, and this is what the Apostle meant in First Corinthians 14:27. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 195.)

He also said to the sisters of the Relief Society that nothing spoken in tongues should be received as doctrine. (Ibid., p. 229.)

President Joseph F. Smith has said:

The devil himself can appear like an angel of light. False prophets and false teachers have arisen in the world. There is perhaps no gift of the Spirit of God more easily imitated by the devil than the gift of tongues. Where two men or women exercise the gift by the inspiration of the Spirit of God, there are a dozen perhaps who do it by the inspiration of the devil. Bless your souls, apostates speak in tongues, apostates prophesy, apostates claim to have marvelous manifestations and what is that to us? . . .

I believe in the gift of the Holy Spirit unto men, but I do not want the gift of tongues except when I need it. I needed the gift of tongues once, and the Lord gave it to me. I was in a foreign land sent to preach the gospel to a people whose language I could not understand. Then I sought earnestly for the gift of tongues, and by the gift and by study, in a hundred days after landing upon those islands I could talk to the people in their language as I now talk to you in my native tongue. This was the gift that was worthy of the gospel. There was a purpose in it. There was something in it to strengthen my faith, to encourage me and to help me in my ministry. (Gospel Doctrine, Chapter 10, p. 201.)

EXPERIENCES OF PRESIDENT DAVID O. McKAY

Two other examples out of the many showing that the gift is given to us today may suffice. First, the experiences of President David O. McKay:

One of the most important events on my world tour of the missions of the church was the gift of interpretation of the English tongue given to the Saints in New Zealand, at a session of their conference, held on the 23rd day of April 1921, at Puketapu, Huntley, Waikato.

The service was held in a large tent, beneath the shade of which hundreds of earnest men and women gathered, in anxious anticipation of seeing and hearing an apostle of the church, the first one to visit the land.

When I looked over that vast assemblage and contemplated the great expectations that filled the hearts of all who had met together, I realized how inadequately I might satisfy the ardent desires of their souls, and I yearned, most earnestly, for the gift of tongues that I might be able to speak to them in their native language.

Until that moment I had not given much serious thought to the gift of tongues, but on that occasion, I wished with all my heart, that I might be worthy of that Divine power.

In other missions I had spoken through an interpreter but, able as all interpreters were, I nevertheless felt hampered, in fact, somewhat inhibited, in presenting my message.

Now, I faced an audience that had assembled with unusual expectations, and I then realized, as never before, the great responsibility of my office. From the depths of my soul, I prayed for Divine assistance.

When I arose to give my address, I said to Brother Stuart Meha, our interpreter, that I would speak without his translating, sentence by sentence, what I said, and then, to the audience I continued:

"I wish, oh I wish I had the power to speak to you in your own tongue, that I might tell you what is in my heart; but since I have not the gift, I pray, and I ask you to pray, that you might have the spirit of interpretation, of discernment, that you may understand at least the spirit while I am speaking, and then, you will get the words and the thought when Brother Meha interprets."

My sermon lasted forty minutes and I have never addressed a more attentive, a more respectful audience. My listeners were in perfect rapport—this I knew when I saw tears in their eyes. Some of them at least, perhaps most of them, who did not understand English, had the gift of interpretation.

Brother Sidney Christie, a native New Zealander, who had been a student at the Brigham Young University, at the close of my address, whispered to me, "Brother McKay, they got your message.

"Yes," I replied, "I think so, but for the benefit of some who may not have understood, we will have Brother Meha give a synopsis of it in Maori."

During the translation, some of the Maoris corrected him on some points, showing that they had a clear conception of what had been said in English.

Two subsequent experiences, one of which occurred on that memorable world tour, enabled me to realize more clearly how the spirit of interpretation may come.

On one occasion when I was addressing an audience at Aintab, Syria, I realized that Elder J. Wilford Booth, who was translating in the Turkish language, had interpreted incorrectly a thought I had expressed and, although I did not then—and do not now—understand a word of Turkish, I stopped Brother Booth in his translation and said, "That was the wrong interpretation Brother Booth."

I then repeated my sentence. "How did you know, Brother McKay," he asked. "I gave the opposite meaning."

Later when I was called to preside over the European Mission, I was one day addressing an audience at Rotterdam, Brother Cornelius Zappey was interpreting and, on that occasion, I had an experience identical to that which occurred with Brother Booth. When I called Brother Zappey's attention to what I felt was not the correct interpretation, he laughingly said to the audience, before making the correction, "There is no need of my interpreting, Brother McKay understands Dutch." (Ms. Historian's Office.)

EXPERIENCE OF ELDER ALONZO A. HINCKLEY

This is an experience by Brother Alonzo A. Hinckley:

One day, when I was alone, visiting among the people at Rotterdam, it was my duty to go back to the homes in which I had left tracts and repossess the literature. As I went I gathered the booklets, [and] some power that I cannot understand, possessed me until I quaked and trembled. I stood and looked at the house at which I was to call and felt as if I could not go to the door. But I knew my duty and so, with fortitude and determination, I went to the house, raised the knocker and dropped it. Almost instantly, the door opened and an irate woman stepped out and closed it behind her. She talked in a very loud shrill voice, berating me most severely.

I did not realize for a moment, that I was understanding Dutch as clearly as though she had spoken English. I felt no supernatural power, or influence, or feeling. I just knew every word she was saying. She spoke so loud that a carpenter, who was working across the street, building a porch on a little store, heard her and, I supposed, thought I was abusing the woman, for he came over to where we stood and brought his son with him and, greatly to my alarm, he carried a broadax. The man took his position near me and listened to the woman, who continued her tirade against me in a shouting voice.

I did not grow angry at the woman's abuse, but my soul was filled with a burning desire to speak her language and testify of the divinity of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. I thought if I could only explain to her the importance of my message and the good it would do her, she would not berate me as she does now.

In a few moments she ceased her abuse, and I began speaking. I spoke in the Dutch language. I defended the truth and bore testimony of the restoration of the Gospel.

I had forgotten the big man who stood near me with his ax, and I looked at the woman and delivered my message of truth; he put his arm across my shoulders and, looking the woman in the face, said, "The Mormon Church may have its black sheep, but this is a man of God."

The woman answered, "I know it."

After our conversation, I went back home, hardly touching the ground. It dawned upon me that the prayers I had offered, and perhaps as a result in part, of the hard study I had made, and the prayers of those at home, had been answered in a moment, for I had spoken the Dutch language intelligently for the first time in my life.

In ecstasy, I rushed home to tell Brother Thatcher in the office, and to tell the president of the mission; but when I attempted to speak, to my great dismay I was the same as before, I could not understand nor speak the language.

President Farrell asked me if I would go to meeting that night. "Yes, President Farrell," I answered, "after a man has been blessed of the Lord as I have been, I will gladly go, but I beg of you not to call upon me to speak even if someone translates what I say."

"Very well," he said, "I promise you, Brother Hinckley, that if you go you will not be asked to speak." I went to meeting, and everything progressed nicely, as I thought, until Brother DeBry, the branch president, arose and, contrary to Brother Farrell's promise, said, "We will now hear from Elder Hinckley."

President Farrell stepped forward, greatly embarrassed, and asked, "Brother Hinckley, shall I interpret for you?"

I felt a power I cannot describe. "Wait, President Farrell," I said as I stood upon my feet; and then I began to speak, not in my native tongue, but in the Dutch language. And then and there, I delivered the first discourse in my life in the tongue of the mission. The following morning I was sent to preside over the Amsterdam District. (Ms. Historian's Office. The remarkable experience of Elder Alonzo A. Hinckley occurred in the Netherlands Mission.)
