Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

7

Marriage in Eternity

Question: "There is what we may call an unwritten law in the world, that a woman cannot seek a companion in marriage but must wait until some man comes along to court and win her. Should a girl show any inclination to take the lead she is frowned upon as committing an improper act. The result is that many of our good young women are doomed to go through life alone. The scriptures teach that 'Neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord.' The Church teaches that marriage is for eternity, and without it there cannot be the exaltation. Are these women, then, who go through life alone, to remain separately without exaltation as angels in heaven to be servants to those who have been more fortunate? This thought is troubling a great many of us."

Answer: In the Kirtland Temple, January 21, 1836, the Lord gave to Joseph Smith the Prophet a vision as follows:

The heavens were opened upon us, and I beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof, whether in the body or out I cannot tell. I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of that kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire; also the blazing throne of God, whereon was seated the Father and the Son. I saw the beautiful streets of that kingdom, which had the appearance of being paved with gold. I saw Fathers Adam and Abraham, and my father and mother, my brother, Alvin, that had long since slept, and marveled how it was that he had obtained an inheritance in that kingdom, seeing that he had departed this life before the Lord had set His hand to gather Israel the second time, and had not been baptized for the remission of sins.

Thus came the voice of the Lord unto me, saying—

All who have died without a knowledge of this Gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom, for I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts.

And I also beheld that all little children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability, are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven. (D.H.C., Vol. 2, pp. 380-381.)

RIGHTEOUS WILL NOT BE DEPRIVED OF BLESSINGS

According to the revealed word of the Lord based upon the restoration of the keys held by Elijah, we go into the temples today and perform vicariously all the ordinances required for exaltation for the dead who died without the opportunity to receive the gospel when they were living on the earth. If this privilege is granted to us to work vicariously for the dead who lived during past ages, surely the Lord will not deprive those who are now living and who are less fortunate, and because of no fault of their own, fail to receive these great blessings upon which, through faithfulness, exaltation is based and offered to the dead. The case of Alvin Smith is in point. He died before the restoration of the gospel, but after the coming of Moroni, yet the Prophet saw him in this vision partaking of the blessings of exaltation. This vision was one still future, it is true, for the Prophet also saw his father and mother there, and they were still living on the earth at the time.

Therefore, through the mercy and justice of the Lord, any young woman who maintains her virtue and accepts in her heart all the commandments and ordinances of the gospel will receive the fulness of the glory and exaltation of the celestial kingdom. The great gift of eternal life will be given her. This gift the Lord has described, shall be a "fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever." All the gifts of exaltation will be hers, because she has been true and faithful, and what was denied her here will be given to her hereafter. (D. & C. 132:19-24.)

Behold mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not an house of confusion.

Will I accept of an offering, saith the Lord, that is not made in my name? Or will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed?

And will I appoint unto you, saith the Lord, except it be by law, even as I and my Father ordained unto you, before the world was?

I am the Lord thy God; and I give unto you this commandment—that no man shall come unto the Father but by me or by my word, which is my law, saith the Lord.

And everything that is in the world, whether it be ordained of men, by thrones, or principalities, or powers, or things of name, whatsoever they may be, that are not by me or by my word, saith the Lord, shall be thrown down, and shall not remain after men are dead, neither in nor after the resurrection, saith the Lord your God.

For whatsoever things remain are by me; and whatsoever things are not by me shall be shaken and destroyed. (D. & C. 132:8-14.)

WORLDLY MARRIAGES WILL COME TO AN END

After explaining this the Lord continues by saying that marriages performed in the world and not according to his law of the new and everlasting covenant, must come to an end when the covenanting parties are dead. For out of the world they neither marry nor are given in marriage. Therefore, those who are otherwise worthy before the Lord, and are satisfied with a marriage according to the laws of the world, may enter his kingdom, but if so they enter there to become "ministering servants," and their status is fixed "forever and ever." This applies, of course, to those who willfully ignore the law of the Lord and are content with a marriage which is to continue only until death separates them.

In the great plan of salvation nothing has been overlooked. The gospel of Jesus Christ is the most beautiful thing in the world. It embraces every soul whose heart is right and who diligently seeks him and desires to obey his laws and covenants. Therefore, if a person is for any cause denied the privilege of complying with any of the covenants, the Lord will judge him or her by the intent of the heart. There are thousands of members of the Church in foreign lands who have married and reared families in the Church, who were deprived of the privilege of being "sealed" for time and all eternity. Many of these have passed away, and their blessings are given them vicariously. The gospel is a vicarious work. Jesus vicariously performed a labor for us all because we could not do it for ourselves. Likewise, he has granted to the living members of the Church that they may act as proxies for the dead who died without the opportunity of acting in their own behalf.

THE PLAN OF RESTORATION

Furthermore, there are thousands of young men as well as young women, who have passed to the world of spirits without the opportunity of these blessings. Many of them have laid down their lives in battle; many have died in their early youth; and many have died in their childhood. The Lord will not forget a single one of them. All the blessings belonging to exaltation will be given them, for this is the course of justice and mercy. So with those who live in the stakes of Zion and in the shadows of our temples; if they are deprived of blessings in this life these blessings will be given to them during the millennium, for the Lord has prepared at that time to ". . . complete the salvation of man, and judge all things, and shall redeem all things, except that which he hath not put into his power, when he shall have sealed all things, unto the end of all things; and the sounding of the trumpets of the seven angels are the preparing and finishing of his work, . . ." (D. & C. 77:12.)

Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. (Matthew 11:28-30.)

Alma has given us comforting words in his counsel to his son Corianton:

I say unto thee, my son, that the plan of restoration is requisite with the justice of God; for it is requisite that all things should be restored to their proper order. Behold, it is requisite and just, according to the power and resurrection of Christ that the soul of man should be restored to its body, and that every part of the body should be restored to itself.

And it is requisite with the justice of God that men should be judged according to their works, and if their works were good in this life, and the desires of their hearts were good, that they should also, at the last day, be restored unto that which is good. (Alma 41:2-3.)
