Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

8

Did Authority Include Keys?

Question: "In considering the restoration of the priesthood the question was discussed as to the correct meaning of keys of the priesthood. There seems to be a difference of opinion on the part of members of our class. It seems very clear to all that the priesthood is divine authority which comes from God which was given to his servants in all dispensations of the gospel by which they prophesied and spoke in his name. Did this authority include the keys or were they some special power additional to the ordination?"

It is true that when a man is ordained to any office in the priesthood he is authorized to labor and perform duties by virtue of that priesthood, but always under someone who holds the authority of direction. President Joseph F. Smith has made this very clear in the following paragraphs found in Gospel Doctrine:

The Priesthood is general in the authority given to man to act for God. Every man ordained to any degree of the Priesthood has this authority delegated to him.

But it is necessary that every act performed under this authority shall be done at the proper time and place, in the proper way, and after the proper order. The power of directing these labors constitutes the keys of the Priesthood. In the fulness, the keys are held by only one person at a time, the prophet and president of the Church. He may delegate any portion of this power to another, in which case that person holds the keys of that particular labor. Thus, the president of a temple, the president of a stake, the bishop of a ward, the president of a mission the president of a quorum, each holds the keys of the labors performed in that particular body or locality. His priesthood is not increased by this special appointment, for a seventy who presides over a mission has no more Priesthood than a seventy who labors under his direction; and the president of an elders' quorum, for example, has no more Priesthood than any member of that quorum. But he holds the power of directing the official labors performed in the mission or the quorum, or, in other words, the keys of that division of the work. So it is throughout all the ramifications of the Priesthood—a distinction must be carefully made between the general authority, and the directing of the labors performed by that authority. (Gospel Doctrine, Chapter 9, 1956, p. 136.)

BISHOP HOLDS KEYS OVER WARD

Every man who is properly chosen to preside in any capacity in the Church should be honored in his calling. When a man is ordained to the office of a bishop, he is given the keys of presidency over the ward in which he resides and should be honored in his calling by every member of the ward, no matter what office any man may hold. The same is true of the president of the stake, the president of a quorum, or whatever it may be. To illustrate what this means we are taught that no father has the right, although he may hold the Melchizedek Priesthood, to baptize one of his own children without first obtaining the sanction of his bishop. When the sanction is obtained, the father is authorized to perform that ordinance for his child. Should any father take it upon himself to perform a baptism, or to ordain his son, without first obtaining the sanction of the presiding officer in the ward or stake, as the case may be who holds the keys of authority, he would be in transgression. This applies to an apostle as well as to the elder in a ward. Even the President of the Church would never think to act in any matter of this kind without first recognizing the bishop of his ward or the president of his stake and the authority which had been delegated to the bishop or the president of the stake.

There have been occasions when men holding the priesthood have overstepped these bounds; but it has been due to the fact that they had a misunderstanding of the authority existing in the officers who are duly appointed. There must be no confusion in the Church, and the proper authority should always be recognized.

ALL THINGS TO BE REVEALED

There are other matters of great interest in relation to the keys of the priesthood, which may not be clearly understood by some. The Lord has revealed that in the present dispensation—the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times—all things from the beginning are to be revealed and the keys of each dispensation restored. This has been "spoken of by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:21; Ephesians 1:10.) In fulfilment of this prediction, the prophets holding keys, from Adam to Peter, James, and John, each came to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and restored their keys. We do not have the detailed report of each of these restorations, but we do have the general statement that such was done. (D. & C. 128:19-21.)

First came Moroni, then John the Baptist, and Peter, James, and John, restoring their priesthoods so that the Church could be organized. Then followed the glorious visions in the Kirtland Temple and other restorations from Adam down. At the October conference in 1840, the Prophet Joseph Smith prepared and had a document read in which we find the following:

Commencing with Adam, who was the first man, who is spoken of in Daniel as being the "Ancient of Days," or in other words, the first and oldest of all, the great, grand progenitor of whom it is said in another place he is Michael, because he was the first and father of all, not only by progeny, but the first to hold the spiritual blessings, to whom was made known the plan of ordinances for the salvation of his posterity unto the end, and to whom Christ was first revealed, and through whom Christ has been revealed from heaven, and will continue to be revealed from henceforth. Adam holds the keys of the dispensation of the fulness of times; i.e., the dispensation of all the times have been and will be revealed through him from the beginning to Christ, and from Christ to the end of the dispensations that are to be revealed. "Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he has purposed in himself; that in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are in earth; even in him." ( D.H.C., Vol. 4, pp. 207-208; also Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 167-168.)

In a revelation given in March 1832, the Lord said:

That you may come up unto the crown prepared for you, and be made rulers over many kingdoms, saith the Lord God, the Holy One of Zion, who hath established the foundations of Adam-ondi-Ahman;

Who hath appointed Michael your prince, and established his feet, and set him upon high, and given unto him the keys of salvation under the counsel and direction of the Holy One, who is without beginning of days or end of life. (D. & C. 78:15-16.)

In the fifth chapter of Genesis the authorities who held the keys of the priesthood from Adam to Noah are named, but to Noah was given additional authority. The Prophet Joseph Smith said of him—

PRIESTHOOD FIRST GIVEN TO ADAM

The Priesthood was first given to Adam; he obtained the First Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generation. He obtained it in the Creation, before the world was formed, as in Genesis 1:26, 27, 28. He had dominion given him over every living creature. He is Michael the Archangel, spoken of in the Scriptures. Then to Noah, who is Gabriel; he stands next in authority to Adam in the Priesthood; he was called of God to his office, and was the father of all living in this day, and to him was given the dominion. These men held keys first on earth, and then in heaven. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 157.)

After the flood Abraham received the keys of the priesthood from Melchizedek, and evidently conferred them upon Isaac, who gave them to Jacob. What happened after the death of Joseph is not clearly stated, but there came a descent from Esaias, who lived in the days of Abraham, to Jethro, priest of Midian and a descendant of Abraham, to Moses. After Moses was taken, the Melchizedek Priesthood was also taken from Israel until the coming of our Savior, when it was again restored. The prophets in Israel held the Melchizedek Priesthood after Moses was taken, but each received his authority and keys by special ordination. (Ibid., pp. 180-181.)

The keys of the priesthood were given to Peter, James, and John at the time of the transfiguration on the mount, but the apostleship was conferred upon them by Jesus Christ when he called them to the ministry, with the other members of the twelve. Peter, James, and John gave Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery the Melchizedek Priesthood, but in the restoration of all things it became necessary for the prophets who held the keys of dispensations in the past to come to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and restore their keys and authorities that all things could be perfected in the great restoration preparatory to the coming of Jesus Christ.
