Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

9

Translated Beings—Part II

Question: "In studying the mission of Elijah a question arose in relation to translated beings. What is their mission? We know that Jesus Christ was "the first fruits" of the resurrection, yet the scriptures state that both Enoch (Moses 7:21 and 69) and Elijah (2 Kings 2:11) were taken into heaven. How can translated beings dwell in heaven before receiving the resurrection?"

Answer: Once before we discussed the question of translated beings, (The Improvement Era, Vol. 56, p. 391 (June 1953); Answers to Gospel Questions, Vol. 1, p. 163.) but perhaps some further discussion will not be out of order. We learn from modern revelation that there are no angels who administer to this earth but those who do belong or have belonged to it. (D. & C. 130:5.) Therefore the angels who appeared to Adam and the antediluvian prophets must have been spirits who had not yet tabernacle in the flesh. Since that time messengers coming to give instruction to the prophets could have been spirits of just persons who had lived on the earth or translated beings who had been reserved for that purpose. We may be sure that any messenger coming before the resurrection of Jesus who had a tangible body was a translated being who had lived on the earth and had been translated to become a messenger to men on the earth. Such would be the case evidently in the visitors who came to Abraham and the personage who wrestled with Jacob.

MANY HAVE BEEN TRANSLATED

According to the Pearl of Great Price, when Enoch was translated, the inhabitants of the city Zion were also taken and were also translated. How many others have been given this great honor we do not know, but there may have been many of whom we have no record. Prominence has been given to the case of Elijah as well as to Enoch, and the purpose of granting to prophets this great blessing is that they may minister upon the earth. Moreover, the Lord, of necessity, has kept authorized servants on the earth bearing the priesthood from the days of Adam to the present time; in fact, there has never been a moment from the beginning that there were not men on the earth holding the Holy Priesthood. (Moses 5:59.) Even in the days of apostasy, and apostasy has occurred several times, the Lord never surrendered this earth and permitted Satan to have complete control. Even when the great apostasy occurred following the death of the Savior's apostles, our Father in heaven held control and had duly authorized servants on the earth to direct his work and to check, to some extent at least, the ravages and corruption of the evil powers. These servants were not permitted to organize the Church nor to officiate in the ordinances of the gospel, but they did check the advances of evil as far as the Lord deemed it necessary. This truth is made manifest in the statement of the Lord in the Doctrine and Covenants wherein the following appears:

Wherefore, I will that all men shall repent, for all are under sin, except those which I have reserved unto myself, holy men that ye know not of. (D. & C. 49:8.)

We know that John the Revelator and the three Nephites were granted the privilege of remaining on the earth in the translated state, to "bring souls unto Christ." We know that this was the request of John (D. & C., Sec. 7.) and likewise the desire of the three Nephites. (3 Nephi 28:4-18.)

ENTERTAINED BY HOLY MESSENGERS

It is reasonable to believe that they were engaged in this work as far as the Lord permitted them to go during these years of spiritual darkness. There are legends and stories which seem to be authentic, showing that these holy messengers were busy among the nations of the earth, and men have been entertained by them unawares. (Hebrews 13:2.) We may also well believe that these translated prophets have always been busy keeping constraint upon the acts of men and nations unbeknown to mortal man.

Translated beings have not passed through death; that is, they have not had the separation of the spirit and the body. This must wait until the coming of the Savior. In the meantime they are busy fulfilling their glorious mission in preparing the way for the elders of Israel to go forth with the message of salvation in all parts of the world.

The Prophet Joseph Smith has given us, through revelation, much that we know about translated persons and the nature of their work in the following excerpts from his teachings:

A PLACE PREPARED . . .

Now the doctrine of translation is a power which belongs to this Priesthood. There are many things which belong to the powers of the Priesthood and the keys thereof, that have been kept hid from before the foundation of the world; they are hid from the wise and prudent to be revealed in the last times.

Many have supposed that the doctrine of translation was a doctrine whereby men were taken immediately into the presence of God, and into an eternal fulness, but this is a mistaken idea. Their place of habitation is that of the terrestrial order, and a place prepared for such characters He held in reserve to be ministering angels unto many planets, and who as yet have not entered into so great a fullness as those who are resurrected from the dead. "Others were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection." (See Hebrews 11:35.)

Now it was evident that there was a better resurrection, or else God would not have revealed it unto Paul. Wherein then, can it be said a better resurrection? This distinction is made between the doctrine of the actual resurrection and translation: translation obtains deliverance from the tortures and sufferings of the body, but their existence will prolong as to the labors and toils of the ministry, before they can enter into so great a rest and glory. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 170-171.)

Translated bodies cannot enter into rest until they have undergone a change equivalent to death. Translated bodies are designed for future missions.

The angel that appeared to John on the Isle of Patmos was a translated or resurrected body (i.e., personage). Jesus Christ went in body after his resurrection to minister to resurrected bodies. There has been a chain of authority and power from Adam down to the present time. (Ibid., p. 191.)
