Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

14

Knowledge of Gospel Principles

Question: "I have been impressed for a long time with the thought that the commandments of the Lord require of the members of the Church a thorough understanding of the fundamental principles of the gospel that we may better obey them. It appears to me that there is a spirit of indifference, or lack of desire, on the part of a great many members in relation to gaining a knowledge of these commandments. The result is a lack of harmony and obedience. This attitude also presents the risk of our being deceived and led astray by the abundance of false doctrine and philosophy which today are taught in the world. If I am right, what can be done about it? Or am I too critical?"

Answer: You are not too critical. Most emphatically the revelations in the Standard Works require of the members an intelligent study of them. Why does the Lord give revelation and commandment if it is not that we may comprehend and obey them? To the unbelieving Jews who opposed him, Jesus said: "Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me." (John 5:39.) The Lord revealed the plan of salvation to Adam after he was driven out of the Garden of Eden and said to him:

Wherefore teach it unto your children, that all men, everywhere, must repent, or they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God, for no unclean thing can dwell there, or dwell in his presence; for, in the language of Adam, Man of Holiness is his name, and the name of his Only Begotten is the Son of Man, even Jesus Christ, a righteous Judge, who shall come in the meridian of time.

Therefore I give unto you a commandment, to teach these things freely unto your children, saying:

That by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death, and inasmuch as ye were born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit, which I have made, and so became of dust a living soul, even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory;

For by the water ye keep the commandment; by the Spirit ye are justified, and by the blood ye are sanctified;

Therefore it is given to abide in you; the record of heaven; the Comforter; the peaceable things of immortal glory; the truth of all things; that which quickeneth all things, which maketh alive all things; that which knoweth all things, and hath all power according to wisdom, mercy, truth, justice, and judgment. (Moses 6:57-61.)

It is, therefore, our duty to know the truths which have been revealed, and the Lord has made a wonderful promise to those who search his truth and abide in his teachings. They are to become perfect, even as he is perfect. A more beautiful or far-reaching pronouncement was never made than this:

And that which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness.

That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day. (D. & C. 50:23-24.) [Author's italics.]

"THE WONDERFUL PROMISE"

Here is the wonderful promise to all who are willing to abide in the truth—and to abide in it they must have knowledge of the truth: they shall be glorified in the celestial kingdom of God. Moreover, in another revelation the Lord declares that "the Spirit giveth light to every man that cometh into the world; and the Spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit.

"And every one that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit cometh unto God, even the Father." (Ibid., 84:46-47.)

If the commandment to keep records had not been given, and no records had been kept regarding the dealings of the Lord with mankind, this world would have dwindled into savagery, and Satan would have taken it completely captive. There would have been no knowledge pertaining to earlier generations. The Lord in his mercy and love saw to it that his word was recorded, and though much of it has come down to us in corrupted form, nevertheless, by the power of the Almighty much has been preserved. It is upon divine records that nations have based their civilizations to a marked degree.

The Latter-day Saints are doubly blessed with the word of the Lord which has come to light through the restoration of the gospel. We have been given the records of the Nephites and the Jaredites, containing many glorious gospel truths. The Lord restored much that had been originally revealed to Adam and Enoch and Abraham, which we find in the Pearl of Great Price, and it is to their condemnation when members of the Church do not take advantage of their opportunities to read, study, and learn what the records contain. After all the revelations the Lord has given through his prophets and the commandments to the people to search these principles, it is to our discredit and shows a lack of love for the Lord and for his blessings which have so abundantly been bestowed upon us when we neglect to study them. In the Book of Revelation, John saw the time at the judgment, when the dead came forth, and the books were opened.

"AND I SAW THE DEAD, SMALL AND GREAT"

And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened; and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works. (Revelation 20:12.) [Author's italics.]

We may wonder whether among these books will not be the divine commandments of the Lord. In relation to the Book of Mormon, the Lord thought it so important to this generation that he had the records preserved to come forth in our day. ". . . which is to show unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers; and that they may know the covenants of the Lord, that they are not cast off forever—And also to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations. . . ." (Title Page, Book of Mormon.) [Author's italics.]

How are we to know this unless we study these revelations? With jealous care the Lord preserved these records for our sakes, and then in his own due time sent Moroni, who hid the records in the earth, to reveal them. Moreover, so important were they to the world as well as to the Church that three special witnesses were prepared to bear witness to the world. To make their witness effective, these three stood in the presence of the angel and heard the voice of God commanding them to bear record to all the world. Why should they bear record to all the world, unless this was one of the most important messages ever revealed for man's salvation?

Knowing our weaknesses, the Lord forbade Mormon to record all of the teachings and covenants which he made with the Nephites when he visited them. Mormon states that he was about to write them, but the Lord said he was to record only the ". . . lesser part. . . .

". . . which is expedient . . . to try their faith, and if it shall so be that they shall believe these things then shall the greater things be made manifest unto them.

"And if it so be that they will not believe these things, then shall the greater things be withheld from them, unto their condemnation." (3 Nephi 26: 8-10.)

THE WRITINGS OF THE BROTHER OF JARED

The same thing is true of the wonderful writings of the brother of Jared. The Lord revealed to him all things from the beginning to the end, but the command came that they should be sealed up that no man could read them, and they were to remain sealed, etc., for the Lord said, "They shall not go forth unto the Gentiles until the day that they shall . . .

". . . exercise faith in me, saith the Lord, even as the brother of Jared did, that they may become sanctified in me, then will I manifest unto them the things which the brother of Jared saw, even to the unfolding unto them all my revelations, saith Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of the heavens and of the earth, and all things that in them are." (Ether 4:6-7.) When the Nephites became righteous after the visitation of our Savior, the Lord permitted the Nephites to have this record, but when they began to fall away, the command to the prophets was to seal the records up again.

It is, therefore, because of the hardness of our hearts and because we are not willing to receive the "lesser part" which has been given us, that we are deprived of the greater things. In the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 130, we are informed as follows:

Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection.

And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come. (D. & C. 130:18-19.)

INSTRUCTION FROM THE PROPHET JOSEPH SMITH

The following instructions are also given us by revelation through the Prophet Joseph:

As far as we degenerate from God, we descend to the devil and lose knowledge, and without knowledge we cannot be saved, and while our hearts are filled with evil, and we are studying evil, there is no room in our hearts for good or studying good. Is not God good? Then you be good; if he is faithful, then you be faithful. Add to your faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, and seek for every good thing. . . .

A man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge, for if he does not get knowledge, he will be brought into captivity by some evil power in the other world, as evil spirits will have more knowledge, and consequently more power than many men who are on the earth. Hence it needs revelation to assist us, and give us knowledge of the things of God. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 217.)

Add to your faith knowledge, etc. The principle of knowledge is the principle of salvation. This principle can be comprehended by the faithful and diligent; and every one that does not obtain knowledge sufficient to be saved will be condemned. The principle of salvation is given us through the knowledge of Jesus Christ. (Ibid., p. 297.)

When the Angel Moroni came to the Prophet Joseph Smith, he quoted to him, with some amplifications, the eleventh chapter of Isaiah and said it was soon to be fulfilled. In that chapter is the following: "They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea." Also, in the word of the Lord to Jeremiah in Chapter 31 of Jeremiah, speaking of the gathering and redemption of Zion and Jerusalem, the promise is made that in that day the Lord would make a new covenant with Israel, and he would put it in their hearts and would be their God and they should be his people. "And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more."

It appears from present conditions that there will have to be either a great cleansing, or a great repentance, before we are ready for this great day. We cannot at this time say that every man knows the Lord and needs not to be taught. Therefore it behooves the members of the Church to turn with full purpose of heart and avail ourselves of every opportunity which the Lord has placed in our hands to improve our knowledge of the gospel and our standing before him.
