Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

15

The Sign of the Dove

Question: "In our stake missionary class we had some discussion in relation to the Holy Ghost descending and resting on Jesus at the time of his baptism by John. In Matthew 3:16 and Mark 1:10 we read that John saw the Holy Ghost descending 'like a dove'; and in Luke 3:22, 'And the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him.' 1 Nephi 11:27 states that Nephi saw in vision the baptism of Christ, and he says, 'I beheld the heavens open, and the Holy Ghost come down out of heaven and abide upon him in the form of a dove.' This agrees with what is written in Section 93, Verse 15, in the Doctrine and Covenants, 'And I, John, bear record, and lo, the heavens were opened, and the Holy Ghost descended upon him a in the form of a dove, and sat upon him, . . .' This is repeated in 2 Nephi 31:8. Now, we know that the Holy Ghost is a Personage of Spirit in the shape of a man and the third member of the Godhead; but we are not clear in regard to the manner in which the Holy Ghost rested upon the Savior, whether it was as a dove would descend or if he took, in fact, the form of a dove. How can we explain this to an investigator?"

Answer: The Prophet Joseph Smith has given us the clearest explanation of this wonderful event in discussing the question of the greatness of John. He said John was one of the greatest of prophets. His greatness was not due to his prophesying or because he performed great miracles, but because he was entrusted with the mission of preparing the way before the Lord and he also had the honor to baptize him. Said Joseph Smith:

Whoever led the Son of God into the waters of baptism, and had the privilege of beholding the Holy Ghost descend in the form of a dove, or rather in the sign of the dove, in witness of that administration? The sign of the dove was instituted before the creation of the world, a witness for the Holy Ghost, and the devil cannot come in the sign of a dove. The Holy Ghost is a personage, and is in the form of a personage. It does not confine itself to the form of the dove, but in sign of the dove. The Holy Ghost cannot be transformed into a dove; but the sign of a dove was given to John to signify the truth of the deed, as the dove is an emblem or token of truth and innocence. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 275-276.)

THE DOVE IS AN EMBLEM OF PURITY

We raise no question as to the fact that the Holy Ghost did appear to John in the form of a dove and that the sign of the dove was given to him as convincing evidence that it was verily the Son of God whom he baptized. It is also true that Nephi was granted in vision to have the same experience. He saw the baptism of our Lord and the Holy Ghost descend upon the Lord apparently in the form of a dove, the dove being an emblem of purity. It is interesting to consider other passages of scripture in regard to the dove. Satan cannot imitate this sign; that is one thing which is denied him. The dove has been considered as a sacred emblem through the history of Israel. It was the dove which Noah sent forth from the Ark which returned to him with the evidence that the waters had departed from the face of the earth. The dove as an emblem of purity was offered in sacrifice in ancient Israel, and perhaps before by, which means certain sins were cleansed. Chief among these was the purifying of mother after the birth of the children as follows:

And when the days of her purifying are fulfilled, for a son, or for a daughter, she shall bring a lamb of the first year for a burnt offering , and a young pigeon, or turtle-dove, for a sin offering, unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, unto the priest:

Who shall offer it before the Lord, and make an atonement for her; and she shall be cleansed from the issue of her blood. This is the law for her that hath born a male or a female.

And if she be not able to bring a lamb, then she shall bring two turtles [turtle-doves], or two young pigeons; the one for the burnt offering, and the other for a sin offering; and the priest shall make an atonement for her, and she shall be clean. (Leviticus 12:6-8.)

A short time after the birth of our Savior, when the days of his mother's purification were accomplished, "they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord. . . .

"And to offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in the law of the Lord, A pair of turtle-doves, or two young pigeons." (Luke 2:22, 24.)

In counseling his apostles as they were about to go forth on their first missionary journey, the Lord said to them:

Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. (Matthew 10:16.)
