Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

16

Was Temple Work Done for the Dead before the Time of Christ?

Question: "In discussing the work for the dead the question was asked: 'Was temple work done for the dead before the time of Christ?' It was decided by the majority that no such work was done. One member took exception to this and asked what was done then in the temples in Old Testament times, if it was not work for the dead? Will you please clarify this for us so that we may all be in full agreement?"

Answer: There was no work done for the dead until after the Savior turned the key when he visited the spirits in prison. The work that was done in the tabernacle (or Temple) Moses built in the wilderness, and in the temple of Solomon and the latter restored temple in Israel, was confined to ordinances for the living. That they did have ordinances is clear from the writings of Moses in the Pentateuch. The Lord made that perfectly clear to the Prophet Joseph Smith in the following words, when revealing the need for a house of the Lord where ordinances could be restored:

And again, verily I say unto you, how shall your washings be acceptable unto me, except ye perform them in a house which you have built to my name.

For, for this cause I commanded Moses that he should build a tabernacle, that they should bear it with them in the wilderness, and to build a house in the land of promise, that those ordinances might be revealed which had been hid from before the world was. (D. & C. 124:37-38.)

ANCIENT ORDINANCES CONFINED TO THE LIVING

The work done in the wilderness and later in the temple in Jerusalem was confined to ordinances for the living, as certain scripture will clearly show in both the Old and the New Testaments. Many of the ancient prophets held the keys of the priesthood, which enabled them to perform the ordinances and obtain the necessary blessings to entitle them to a place in the celestial kingdom. And these blessings continued to be given to those who were worthy, and after the resurrection of Christ they came forth to obtain their exaltation in the celestial kingdom.

All ordinances for the dead had to wait until after Jesus Christ had gained the victory over death, and then to Peter and his brethren the authority to officiate in behalf of the dead was revealed. Unfortunately, there is little written in the New Testament giving the history of such ordinances having been performed. Paul has given us the clearest insight in his first epistle to the Corinthian saints wherein he spoke of baptism for the dead, implying that this principle was very well understood. He used it as an argument in favor of the resurrection. In some of the writings of the "early fathers" there is also some knowledge that such a doctrine was practiced.

President Brigham Young has given us a clear statement, fully covering this question. Said he:

Jesus was the first man that ever went to preach to the spirits in prison, holding the keys of the Gospel of salvation to them. Those keys were delivered to him in the day and hour that he went into the spirit world, and with them he opened the door of salvation to the spirits in prison. (Journal of Discourses, p. 378, 1925 edition.)

BIBLE REFERENCES BEARING ON THE QUESTION

There are in the Bible many references which have a bearing on this question. First let us consider the words of the Lord to Isaiah:

I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles;

To open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house.

I am the Lord; that is my name: and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images. (Isaiah 42:6-8.)

The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound. (Ibid., 61:1-2.)

These references to the opening of the prison and the proclaiming of liberty to the captives evidently have reference to the dead who had been confined in darkness not knowing their fate. Shortly after the Savior entered his ministry he visited his home town, Nazareth, and upon entering the synagogue the scriptures were placed in his hands. He opened them and read the words of Isaiah, and said to the people: "This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears." (Luke 4:21.) That is to say, the time had come for the preaching of the gospel and the redemption of both the living and the dead.

LAZARUS AND THE RICH MAN

The most positive saying of the Lord in relation to the status of the dead before his resurrection is implied in the story of the rich man and Lazarus. This is one of the most familiar of the Lord's parables. It is so interesting and pertinent to this question that it is not amiss to quote part of it here:

There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day:

And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate full of sores.

And desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the rich man's table: moreover the dogs came and licked his sores.

And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom: the rich man also died, and was buried;

And in hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom.

And he cried and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue; for I am tormented in this flame.

But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.

And beside all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed; so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot; neither can they pass to us, that would come from thence. (Ibid., 16:19-26.)

This is as far as the parable relates to our question. There was a great gulf which separated those who had not complied with the laws of the gospel from those who had, and it could not be passed. It was this great gulf that our Savior bridged when he went to the spirits in prison. President Joseph F. Smith's vision of the redemption of the dead is in perfect harmony with this parable. Christ did not go to the imprisoned wicked spirits. He declared his message to those who were worthy. Then he organized his forces and commissioned the faithful servants to cross the gulf and take the message to those who sat in darkness.

THE VISION OF ENOCH

There is further light thrown on this question in the vision given to Enoch when the Lord appeared to him.

Wherefore, I can stretch forth mine hands and hold all the creations which I have made; and mine eye can pierce them also, and among all the workmanship of mine hands there has not been so great wickedness as among thy brethren.

But behold, their sins shall be upon the heads of their fathers; Satan shall be their father, and misery shall be their doom; and the whole heavens shall weep over them, even all the workmanship of mine hands; wherefore should not the heavens weep, seeing these shall suffer?

But behold, these which thine eyes are upon shall perish in the floods; and behold, I will shut them up; a prison have I prepared for them.

And That which I have chosen hath plead before my face. Wherefore, he suffereth for their sins; inasmuch as they will repent in the day that my Chosen shall return unto me, and until that day they shall be in torment. (Moses 7:36-39. Italics Author's.)
