Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

17

Spirits of the Dead Returning Home

Question: "Will you please be kind enough to explain the statement of Alma recorded in Chapter 40 of Alma verses 11 to 14. It has been my understanding that all spirits at death were assigned to a spirit world prepared for them where they awaited the resurrection, and that they did not enter the presence of the Father until the resurrection. If what Alma says is true, then why did Jesus say to Mary, 'Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father.' Or is the case of the Savior an exception?"

Answer: These words were spoken by Alma when giving his final instruction to his son Corianton. Corianton, who had been somewhat wayward, wondered concerning the justice of God, and Alma counseled him to turn from evil and serve the Lord, which counsel he received. In order to get the full meaning of Alma's thought we should quote the verses.

Now concerning the state of the soul between death and the resurrection—Behold, it has been made known unto me by an angel, that the spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body, yea, the spirits of all men, whether they be good or evil, are taken home to that God who gave them life.

And then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness, which is called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow.

And then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of the wicked, yea, who are evil—for behold, they have no part nor portion of the Spirit of the Lord; for behold, they chose evil works rather than good; therefore the spirit of the devil did enter into them, and take possession of their house—and these shall be cast out into outer darkness; there shall be weeping, and wailing and gnashing of teeth, and this because of their own iniquity, being led captive by the will of the devil.

Now this is the state of the souls of the wicked, yea, in darkness, and a state of awful, fearful looking for the fiery indignation of the wrath of God upon them; thus they remain in this state, as well as the righteous in paradise, until the time of their resurrection.

DEAD RETURN TO WORLD OF SPIRITS

These words of Alma as I understand them, do not intend to convey the thought that all spirits go back into the presence of God for an assignment to a place of peace or a place of punishment and before him receive their individual sentence. "Taken home to God," (Compare Ecclesiastics 12:7.) simply means that their mortal existence has come to an end, and they have returned to the world of spirits, where they are assigned to a place according to their works with the just or with the unjust, there to await the resurrection. "Back to God" is a phrase which finds an equivalent in many other well known conditions. For instance: a man spends a stated time in some foreign mission field. When he is released and returns to the United States, he may say, "It is wonderful to be back home"; yet his home may be somewhere in Utah or Idaho or some other part of the West.

In the question of spirits returning to God, President George Q. Cannon has made the following comment:

Alma, when he says that "the spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body . . . are taken home to that God who gave them life," has the idea doubtless, in his mind that our God is omnipresent—not in His own personality but through His minister, the Holy Spirit.

He does not intend to convey the idea that they are immediately ushered into the personal presence of God. He evidently uses that phrase in a qualified sense. . . . Solomon, makes such a similar statement: "Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it." The same idea is frequently expressed by the Latter-day Saints. (Gospel Truths, p. 73.)

Paradise is a term which means a place of departed spirits according to the Prophet Joseph Smith. "Hades, the Greek, or Sheol, the Hebrew, these two significations mean a world of spirits." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 310.) Before the resurrection of Christ, the wicked were shut up in darkness and were not visited. In this awful state they suffered the torment of their consciences not knowing what their fate would be, just as Alma has pictured it. We are given further light on the condition of the wicked in this spirit world from the words of the Lord to Enoch.

But behold, their sins shall be upon the heads of their fathers; Satan shall be their father, and misery shall be their doom; and the whole heavens shall weep over them, even all the workmanship of mine hands; wherefore should not the heavens weep, seeing these shall suffer?

But behold, these which thine eyes are upon shall perish in the floods; and behold, I will shut them up; a prison have I prepared for them.

And That which I have chosen hath plead before my face. Wherefore, he suffereth for their sins; inasmuch as they will repent in the day that my Chosen shall return unto me, and until that day they shall be in torment. Wherefore, for this shall the heavens weep, yea, and all the workmanship of mine hands. (Moses 7:37-40.)

THE DEMAND OF JUSTICE

From these paragraphs we learn that the Lord does not delight in punishment, however there is the demand of justice which must be met, and therefore the wicked are forced to suffer, and this suffering helps to cleanse them from their sins. Before the visit of our Savior to the spirit world there was a gulf separating the righteous from the wicked, and the wicked were evidently without knowledge as to what fate awaited them. (Luke 16:19-31.) Savior after his crucifixion bridged this gulf and the gospel was carried to those who sat in this darkness and through the instruction of those who held the priesthood, these miserable spirits were taught the gospel. They were granted some measure of blessing according to their works on earth and according to their opportunity or lack of it, to hear the gospel when living on the earth, and accept the same in the spirit world.

It seems to be evident from his words to Mary at the tomb, that Jesus had not ascended to, or been in the presence of, his Father, between the time of his crucifixion and his resurrection. These words of the Savior's to Mary seem to indicate the condition which confronts all who die, between death and the resurrection.
