Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

18

Little Children and the Sacrament

Question: "Is It proper for small children who are not old enough to be baptized to partake of the sacrament, especially those who cannot understand the simplest things about the Savior, much less remember him or keep his commandments? What is the history of this practice and on what scripture is it based?"

Answer: It may be true that some of the smaller children who attend the Sunday Schools and sacrament meetings with their parents are too young to realize the significance of this sacred ordinance, but what injury can come to them or to the ordinance if they are permitted to partake? We know that the feelings of our Savior were very tender toward little children. When parents brought them to him to be blessed, his disciples felt that it was an improper act. Perhaps they were solicitous for the Savior and felt that this was a burden to him, therefore they sought to prevent it, but the Savior answered them:

Suffer little children, and forbid them not, to come unto me: for of such is the kingdom of heaven.

And he laid his hands upon them, and departed thence. (Matthew 19:14-15.)

We have no evidence that little children were ever denied this privilege since the restoration of the gospel. President Wilford Woodruff granted this privilege to the children of the Sunday Schools without regard to age. If little children belong to the kingdom of God how could there be any restriction placed upon them in such a matter? Moreover, we are taught by revelation that little children are redeemed, should they die in tender childhood, for this decree went forth from the foundation of the world, that through the mercy and redemption of Jesus Christ all little children who die should be saved, and Satan has no power over them. (D. & C. 29:46-47.)

LITTLE CHILDREN ARE WITHOUT SIN

It is also revealed "that all little children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability, are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven." (D.H.C., Vol. 2, p. 381.) Parents are commanded to teach their children to understand the principles of the gospel from their earliest childhood; to teach them to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Jesus Christ, the ordinance of baptism for the remission of sins and to pray, before they reach the age of accountability, so that they will know why these ordinances and principles are essential parts of the gospel of Jesus Christ. (D. & C. 68:25-28.) If parents neglect this important duty then the sin will rest on the parents.

Perhaps we underestimate the intelligence of our small children. How young must they be before they can begin to understand? When the Savior visited the Nephites he blessed their little children as he did those in Palestine. This incident is worthy of full consideration here:

And when he had said these words, he wept, and the multitude bare record of it, and he took their little children, one by one, and blessed them, and prayed unto the Father for them.

And when he had done this he wept again;

And he spake unto the multitude, and said unto them: Behold your little ones.

And as they looked to behold they cast their eyes towards heaven, and they saw the heavens open, and they saw angels descending out of heaven as it were in the midst of fire; and they came down and encircled those little ones about, and they were encircled about with fire; and the angels did minister unto them. (3 Nephi 17:21-24.)

Behold, it came to pass on the morrow that the multitude gathered themselves together, and they both saw and heard these children; yea, even babes did open their mouths and utter marvelous things; and the things which they did utter were forbidden that they should not any man write them. (Ibid., 26:16.)

There is no reason why any member of the Church should be concerned over the fact that little children may partake of the sacrament. The most important thing is to be sure that we who are grown to full maturity keep ourselves worthy of this sacred ordinance.
