Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

19

The Fourth Article of Faith

Question: "During a recent correspondence with a non-member of the Church, I was asked why we had presumed to add to the fourth article in the Articles of Faith, thus making it read different from the original statement that was made by the Prophet Joseph Smith. I was unaware that any addition had been made and in looking in the 'Documentary History of the Church,' I found it reads:

"We believe that the first principles and ordinances of the Gospel are: (1) Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; (2) Repentance; (3) Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; (4) Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.'

"In the 'Essentials in Church History,' compiled by you, it reads: 'We believe that these ordinances are . . .'

"Neither of these exactly correspond with what we now use. I presume a change has been made for clarification. If so, what exactly was the original, and why and when was the change made?"

Answer: The Articles of Faith appeared in an article furnished by the Prophet Joseph Smith to Mr. John Wentworth, publisher of the Chicago Democrat, in 1842. Originally the fourth article read as follows:

We believe that these ordinances are: 1st. Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; 2d. Repentance; 3d. Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; 4th. Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.

In the Essentials in Church History, the original is followed exactly as when first published.

The reason for the adding of the word "principles," and that is the only change, was because the brethren considered when they were preparing the 1921 edition for publication of the Doctrine and Covenants, that the term ordinances did not fully cover the article completely. For instance, "faith" is not an ordinance, neither is "repentance," but they are principles. Therefore we felt fully justified in making the article so that it would convey clearly just what the Prophet intended. So now it reads: "We believe that the first principles and ordinances are," and in doing this we were perfectly within the bounds of propriety. Were the Prophet here, he would fully justify our action.

We have no apology to make for this addition. We have in no sense destroyed the original meaning.
