Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

20

Location of the Garden of Eden

Question: "I have a friend who is interested enough in the doctrines of the Church to ask many questions. From someone she obtained the information that we believe that the Garden of Eden was in the state of Missouri, and she asked me about it. I had always understood this to be what we believe and I told her so. She wanted to know how we explain what is in the Bible, where it tells about the river in the garden which divided into four more, the Pison, Gison, Hiddekel, and Euphrates. We know where the Euphrates is today, and the Bible map shows that the land of Havilah is located in Ethiopia. Could you please explain our views?"

Answer: The rivers spoken of in Genesis and in the Book of Moses are rivers that existed when all the waters of the earth were in one place. If all the waters were in one place, then obviously all the land was in one place. This was before the days of the flood. In Genesis we read:

And God said, let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place and let the dry land appear: and it was so. (Genesis 1:9. See also D. & C. 133:22-24.)

According to the revelations of the Lord, Noah and his family in the Ark sailed during the time of the flood from some place evidently in what is known now as America, and landed at Ararat thousands of miles away. We read that it was in the seventeenth day of the second month when the great deep was broken up, and the rain was forty days. The Ark landed at Ararat on the seventeenth day of the seventh month, therefore there were five full months of travel when the Lord drove the Ark to its final destiny. Without any question a considerable distance separated the point where the Ark commenced the journey and where it landed. There can be no question to contradict the fact that during the flood great changes were made on the face of the earth. The land surface was in the process of division into continents. The rivers mentioned in Genesis were rivers that existed in the garden of Eden long before the land was divided into continents and islands. (Genesis 7:11.)

NATURAL TO NAME PLACES AFTER FAMILIAR LOCATIONS

It would be the most natural thing in the world for Noah, after he arrived at his destiny in Ararat, to give names to rivers and to country, similar to the names with which he was familiar when his journey in the Ark commenced. It is the custom even today for explorers to name countries and rivers after familiar points and streams in their native countries. We are informed that there are great ancient river beds buried in the land of Missouri. Therefore the River Euphrates in Asia took the name naturally.

Remember also that not too many centuries after Noah landed at Ararat, the entire land surface of the earth was changed and divided, and what had previously been one grand continent, was broken up into many continents and islands. So it is impossible for us today to know exactly what changes were made in that world catastrophe. (Ibid., 10:25.)

Of course we rely definitely on the word of the Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith. In one of the revelations given to the Church, May 19, 1838, the Lord said, speaking of a certain point in Missouri known as Spring Hill, in Daviess County:

ADAM-ONDI-AHMAN, because, said he, it is the place where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel the prophet. (D. & C. 116. See also Sec. 78:15.)

We also read in Section 107:

Three years previous to the death of Adam, he called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, who were all high priests, with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing.

And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the prince, the archangel.

And the Lord administered comfort unto Adam, and said unto him: I have set thee to be at the head; a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou art a prince over them forever.

And Adam stood up in the midst of the congregation; and, notwithstanding he was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy Ghost, predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation. (Ibid., 107:53-56.)

UNDERSTANDABLE TO THOSE WHO KNOW THE TRUTH

There is no difficulty when we understand the truth, that is, that while these rivers carry the same names, they are not the same rivers which were in the Garden of Eden.
