Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

21

Cherubim, Seraphim, and Angels

Question: "I am somewhat confused in regard to the difference between cherubim and seraphim and angels, as recorded in the Bible. Who and what are the cherubim and seraphim mentioned in the Old Testament?"

Answer: These are terms that are sometimes applied to angels. The Lord set cherubim, according to the Hebrew Ha-Kerubim, to guard the way to the tree of life, when Adam and Eve were driven out of the Garden of Eden. There is no doubt that these were heavenly beings, or angels, as the plural form is used. However, down through the years this has been a mystery. Dr. Adam Clark in his Commentary says in speaking of the cherubim:

But what are these? They are utterly unknown, conjectures and guessers relative to their nature and properties are endless. What these were we cannot distinctly say, it is generally supposed, that a cherub was a creature with four heads and one body; and the animals of which these emblematical forms consisted were the noblest of their kind. The lion among the wild beasts; the bull, among the tame; the eagle, among the birds and man at the head of all.

According to dictionary definitions which have come to us through the ages of apostasy, there is a prevailing notion that angels are superior beings to human beings. A seraph is an angel of the highest order and cherub denotes "(1) a beautiful child or infant, one of the order of angelic beings ranking second to the seraphim in the celestial hierarchy, and held to excel in knowledge. The archangel holds highest rank."

The simple truth gathered from modern revelation is that these beings that guarded the way to the tree of life were angels. Evidently faithful personages belonging to this world who had not, at the time, received the privilege of partaking of mortality, for the Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith that "there are no angels who minister to this earth but those who do belong to it." (D. & C. l30:5.)

CHERUBIM AS SYMBOLIC FIGURES

The cherubim on the Ark of the Covenant were placed there as symbolic figures, representing guardians, whose wings protected the altar. These, like the figures seen by Ezekiel, were symbolic, not necessarily living beings, and by them the Lord was teaching Ezekiel a lesson in relation to his mission to Israel. The same is true in relation to the several beasts seen by the Revelator John. All of these visions by symbolic representation had something to do with history which the Lord was revealing, the full meaning of which has not been made clear to our understanding.

Just when the notion arose that angels have wings may not be very clear. There is a prevailing idea today, which arose during the centuries of apostasy, that angels are superior to human beings in their nature—in fact, that they belong to an entirely distinct and different race. Angels are ministering servants who carry messages from our Eternal Father and his Son Jesus Christ. All angels coming to Adam after the fall were spirits belonging to this earth who had not yet obtained bodies of flesh and bones. After men had been translated as was Enoch, they, as translated beings, could and did come to minister unto the prophets. Thus it could have been a translated being who was sent to Jacob and with whom he wrestled. That he wrestled with the Lord is an untenable notion. (See Answers to Gospel Questions, Vol. 1, pp. 163-168.)

Speaking of angels, the Prophet Joseph Smith has revealed the following:

There are two kinds of beings in heaven, namely: Angels, who are resurrected personages, having bodies of flesh and bones—

For instance, Jesus said: Handle me and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have.

Secondly: The spirits of just men made perfect, they who are not resurrected, but inherit the same glory. (D. & C. 129:1-3.)
