Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

22

Cremation of the Dead

Question: "Over-populated countries have resorted to cremation of their dead to preserve land space. I understand in some countries this is mandatory. What is the belief of the Latter-day Saints in relation to the practice of cremation?"

Answer: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has never taken a definite stand on this question. Presumably no edict in relation to it will ever be taken. The matter of burial of the dead, as far as the Church is concerned, is an individual or a family matter. If any member of the Church should state in his will, or make any general statement, that he wished to be cremated, the Church authorities would not step in and interfere but would consider it something with which they had no official concern.

From the beginning of time it has been the custom to bury the dead, and in no sense whatever can I, or would I, speak in a manner to have my thoughts considered as a doctrine of the Church. I can express only my personal view, which is that when the time comes for me to die, I desire to have my body laid away in the place selected by the side of my loved ones. This custom is in keeping with historical tradition.

ESSENTIAL PARTICLES WILL BE RESTORED

It is true that the mortal body in due time returns to the earth as the Lord predicted that it should. Much of the cremated body is carried off into the air and only a small portion of ash remains. However it is impossible to destroy a body. It makes no difference whether a body is consumed by fire, buried in the depths of the sea, or placed in the tomb, the time will come when every essential particle will be called back again to its own place, and the individual whose body was laid away, or scattered to the winds, will be reassembled with every essential part restored. It was to bring to pass this restoration that Jesus died upon the cross, and it is by his command that the individual elements will be called back to their own place. Jesus said to the Jews:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live:

For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself;

And hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man.

Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming in the which all that are in their graves shall hear his voice. And shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. (John 5:25-29.)

THE RESURRECTION FROM A SCIENTIFIC POINT OF VIEW

Dr. Joseph S. Amussen, several years ago, wrote an article on the resurrection from the scientific point of view. From that article I quote the following:

There is a a "star-dust" in our bodies. A glorious substance that is an inheritance from the divine past.

It is a material that is immortal and links the eternity of the past with that of the future. It is a a "star-dust" which forms the intelligent and organizing principles which compose our real, individual bodies, and which clothes itself with the food substances we assimilate and use temporarily.

Joseph Smith was the first to call attention to these particles of matter. He called them the fundamental parts of our bodies.

It is interesting to note that scientists are approaching the same conception which was first given to the world by the Prophet.

In this article statements made by the prophets of God and by men of science will be compared in an effort to show that science is beginning to support this doctrine of the resurrection as held by the Latter-day Saints.

In discussing the resurrection, Elder Orson Pratt remarked that man's body changes every seven years. The Prophet Joseph Smith who was present, then made this statement:

"There is no fundamental principle belonging to a human system that ever goes into another in this world or the world to come; I care not what the theories of men are. We have the testimony that God will raise us up, and he has the power to do it. If anyone supposes that any part of our bodies, that is, the fundamental parts thereof, ever goes into another body, he is mistaken."—History of the Church, Vol. 5:339.

While reading The Romance of Chemistry, by J. Arthur Thompson, I came across these words:

"Some biologists hold the view that there is an 'ultimate molecule' of life hidden in the protoplasm, which holds the secret of the endless building up and breaking down. Sir Ray Lankester gives this 'supreme life stuff' the name of 'plastogen,' and says in regard to its workings that while they can be grouped with the chemical and physical qualities of other bodies, they so far transcend them in complexity and in immensity of result, (the whole creation of plant and animal life) that their appearance constitutes in effect, a new departure, a sudden and to us unaccountable acquirement."

This corroborates the teachings of the Prophet, and indicates that men of science are beginning to recognize the doctrine of a "fundamental principle" of matter in our bodies; and some, to give it a name, refer to it in such terms as "the ultimate molecule of life," "supreme life stuff," and "plastogen." (The Improvement Era, Vol. 30, p. 701.)

WORLDLINESS DENIES RESURRECTION

One reason for cremation, presumably, is that the world today, even much of the so-called Christian world, is denying that there is to be any resurrection. Therefore the mortal body returns to dust never to rise again. However, the resurrection is literally a coming forth from the dead of the mortal body, with every part that is an essential part intact and immortalized that the body will not die again. It is true that the immortal body will be purified, and gross material that is not an essential part will be eliminated. It makes no difference whatever as to the disposal of the body, every essential part will be restored to its proper frame. Resurrected persons will appear just as they did in mortal life, only with bodies that are celestial, bodies that are terrestrial, bodies telestial, and other bodies that receive no glory whatever. But each will maintain its individual identity and will be so recognized after the resurrection. (Alma 11:43-44.)
