Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

26

Marriage in Heaven

Question: "How do you reconcile the words of Jesus in Matthew 22:23-31 and in Luke 20:27-38 with the belief that there is to be marriage in heaven? These passages seem to be clear that such is not the case and contradict the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The matter came up in our class, and no one seemed to be able to give a proper explanation."

Answer: The words of the Savior to the Sadducees in answer to their question are perfectly correct in this instance. This is made clear when we discover that the questioning Sadducees did not believe in the resurrection of the dead; they did not believe in any marriage hereafter. Therefore, there was no other answer which the Lord could have given them. To get this matter clearly before us we must understand the story which is as follows:

Then came to him certain of the Sadducees, which deny that there is any resurrection; and they asked him,

Saying, Master, Moses wrote unto us, If any man's brother die, having a wife, and he die without children, that his brother should take his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother.

There were therefore seven brethren: and the first took a wife, and died without children.

And the second took her to wife, and he died childless.

And the third took her; and in like manner the seven also; and they left no children, and died.

Last of all the woman died also.

Therefore in the resurrection whose wife of them is she? for seven had her to wife.

And Jesus answering said unto them, The children of this world marry, and are given in marriage:

But they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage:

Neither can they die any more: for they are equal unto the angels; and are the children of God, being the children of the resurrection.

Now that the dead are raised, even Moses shewed at the bush, when he calleth the Lord the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.

For he is not a God of the dead, but of the living: for all live unto him. (Luke 20:27-38.)

HARMONIOUS WITH LATTER-DAY DOCTRINE

This answer from the Lord was in keeping with their folly. It is the same doctrine that he gave to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as follows:

Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion.

Will I accept of an offering, saith the Lord, that is not made in my name?

Or will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed?

And will I appoint unto you, saith the Lord, except it be by law, even as I and my Father ordained unto you, before the world was?

I am the Lord thy God; and I give unto you this commandment—that no man shall come unto the Father but by me or by my word, which is my law, saith the Lord.

And everything that is in the world, whether it be ordained of men, by thrones, or principalities, or powers, or things of name, whatsoever they may be, that are not by me or by my word, saith the Lord, shall be thrown down, and shall not remain after men are dead, neither in nor after the resurrection, saith the Lord your God.

For whatsoever things remain are by me; and whatsoever things are not by me shall be shaken and destroyed.

Therefore, if a man marry him a wife in the world, and he marry her not by me nor by my word, and he covenant with her so long as he is in the world and she with him, their covenant and marriage are not of force when they are dead, and when they are out of the world; therefore, they are not bound by any law when they are out of the world.

Therefore, when they are out of the world they neither marry nor are given in marriage; but are appointed angels in heaven; which angels are ministering servants, to minister for those who are worthy of a far more, and an exceeding, and an eternal weight of glory.

For these angels did not abide my law; therefore, they cannot be enlarged, but remain separately and singly, without exaltation, in their saved condition, to all eternity; and from henceforth are not gods, but are angels of God forever and forever. (D. & C. 132:8-17.)

THE TRUE MEANING OF THE SAVIOR'S ANSWER

So here we have the true understanding of the Savior's answer to the Sadducees. If by any chance, any who believed as they believed, and therefore were married for time only, proved worthy to obtain that world, that is the kingdom of God, they would have to enter there separate and singly to become servants—angels—to wait on those who were worthy of the exaltation. These Sadducees who might be worthy of a place in that kingdom would be in exactly the same condition that members of the Church of Jesus Christ will find themselves, if they likewise, have been content with a civil union only.

It was a very different answer the Lord gave the Pharisees when they came to him tempting him about divorce. The Pharisees believed in the resurrection of the dead, therefore the Lord said to them in relation to marriage:

. . . Have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning made them male and female,

And said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh?

Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let no man put asunder. (Matthew 19:4-6.)

Here we have the doctrine of marriage for eternity most definitely taught by our Redeemer. Why the difference in the answers? The Sadducees denied the resurrection and the future life; the Pharisees accepted both, and each got the answer according to belief and attitude in life. Let it be remembered that the first marriage on this earth was made before there was any death. In that day the Lord said: "It is not good for man to be alone." Therefore he gave him a wife. This marriage was not intended to be broken, and the idea of death and an eternal separation never entered into it.

DOCTRINE MISINTERPRETED BECAUSE OF APOSTASY

Unfortunately in the great apostasy which swept over the earth, the words of the Lord to the Pharisees were misinterpreted because the spirit of revelation had ceased. Therefore the Christian world, Protestant and Catholic, has fallen into this fatal error. Does not your mind go back to the numerous stories and poems that have been written, in which the heart of the poet has yearned for the reuniting of parents and children in the life to come? The Lord has planted in the heart of the honest and devout this yearning, yet they lay away their loved ones in utmost despair. Where is there a father or a mother who loved a child that was taken away by death that has not had the yearning feeling, almost to despair, that they hoped to have the child again? Is this not also true of husbands and wives who love each other? There come in their hearts a rebellion against this popular but terrible doctrine. Have they forgotten the words of the Apostle Paul:

Nevertheless, neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord. (1 Corinthians 11:11.)

And again:

For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,

Of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named. (Ephesians 3:14-15.)
