Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

27

Moses and Elias at the Transfiguration

Question: "What was the purpose of the mission of Moses and Elias at the transfiguration of the Savior, when he took Peter, James, and John with him upon the mountain?"

Answer: It is very apparent that this was a sacred mission which in all of its particulars was not revealed to the world. The only mention of the purpose of that visitation is given by Luke to the effect that Moses and Elias spoke to Jesus in relation to his death which should be accomplished at Jerusalem. The questions put to Jesus by the apostles as they descended from the mountain infer that there was something said in relation to the restoration of all things before the second coming of the Lord. However, they were placed under a strict command not to reveal what had taken place, even to their associates, until after the Savior's resurrection. It is quite evident that much that took place was of such a sacred nature that it was not to be revealed to the world.

PETER'S TESTIMONY

Peter in later years bore witness to the significance of this heavenly vision as a testimony of the divinity of Jesus Christ, in the following words:

For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty.

For he received from God the Father honor and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy mount.

We have also a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts:

Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation.

For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. (2 Peter 1:16-21.)

It seems apparent that while on the mount these three apostles received an endowment and a commission to act as a presidency in the Church after the crucifixion of our Lord. The Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith the following in relation to this spiritual manifestation:

The Priesthood is everlasting. The Savior, Moses and Elias gave the keys to Peter, James and John on the mount, when they were transfigured before him. The Priesthood is everlasting—without beginning of days or end of years; without father, mother, etc. If there is no change in ordinances, there is no change in Priesthood. Wherever the ordinances of the Gospel are administered, there is the Priesthood. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 158.)
