Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

28

The Lord's Appearance to the Brother of Jared

Question: "There are several references testifying to the fact that the Lord appeared to ancient prophets before the flood, yet we read in the Book of Mormon, Ether 3:6-16, that the Lord had never shown himself to man prior to the days of the Brother of Jared. What explanation can be offered to clarify this apparent contradiction?"

Answer: There is no contradiction. When Adam was in the Garden of Eden and before the Fall, he was in the presence of God the Father. He walked with God, for he was free from sin and in possession of an eternal body that could have endured forever. (2 Nephi 2:22.) When he and Eve partook of the forbidden fruit, they were cast out of the presence of the Father and became subject to death, or mortal. From that time forth Jesus Christ became the Advocate and Mediator between the Father and mankind. This fall brought the first, or spiritual death, as well as mortality on Adam. Now there are several references in the Old Testament which declare that the Lord appeared to Enoch and talked with him. Enoch wrote that the Lord commanded him to get on the mount Simeon, and there said Enoch:

I saw the Lord; and he stood before my face, and he talked with me, even as a man talketh one with another, face to face. (Moses 7:4.)

In the Bible all that is written is the following:

And Enoch walked with God after he begat Methuselah three hundred years, and begat sons and daughters:

And all the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty and five years:

And Enoch walked with God: and he was not; for God took him. (Genesis 5:22-24.)

BROTHER OF JARED SAW THE LORD IN HIS FULNESS

It is true that the Savior appeared to the prophets before the flood, but it is evident that he did not reveal himself in the fulness as he did to the Brother of Jared. Talking "face to face," as stated in this revelation, does not mean that the Lord did not appear in a cloud; or, that his body was partially hidden from the view of the prophet. All of this could occur and yet the Lord still be partially, if not completely, hidden from the prophet's view. The great difference rests in this, which the conversation of the Lord with the Brother of Jared clearly indicates: The Savior was conversing with the Brother of Jared in person, yes, evidently face to face, yet the Lord was hidden by a veil. The Brother of Jared knew that the Lord was there, but evidently he did not understand that the Lord had a body apparently of flesh and bones. Through his great faith he was able to see the finger of the Lord when the Lord touched the stones. So astonished did the prophet become that he fell to the earth in fright, fearing that the Lord might strike him. Receiving the assurance that all was well the following conversation occurred:

And the Lord said unto him: Because of thy faith thou hast seen that I shall take upon me flesh and blood; and never has man come before me with such exceeding faith as thou hast; for were it not so ye could not have seen my finger. Sawest thou more than this?

And he answered: Nay; Lord, show thyself unto me.

And the Lord said unto him: Believest thou the words which I shall speak?

And he answered: Yea, Lord, I know that thou speakest the truth, for thou art a God of truth, and canst not lie. (Ether 5:9-12.)

Then the Lord revealed to him his entire body, and then he said:

And never have I showed myself unto man whom I have created, for never has man believed in me as thou hast. Seest thou that ye are created after mine own image? Yea, even all men were created in the beginning after mine own image.

Behold, this body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I created after the body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit will I appear unto my people in the flesh. (Ibid., 3:15-16.)

So the Savior showed to the Brother of Jared his entire body just as it would appear when he dwelt among men in the flesh.

MANY SAW CHRIST AFTER HIS RESURRECTION

It is a reasonable conclusion for us to reach, and fully in accordance with the facts, that the Lord had never before revealed himself so completely and in such a manner. We may truly believe that very few of the ancient prophets at any time actually beheld the full person of the Lord. It is very likely that Moses saw him. Generally the prophets saw him in vision in the years before his resurrection. Since that time he has been seen. The angel in the Book of Revelation describes his glorious body; so did Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, when the Lord appeared to them in the Kirtland Temple. He appeared to the Nephites, and they had the opportunity to see the wounds in his hands and feet as did also the disciples in Jerusalem. When the Savior appears to the Jews as their deliverer, they will see him in person and shall make inquiry as to where he received the wounds in his hands and feet. He will answer them: "Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends." (Zechariah 13:6.)
