Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

31

The Savior and the Power of Death

Question: "We are taught that Jesus was not subject to death. The question has arisen in our class whether or not if he had lived a natural life would he have died a natural death?"

Answer: Any speculation of this nature is unprofitable for discussion in any of our priesthood quorums or auxiliary classes. Jesus came here to fulfil a definite mission which was assigned to him before the foundation of this earth was laid. He is spoken of in the scriptures as "the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world." He volunteered to come, in the Meridian of Time, to redeem men from the fall which would come upon them through the transgression of Adam.

Contrary to the prevailing notion in the world, the mortal probation was decreed in the councils in heaven, long before Adam was placed on the earth. We are informed in the revelations the Lord has given us that we all lived in the pre-existence as spirits, and the offspring of God. In order that the eternal plan of progression might be accomplished it would be necessary for these spirits to have a mortal probation, obtaining tabernacles of flesh and bones for their immortal spirits. Adam and Eve were sent to the earth to people it and to create bodies for these spirits. When they, Adam and Eve, were placed on the earth they were given bodies made from the dust of the earth, and the Lord placed in these bodies their spirits. While they were in the Garden of Eden, they were not subject to death and could have remained in that state forever. Had they so determined to do, they would have remained without accomplishing the purpose of their physical creation which was to multiply and fill the earth with their offspring. It was never the intention that this should be, but that by a transgression of the law under which they lived, the way would be opened for them to fulfil this great commandment of increase. Therefore it became necessary for them to partake of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and by doing so they made it possible for the earth to be peopled with their posterity. The fulfilling of this commandment resulted in bringing mortality upon them, and they became subject to death, and this death was inherited by every creature.

MORTALITY AN ESSENTIAL PART OF EXISTENCE

This mortal existence was an essential part of the great plan of redemption. We are informed that it is a probationary state where we are to be proved to see if we will be true to the commandments of our Eternal Father, walking by faith and shut out of his presence and becoming subject to the temptations, trials, pains and also the joy and pleasure which we find in mortality.

Paul has said of this mortal existence:

For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.

Now if any man build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble;

Every man's work shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is.

If any man's work abide which he hath built thereupon he shall receive a reward.

If any man's work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss: but he himself shall be saved; yet so as by fire. (1 Corinthians 3:11-15.)

The bringing of mortality into the world, which was so essential to our ultimate worthiness for rewards or punishment, made it essential that there be some power of redemption. This redemption had to be infinite, for it was to restore to every creature that which had been taken away from this world by death. The Savior said to the Jews:

Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again.

No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father. (John 10:17-18.)

How he received this power is explained by Luke. Jesus is the only person born into this world who did not have an earthly father. The Father of his body is also the Father of his Spirit, and the Father of the spirits of all men. From his Father he obtained eternal life; from his mother he obtained the power to die, for his mother was a mortal woman. From her he got his blood, and from his Father he got his immortality. Thus having the power to lay down his life and take it again, he was able to pay the price of Adam's transgression, and redeem all creatures from the grave.

INFINITE ATONEMENT REQUIRED

The clearest understanding of the Savior's mission is obtained from the Book of Mormon. Here is a quotation from the teachings of Jacob, the brother of Nephi, who spoke not only to his people, but to the Gentiles of this dispensation. In relation to the divine mission of Jesus Christ he said:

Wherefore, it must needs be an infinite atonement—save it should be an infinite atonement this corruption could not put on incorruption. Wherefore, the first judgment which came upon man must needs have remained to an endless duration. And if so, this flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more.

O the wisdom of God, his mercy and grace! For behold, if the flesh should rise no more our spirits must become subject to that angel who fell from before the presence of the Eternal God, and became the devil, to rise no more. And our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself; yea, to that being who beguiled our first parents, and transformeth himself nigh unto an angel of light, and stirreth up the children of men unto secret combinations of murder and all manner of secret works of darkness.

O how great the goodness of our God, who prepareth a way for our escape from the grasp of this awful monster; yea, that monster, death and hell, which I call the death of the body, and also the death of the spirit.

And because of the way of deliverance of our God, the Holy One of Israel, this death, of which I have spoken, which is the temporal, shall deliver up its dead; which death is the grave. (2 Nephi 9:7-11.)

CHRIST HAD LIFE IN HIMSELF

There are many other writings in the Book of Mormon which teach us of the divine mission of Jesus Christ, also in the Doctrine and Covenants, words that are very plain and full of meaning. The Savior taught his disciples and the Jews also in plainness, but before his crucifixion they could not understand. The prophets of old likewise spoke of the ministry of Christ and the purpose of his atonement. Chapter 53 of Isaiah is a synopsis of the life and mission of our Lord. What a dreadful situation we would have been in without this infinite atonement! Our bodies returning to the dust there to remain forever; our spirits becoming subject to Satan, and we would have had no recourse. How grateful we should be for the mercies of our Eternal Father and his beloved Son that the way was opened for our escape.

Satan, from the beginning, was determined to destroy the whole human family. No doubt he felt, after he had induced Adam and Eve to take a course which brought upon them banishment from the presence of God, and the mortal death, that he had accomplished his purpose. To him death meant that the spirits of all men would become subject to him forever. The atonement of Jesus Christ released all creatures subject to death from Satan's grasp. Therefore the resurrection of the dead shall be as infinite as is the fall.

It is foolish for us to be speculating on what would have been had Jesus refused to accomplish his mission, and whether had he done so, would he eventually have died as other men die. The fact remains that he had life in himself and withal the power to die. "No man taketh it from me, I lay it down of myself." (John 10:18.) He came to be an infinite atonement and by the shedding of his blood, pay to death and hell a debt, giving back his blood, the earthly element, and insuring to every creature immortality for the redemption had to be as universal as the fall.
