Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

32

Plural Gods

Question: "ln the book, 'Doctrines of Salvation,' Vol. 1, at the bottom of Page 11 and top of Page 12, we find a statement by the Prophet Joseph Smith about plural Gods. We also find in the Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses, Chapter 1, Verse 6, the following: 'And I have a work for thee, Moses, my son; and thou art in the similitude of mine Only Begotten, and mine Only Begotten is and shall be the Savior, for he is full of grace and truth; but there is no God besides me, and all things are present with me, for I know them all.' These statements appear to be contradictory. Please explain this apparent contradiction."

Answer: In order to understand the doctrine of plural Gods, it is necessary to consider more fully the remarks made by the Prophet Joseph Smith in discourses delivered in the spring and early summer of 1844. Therefore I quote from one of these talks delivered June 16, 1844, after reading the following text from Revelation 1:6:

"And hath made us kings and priests unto God and his Father; to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen."

It is altogether correct in the translation. Now, you know that of late some malicious and corrupt men have sprung up and apostatized from the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and they declare that the Prophet believes in a plurality of Gods, and, lo and behold! we have discovered a very great secret, they cry—"The Prophet says there are many Gods, and this proves that he has fallen."

It has been my intention for a long time to take up this subject and lay it clearly before the people, and show what my faith is in relation to this interesting matter. I have contemplated the saying of Jesus (Luke 17th chapter, 26th verse)—"And as it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man." And if it does rain, I'll preach this doctrine, for the truth shall be preached.

I will preach on the plurality of Gods. I have selected this text for that express purpose. I wish to declare I have always and in all congregations when I have preached on the subject of the Deity, it has been the plurality of Gods. It has been preached by the elders for fifteen years.

I have always declared God to be a distinct personage, Jesus Christ a separate and distinct personage from God the Father, and the Holy Ghost was a distinct personage and a Spirit: and these constitute three distinct personages and three Gods. If this is in accordance with the New Testament, lo and behold! we have three Gods anyhow, and they are plural, and who can contradict it?

"Our text says, "And hath made us kings and priests unto God and his Father." The apostles have discovered that there were Gods above, for Paul says God was the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. I am bold to declare I have taught all the strong doctrines publicly, and always teach stronger doctrines in public than in private.

John was one of the men, and apostles declared they were made kings and priests unto God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. It reads just so in the Revelation. Hence, the doctrine of a plurality of Gods is as prominent in the Bible as any other doctrine. It is all over the face of the Bible. It stands beyond the power of controversy. A wayfaring man, though a fool, need not err therein. Paul says there are Gods many and Lords many. I want to set it forth in a plain simple manner; but to us there is but one God—that is pertaining to us; and he is in all and through all. But if Joseph Smith says there are Gods many and Lords many, they cry, "Away with him! Crucify him! Crucify him!" . . .

REVEALED TRUTH TO JOSEPH SMITH

Some say I do not interpret the scripture the same as they do. They say it means the heathen gods. Paul says there are Gods many and lords many; and that makes a plurality of Gods, in spite of the whims of all men. Without a revelation, I am not going to give them the knowledge of the God of heaven. You know and I testify that Paul had no allusion to the heathen gods. I have it from God, and get over it if you can. I have a witness of the Holy Ghost, and testimony that Paul had no allusion to the heathen gods in the text. I will show from the Hebrew Bible that I am correct, and the first word shows a plurality of Gods; and I want the apostates and learned men to come here and prove to the contrary, if they can. An unlearned boy must give you a little Hebrew.

"Berosheit baurau Eloheim ait aushamayeen vehau auraits," rendered by King James' translators, "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth." I want to analyze the word Berosheit. Rosh, the head; Sheit, a grammatical termination; the Baith was not originally put there when the inspired man wrote it, but it has been since added by an old Jew. Baurau signifies to bring forth; Eloheim is from the word Eloi, God, in the singular number; and by adding the word heim, it renders it Gods. It read first, "In the beginning the head of the Gods brought forth the Gods," or, as others have translated it, "The head of the Gods called the Gods together." I want to show a little learning as well as other fools. . . .

The head God organized the heavens and the earth. I defy all the world to refute me. In the beginning the head of the Gods organized the heavens and the earth. Now the learned priests and the people rage, and the heathen imagine a vain thing. If we pursue the Hebrew text further, it reads, "Berosheit baurau Eloheim ait aashamayeen vehau auraits"—"The head one of the Gods said, Let us make a man in our own image." I once asked a learned Jew, "If the Hebrew language compels us to render all words ending in heim in the plural, why not render the first Eloheim plural?" He replied, "That is the rule with few exceptions; but in this case it would ruin the Bible." He acknowledged I was right. I come here to investigate these things precisely as I believe them. Hear and judge for yourselves; and if you go away satisfied, well and good.

In the very beginning the Bible shows there is a plurality of Gods beyond the power of refutation. It is a great subject I am dwelling on. The word Eloheim ought to be in the plural all the way through—Gods. The head of the Gods appointed one God for us; and when you take that view of the subject, it sets one free to see all the beauty, holiness and perfection of the Gods. All I want is to get the simple, naked truth, and the whole truth.

They found fault with Jesus Christ because he said he was the Son of God, and made himself equal with God. They say of me, like they did of the apostles of old, that I must be put down. What did Jesus say? "Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are Gods? If he called them Gods unto whom the word of God came, and the scriptures cannot be broken, say ye of him whom the Father hath sanctified and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest because I said I am the Son of God?" It was through him that they drank of the spiritual rock. Of course he would take the honor to himself. Jesus, if they were called gods unto whom the word of God came, why should it be thought blasphemy that I should say I am the Son of God? (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 369-374. See also John 10:34-36; Psalm 82:6.)

TO US THERE IS ONE GODHEAD

It is rather strange that Latter-day Saints read the revelations of the Lord as they are found in the Bible, Doctrine and Covenants, Book of Mormon, and Pearl of Great Price where there are so many references in relation to the eternal celestial kingdom and the exaltation which is promised to those who are faithful and true to the end and seemingly fail to comprehend them. It is perfectly true, as recorded in the Pearl of Great Price and in the Bible, that to us there is but one God. Correctly interpreted God in this sense means Godhead, for it is composed of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. This Godhead presides over us, and to us, the inhabitants of this world, they constitute the only God, or Godhead. There is none other besides them. (1 Corinthians 8:5-6.) To them we are amenable, and subject to their authority, and there is no other Godhead unto whom we are subject. However, as the Prophet has shown, there can be, and are, other Gods.

Have we overlooked the fact that the scriptures, ancient and modern, hold out the promise to all those who are faithful and true to every covenant and obligation which the gospel places upon them that the reward will be that they shall become gods? Jesus taught this doctrine to the Jews. It is interwoven throughout all of our Standard Works. The promise has been made to all who are just and true, that they shall become sons and daughters of God, members of his household, (Ephesians 3: 14-15.) "joint heirs with Jesus Christ," (Romans 8:17.) and entitled to the fulness of exaltation.

Then shall they be gods, because they have no end; therefore shall they be from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue; then shall they be above all, because all things are subject unto them. Then shall they be gods, because they have all power, and the angels are subject unto them. (D. & C. l32:20.)

INNUMERABLE GALAXIES IN THE UNIVERSE

In the days of the Prophet Joseph Smith the idea throughout the world in relation to the universe was exceedingly vague. Great discoveries were made during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The knowledge is now revealed that there are throughout the universe millions, in fact, innumerable galaxies—island universes—of stars. Formerly it was the doctrine of astronomers that these were patches of nebulae, or clouds of matter in course of formation into worlds. Their more powerful and delicate instruments have now revealed they are enormous clusters of stars, separated from each other by thousands, perhaps by millions, of light years from each other. Thus the great universe of stars has multiplied beyond the comprehension of men. Evidently each of these great systems is governed by divine law; with divine presiding Gods, for it would be unreasonable to assume that each was not so governed. As the discoveries increase—and we have learned but a few of the principles concerning them—more and more knowledge may be imparted, but the fulness will never come to mortal minds restricted to mundane things. The time will eventually come, when time and mortality are changed and immortality comes, that all things will be made known to those who have obtained the exaltation.
