Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

33

How Can a Spirit Be a Member of the Godhead?

Question: "How do you account for the Holy Ghost being a Spirit also being a member of the Godhead, since we are taught that the spirit without the body cannot receive a fulness of joy? Will the time ever come when the Holy Ghost will receive a body?"

Answer: There is so much in relation to the gospel that we are required to do and so many commandments to observe and ordinances to receive in order that we may obtain an exaltation in the kingdom of God, that we should have no time to enter into speculation in relation to the Holy Ghost. The third member of the Godhead has been assigned to certain duties which are essential in the plan of redemption. We, the members of the Church, should so live that we may have his companionship and thus have our minds quickened, our knowledge increased, and our salvation assured. Without this companionship we are nothing; our minds could not be enlightened; and our comprehension of the everlasting gospel would be impaired. Why not leave matters which in no way concern us alone, and devote our time in gaining knowledge essential to our salvation through the inspired guidance of the Holy Ghost?

NO TIME TO SPECULATE

One of the wisest counsels the Prophet Joseph Smith gave to the members of the Church is to let mysteries alone. In fact we have no time to waste on such things if we employ our time to the essential things in relation to our salvation.

We read in the Pearl of Great Price (Moses 1) that the Savior did a marvelous work as a Spirit. At the command of his Father he created worlds, evidently similar to our own, for the purpose of bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. It was Jesus who gave commandments to Adam after he was driven out of the Garden of Eden and who directed Enoch and Noah before the flood. It was Christ who named Abraham and made the covenant with him that through his posterity all nations would be blessed. He, it was, who called Moses to lead Israel out of Egypt and who wrote with his finger on the tables of stone. He had no body until he was born in Bethlehem. If Christ could do these things as a Spirit, the Holy Ghost can carry out the mind and will of the Father and the Son as a Spirit. We are taught plainly that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are one God, that is one Godhead; that the Holy Ghost knows the mind and will of the Father and the Son and has the mission to teach those who keep the covenants they make with the Lord. We cannot compare ourselves and our destiny with the Holy Ghost and the position he occupies. Speculation on such things is not edifying.

MISSION OF THE HOLY GHOST

After Jesus returned to his Father, the Holy Ghost was sent to his disciples to teach them and bring back things to their minds. Jesus said to them in these words a few hours before he was delivered to his enemies that he would send the Holy Ghost to them:

If ye love me keep my commandments.

And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever;

Even the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you. (John l4:15-17.)

The religious world is without the guidance of the Holy Ghost. Many of the people think they have that great gift, but without baptism by divine authority and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost this gift and guidance are not given, for the Lord most definitely has spoken it. They do have the guidance which comes from the Spirit of Christ, and this gift will lead them to the truth if they will but hearken to it. (D. & C. 84:45-53; Moroni 7:16.) The only exception is that spoken of by Moroni to all who will sincerely read the Book of Mormon with a prayerful heart.

SEEK FOR THAT WHICH HAS BEEN REVEALED

Behold, I would exhort you that when ye shall read these things, if it be wisdom in God that ye should read them, that ye would remember how merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men, from the creation of Adam even down until the time that ye shall receive these things, and ponder it in your hearts.

And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost.

And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things. (Moroni 10:3-5.)

According to the Prophet Joseph Smith the Lord will manifest his truth to the sincere seeker after truth, just as he did with Cornelius, but after the testimony is given, and the person rejects it, there will come no further manifestation.

Too many members of the Church bother themselves about something which does not concern us and which has not been revealed. They neglect the weightier matters and fail to seek for the light and truth which is revealed and also to obtain and be true to the ordinances and covenants so essential to our salvation.
