Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

34

The Mission of the Holy Ghost

Question: "In Matthew 12:31-32, the Savior speaks of the mission of the Holy Ghost: 'Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven.

"'And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come.'

"This has caused me to wonder if the Holy Ghost is placed on a higher plane than the person of Christ himself, yet Jesus is spoken of as the second Personage in the Godhead. Just why Jesus would make blasphemy against the Holy Ghost of greater importance than speaking blasphemy against him, appears to be a little strange."

Answer: It is true that Jesus is the second Personage in the Godhead, and all power and authority were given unto him both in heaven and in earth. (Matthew 28:18.)

The Holy Ghost is the Messenger, or Comforter, which the Savior promised to send to his disciples after he was crucified. This Comforter is, by his influence, to be a constant companion to every baptized person, and to administer unto the members of the Church by revelation and guidance, knowledge of the truth that they may walk in its light. It is the Holy Ghost who enlightens the mind of the truly baptized member. It is through him that individual revelation comes, and the light of truth is established in our hearts. We read in the blessings on the sacrament that if we will keep these commandments; that if we will take upon us the name of Christ, always remember him, and keep his commandments which he has given us, that we may always have his Spirit to be with us. This Spirit of truth, the Savior said, "the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him"; but the true followers of Christ, those who have been baptized for the remission of their sins and have had hands laid upon their heads for the gift of the Holy Ghost, by a duly authorized servant of Jesus Christ, are entitled to this companionship, for "he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you."

WORLD BEREFT OF THE HOLY GHOST

The world is greatly deceived, for many honest souls feel that they have the guidance of the Holy Ghost, but they do not, for the Lord has said that the world cannot receive this great gift. It is true that the Lord does bless and give guidance to many who are not members of the Church, and if they are true seekers after truth, the Holy Ghost will give them a manifestation as he did to Cornelius, also, as Moroni said, an earnest seeker for truth may have a manifestation from the Holy Ghost, but he has no promise of continued manifestations. If they do not heed the first manifestation they are left to themselves. The Lord has given to every man who comes into the world the guidance of the Light of Christ. John said that this gift is the true light, "which lighteth every man that cometh into the world." (John 1:9. Compare Moroni 7:16.) Direction from this Spirit is given to men, whether they believe or whether they do not. It is a free gift to every soul.

The question is, why should blasphemy against the Holy Ghost be a greater evil than to blaspheme the name of God or Jesus Christ? The answer is, because the Father and the Son are not our constant companions. Moreover, the Holy Ghost is Spirit speaking to spirit. When a man has the manifestation from the Holy Ghost, it leaves an indelible impression on his soul, one that is not easily erased. It is Spirit speaking to spirit, and it comes with convincing force. A manifestation of an angel, or even of the Son of God himself, would impress the eye and mind, and eventually become dimmed, but the impressions of the Holy Ghost sink deeper into the soul and are more difficult to erase. When a person denies the truth which has been made manifest to him by power of the Holy Ghost, and which, perhaps, has been repeated time and time again, and then he denies Christ and turns away from the truth and puts Christ to open shame, there can be no forgiveness. Therefore the Savior spoke in this emphatic manner of those who turned against him after once having the light and who crucified him spiritually again.

ANCIENT APOSTLES UNDERSTOOD DOCTRINE

Paul understood this doctrine and so did Peter. Hear what they had to say:

For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost.

And have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come,

If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame. (Hebrews 6:4-6.)

For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the beginning.

For it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after they have known it, to turn from r for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them. (2 Peter 2:20-21. See Answers to Gospel Questions, Vol. 1, pp. 68-74.)
