Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

35

Is the Spirit of the Lord with Every Man?

Question: "During the study of our lesson the statement was made that the Spirit of the Lord has been removed from the earth. This was later defined as being the Spirit of truth which lights every man who comes into the world. Is this so? If it is, why do the missionaries still preach that the Spirit of the Lord is with every man, so they can distinguish between good and evil? Has the Spirit of the Lord been taken away from church members as well as from the world at large? When I joined the Church, I was told the Spirit of the Lord inspired the great men of the earth—doctors, inventors, scientists and others. Who inspires them now?"

Answer: The word of the Lord to Joel is being fulfilled, and has been since the organization of the Church, and the Lord is still pouring out his spirit upon certain individuals who are discovering, inventing, and bringing to pass his purposes in the earth; and he will continue to do so until his purposes are accomplished.

THE SPIRIT OF CHRIST

The Spirit of Christ, or Light of truth, is not to be confounded with the Holy Ghost. The Spirit of Christ, the Lord has revealed, "giveth light to every man that cometh into the world; and the Spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit." (D. & C. 84:46.)

John the apostle has written:

There was a man sent from God, whose name was John.

The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all men through him might believe.

He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light.

That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. (John 1:6-9.)

The Holy Ghost is a Personage of Spirit, the Comforter whom Christ said he would send to enlighten the minds of his disciples, after he left them. While the Light of Christ, or Spirit of Christ, is a gift that every man receives, the Holy Ghost is given only to those who have been baptized for the remission of their sins and had hands laid upon their heads by someone divinely authorized holding the Holy Priesthood of God. Unfortunately thousands in the world think they have this gift, having been deceived by those who do not have this authority, but the Lord said to his disciples:

And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever;

Even the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you. (Ibid., 14:16-17.)

Therefore no matter how good a person may be, he is not entitled to the constant guidance of the Holy Ghost, until he has complied with the commandments, has been duly baptized and confirmed by one who has the divine authority.

INSPIRATION GIVEN TO MEN OF TALENT

When Joel by inspiration stated that the Lord would pour out his spirit upon all flesh, he did not mean that this Spirit which should be poured in such abundance, was to be the Holy Ghost. That the Holy Ghost would be received by some is evident, but it was to be the Light of Christ that was to be so universally received. The many remarkable events, discoveries, and inventions of the later centuries, particularly since the restoration of the gospel, that have been poured out prove this thesis to be true. The time of preparation for the restoration of the gospel commenced several hundred years ago, when there was no one on the earth to perform legal baptisms or bestow the gift of the Holy Ghost. The inspiration given to the so-called reformers, the invention of printing and the making of books that could be placed in the hands of the multitude, the discovery of the western hemisphere and a thousand other things were the beginning of the fulfilment of the prophecy of Joel. These wonders have been coming rapidly since the beginning of the nineteenth century, and particularly since the organization of the Church. In bringing to pass these great discoveries, the Lord has used men who apparently and boastingly have no faith in him, yet because of their talents he has seen fit to use them.

DISCOVERIES CHANGE MANNER OF LIFE

All of these wonderful things that have changed the manner of life and action have come, and are still coming, because the time is here for them, and all is preparatory to the coming of the Son of God. All of this does not prevent the Lord from withdrawing his spirit—that is to say, the guidance in righteousness and truth—from these very same men and many others. He has said:

I, the Lord, am angry with the wicked; I am holding my Spirit from the inhabitants of the earth.

have sworn in my wrath, and decreed wars upon the face of the earth, and the wicked shall slay the wicked, and fear shall come upon every man;

And the saints also shall hardly escape; nevertheless I am the Lord, am with them, and will come down in heaven from the presence of my Father and consume the wicked with unquenchable fire. (D. & C. 63:32-34.)

For I, the Almighty, have laid my hands upon the nations, to scourge them for their wickedness.

And plagues shall go forth, and they shall not be taken from the earth until I have completed my work, which shall be cut short in righteousness. (Ibid., 84:96-97.)

And he that repents not, from him shall be taken even the light which he has received; for my Spirit shall not always strive with man, saith the Lord of Hosts. (Ibid., 1:33.)

THE EVIL RECEIVE INSPIRATION FROM SATAN

The present turmoil and contentions in the world are due to the fact that the leaders of nations are getting their inspiration from Satan, not from the Lord. His Spirit is withdrawn from them, according to his promise, in spiritual things. The Lord would be glad to direct them, but they seek not his counsel. The spirit of the evil one is placing in their minds vain and fantastic notions and leading mankind farther away from the truth as they boast in their own strength, while the Almighty sits in the heavens and no doubt laughs at their folly.

The Spirit of the Lord has not been taken away from those who are willing to keep his commandments.
