Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

36

Was the Holy Ghost on the Earth before the Time of Our Savior?

Question: "In our class discussion the thought was expressed that the Holy Ghost was not upon the earth before nor during the time of the Savior's life and ministry. If it is the function of the Holy Ghost to teach and warn and bear testimony of the mission of the Savior, to be received following baptism, and if we believe the gospel to be the same yesterday, today, and forever, how can we account for the fact the Holy Ghost was not upon the earth until after the death of Jesus Christ? Would it not be according to reason that the Holy Ghost would be upon the earth as long as the gospel was upon the earth?"

Answer: It is an astounding thing that an entire class studying the gospel would not have one member who could settle this question definitely from the scriptures. If the members of the class will read their Book of Mormon, they will find that Lehi and Nephi and all the prophets had the gift of the Holy Ghost, and by that Spirit, Nephi received visions.

If they had read in the Pearl of Great Price, they would have seen that the ancient prophets were guided by the Holy Ghost and that when Adam was baptized, he was caught away by the Spirit of the Lord, and the Spirit of the Lord, or Holy Ghost, descended upon him.

HOLY GHOST PRESENT IN ADAM'S DAY

And it came to pass, when the Lord had spoken with Adam our father, that Adam cried unto the Lord, and he was caught away by the Spirit of the Lord, and was carried down into the water, and was laid under the water and was brought forth out of the water.

And thus he was baptized, and the Spirit of God descended upon him, and thus he was born of the Spirit and became quickened in the inner man. (Moses 6:64-65.)

And in that day the Holy Ghost fell upon Adam, which beareth record of the Father and the Son, saying: I am the Only Begotten of the Father from the beginning, henceforth and forever, that as thou hast fallen thou mayest be redeemed, and all mankind, even as many as will. (Ibid., 5:9.)

It was by the gift of the Holy Ghost that the ancient prophets spoke:

For the prophecy came not in old times by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. (2 Peter 1:21.)

Luke wrote that Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost before the coming of Jesus Christ:

And it came to pass, that when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost. (Luke 1:41.)

Simeon blessed the infant Savior and was filled with the Holy Ghost:

And, behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon; and the same man was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel: and the Holy Ghost was upon him.

And it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost, that he should not see death, before he had seen the Lord's Christ. (Ibid., 2:25-26.)

ALL ANCIENT PROPHETS WERE INSPIRED BY HOLY GHOST

A little ordinary thinking would reveal to us the fact that the ancient prophets could not have spoken by prophecy and revelation unless they were in possession of this great gift. Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel and, in fact, all of the prophets were inspired and revealed to mankind, and more especially to Israel, the commandments of the Lord. It was by this gift that Joseph interpreted the dreams of the butler and the baker and that Daniel received his great visions concerning Israel and our present times.

This error arises in the fact that the disciples of Jesus did not receive the gift of the Holy Ghost while he was with them. The reason for this, in part at least, was due to the fact that they had with them to guide and teach them the second member of the Godhead, even Jesus himself. While he was with them there was no occasion for them to have the companionship of the Holy Ghost. Before the Savior left them, he promised to send them the Comforter, or Holy Ghost. This promise was given only a few hours before his crucifixion, as he was in counsel with them at the Feast of the Passover. On that occasion he said:

And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever;

Even the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you. (John 14:16-17.)

But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. (Ibid., 14:26.)

These are the final words of the Savior to his disciples just before his ascension:

But ye shall receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth. (Acts 1:8.)
