Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

37

"No Man Hath Seen God at Any Time"—a Mistranslation

Question: "How, as the Church claims, could Joseph Smith see God when the Bible clearly states in St. John 1:18, 'No man hath seen God at any time,' and in Exodus 33:20, 'Thou canst not see my face: for there shall no man see me, and live?"

Answer: You quote from Exodus 33:20, "And he said, thou canst not see my face: for there shall no man see me, and live." Yet in the same chapter, Verse 11, it reads thus: "And the Lord spake unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend."

It is to be hoped that you are aware that the Bible has come down to us through many translations and that it has been copied many times; moreover that there is no original manuscript of any of the books of the Bible. The scribes in the beginning and through the years had to write every word by hand. Moreover, the original manuscripts were not written as we write today with separate words but in uncials, that is to say, the words ran together in this fashion sothatitbecameverydifficultto discover the correct meaning, and errors crept in.

No Bible student today believes that the Bible has come down to us in its perfect and original appearance in the manuscripts. Scribes left out words and phrases, just as we do at times in typing, missing one whole line and thus changing the meaning. Moreover, the scribes added or interpreted according to their own opinions at times. These things are quite generally understood. Therefore we find errors and contradictions in the Bible.

GOD APPEARED TO HIS ANCIENT PROPHETS

There are too many passages which declare very definitely that God did appear, "face to face," with his ancient servants. Therefore, passages which declare that no man has seen him, must be in error. For instance, the passage in John 1:18, to which you refer, is likely due to the fact that a translator in more recent years did not believe that God was a Personage and therefore could not be seen. This notion has come down to us since the introduction of the Athanasian Creed in 325 A.D. The Prophet Joseph Smith has given us a correction of this passage as follows:

And no man hath seen God at any time, except he hath borne record of the Son, for except it is through him no man can be saved. (John 1:19, Inspired Version. Compare John 1:18, King James Version.)

Again in 1 John 4:12, the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith the following correction:

No man hath seen God at any time, except them who believe. If we love one and other, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfect in us. (Compare 1 John 4:12, King James Version.)

Now let us consider other verses from John's Gospel, and Authorized Version:

It is written in the prophets, And they shall be all taught of God. Every man therefore that hath heard, and hath learned of the Father, cometh unto me.

Not that any man hath seen the Father, save he which is of God, he hath seen the Father. (John 6:45-46.)

If we were not aware of the fact that mistranslations exist, it would appear that our Savior contradicted himself. The latter verse (John 6:46) does not harmonize with John 1:18.

We read that Abraham talked with God face to face, and he also talked with Enoch and others. (Genesis 5:24; 17:1-9; Moses 1:1-2; 6:43.) The modern world, however, will have none of it and have rejected the living God for one who cannot be seen or heard.
