Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

38

The Craftiness of Satan

Question: "Observing the church activities and recreational programs of other churches, the adoption of the law of tithing in some groups and the moderation of views regarding heaven and hell, it appears that religion is turning towards Mormonism every day. Is it possible that this is evidence that they are being prepared to receive the gospel?"

Answer: While in recent months there has been a blare of trumpets, so to speak, because some sectarian churches have introduced a system of tithing, and perhaps there have come modifications in some instances of former long established doctrines, this does not prove that the Protestant world is coming any nearer to the fundamental principles of the gospel. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has practiced the law of tithing according to the manner in which the Lord revealed it for over one hundred and twenty-five years, and the world has given no heed to their teaching, but when a few sectarian people announce their acceptance of such a doctrine, it is published in newspapers and magazines as a wonderful innovation in religion. It may be true also, that some denominations have modified some former doctrines, such as infant damnation, but you may be assured that they have not been brought any nearer to the truth.

Satan is just as cunning today as he ever was, and he may cause some peoples to modify former teachings, but you may be assured that he has no intention of having them accept any of the fundamental teachings of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. You may be sure he never permits one church or people to have very much of revealed truth. He may have scattered some teachings in order to maintain his deceptions, but he is not leading anyone to the restored gospel.

RELIGIONS DEPART FROM FUNDAMENTAL TRUTHS

The careful study of the faiths and teachings of the various religions today will show you that the people are getting farther and farther away from the fundamental doctrines. Many of the people, formerly devout in some church organization, today are denying the divine inspiration of the Bible. They are willing to accept Christ as a great, perhaps the greatest teacher; but more and more they are denying his divinity, or that he is the Son of God. They look upon the ancient prophets as being semi-civilized, and upon religion as a progressive thing. They maintain that we know more today about God than the ancient prophets did in biblical times. As an example, here is a statement to the effect that "we have advanced a long way in religious tolerance since the days of Elijah," as much as to say that it was merely because he was intolerant that he called down fire from heaven. People profess today to be liberal in their religious thinking, "broad-minded" and far above the "narrow-mindedness" of Moses who gave to Israel such stringent laws. In their thinking, prophets of olden days were ignorant, superstitious, and their leaders imagined that God gave them commandments. Here is something which gives us a true insight into the thinking of this modern world:

As the forehead of man grows broader, so do his creeds;

And his gods they are shaped in his image, and mirror his deeds;

And he clothes them with thunders and beauty, clothes them with music and fire;

Seeing not, as he bows by their altars, that he worships his one desire.

PROGRESSIVE DOCTRINE IS INCREASING

Here is a doctrine that is rapidly growing even among many so-called Christian peoples. The world is getting so broad-minded that tolerance has reached the point that most anything is tolerated. The result is that moral conditions have been retarded and crime has been increased. We are frequently told, even by professed Christians, that the doctrines concerning the Supreme Being have progressed; that the ancients with their prophets who apparently talked with God, were intolerant and that they were led to worship a God of vengeance, although they called him the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Recently the following was published in a respectable religious magazine of one of the great Protestant churches:

"If we truly believe that the spirit lives, and that the corpse is an outworn tent in which it no longer dwells, why not treat it so? But the Prayer Book still commits it to the ground from which it is supposed to come, where it is to rest until the archangel's trumpet summons it to rise incorruptible." The article then goes on to say that in a pagan funeral, the body was buried, or perhaps cremated, which was far more "sensible," since the body was never again to rise. Then the article concluded: "Of course, all cemeteries should be abolished, with the pagan custom of visiting them, and the land used for a productive purpose."

This is a rapidly growing thought in the so-called Christian world. That is to say, that since there is no restoration of the body after death and the spirit is free, all bodies should be destroyed.

ANOTHER WORLDLY MISCONCEPTION

Many years ago the following was published in a semi-religious journal:

In one of Erasmus's "Colloquies" the questions and answers are over the "Apostles' Creed," so called, and, at last the questioner comes to the article of the Creed which in the original is "the Resurrection of the Flesh," but which we usually have softened into "the Resurrection of the Body," though it means the same thing. It proceeds as follows:

"Do you believe in the future Resurrection of the Flesh?"

"It would be vain to believe the other things, if I did not believe this, the chief of all."

"What do you mean when you speak of flesh?"

"The human body, animated with a human soul."

"Will every soul receive its own body which it left at death?"

"That very same, from which it departed. For in the Creed as given by Cyprian it says this flesh."

"But how can it be the body, so many times transmuted from one form to another, can be restored to its original nature that which has but changed its form?"

"I have no concern to ask how it is done. It is enough for me that he has promised it who is so true that he cannot lie, so powerful that whatever he chooses he can do with a nod."

"But what need will there be of the body?"

"That the whole man may be glorified with Christ, who here suffered with Christ."

Then the editor of the paper concludes:

We prefer to talk of the spiritual body, which is not the body of flesh. It is the spiritual body which will arise, that is, will survive; and the spiritual body is the soul immortal. So we interpret Paul. And in the assurance of the eternal life with Christ we rest on His promise, "This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise."

THE WORLD IS NOT APPROACHING REVEALED TRUTH

This doctrine is rapidly growing in the sectarian world. The idea that Jesus Christ did not die to restore the bodies of the children of Adam in the glorious resurrection and give them immortality and eternal life as resurrected beings is the work of Satan and it is rapidly taking hold in the religious world.

The answer then, is no, the world is not modifying its course and bringing it into harmony with the revealed truth. To the contrary, day by day they are separating themselves more and more from the fundamental teachings of our Lord, Jesus Christ. Many of them still deny the mercies of a Just Creator to little children who die without being "christened." They still deny salvation to the dead who died without the opportunity of hearing the gospel and hence could not believe on Jesus Christ. They have closed the heavens against themselves, proclaiming that the canon of scripture is complete, and there is to be no further revelation, no more coming of heavenly messengers and that man must depend on his own reason for such inspiration as he may receive.
