Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

40

The Descendants of Cain

Question: "My study of the scriptures has resulted in some 'unorthodox' conclusions, about which, if untenable, I should like to be put right with respect to the following:

"1. The black race comes through only one of Ham's sons—Canaan.

"2. The people known as Egyptians are not cursed with a black skin but have received another curse barring them from the priesthood. Egyptus was not a black woman.

"3. Negroes are not precluded from holding the priesthood. I call attention to II Nephi 5:21.

"4. The curse pronounced by Noah on Pharaoh 'pertaining to the priesthood' was not because of the color of his skin. The first Pharaoh established an imitation patriarchal order of government patterned after the patriarchal reign of Adam, and also Noah. He could not have that 'right of priesthood' that is, the right of the patriarchal order, because he was not of the proper lineage. The right of that order was conferred upon Shem, the rightful heir."

Answer: In the study of the scriptures, and especially these of a very ancient date, the first consideration is to discover that we have received such a meager record covering centuries of time. From Adam to Abraham is about 2000 years, yet it is all recorded in some twelve or fourteen pages. This history is, therefore, at best only a synopsis and most of the vital things are not even mentioned. Then again, this record has come down to us through manuscripts, many times copied and many times translated so that much of the "plain and precious" parts have been eliminated or changed. If we had the record in its purity and fulness as it was originally given, all of these obscure matters would be cleared.

THE PATRIARCHAL PRIESTHOOD

It is not expedient to go into this matter in the fulness which, perhaps, the subject demands, but here are a few reflections which may not have been considered. It is true that the patriarchal priesthood was handed down from father to son, and that the keys of it belonged to the oldest son by right of primogeniture; but notwithstanding this, all of the faithful men who obtained the priesthood had this patriarchal office from the days of Adam down to the days of Moses. This order of the priesthood was the one conferred upon these ancient prophets and teachers, whether they were the first-born or the last born, if they were faithful.

Your attention is called to the fact that if this priesthood was the right of the first-born only, then the right would have been vested in Japheth, not Shem, after the flood, for Japheth was older than Shem. It could not be, then, on the ground of primogeniture that the descendants of Ham were denied the patriarchal priesthood. If this order was to be followed down to Moses, then Moses should not have been called to lead Israel, for he was of the tribe of Levi. Then again, we should remember that Moses got his priesthood from Jethro, who was not a descendant of Israel, but of Abraham through a younger branch of his family.

BLACK SKIN WAS NOT THE CURSE

The next question: "Was Cain cursed with a black skin?" Technically the black skin was not the curse, but the mark of the curse. The scriptures do not say that Cain was made black, but we read that his descendants were. (Moses 7:22.) We may well suppose that Cain was also black and that this was the mark the Lord placed upon him. (Genesis 4:15.)

The question also arises: "Why was it that Enoch and others of the prophets before the flood, avoided preaching the gospel to the descendants of Cain?" (Moses 7:8, 12.)

We learn that Noah was 450 years old when Japheth was born, and he was 492 when Shem was born, and Ham was born eight years later. Noah was a righteous man, and therefore we must conclude that he followed the admonition of the Lord to multiply. We reach the conclusion then, that Noah had numerous sons and daughters, but only three of his sons and their wives had faith enough to follow Noah into the Ark. What of the others? We get some light from the Pearl of Great Price:

And the Lord said unto Noah: The daughters of thy sons have sold themselves; for behold mine anger is kindled against the sons of men, for they will not hearken to my voice. (Ibid., 8:15.)

THE SEED OF CAIN HAD TO BE PRESERVED

Could it not be said of Ham that he was righteous in that he followed his father into the Ark? The seed of Cain had to be preserved, and Cain was chosen for that mission. It is very possible that Ham received his name due to the fact that he married a black woman. We learn that the names of many individuals in those early years were given them—and often changed—due to incidents which occurred in their lives. For example, Esau's name was changed to Edom, and Jacob's name to Israel, and Abraham was at first known as Abram. It is likely that Ham's name was changed because he had a black wife, for ham is an adjective in Egyptian for black. The name Egyptus means forbidden. (Abraham 1:23.) Is it not reasonable to believe that this has reference to the fact that her descendants, as well as her ancestors, were denied some great blessing? And that that great blessing was denial of the priesthood?

We are informed that the right to the priesthood was denied Pharaoh, and this is in full accord with the attitude of Enoch and others before the flood. Then is it not reasonable to think that Ham named one of his sons Caanan after Cain? We may not be justified in declaring that the daughters of Ham were fair before the flood. We have no evidence that Ham had either sons or daughters before the flood. We have no evidence that it was the sons and daughters of any of the sons who entered the Ark who received the condemnation of the Lord. It could have been sons and daughters of other sons who refused to hearken to their father, and to the sons who rebelled, there may have been daughters who were fair. In fact, this is the plain implication of the scriptures.

SIGNIFICANT EXPRESSIONS OF SCRIPTURE

Reference that the "blood of the Canaanites was preserved in the land," and thus from Ham sprang the race which preserved the curse in the land are significant expressions. Again we read: "Now, Pharaoh being of the lineage by which he could not have right to the priesthood, notwithstanding the Pharaohs would fain claim it from Noah through Ham," is also significant. (Ibid., 1:27.) Is it not possible also that the Lord did curse the land so that it did not produce in its strength to Cain; and is it not possible that the Lord could have modified this in the case of some of Cain's descendants wherein they showed some measure of righteousness? (Ibid., 1:26.)

It is true that the Negro race in their native land occupy lands of much heat, as well as they did before the flood, but such discussion does not aid us much in the matter of the curse placed on Cain and his posterity. In regard to this we should be satisfied with what the Lord has revealed in relation to Cain and his posterity. The Pearl of Great Price tells us definitely that the Egyptians were denied the priesthood. The Prophet taught his brethren that Cain was denied the priesthood and his posterity also to the latest generations. The promise was given that this curse, or restriction, will be removed, when the time comes in some future sphere, when Abel will have posterity. This evidence is collected and published in The Way to Perfection, chapters 15 and 16.

Fortunately for the Negro, he is not denied entrance into the Church. He may be baptized for the remission of his sins and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and if true and faithful to the end, he may enter the celestial kingdom. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints holds out more for the Negro than any other religious denomination. Salvation in the Kingdom of God is open to him, with the promise that in the due time of the Lord, if he receives the gospel, all restrictions will be removed. We have in the Church many good, honest, faithful Negroes who fully understand.

EVERY SPIRIT INNOCENT IN THE BEGINNING

We are taught that every spirit was innocent in the beginning in the spirit world. It is equally true that every spirit comes into this world innocent as far as sin in this world is concerned. It is one of the most abominable, cruel and unreasonable doctrines that Satan ever introduced into this world to lay at the door of innocent, helpless babies, a sin which they never committed. Jesus Christ paid the debt for "original sin," or the bringing of death into the world. No other soul ever born, or that may yet be born, will be charged with any taint because of Adam's Fall. Jesus Christ came and paid that debt, and the sprinkling or touching the body of a baby with water to cleanse it from original sin, and to condemn it to "limbo," and deny it the mercies of the Lord if it is not so touched or sprinkled, comes close to being an unforgivable sin. Spirits who have received the privilege of coming to this earth had their agency in that spirit world. Some of them failed because of rebellion and were cast out with Lucifer. Others were not valiant and therefore came into this world under some restriction, and the Lord deals with them according to their works.
