Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

41

"Though Your Sins Be as Scarlet"

Question: "I am not a member of the Latter-day Saints, however I am taking the liberty of writing you because you have been able to clear up many of the apparent conflicts in the scriptures and doctrines. The Old Testament prophet Isaiah said, 'Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.' This, of course, on conditions of repentance. Now I read where Joseph Smith said that an adulterer cannot enter into the celestial kingdom. ('History of the Church,' Vol. 6:81.) Can you reconcile this for me, or are there actually sins for which we cannot receive forgiveness?"

Answer: This quotation from Isaiah is quite generally misunderstood. It is clear from a careful reading of this first chapter in Isaiah, that this remark had no reference to individuals at all, but to the House of Israel. The first verse states clearly this prophecy is what Isaiah saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem, and in succeeding verses we have the following:

Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evildoers, children that are corrupters: they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger, they are gone away backward. . . .

Your country is desolate, your cities are burned with fire: your land, strangers devour it in your presence, and it is desolate as overthrown by strangers.

And the daughter of Zion is left as a cottage in a vineyard as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers, as a besieged city.

Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorah. . . .

Learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow. (Isaiah 1:4, 7-9, 17.)

The promise now follows. If you, a rebellious nation, will repent and turn again unto the Lord, your sins, "though as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool." (Ibid., 1:18.) So, we see, this is not an individual promise, but one to a rebellious nation. No matter how many prophets the Lord sent to Israel and Judah, and how many times he pleaded with them, all through their history they were rebellious.

Here we find a promise that if they would return to the Lord, their past sins would be forgotten, and he would again receive them as his people and bless them abundantly, and they should continue to be his covenant people. So we see that this passage does not apply to individuals and individual sins.

If you will read through Isaiah, Jeremiah, and others of the prophets, you will discover that Israel and Judah did not repent; they were finally driven from their cherished land and have suffered through the ages for their iniquities.

THE PROMISE OF THE GATHERING

The Lord promised that in the last days he would gather them and cleanse them. They could have been cleansed and retained their promised lands, but they turned from serving the Lord, and this great punishment came upon them. Now, in these last days, the Lord is remembering his promises to them, and the gathering has commenced both to the land of Zion, which is America, and to Jerusalem, or the land of Palestine. Here is a passage from Isaiah in regard to the gathering and cleansing of Judah and Israel:

And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, which shall be left from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shimar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea.

And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth. The envy also of Ephraim (i.e., the Ten Tribes) shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah (the two tribes) shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim.

But they shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines (Gentiles) towards the west; they shall spoil them of the east together: they shall lay their hand upon Edom and Moab; and the children of Ammon shall obey them.

And the Lord shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea; and with his mighty wind shall he shake his hand over the river, and shall smite it in the seven streams, and make men go over dryshod. And there shall be an highway for the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria; like as it was to Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt. (Ibid., 11:11-16.)

LATTER-DAY SAINTS FULFILL PROPHECY OF GATHERING

We claim that this is being fulfilled in the gathering of the Latter-day Saints, and with them the Lord has set up the ensign to the nations. This chapter was quoted by Moroni to the Prophet Joseph Smith who said it was about to be fulfilled.

Again the Lord said to Isaiah:

Fear not: for I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from the east, and gather them from the west;

I will say to the north, Give up; and to the south, Keep not back: bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth;

Even every one that is called by my name: for I have created him for my glory, I have formed him; yea, I have made him. (Ibid., 43: 5-7.)

UNPARDONABLE SINS

All manner of sins may be forgiven except the shedding of innocent blood or the sin against the Holy Ghost. John wrote as follows:

If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto death: I do not say that he shall pray for it.

All unrighteousness is sin: and there is a sin not unto death. (1 John 5:16-17.)

In relation to the sin of adultery, the Lord gave to the Church his law, February 9, 1831, in Kirtland, Ohio. This law covers many subjects and all kinds of transgressions and sins. In the matter of adultery we have the following:

Thou shalt not commit adultery; and he that committeth adultery, and repenteth not, shall be cast out.

But he that has committed adultery and repents with all his heart, and forsaketh it, and doeth it no more, thou shalt forgive.

But if he doeth it again, he shall not be forgiven, but shall be cast out. (D. & C. 42:24-26.)

The deadly nature of this sin is too apparent to be pointed out. However, the Lord looks upon it as a sin second only to the shedding of innocent blood. This revelation was given long before the endowment in the temple was given. For those who violate sacred covenants, the penalty is, and should be, far more severe. The Lord has pointed out in the revelations given to Israel anciently and to the Church in our day that such a sin is not easily forgiven. While it is required of us to forgive all men, the Lord has not said that he is under such necessity. He will forgive whomsoever he will according to the nature of their crime and their true repentance, and after the punishment, if such punishment is necessary, is meted out and justice fully satisfied. The statement of the Prophet in the History of the Church (Documentary History 6:81) is evidently true wherein there has been no repentance or penalty inflicted for such an offense, but if all the requirements are met according to the divine law, there may be forgiveness.
