Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

43

Guided Missiles and Interplanetary Travel

Question: "A group of us were discussing the recent scientific developments in relation to guided missiles, rockets, earth satellites, and the predictions of interplanetary communication and travel, and we wondered what our view should be towards such things. We realize that as long as we are doing all we can to further the work of the Church and to keep the divine commandments, we have nothing to fear from these developments.

"We are curious, however, as to whether such discoveries can be interpreted as part of prophecy; not just the world being in turmoil; but something necessary to the literal fulfilment of a definite prophecy. Specifically, do you believe the knowledge necessary to travel in space is a prerequisite to the return of the Ten Tribes or the City of Enoch? Some members of our group have expressed the belief that God will not allow man to obtain a knowledge of space travel prior to the second coming of our Lord."

Answer: In relation to the present trend of science in the development of synthetic planets which, for a season revolve around the earth, and the trend of science in developing guided missiles, or even the sending of passengers to the moon and other planets, you need not be troubled in the least. It is true, that the use of such dreadful instruments of destruction, as missiles and nuclear bombs, could create great havoc and bring untold destruction in the case of war. That war will eventually come is inevitable, but we should have faith in the Lord that he will protect those who humble themselves and keep his commandments.

There are predictions by the ancient prophets to the effect that great destruction will come and that the wicked will destroy the wicked. Ezekiel has given us the vision of the final destruction before the coming of the Lord, and the Lord revealed a portion of this to the Prophet Joseph Smith which is found in the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 45. Zechariah also, in the closing chapters of his prophecy, has described many of the scenes that will take place in this final struggle and the coming of the Savior, in the midst of the turmoil, to the relief of the persecuted Jews who have gathered to their ancient inheritance. These are very interesting revelations. They will all come to pass in their prophetic order before the reign of peace shall be ushered in. The righteous have been commanded to stand in holy places while these destructions are coming upon the world.

SIGNS IN THE HEAVENS

The Savior said that preceding his coming there would be signs in the heavens. No doubt there will be appearances of commotion among the heavenly bodies. We are informed by prophecy that the earth will reel to and fro. This will make it appear like the stars are falling. The sun will be darkened and the moon look like blood. All of these wonders will take place before Christ comes. Naturally the wonders in the heavens that man has created will be numbered among the signs which have been predicted—the airplanes, the guided missiles, and man-made planets that revolve around the earth.

The Lord will permit men to go just so far and no farther; and when they get beyond the proper bounds, he will check them. The Lord opened to the vision of Moses many of his works. Moses looked into the heavens and found that they "are many, and they cannot be numbered unto man; but they are numbered unto me, for they are mine," the Lord said to him. After showing Moses the great wonders of the heavens, then the Lord said:

"But only an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, give I unto you." Then Moses was content and said, "Be merciful unto thy servant, O God, and tell me concerning this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, and also the heavens [i.e., the heavens belonging to this earth] and thy servant will be content." (Moses 1:33-36.)

MAN IS LIMITED TO HIS OWN EARTH

When man was placed on this earth it became his probationary, or mortal home. Here he is destined to stay until his earth-life is completed, subject to all the mortal conditions outlined in the beginning. There is no prophecy or edict ever given that mortals should seek dominions beyond this earth while they dwell in mortality. Here we are, and here we should be content to stay. All this talk about space travel and the visiting of other worlds brings to mind vividly an attempt long ago made by foolish men who tried to build to heaven.

This earth is our destined earth home. With this in mind, wise men will be content and will wait until the time comes when this earth is cleansed and purified from all sin for heavenly visits, and in that day they will come.

The Lord has been preparing for a long time for the return of the Ten Tribes. Section 133, in the Doctrine and Covenants, has much to say in relation to this great event. Where they are, no man knows, for this is one of the grand secrets the Lord has kept to himself. The wars and rumors of wars and the great destructions that are to come on the earth should give us all far more concern than the thought that man is, or may be able, to visit other planets while a mortal, erring man.

The main thing for Latter-day Saints to do is to keep the commandments humbly, and in humility perform the duties assigned to them. If we will do that then we have nothing to fear.
