Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

44

Predestination and Free Agency

Question: "Will you please explain the words of on Paul in Ephesians, Chapter 1, particularly verses 4 to 7? These verses read as follows:

"'According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love:

"'Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.

"'To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the beloved.

"'In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace.'"

Answer: First let us consult the dictionary in regard to the meaning of the word predestination.

Contrary to the notion of many in the religious world, it does not mean that our Eternal Father passed an edict in the creation that some men were predestined, or appointed, to eternal condemnation and some to receive eternal life. The simple meaning is that in the beginning laws were adopted by which man, when he received this mortal life, would be subject to abide by certain definite rules and regulations which we call the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

The decree went forth that those who were obedient to the laws and commandments designed for observance in this life would be blessed with eternal life, and those who rebelled would be subject to such punishment as their deeds merited. This is a decree that cannot be broken. Each individual would be judged by his individual acts. If he did well, then he would receive the reward of exaltation, and those who were faithful and true would become the sons and daughters of God and dwell eternally with him as his heirs entitled to the fulness of his kingdom. (Romans 8:12-18; Ephesians 3:14-15.)

FREE AGENCY IS A GIFT OF GOD

Free agency is one of the greatest gifts of God. There could be no salvation, neither punishment for sin, without it. It was this great principle that Satan endeavored to destroy and for which Jesus died upon the cross, and as the poet has stated it, we, each and all, make our own choice. We can accept the mission of Jesus Christ and be true to him, or we can rebel and receive the merited punishment. We are free agents in all these matters.

Know this, that every soul is freeTo choose his life and what he'll be;For this eternal truth is given,That God will force no man to heaven.

He'll call, persuade, direct aright—Bless him with wisdom, love, and light—In nameless ways be good and kind,But never force the human mind.—Wm. C. Gregg
