Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

45

Archaeological Investigation and the Book of Mormon

Question: "Do you know of any archaeologist who is not a member of the Church who has used the Book of Mormon as a guide in his investigations? Do you know of any archaeologist who has joined the Church because of what is written in the Book of Mormon? We have heard that such is the case."

Answer: We have no authentic evidence that archaeologists have depended on what is written in the Book of Mormon to aid them in their scientific research. It is true that such a rumor has been circulated, but so far as we know without any evidence in fact, and no such statement has ever gone forth with authority from any authorized official of the Church.

There are occasions when archaeologists have come into the Church through their reading of the Book of Mormon. Dr. Robert Thomas Hill, a scientist, came in the Church primarily through his testimony of the truth of the Book of Mormon. A. Hyatt Verrill, a scientist and archaeologist, likewise became a member of the Church. There may have been many others. However, we have never associated their research with what is recorded in the Book of Mormon.

The writer is acquainted with Mrs. Verrill and has corresponded with her in relation to her genealogical research and temple work. A. Hyatt Verrill and his wife were baptized by President Heber Meeks in the Southern States Mission, February 4, 1945, at West Palm Beach, Florida. He was born in New Haven, Connecticut, July 23, 1871, attended Hopkins Grammar School and Yale University. He was interested in the American Indian, and the old civilization of the New World, and wrote books on these topics. The Book of Mormon had great influence on him. The following comment is from an article in The Improvement Era, Vol. 48, 1945, and is from the pen of Brother Verrill:

TESTIMONY OF A. HYATT VERRILL

I have no doubt that the Book of Mormon is a religious record of these early South Americans, just as much as the Bible is a record of the ancient Israelites. In all my research I have not found anything which does not harmonize with the Book of Mormon.

I am seventy-three years old and have studied every known religion that is in the earth today. I have joined none of them because they did not have the truth; but I am happy that I have found the truth in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Some of the accomplishments of Brother Verrill can be found in volumes of Who's Who In America.

It is the personal opinion of the writer that the Lord does not intend that the Book of Mormon, at least at the present time, shall be proved true by any archaeological findings. The day may come when such will be the case, but not now. The Book of Mormon is itself a witness of its truth, and the promise has been given most solemnly that any person who will read it with a prayerful heart may receive the abiding testimony of its truth. Following is the promise of witnesses:

Wherefore, at that day when the book shall be delivered unto the man of whom I have spoken, the book shall be hid from the eyes of the world, that the eyes of none shall behold it save it be that three witnesses shall behold it, by the power of God, besides him to whom the book shall be delivered; and they shall testify to the truth of the book and the things therein.

And there is none other which shall view it, save it be a few according to the will of God, to bear testimony of his word unto the children of men; for the Lord God hath said that the words of the faithful should speak as if it were from the dead.

Wherefore, the Lord God will proceed to bring forth the words of the book, and in the mouth of as many witnesses as seemeth him good will he establish his word; and wo be unto him that rejecteth the word of God! (2 Nephi 27:12-14.)

THE DIVINE LAW OF WITNESSES

It is the divine law that in the mouths of two or more witnesses the Lord establishes his work, not through scientific research or study. This law was given to Israel, and our Savior referred to it when challenged by the wicked Jews who accused him of having no witness in his behalf that he was the Son of God. That conversation is worthy of presenting here.

Then spake Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life.

The Pharisees therefore said unto him, Thou bearest record of thyself; thy record is not true.

Jesus answered and said unto them, Though I bear record of myself, yet my record is true: for I know whence I came, and whither I go; but ye cannot tell whence I come, and whither I go.

Ye judge after the flesh; I judge no man.

And yet if I judge, my judgment is true: for I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me.

It is also written in your law, that the testimony of two men is true.

I am one that bear witness of myself, and the Father that sent me beareth witness of me. (John 8:12-18.)

True to this principle of divine witnesses, the Lord declared that the Book of Mormon would bear witness of itself, to the condemnation of all who should read and reject it; but this was not all, he would appoint witnesses to bear record of it to the world. Therefore, he chose three special witnesses, who not only beheld the plates from which the Book of Mormon came, but did so in the presence of an angel. The testimony of these three men is printed in each copy of the Book of Mormon. These men have declared that this presentation of the plates also received the testimony of God who spoke to them and commanded them to bear witness of the book to all the world. Each of these three remained true to that testimony to their death, never wavering no matter what else they may have done.

Besides these three were eight others who also testified to seeing the plates, and not one of these ever denied that testimony, though some could not stand the extreme pressure which persecution put upon them.

In this manner the Lord fulfilled the law of divine witnesses. The people in the world are therefore duly warned, and if they fight against the Book of Mormon and condemn its teachings, they shall answer for it before the judgment seat of God.
