Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

47

Why Does Not the Doctrine and Covenants Contain More Revelation?

Question: "From the teaching of continuous and direct revelation to the President of the Church, the question is frequently asked why the Doctrine and Covenants has not had more revelations added. Are there direct revelations and prophecies from the Lord to our presidents of recent date that are available to members?"

Answer: When the Lord has a revelation to be placed in the Doctrine and Covenants he will indicate it. The Doctrine and Covenants does not contain all the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith. It is a "selection" of revelations which contain doctrines and commandments covering every phase of salvation, which, if we will follow them, will direct us to the celestial kingdom. The Lord has given revelation to each of the presidents of the Church, but it is unnecessary that every word revealed should be added to that volume. President Wilford Woodruff said:

I have had the administration of angels in my day and time, though I never prayed for an angel. I have had, in several instances, the administration of holy angels. . . . The Lord revealed to me by vision, by revelations, and by the Holy Spirit, many things that lay before me. (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, pp. 288, 300.)

THE LORD HAS GIVEN REVELATIONS TO ALL PRESIDENTS

President Brigham Young had similar experiences, and the revelations of the Lord were with him in directing the pioneers across the plains. He had the revelations from the Lord in the building of colonies and cities throughout the western territory and in sending forth men and women to colonize them. The history which is written gives evidence of that inspiration. President John Taylor also was directed during many trying days by revelation from the Lord. President Joseph F. Smith was likewise led, and we have at our command his vision of the redemption of the dead. (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, p. 601. Read also pages 596-602.) President Heber J. Grant had the spirit of prophecy and revelation, to the writer's knowledge, for the benefit of the members of the Church, and so has it been down to the present day.

Can you tell me why some members of the Church are clamoring for more revelation to be placed in the Doctrine and Covenants, when most of those who do are not keeping the commandments of the Lord that are already revealed? What privilege does a person have to ask for more revelation, when he does not conform his life to the commandments already given? There is a very significant statement in Section 59 of the Doctrine and Covenants as follows:

And they (the saints who are faithful) shall also be crowned with blessings from above, yea, and with commandments not a few, and with revelations in their time—they that are faithful and diligent before me. (D. & C. 59:4.)

DO WE READ WHAT GOD HAS ALREADY REVEALED?

There is also a very significant saying given by prophecy by Nephi to his people that Latter-day Saints should think about and heed. It is as follows, and was given because the Nephites had become indifferent to the commandments the Lord had given them:

Behold, this is the doctrine of Christ, and there will be no more doctrine given until after he shall manifest himself unto you in the flesh. And when he shall manifest himself unto you in the flesh, the things which he shall say unto you shall ye observe to do.

And now I, Nephi, cannot say more; the Spirit stoppeth mine utterance, and I am left to mourn because of the unbelief and the wickedness, and the ignorance, and the stiffneckedness of men; for they will not search knowledge, nor understand, great knowledge, when it is given unto them in plainness, as plain as word can be. (2 Nephi 32:6-7.)

We, the members of the Church, should heed the admonition of Nephi, for there exists among us the same stiffneckedness and lack of seeking for knowledge, yet a clamoring by many for more to be revealed. Let us learn to observe the revelations already given, then we may in reason ask for more. We are even now aware that many of the revelations contained on the plates from which comes the Book of Mormon, have been withheld from us because we have not proved ourselves worthy to receive them. In relation to these sacred historical writings, the following is revealed:

For the Lord said unto me: They shall not go forth unto the Gentiles until the day that they shall repent of their iniquity, and become clean before the Lord.

And in that day that they shall exercise faith in me, saith the Lord, even as the brother of Jared did, that they may become sanctified in me, then will I manifest unto them the things which the brother of Jared saw, even to the unfolding unto them all my revelations, saith Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of the heavens and of the earth, and all things that in them are. (Ether 4:6-7.)

EACH MEMBER SHOULD HEED COUNSEL

Let us one and all take an inward look. Perhaps it is because we have not humbled ourselves; because we have failed to heed the commandments and to accept and abide in the revelations already given, that there is not more given to us. It is my humble opinion that we are receiving council by inspiration, or revelation, at every general conference of the Church. Would it not be wise for the members of the Church to pay more heed to these counsels and prepare ourselves for more to come?
