Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

48

The Inspired Version of the Bible

Question: "When was the Inspired Version of the Bible first published and why isn't it used more universally by the Church today? I understand the Reorganized Church published this translation."

Answer: The most important part of this revision of the scriptures was published by the Church as far back as 1851, in the Pearl of Great Price. This is known as the "Book of Moses." This begins with the "Vision of Moses" given to the Prophet Joseph Smith as early as June 1830, and continues with the account of creation and the history of man up to the time of the building of the Ark, or to the account as given in Genesis up to Verse 13 of Chapter 6.

The Reorganized Church did not publish the "Inspired Translation" until 1867. The original manuscript of this revision was in the possession of the widow of Joseph Smith who refused to accept Brigham Young as the presiding officer of the Church and also refused to turn the manuscript over to the Church. However, a copy of this revision was made by John M. Bernhisel, at the request of Joseph Smith, and this is in the possession of the Church. It was from this copy of the manuscript that the "Book of Moses" was published in the Pearl of Great Price.

REVISION OF BIBLE WAS NOT COMPLETE

The reason why the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has not published the entire manuscript is not due to any lack of confidence in the integrity of Joseph Smith, or doubt as to the correctness of the numerous additions and changes which are not in the Authorized Version of the Bible. The members of the Church do accept fully all of these and additions as having come by divine revelations to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The reason that it has not been published by the Church is due to the fact that this revision was not completed. It was the intention of Joseph Smith, while at Nauvoo, to take the scriptures up again and complete his labors, making numerous corrections which had not been made by him in the earlier revision. It is recorded in the History of the Church that this was his intention. Due to persecution and mobbing this opportunity never came, so that the manuscript was left with only a partial revision.

For all practical purposes the missionaries of the Church have found it advantageous to use the King James translation, which is accepted by most Protestants. Nevertheless many of the missionaries have called attention to some of the passages revised by Joseph Smith which give a plain and more reasonable rendition over that of other translations.

Numerous deletions or faults in translations of Bibles we use today would make it difficult for missionaries to quote chapter and verse from the "Inspired Translation" in their missionary work since the Prophet's revision includes omissions. The King James Version gives us a common ground for proselyting purposes.
