Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

49

Is There Such a Place as Hell?

Question: "Does the Church believe that there is such a place as hell? It seems to me that hell is a place as well as a condition of misery for the souls of the wicked."

The Church does teach that there is a place called hell. Of course we do not believe that all those who do not receive the gospel will eventually be cast into hell. We do not believe that hell is a place where the wicked are being burned forever. The Lord has prepared a place, however, for all those who are to be eternally punished for the violation of his laws. In Section 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord has given us the clearest and most complete information in revelation to the salvation of mankind and the punishment of the wicked. Briefly stated it is this:

INDIVIDUALS TO BE GRADED

These are they who are cast down to hell and suffer the wrath of Almighty God, until the fulness of times, when Christ shall have subdued all enemies under his feet, and shall have perfected his work; (D. & C. 76:106.)

Yet these, after they have been punished for their sins and having been turned over to the torments of Satan, shall eventually come forth, after the millennium, to receive the telestial kingdom—

For they shall be judged according to their works, and every man shall receive according to his own works, his own dominion, in the mansions which are prepared

And they shall be servants of the Most High; but where God and Christ dwell they cannot come, worlds without end. (Ibid., 76:111-112.)

MUST PAY PRICE FOR SINS

All those who enter the telestial kingdom, which will be a place, as each of these kingdoms will be, will be punished for their sins. Satan for a time will have dominion over them until they have paid the price of their sinning, before they can enter into that telestial kingdom.

This earth will become a celestial kingdom when it is sanctified. Those who enter the terrestrial kingdom will have to go to some other sphere which will be prepared for them. Those who enter the telestial kingdom, likewise will have to go to some earth which is prepared for them, and there will be another place which is hell where the devil and those who are punished to go with him will dwell. Of course, those who enter the telestial kingdom, and those who enter the terrestrial kingdom will have the eternal punishment which will come to them in knowing that they might, if they had kept the commandments of the Lord, have returned to his presence as his sons and his daughters. This will be a torment to them, and in that sense it will be hell.
