Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 2 ( 1958)

50

Was the Fall Inevitable?

Question: "Was the 'Fall' inevitable and necessary to the human race? Our whole hope of salvation rests on the character of God the Father, does it not? If he is just and consistent we are secure. If he is unfair or changeable we have no security. If God ever gave man contradictory commandments did he not at that point rob man of his free agency? We are repeatedly told we are free to choose between good and evil; between obedience and disobedience; but if a situation was set up in which two commandments contradict each other, then man [Adam] was free to choose only between two disobediences. Is that fair? If God 'framed' man and then cursed him and punished him for something he could not help doing, what assurance have we that when we do our very best we won't find ourselves cursed and cast out for doing the very thing God meant us to do? Is this justice? Is that free agency?"

Answer: Of course you have set up a contradictory statement which is not in accord with the facts. It is to be hoped that a story of the Savior's ministry, why he came to the earth and what he did, in a manner that will appeal may here be presented. Let us go back and present the story from the beginning.

We are taught that we are all children of God; he is our Eternal Father. By that we mean that he is the Father of our spirits, and that Jesus Christ is our Elder ( Oldest) Brother—the Firstborn Son of God in the Spirit and the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh. For an untold period of time we dwelt in the presence of our Father, and there we walked by sight. We saw him as a glorious being with a body that shone with the brilliance like the sun. He had a body of flesh and bones—a tabernacle for his Spirit. We were spirits only, so was Jesus. As spirits, dwelling in that first estate, it was impossible for us to obtain a fulness of joy. We could not advance to receive the blessings which our Father had in store for his children in that estate. It was the will of our Father that we have the opportunities of a second estate where we would receive bodies of flesh and bones as tabernacles for our spirits.

This was not all. It was necessary also that we pass through a period of mortality where we would be required to walk by faith and be shut out of the presence of our Father.

SECOND ESTATE NECESSARY FOR EXISTENCE

This second estate also required that we gain experience that could not be gained in any other way, being subject to all the vicissitudes which the mortal life would bring. In other words, a period of mortality was essential to our eternal exaltation where we would be subject to pain, sorrow, temptation as well as to receive the pleasures and joys of this mortal life. We were to be tried as gold is purified in the crucible. The result of our obedience to the commandments of our Father would be the privilege to return to his presence to become his eternal sons and daughters, clothed with all power and glory, even to the fulness, and be like him.

We may not understand all the reasons, but we do gain knowledge that this period of trial, temptation, sickness and tribulation interspersed with all the great pleasures of mortal life, has been given us in this "probationary state" to prepare us for everlasting life. I repeat, it was necessary that mortality for a short season come to each of us. The Lord did not send us here to grope aimlessly in darkness not knowing the way. From the very beginning he sent servants—angels from his presence—to teach Adam and his posterity the plan of eternal life and how it can be obtained. We have never been without spiritual guidance, nor without the constant teachings of those who had contact with the heavens to reveal to us the will of our Father. It is only through rebellion and rejection of these counsels and commandments, revealed by our Father and his servants that men have been overcome with evil.

ADAM AND EVE HAD SPECIFIC MISSION

You learn from the Pearl of Great Price (Book of Moses) how Adam and Eve were chosen before, or in the first estate, to come down here and commence the race. You are asked to accept by faith the fact that Adam and Eve came here and received their bodies in a condition where there was no death. They could have lived forever in the Garden of Eden where they were before the Fall. So it is written.

And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden. And all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end. (2 Nephi 2:22.)

The Father never at any time put one block in their way of remaining in that condition forever, but for a wise purpose they could not keep the first great commandment while in the Garden of Eden. Lehi has made that clear. It is true the Fall was in the plan of salvation and it was necessary for them to fall, but they were not coerced or in any way persuaded by the Lord to eat the fruit. It is clear that Adam and Eve were given their agency. The commandment the Lord gave them about eating the fruit, however, is different from any other commandment ever given in relation to committing sin. The Lord said to them that they could eat of the fruit of every tree in the garden except the fruit of the tree of the "knowledge of good and evil," and frankly told them if they ate of that fruit they would surely die. But he said, "thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee." (Moses 3:17.)

THE FALL OF ADAM WAS NOT A SIN

It may seem very cruel to us without any understanding of all the circumstances, to know that the Fall brought upon us all such awful consequences, and made it possible for an infinite atonement to be offered to amend the broken law. Adam and Eve did not come here in a mortal state. They had to come in the manner in which they did and then transgress the law. The transgression of that law, contrary to the view of many, was not a sin. It was not a sin any more than the transgression in the laboratory by a chemist in combining two substances and creating another entirely different from the first. It was not a sin to bring to pass mortality, a condition which was essential to the eternal welfare of man. The Fall changed the nature of Adam and Eve to fit them for the condition in which we now are. After the coming of an angel with the plan of salvation informing Adam and Eve of the redemption which was to be made by Jesus Christ, Eve rejoiced and said:

. . . Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient. (Ibid., 5:11.)

All of this had come because of the Fall. Yes, it was "inevitable"; it had to be. If there had been some other way, you and I may both be agreed that our Eternal Father would have chosen it. God is not the author of death nor sin. There may be some things that we have to accept on faith, and we should prepare ourselves to accept all things which the Lord reveals, whether we fully understand them or not. We may be sure that Abraham could not understand why the Lord would command him to take Isaac and offer him as a sacrifice. Evidently there seemed to be no reason for it. However, Abraham never questioned the Lord and obediently went forth to carry out the commandment. Thus the Lord proved Abraham who showed his loyalty for which he was rewarded and exalted above his fellows.

We should never permit ourselves to say the Lord did something that was wrong, or that could have been avoided, or that there was a better way. We are very weak mortals. Our experiences are very limited, and we should not rise up and say that the Lord is unjust, or that he has committed an error.

PLAN PREPARED BEFORE EARTH WAS FORMED

Remember Jesus was chosen to fill his mission long before the earth was formed. In the great council he volunteered to come to the earth and perform the great sacrifice that would redeem us from death, and on condition of our repentance and faithful acceptance of the gospel plan, also from our individual sins.

To a great many, no doubt, the plan of Lucifer appealed as being much better. He offered to save all the spirits that not one should be lost. To those ignorant of the plan of salvation this must have had an appeal. He promised something he could not deliver, a salvation that was worthless, for he would have compelled every spirit to obey, thus depriving each of his agency, one of the greatest gifts of God.

If we did not have the privilege of choosing for ourselves, there could be no salvation. Therefore mortality was essential to this second probation. It could not come in any other way except by the changing of the pre-mortal life. However this mortal existence found Adam and his posterity in an awful predicament as explained by Jacob, son of Lehi:

For as death hath passed upon all men, to fulfil the merciful plan of the great Creator, there must needs be a power of resurrection, and the resurrection must needs come unto man by reason of the fall; and the fall came by reason of transgression; and because man became fallen they were cut off from the presence of the Lord.

Wherefore, it must needs be an infinite atonement—save it should be an infinite atonement this corruption could not put on incorruption. Wherefore, the first judgment which came upon man must needs have remained to an endless duration. And if so, this flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more.

O the wisdom of God, his mercy and grace! For behold, if the flesh should rise no more our spirits must become subject to that angel who fell from before the presence of the Eternal God, and became the devil, to rise no more.

And our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself: yea, to that being who beguiled our first parents, who transformeth himself nigh unto an angel of light, and stirreth up the children of men unto secret combinations of murder and all manner of secret works of darkness.

O how great the goodness of our God, who prepareth a way for our escape from the grasp of this awful monster; yea, that monster, death and hell, which I call the death of the body, and also the death of the spirit.

And because of the way of deliverance of our God, the Holy One of Israel, this death, of which I have spoken, which is the temporal, shall deliver up its dead; which death is the grave.

And this death of which I have spoken, which is the spiritual death, shall deliver up its dead; which spiritual death is hell; wherefore, death and hell must deliver up their dead, and hell must deliver up its captive spirits, and the grave must deliver up its captive bodies, and the bodies and the spirits of men will be restored one to the other; and it is by the power of the resurrection of the Holy One of Israel.

O how great the plan of our God! For on the other hand, the paradise of God must deliver up the spirits of the righteous, and the grave deliver up the body of the righteous; and the spirit and the body is restored to itself again, and all men become incorruptible, and immortal, and they are living souls, having a perfect knowledge like unto us in the flesh, save it be that our knowledge shall be perfect. (2 Nephi 9:6-13.)

AN INFINITE ATONEMENT REQUIRED
