WHEN WILL CHRIST COME?

SECOND COMING WILL BE TOMORROW. I was asked, not long ago, if I could tell when the Lord would come. I answered, Yes; and I answer, Yes, now. I know when he will come. He will come tomorrow. We have his word for it. Let me read it

"Behold, now it is called today until the coming of the Son of Man, and verily it is a day of sacrifice, and a day for the tithing of my people; for he that is tithed shall not be burned at his coming." (Now there is a discourse sufficient on tithing.) "For after today cometh the burning -- this is speaking after the manner of the Lord -- for verily I say, tomorrow all the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, for I am the Lord of Hosts; and I will not spare any that remain in Babylon."1.1

So the Lord is coming, I say, tomorrow. Then let us be prepared. Elder Orson F. Whitney used to write about the Saturday Evening of Time. We are living in the Saturday Evening of Time. This is the 6th day now drawing to its close, When the Lord says it is today until his coming, that, I think, is what he has in mind, for he shall come in the morning of the Sabbath, or seventh day of the earth's temporal existence, to inaugurate the millennial reign and to take his rightful place as King of kings and Lord of lords, to rule and reign upon the earth, as it is his right. 1.2

Satan has usurped power and authority from the beginning, and men have followed him, but his day is drawing to its close, and the day is dawning for Israel, for Zion, for the universal establishment of truth, when the earth shall be cleansed of all impurity, all wickedness, for when Christ comes that which is wicked cannot remain.2.3

DAY OF THE LORD IS NEAR. I believe that the coming of the Son of God is not far away, how far I do not know, but I do know that it is over 100 years nearer than it was when Elijah the prophet came to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple on the 3rd day of April, 1836. Elijah's words point to the fact that we are that much nearer. And this ancient prophet declared that by the restoration of those keys we should know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at our doors.2.4

The world is rapidly coming to its end, that is, the end of the days of wickedness. 2.5 When it is fully ripe in iniquity the Lord will come in the clouds of heaven to take vengeance on the ungodly, for his wrath is kindled against them.2.6 Do not think that he delayeth his coming. Many of the signs of his coming have been given, so we may, if we will, know that the day is even now at our doors.2.7

SOME NOW LIVING MAY SEE SECOND COMING. The day of the coming of the Lord is near. I do not know when. I am not looking, however, upon the coming of the Son of Man as I looked once upon the day when men would speak from city to city and throughout the land without the aid of wires, and would be heard -- as something that may come in some far distant time -- because I sincerely believe it will come in the very day when some of us who are here today [April 5, 1936] will be living upon the face of the earth. That day is close at hand.

It behooves us as Latter-day Saints to set our houses in order, to keep the commandments of God, to turn from evil to righteousness, if it is necessary, and serve the Lord in humility and faith and prayer.3.8

CHRIST WILL COME IN DAY OF WICKEDNESS. When we become ripe in iniquity, then the Lord will come. I get annoyed sometimes at some of our elders who when speaking say the Lord will come when we all become righteous enough to receive him. The Lord is not going to wait for us to get righteous. When he gets ready to come, he is going to come -- when the cup of iniquity is full -- and if we are not righteous then, it will be just too bad for us, for we will be classed among the ungodly, and we will be as stubble to be swept off the face of the earth, for the Lord says wickedness shall not stand.3.9

Do not think the Lord delays his coming, for he will come at the appointed time, not the time which I have heard some preach when the earth becomes righteous enough to receive him. I have heard some men in positions and places of trust in the Church preach this, men who are supposed to be acquainted with the word of the Lord, but they failed to comprehend the
 scriptures. Christ will come in the day of wickedness, when the earth is ripe in iniquity and prepared for the cleansing, and as the cleanser and purifier he will come, and all the wicked will be as stubble and will be consumed.3.10

GOSPEL WARNING PRECEDES SECOND COMING

WARNING VOICE ALWAYS PRECEDES JUDGMENTS. Would it not be an extraordinarily strange thing if the Lord should come and begin his reign of peace -- take vengeance on the wicked, cleanse the earth from sin -- and not send messengers to prepare the way before him?

Should we expect the Lord to come to judge the world without first giving it warning and preparing the means of escape for all who will repent?

Noah was sent to the world to warn it of the flood. If the people had hearkened, they would have escaped.4.11 Moses was sent to lead Israel into the promised land to fulfil the promises made to Abraham. 4.12 John the Baptist was sent to prepare the way for the coming of Christ.4.13 In each instance the call came through the opening of the heavens. Isaiah, Jeremiah, and other prophets were sent to warn Israel and Judah before the scattering and captivity came upon them.4.14 Had they given heed a different page of history would have been written. They had their chance to hear; they were warned and had the means of escape which they rejected.

GOSPEL WITNESS PRECEDES SECOND COMING. The Lord promised to have the same interest in humanity preceding his second coming. Said he: "And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come." 4.15 Again: "And he shall send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other."4.16

John on Patmos saw in vision in the last days an "angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue and people."4.17

Joseph Smith declared that Moroni -- an ancient prophet on this continent, and now resurrected -- in partial fulfilment of this promise, taught him the gospel, giving him instruction in relation to the restoration of things preceding the coming of Christ. 4.18 And the Lord said: "For behold, the Lord God hath sent forth the angel crying through the midst of heaven, saying: Prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight, for the hour of his coming is night." 5.19

Accepting this as true, Latter-day Saints believe that communication has been established with the heavens in modern times, and now the gospel of the kingdom is sent out as a witness to the world before Christ shall come.5.20

APOSTATE CHRISTIANITY CARRIES NO WARNING OF SECOND COMING. It is well understood that the teachings of the so-called Christian churches have been declared in all the world for many hundreds of years. In all lands churches have been organized and ministers have proclaimed their teachings. There is nothing peculiar about their message in relation to the present age -- nothing distinctive which would mark any one or all of them his having the special declaration of the gospel of the kingdom which was promised as a witness in the latter days.

The implication in these words of our Lord -- that "this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come" 5.21 -- the implication is that in the last days the Lord would give as a sign to all nations the sending anew of the message of the gospel of the kingdom and that it would be different from the teachings then being taught and received among the nations. Otherwise how could it be distinguished and accepted as a sign of his second coming?

Moreover, when this declaration of the gospel of the kingdom should reach all nations, then should the end come, or in other words, the time for the appearance of our Lord. The preaching of the many doctrines of the various denominations was carried to all nations many long years ago, but the end did not come with this universal declaration.

RESTORED GOSPEL WARNS THE WORLD. Joseph Smith and his associates were taught by heavenly messengers and by revelation that the burden of this message was upon them. They were instructed that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was duly appointed to send forth ambassadors for Christ with the special message of this gospel of the kingdom to all nations. The Lord said in this connection: "And the voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days. And they shall go forth and none shall stay them, for I the Lord have commanded them."6.22

The Latter-day Saints may be considered strange and peculiar in believing that they have been called upon to fullfil this ancient scripture, but it is with full confidence that the Lord has spoken that they are diligently' sending missionaries into all parts of the earth. Moreover, when all nations have heard this message, as it has been revealed in these last days, then may we look forth for the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, for at that day all nations will have been warned by the messengers who were sent unto them according to the Lord's promise. 6.23

MODERN INVENTIONS AID IN RAISING WARNING VOICE. This work of preaching the gospel to the nations has not yet been finished. The missionaries of the Church are now going out with this message, but the Lord has said he would cut short his work in righteousness, 6.24 moreover that he would hasten it in its time.6.25 By means of modern invention and discovery we can readily see how this may be accomplished, and the hearts of the people of the earth he reached by radio, through the press, and by communication such as
 the nations of the earth did not have in former times. I do not know how long it will be before this mission shall be accomplished and these words of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ shall be fulfilled, but that he will work speedily, that he will accomplish his purposes within the time that he has set, I fully believe, and his promises shall not fail. 7.26

DISASTERS FOLLOW REJECTION OF GOSPEL WARNING. From time to time, someone filled with hatred of the truth, in the blind desire to destroy the work of the Lord, appeals to the nations to cast out the elders of Israel who are carrying this message of salvation unto all who will believe, and warning others that they may be left without excuse.

It would be a sorry day for any nation, where the gospel is being preached, should it conclude to drive the elders of the Church from its borders and deny them the right to preach the gospel among the people. The elders insure peace unto the nations, so long as they will hear the message of salvation and will protect and defend the truth, When the time comes that the nations will cast the elders out and no longer receive their testimony, but "bow to Satan's thrall," as we heard in the anthem this afternoon, woe be unto them.

We read in the word of the Lord that after the testimony of the elders will come wrath and indignation upon the people. For after their testimony will come the testimony of earthquakes that shall cause suffering and sorrow, and men shall fall upon the ground for fear. There shall come also the testimony of thunderings, and the voice of lightnings, and the voice of tempests, and the voice of the waves of the sea heaving themselves beyond their bounds. All things shall be in commotion, and men's hearts shall fail them because of fear that shall come upon the people, These things shall follow the testimony of the elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, when the people of the world reject them and drive them from their borders. 8.27

GOSPEL ACCEPTANCE BEFORE SECOND COMING

"TIMES OF GENTILES" TO BE FULFILLED. We go unto them with a message of peace, of truth, of eternal salvation, calling upon them to repent of their sins and enter into the true fold, where they may receive rest. When they will not do this, but to the contrary, will listen to the unrighteous and condemn the truth, then God will withdraw the gospel from among them. In that day the times of the Gentiles will be fulfilled and the gospel will be carried to the Jews. 8.28 For, this gospel must be preached to them as well as to the Gentile nations; and a remnant of the Jews will gather -- as they are gathering since the dedication of their land for their return -- in Palestine, and as a remnant of Ephraim and his fellows are now gathering to the land of Zion.

JEWS TO BE CONVENED AT SECOND COMING. The Jews in due time will be established in their own land, and the Lord will come, according to his promise, unto his people in the hour of their distress and will deliver them from their enemies. Then will they look upon him and discover his wounds and shall say: "What are these wounds in thine
 hands?" And he shall answer them: "Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends." Then will they fall down and worship him as their Redeemer -- the Son of God.8.29 After that they will be cleansed of their sins and shall receive the gospel. 8.30

And the nations that seek to destroy Jerusalem in that day will the Lord destroy, for he shall be King over all the earth, and righteousness shall prevail among the people. 8.31 Zion shall be established on this continent; Jerusalem will be re-established on the old continent, and wickedness will depart from the earth, for when Christ comes and the righteous with him, the wicked will be as stubble and will be consumed.9.32

Therefore, I desire to bear my testimony unto all people and say unto those who raise their hands against this work See that you do it not, for this is the work of God. He has established it, and when you reject it, you reject him, and after the testimony of the elders will come the testimony of trouble and distress as the prophets have predicted.9.33

JEWS TO BEGIN TO BELIEVE BEFORE SECOND COMING. Not many of the Jews, I take it from my reading of the scriptures, will believe in Christ before he comes, The Book of Mormon tells us that they shall begin to believe in him9.34 They are now beginning to believe in him, The Jews today look upon Christ as a great Rabbi. They have accepted him as one of their great teachers; they have said that, "He is Jew of Jew, the greatest Rabbi of them all," as one has stated it. When the gospel was restored in 1830, if a Jew had mentioned the name of Christ in one of the synagogues, he would have been rebuked. Had a rabbi referred to him, the congregation would have arisen and left the building. And so, we see the sentiment has changed. Now I state this on Jewish authority that they are beginning to believe in Christ, and some of them are accepting the gospel.

But in the main they will gather to Jerusalem in their unbelief; the gospel will be preached to them; some of them will believe. Not all of the Gentiles have believed when the gospel has been proclaimed to them, but the great body of the Jews who are there assembled will not receive Christ as their Redeemer until he comes himself and makes himself manifest unto them. 9.35

WHERE LORD WILL FIND FAITH AT HIS COMING. I can testify that when the Lord will come, he will, find faith upon the earth.10.36 That faith, however, which he will find, shall be limited to a very small portion of the inhabitants of the earth, He will not find faith in the nations abroad to any noticeable extent; he will not find faith among the peoples of the earth who have not received the gospel as it has been restored. But there will be faith among those of the house of Israel who have been gathered out from the nations and who have repented of their sins and received the message that came through the Prophet Joseph Smith.10.37

JOSEPH SMITH: MESSENGER BEFORE THE LORD

MESSENGER TO PREPARE WAY FOR SECOND COMING. One of the quotations given to Joseph Smith by Moroni, September 21, 1823, was the following: "Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he shall come, saith the Lord of hosts."10.38

In quoting the words of Malachi to Joseph Smith the Angel Moroni also said that these words were shortly to be fulfilled: "But who may abide the day of his [Christ's] coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers' soap: And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years.

"And I [Christ] will come near to you to judgment; and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against false swearers, and against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow, and the fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right, and fear not me, saith the Lord of hosts."11.39

SECOND COMING A DAY OF VENGEANCE AND JUDGMENT. In believing that this has reference to the second coming of Christ the Latter-day Saints stand in a peculiar position among all people, for it is the general belief that this had fulfilment in the first coming of Christ. If we investigate the matter, however, it is made very clear that in the days of the ministry of the Redeemer of the world, he did not come in judgment and to purify in the crucible so that all dross should be destroyed. In that day he was abused and persecuted and denied by men. The widow and the fatherless were not given justice against those who oppressed them. Sorcerers and adulterers were not punished, and all men were able to abide that day,

But, when Christ comes the second time it will be in the clouds of heaven, and it shall be the day of vengeance against the ungodly, when those who have loved wickedness and have been guilty of transgression and rebellion against the laws of God will be destroyed. All during the ministry of Christ wickedness ruled and seemed to prevail, but when he comes in the clouds of glory as it is declared in this message of Malachi to the world, and which was said by Moroni to be near at hand, then Christ will appear as the refiner and purifier of both man and beast and all that pertains to this earth, for the earth itself shall undergo a change and receive its former paradisiacal glory. 11.40

JOSEPH SMITH PREPARED WAY FOR RETURN OF LORD. Joseph Smith was sent to prepare the way for this second coming, by the proclamation of the fulness of the gospel and the granting to all men the means of escape from iniquity and transgression. The fulfilment of this prophecy by Malachi is even now at our doors, and before many years have passed away Christ shall come as the re finer and purifier of this earth which today is suffering in
 the throes of lawlessness and transgression.

When that day comes, then all that is evil shall he removed, and the words of the Lord shall be fulfilled wherein he has said: "I have trodden the winepress alone: and of the people there was none with me: for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment. For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come."12.41

In this day messengers of the Lord have been sent. John the Baptist came to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and gave them his priesthood, thus preparing the way for the coming of the Lord. 12.42 Moreover, the Lord has come suddenly to his temple and in it ministered to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, April 3, 1836. In that temple Joseph and Oliver received authority for the purging of the sons of Levi, and for the gathering of the Jews so that eventually their offerings may be pleasant before the Lord, when they return to their land and are forgiven for their transgressions. 12.43

LORD HAS "SUDDENLY COME TO HIS TEMPLE." Malachi said the Lord would suddenly come to his temple.12.44 In 1830 our Savior said he would come suddenly to his temple. 12.45 That coming was for a definite purpose: To restore keys; to purge the sons of Levi; to prepare for the offering of Judah when the Jews will be cleansed of their iniquity; and to be as a refiner and purifier, bringing salvation to all men who will obey his voice.

It is true that many even of the Latter-day Saints are looking forth to that coming of our Lord. Let us stop and reflect a moment. Has the Lord not come already suddenly to his temple to bring about these glorious purposes? Christ appeared suddenly in this temple. Then He sent Moses with the keys for the gathering of Israel. Since Moses established Aaron and the Levites in their priesthood, do not these keys also confer the power in this dispensation for the purging of Levi and Judah that they may offer an offering in righteousness?

Do not the keys held by Elias confer all that was held by Abraham? Do not the keys held by Elijah grant to the Church all the power of sealing authority? Is it not a fact that either in this temple. or in some other consecrated spot, all the keys of all the prophets since the would began have now been revealed and restored to earth for the complete consummation of the work of the Lord? Is not the great and dreadful day of the Lord very near our doors? What else by way of authority for the salvation of man is to be revealed? Is not the fulness of the gospel here? 13.46

COMING OF CHRIST AT ADAM-ONDI-AHMAN. Daniel speaks of the coming of Christ, and that day is near at hand. There will be a great gathering in the Valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman; there will be a great council held. The Ancient of Days, who is Adam, will sit. The judgment -- not the final judgment -- will be held, where the righteous who have held keys will make their reports and deliver up their keys and ministry. Christ will come,
 and Adam will make his report. At this council Christ will be received and acknowledged as the rightful ruler of the earth. Satan will be replaced.13.47 Following this event every government in the world, including the United States, will have to become part of the government of God.14.48 Then righteous rule will be established. The earth will be cleansed; the wicked will be destroyed; and the reign of peace will be ushered in.14.49

Now we are looking forward to that time. We are hoping for it; we are praying for it. The righteous will rejoice when he comes, because then peace will come to the earth, righteousness to the people, and that same spirit of peace and joy and happiness which prevailed upon this continent for 200 years among the Nephites shall again be established among the people and eventually shall become universal, and Christ shall reign as Lord of lords and King of kings for 1,000 years. We are looking forward to that time.14.50

THE LAST DAYS

WHAT IS MEANT BY THE LAST DAYS. The Lord has declared, by his own voice and by revelation to his servants, the prophets, that we are living in the last days. 14.51 When we speak of the last days, we do not mean that this is the end of the earth, that it shall cease presently to exist. We mean that we are living in that period of time known as the dispensation of the fulness of times, in which the Father has promised to gather all things together in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are on earth.14.52 We mean we are living in the day when unrighteousness shall cease, when wickedness shall no longer be found on the face of the earth, when this earth shall be turned over, according to the promise the Lord made to Daniel the Prophet, to the saints of the Most High, who shall possess it forever and ever. 14.53

PERILOUS NATURE OF LAST DAYS. We are living in a critical period of the world's history. Great events are before us. The Lord in his mercy, and with justice and judgment, is going to cut short his work in righteousness.15.54 The decrees have gone forth, and it behooves us as members of the Church to be united and to serve him and keep all his commandments. 15.55

We are living in a day of trouble, of tribulation, when men's hearts are failing them, The Lord pointed out this day while in his ministry and admonished by prophecy those living now to watch and pray, that they might not be led astray, that they might not be found unprepared, should they be so fortunate as to be here at the great day of his coming. 15.56

We are living in perilous times, in a day when the mission of the Church is perhaps more pronounced, and our message to the world more clearly defined, than ever before, As a people we stand as witnesses for Christ in a day when the world has turned from him, when they are teaching the doctrines of men and discarding the fundamental truths of the Christian faith. 15.57

HARVEST OF THE WHEAT: BURNING OF THE TARES. The parable the Lord taught of the wheat and the tares had reference to the last days, According to the story a sower planted good seed in his field, but while he slept the enemy came and sowed tares in the field, When the blades began to show, the servants desired to go and pluck up the tares, but the Lord commanded them to let both the wheat and the tares grow up together until the harvest was ripe, lest they root up the tender wheat while destroying the tares, Then at the end of the harvest, they were to go forth and gather the wheat and bind the tares to be burned, In the explanation of this parable, the Lord laid to his disciples that "the harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are the angels." 15.58

The tares and the wheat are growing together and have been growing in the same field for all these years, but the day is near at hand when the wheat will be garnered, and the tares likewise will be gathered to be burned, and there will come a separation, the righteous from the wicked. And it behooves each one of us to keep the commandments of the Lord, to repent of our sins, to turn unto righteousness, if there is need of repentance in our hearts. 16.59

IMMINENT SEPARATION OF RIGHTEOUS AND WICKED. The tares are being bound in bundles to be burned, The wheat is being garnered into barns, and the day of separation is near at hand. Even the Church shall be cleansed, and those who are of the world, who are numbered among the members of the Church, will be cast out, and will find their place among those who are unworthy, where there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. 16.60

Build up and strengthen the members of the Church in faith in God; goodness knows we need it. There are so many influences at work to divide us asunder, right among the members of the Church, and there is going to come, one of these days in the near future, a separation of the wheat from the tares, and we are either wheat or tares, We are going to be on one side or the other. 16.61

The time will come, just as sure as we live, that there will be a separation between the righteous and the unrighteous.16.62 Those who will not keep the law of the Lord will deny the faith, for he will withdraw his Spirit from them if they do not repent, after laboring with them and doing all that is possible to keep them in the line of duty. He will withdraw his Spirit from them and they will be left unto themselves, They must take one side or the other, for this separation must surely come. 16.63 ANGELS NOW REAPING THE EARTH. "Verily I say unto you, ye are clean, but not all; and there is none else with whom I am well pleased." That was said of the Church over 100 years ago. The Lord is not pleased with us today, for we are not clean, all of us, "For all flesh is corrupted before me; and the powers of darkness prevail upon the earth, among the children of men, in the presence of all the hosts of heaven -- Which causeth silence to reign, and all eternity is pained, and the angels are waiting the great command to reap down the earth, to gather the tares that they may be burned; and, behold, the enemy is combined."17.64

That revelation was given January 2, 1831, and in that day the Lord said that all flesh was corrupt before him, What did he say about all flesh in the days of Noah? 17.65 Do you think the world has improved? If you do, you have not read very carefully these scriptures, So the angels were waiting, 100 years ago, to go forth to bind the tares and reap down the earth.

President Wilford Woodruff declared by revelation, after the dedication of the Salt Lake Temple, that the angels spoken of here, who were waiting to go forth to bind the tares and to reap down the earth, had been loosed and sent on their mission. 17.66

You will remember in the parable of the tares the Lord said to his servants that they were not to disturb the tares, lest in rooting them up they would root up the wheat also, because the blade was tender, Let both, he said, remain until the harvest is fully ripe. Then he tells us that that harvest was to come at the end of the world.17.67

As far back as 1893 the prophet of the Lord, President Wilford Woodruff, declared that the angels had been sent out to bind the tares and to prepare the earth for the burning; and yet the burning is not to come until the earth is ripe in iniquity. 18.68

REBELLIOUS TO BE CUT OFF AT SECOND COMING. The 22nd and 23rd verses of the 3rd chapter of Acts have reference to Christ and are yet to be fulfilled. They are as follows: "For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye heir in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass, that every soul, which will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people."18.69

This is in keeping with the expression in the first section of the Doctrine and Covenants that "the day cometh that they who will not hear the voice of the Lord, neither the voice of his servants, neither give heed to the words of the prophets and apostles, shall be cut off from among the people." 18.70

This prophet of whom Moses spoke is Christ, and when he sees fit to speak and to give commandments unto the people, with the power and force with which it shall be given at some future time, not only will the members of the Church be removed who refuse to hear, but his judgments shall go forth upon the nations and upon the ungodly among them, who shall perish, and that day is near at hand.18.71
