CHRIST DECREED WARS FOR LAST DAYS

WAR AND DESOLATION TO PRECEDE SECOND COMING. In that great revelation on war, the Lord has told us that beginning with the rebellion Of South Carolina great destructions would come, and they would continue to be poured out upon the earth until the time should come when the decrees of God would be fully consummated, finished, and he would make an end of all nations.38.1 I look for that to be fulfilled, and Christ will come to reign; his kingdom will be established on earth as in heaven, as he has taught us to pray: "Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven."38.2 I pray for that time to come.

I plead with the Latter-day Saints to stand firm and faithful in the discharge of every duty, keeping the commandments of the Lord, honoring the priesthood, that we may stand when the Lord comes -- whether we be living or dead, it matters not -- to be partakers of this glory. Remember, when this time comes, this earth is to be cleansed of its unrighteousness, and the wicked shall be as stubble and shall pass away.38.3

LORD DESTROYED WICKED IN FLOOD OF NOAH. God said unto Noah: "The end of all flesh is come before me, for the earth is filled with violence, and behold I will destroy all flesh from off the earth."38.4 It should be remembered that the Lord said he would do it!

So the Lord commanded Noah to build an ark into which he was to take his family and the animals of the earth to preserve seed after the flood, and all flesh that was not in the ark perished according to the Lord's decree. Of course this story is not believed by the wise and the great among the children of men, any more than was Noah's story in his day.

LORD KILLED INHABITANTS OF SODOM AND GOMORRAH. Then after this new start men again became carnal, sensual, and devilish upon the earth, and drastic punishment had to be meted out to some of the earth's inhabitants once more according to the Lord's decree. In the days of Abraham there were two cities known as Sodom and Gomorrah in
 which wickedness was without measure, and the Lord said to Abraham that he was going to destroy these cities.

Abraham pleaded with the Lord to spare them. which the Lord promised to do if 10 righteous souls could be found therein. Since this could not be done "the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven," and these cities with all their inhabitants were destroyed.39.5 And again the Lord said he did it! But the self-righteous and the wise of this present day say this is not a true record, for a merciful God would not do such a thing even if the people were wicked.

LORD COMMANDED ISRAEL TO DESTROY AMORITES. About this time the Lord promised to give to Abraham for an everlasting inheritance all of this land where Sodom and Gomorrah were and all of the land from "the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates," but Abraham was told that his posterity could not possess the land for 400 years, because "the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full." 39.6 When the time came and the wickedness of the Amorites was full. the Lord commanded Israel to take their armies and cleanse the land of this wickedness and take possession of the inheritance which had been promised their father Abraham.40.7

ISRAEL AND JUDAH CURSED FOR INIQUITY. And thus, down through the ages, we discover, if we are willing to believe what is written in the scriptures, that judgments and destructions had to be poured out upon the wicked because they would not repent. Even the kingdoms of Israel and Judah were destroyed and the people scattered because of the anger of the Lord which was kindled against them for their transgressions. 40.8 At least this is the case if we are willing to believe the word of the Lord given through his prophets.

JAREDITES DESTROYED FOR REJECTING CHRIST. Not only were these punishments meted out to the inhabitants of the so-called old world, but destructions awaited the inhabitants of this western world for the same cause. Through their prophets they were constantly reminded that this land is "choice above all other lands, which the Lord God had preserved for a righteous people." And he. the Lord, had "sworn in his wrath unto the brother of Jared, that whoso should possess this land of promise, from that time henceforth and forever, should serve him. the true and only God, or they should be swept off when the fulness of his wrath should come upon them." 40.9 When these people refused to worship the true and living God, then his wrath came upon them -- if we are willing to believe the record -- and they were swept off.40.10

LORD DESTROYED NEPHITES AND LAMANITES FOR INIQUITY. Then another people came to possess the land under all the blessings of protection and guidance of the Lord. These same promises and warnings were made to the second group of inhabitants, and the prophets who were raised up among them constantly warned them of these promises the Lord had made. 41.11 But these people also fell from grace. and the wrath of the Almighty came upon them. So wicked had they become at the time of the crucifixion of our Lord that
 it became necessary for him to destroy many of their cities by earthquake, flood, fire, and other forms of destruction.

Yes, it is true, the same meek and lowly Nazarene, who came into the world and offered himself a sacrifice for sin because of the great love his Father and he had for the human family -- he "who is infinite and eternal, from everlasting to everlasting the same unchangeable God," 41.12 who loves little children and suffered them to come unto him -- found himself under the necessity of meting out punishment to the inhabitants of this choice land and that too in a most drastic fashion. Hearken to his words which he uttered after his resurrection:

"Wo, wo, wo unto this people; wo unto the inhabitants of the whole earth except they shall repent; for the devil laugheth, and his angels rejoice, because of the slain of the fair sons and daughters of my people; and it is because of their iniquity and abomination that they are fallen! Behold that great city Zarahemla have I burned with fire, and the inhabitants thereof. And behold, that great city Moroni have I caused to be sunk in the depths of the sea, and the inhabitants thereof to be drowned. And behold, that great city Moronihah have I covered with earth, and the inhabitants thereof, to hide their iniquities and their abominations from before my face, that the blood of the prophets and the saints shall not come any more unto me against them." 41.13

The Lord also sent destructions upon the cities of Gilgal, Onihah, Mocum, Jerusalem, Gadiandi, Gadiomnah, Jacob, Gimgimno, Jacobugath, Laman, Josh, Gad, Kishkumen and others. 41.14

DESTRUCTION AWAITS WICKED OF OUR DAY. But, says the self-righteous modernist, such things could not be, for God is "a God of Love," and the Savior "a man of peace," and the God I worship does not "decree death upon farmers, factory hands," and "women and children, regardless of who has sinned!"

We who live in the present day should take heed and profit by the experiences of those who have gone before and not fall into their grievous errors. We should remember that the same warnings have been given to us and "to all the inhabitants of the earth," that destruction awaits this age unless they refrain from wickedness and abominations. Let us not forget that the Lord said that it should be in this day as it was in the days of Noah. 42.15

We should remember also that he is still a "God of wrath" as well as a "God of love, and that he has promised to pour out his wrath upon the ungodly, and "take vengeance upon the wicked" who will not repent. Not only did the ancient prophets predict that such should be the case in these latter days, but the Lord has spoken it in our own dispensation. 42.16

WICKED TO SLAY WICKED UNTIL THE LORD COMES. The Lord says he has decreed wars.42.17 Why? Because of the hatred in the hearts of men, because of the wickedness in
 the hearts of men, because they will not repent. Here is another passage: "And it shall come to pass, because of the wickedness of the world, that I will take vengeance upon the wicked, for they will not repent; for the cup of mine indignation is full; for behold, my blood shall not cleanse them if they hear me not." 42.18

These things the Lord said through his Prophet in warnings that have come to the people of this nation and other lands. The Lord says the wicked will not repent, and because they will not repent he has decreed wars to come upon them, and the wicked shall slay the wicked, 43.19 and thus the earth will be cleansed, as we read in the 24th chapter of Isaiah, until there shall be few men left.

I know that what I am saying is not pleasing to some people, and that I will be criticized for it, but I do not care about that; it is the word of the Lord, and I want to warn the Latter-day Saints. I am going to read another passage of scripture: "For behold, and lo, vengeance cometh speedily upon the ungodly as the whirlwind; and who shall escape it? The Lord's scourge shall pass over by night and by day, and the report thereof shall vex all people; yea, it shall net be stayed until the Lord come."43.20

NO PEACE ON EARTH UNTIL CHRIST COMES. I read from another revelation just a moment ago where the Lord said that the time was coming when peace would be taken from the earth,43.21 and I declare to you that it has been taken from the earth; and I say now -- no, I don't say it, the Lord says it -- "it shall not return until the Lord comes."

So, let them cry peace; let them seek for peace; they will not find it until Christ comes, who is the Prince of Peace, to take his place where he rightfully belongs as King of kings, ruling and reigning upon the face of the earth. There will be no peace in this land or any other land, but there will be plague, trial, and suffering from this time forth until Christ comes. The only escape is by repentance on the part of the people, and they will not repent.

WILL SAINTS ESCAPE LATTER-DAY PERILS? What about the Latter-day Saints? In one passage that I have read it says that the saints will hardly escape. 43.22 Well, I do not think they are going to escape. I will tell you why: "For the indignation of the Lord is kindled against their abominations and all their wicked works." (That is the people of the earth.) "Nevertheless, Zion shall escape if she observe to do all things whatsoever I have commanded her. But if she observe not to do whatsoever I have commanded her, I will visit her according to all her works, with sore affliction, with pestilence, with plague, with sword, with vengeance, with devouring fire. Nevertheless, let it be read this once to her ears, that I, the Lord, have accepted of her offering; and if she sin no more none of these things shall come upon her." 44.23

That was said over 120 years ago -- in 1833. The Lord made the promise to the Latter-day Saints that if they would keep his commandments, they should escape when these destructions like a whirlwind should come suddenly -- when all these trials and sufferings
 should come upon the people of the earth, the Latter-day Saints might escape if they would keep his commandments.

SAINTS MUST REPENT TO ESCAPE PLAGUES. We are not keeping his commandments. Some of the Latter-day Saints are to the best of their ability, but many of them are not. We are covenant-breakers; we violate the Sabbath day, we will not keep it holy; we do not keep our bodies clean; I do not believe we pray -- a large part of us, I mean. As far as the fast day is concerned, we have forgotten it. We are not half as good as we think we are. We need repentance, and we need to be told to repent. We need to have our attention called to these conditions that we might repent and turn to the Lord with full purpose of heart lest these destructions come upon us.

We do not pay our tithing -- some of us pay tithing, which is one-tenth of that which we receive, and some of us pay donations and call it tithing; some of us do not pay at all. 44.24

DESTRUCTION OF WICKED AN ACT OF MERCY. Some people think it is not like God to take vengeance upon people, because he is a merciful God. The fact is he takes vengeance upon the ungodly because he is merciful. He is merciful to them in removing them and shows consideration for all others who keep his commandments. It was for this very reason that he destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, and cleansed Palestine when Israel entered the land, and destroyed so many Nephite cities at the time of his crucifixion. It was the meek and lowly Nazarene who did all of these things, because in his mercy and justice he had to cleanse the earth for the benefit of the sinful as well as for the righteous who remained.45.25

WARS ATTENDING SECOND COMING

BATTLES OF ARMAGEDDON AND GOG AND MAGOG. Before the coming of Christ, the great war, sometimes called Armageddon,45.26 will take place as spoken of by Ezekiel, chapters 38 and 39. Another war of Gog and Magog will be after the millennium.45.27

"TIME" OF FINAL WAR NOT REVEALED. During the past two years the question has constantly arisen and been discussed in priesthood classes, Sunday Schools, and in private conversations -- "Is this great war (World War II) which has cast its evil shadow over a large portion of the world, and which threatens to engulf all the rest of mankind, the great last war to precede the second coming of our Lord, as predicted by the prophets?"

We may answer this question by saying we truly hope that it is; but the Lord very definitely informed his disciples that not even the angels in heaven knew the day nor the hour when he should make his appearance, but his Father only.45.28 Therefore, unless the Lord sees fit to reveal to us the information, we do not know when or where this great conflict will end. Let us hope and pray that it may be the last struggle before permanent peace and righteousness shall be sent down from heaven and Christ come to take his rightful place as King of kings upon the earth. 46.29

FINAL WAR TO MAKE "A FULL END OF ALL NATIONS." In regard to the wars (World War II) now raging on the earth, I am sure the prophets have spoken of them. The Lord told Joseph Smith that the war between the States, commencing with the rebellion of South Carolina, was the beginning of the end. At that time peace was taken from the earth, and the prediction was made that beginning at that place, eventually war would be poured out upon all nations, bringing misery, death, mourning, famine, plague, earthquake, vivid lightnings, and so forth, causing the inhabitants of the earth to be made "to feel the wrath, and indignation, and chastening hand of an Almighty God, until the consumption decreed hath made a full end of all nations." 46.30 It appears that now this is in course of fulfilment. . . .

SIEGE OF JERUSALEM TO END FINAL WAR. Ezekiel has given us in the 38th and 39th chapters much in detail in relation to the great battle which shall precede the coming of the Son of Man to reign. Joel and Daniel also prophesied of these great events, which may even now be on the way to complete consummation.46.31

One thing we are given by these prophets definitely to understand is that the great last conflict before Christ shall come will end at the siege of Jerusalem. So said Ezekiel and Daniel, and the Lord declared to Joel: "For, behold, in those days, and in that time, when I shall bring again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem [i.e. the return from captivity], I will also gather all nations, and will bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat, and will plead with them there for my people and for ray heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations, and parted my land." 46.32

At this time, prophesied Joel, will the Lord judge the heathen: "Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe: come, get you down; for the press is full, the fats overflow; for their wickedness is great. Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision: for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision."47.33

So we are given to understand that when the armies gather in Palestine will be the time when the Lord shall come in judgment and to make the eventful decision which will confound the enemies of his people and establish them in their ancient land forever.

CHRIST TO COME IN MIDST OF FINAL BATTLE. Zechariah is another prophet who has plainly spoken of these great events. According to his predictions the nations will gather and lay siege to Jerusalem. Part of the city will fall, with dire consequences to its inhabitants, when a great earthquake will come, the Mount of Olives will cleave in twain, and the persecuted people will flee into this valley for safety. At that particular time will the Savior come as their Deliverer and show them his hands and his feet. They will look upon him and ask him where he received his wounds, and he will tell them they were received in the house of his friends -- he is Jesus Christ, their Redeemer. Then will they fall to the ground and mourn, every family apart, because their ancestors persecuted their King and the children have followed in the footsteps of the feathers.

At that time shall come the redemption of the Jews. Jerusalem shall then be rebuilt and the promises that it shall become a holy city will be fulfilled. The punishment which shall come upon those who lay siege to this land will be their destruction. The prophets have portrayed this in much detail with all its horrors.47.34 These events are confirmed in the revelations to the Prophet Joseph Smith, as found in the Doctrine and Covenants, particularly sections 29, 45, and 133.

ELDERS TO WARN OF FINAL WARS. Much more could be written in detail regarding these conflicts, but what is written will suffice. It is, of course, a gloomy picture; but is it not the duty of the elders of Israel to speak of these things with a warning voice? Shall we close our eyes and our ears and seal our understandings simply because some things are unpleasant to the ear and to the eye? Shall we refuse to raise a warning voice when danger approaches, when trouble is near, when destruction is at our door? Such a course would be cowardly if we know the truth. We cannot cry "all is well" when danger lurks on every side. We must not lull the people to sleep in a false security. President Woodruff declared that "no man that is inspired by the Spirit and power of God can close his ears, his eyes, or his lips to these things!" 48.35

PEACE TAKEN FROM EARTH

NO PEACE AGAIN UNTIL CHRIST COMES. Peace has been taken from the earth, and it will not return until Christ comes to bring it. When that day arrives, he has promised to "send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity," but when that day comes, he further says, "then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father."48.36

One year after the organization of the Church peace could not have been taken from the earth, in justice, but the Lord said the time would speedily come. 48.37 That time has come. Peace has departed from the world. The devil has power over his own dominion. This is made manifest in the actions of men, in the distress among the nations, in the troubles that we see in all lands, including this land which was dedicated to liberty.

There is no peace. Men's hearts are failing them. Greed has the uppermost place in the hearts of men. Evil is made manifest on every side, and people are combining for their own selfish interests. Because of this I was glad to hear the warning voice raised by our beloved President and by his counselors, yesterday, and by others of the brethren who have spoken; for I think this should be a time of warning, not only to the Latter-day Saints, but to all the world. We owe it to the world to raise a voice of warning, and especially to the members of the Church. 49.38

NO WORLD PEACE BECAUSE OF WICKEDNESS. We do not need to be worrying about the times and the seasons when Christ shall come, but we do need to watch and pray and be
 ready. Paul, by prophecy, declares that in the day when these calamities shall come, the people would be saying, "peace and safety," in other words, would be seeking for safety, and seeking for peace, and during these very times would come destruction upon them. 49.39

What is the matter with the nations today? They are frightened, aren't they? Each nation is contending and contesting with other nations -- trying to enter into agreements in regard to armaments, trying to curtail other nations, and trying to build up themselves -- and at the same time asking for peace conferences and conventions, and world courts and leagues of nations, and everything else, in order that they might establish peace in the earth, which they cannot do because they will not get down to the fundamental principles upon which peace is based.

As long as they have in their hearts selfishness and greed, and the desire for power and for wealth, and for all of the other things that belong to this world, and forget the things of the kingdom of God, there will be no peace, and there will be no contentment. There will be quarreling and contention, strife and war, and in the midst of all their labor, trouble will come which they could avoid, and that very easily, by repentance, getting contrite spirits and broken hearts, and loving their neighbors; but this they will not do.

Isn't it the height of absurdity to think that nations calling themselves Christians, worshiping presumably the same God, will stand ready to spring at each other's throats? In a revelation given to the Church, the Lord said, "If ye are not one ye are not mine," 50.40 and in speaking to his disciples, when he was upon the earth, he said, "Why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?"50.41

FEAR IS BASIS FOR MODERN SEARCH FOR PEACE. The nations of the earth today are crying for peace. But why? Is it because in their hearts is found the love of God? No! But because of fear -- fear of their fellows. Unrighteousness, the desire to possess, the spirit of greed and to take advantage of others, his brought to pass a condition of unrest. These, together with the wickedness which is in the hearts of the people, have brought a condition of trouble and woe among the nations, so that they fear and tremble, not because one nation believes or thinks that the Lord is blessing other peoples more than he is blessing it, but because the nations know what is in their own hearts; and they fear that the same thing is in the hearts of their neighbors; and in that they are justified, for that spirit of envy and strife is everywhere in the world. 50.42

PEACE LOST BECAUSE GOSPEL REJECTED. Today we find this world torn asunder, wickedness prevailing in the hearts of the people, distress among the nations, bloodshed such as the world has never seen before. I am going to be bold enough to say that all of this could have been avoided; it would have been unnecessary if the inhabitants of the world had hearkened to the voice of the elders of Israel who are sent to them with this message of salvation, and which they refused to receive.

FUTILITY OF INSINCERE PRAYERS FOR PEACE. Furthermore, we cry for peace; we are called upon to pray for peace, and we are praying for peace. I have never had very much confidence in the proclamation or the request that was made asking the people of this country to pray for peace, for the very good reason that it was not sincere. We cannot pray to the Lord and say: "Listen to our cause; bring victory to us; do what we want you to do; but don't ask us to do what you want us to do."

We have heard from quite a number of those who have spoken in this conference of the wickedness that prevails throughout the world, the wickedness among the boys who have gone into the armed forces of the country, the wickedness of the people who are not in those forces. We all know those things are true, that immorality is rampant, that drunkenness and the filthy use of tobacco are weakening the constitutions of those who go out to fight, and these evils are also among those not in the armed forces. The world is full of evil. 51.43

WHAT OF THE FUTURE? Trouble in the earth will continue; there will be distress, calamity, and perplexity among the nations.

We need not look for peace in the immediate future because peace will not come. Nevertheless, we may look forward with rejoicing; we need not be downcast, but in the spirit of faith and hope, and in the fear of the Lord, we should look to the future with feelings of joy, of humility, and of worship, with the desire in our hearts, stronger if possible than ever, of serving the Lord and keeping his commandments, for the day of his coming draws near. 52.44

WATCH AND BE READY

LORD WILL COME AS A THIEF IN NIGHT. "Watch therefore: for ye know not what hour your Lord doth come. But know this, that if the goodman of the house had known in what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house to be broken up. Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not the Son of man cometh." 52.45

So I say to you, my brethren and sisters, and to all who may hear my voice, we are living in the dispensation of the fulness of times. In the year 1836 one of the ancient prophets stood before Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and conferred upon them certain keys that had been promised to be revealed before the second coming of Christ. After he had given authority unto these two young men, he said unto them: "By this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors."52.46 That was in 1836, 120 years ago; 120 years have passed. We are that much nearer the opening of that door and the coming of Christ.

I know that there are many, and even some among the Latter-day Saints, who are saying just as the Lord said they would say, "The Lord delayeth his coming." 52.47 One man said: "It is
 impossible for Jesus Christ to come inside of three or four hundred years." But I say unto you, Watch.

I do not know when he is going to come. No man knows. Even the angels of heaven are in the dark in regard to that great truth.52.48 But this I know, that the signs that have been pointed out are here. The earth is full of calamity, of trouble. The hearts of men are failing them. We see the signs as we see the fig tree putting forth her leaves; and knowing this time is near, it behooves me and it behooves you, and all men upon the face of the earth, to pay heed to the words of Christ, to his apostles and watch, for we know not the day nor the hour. But I tell you this, it shall come as a thief in the night, when many of us will not be ready for it.53.49

RESTORED GOSPEL PREPARES MEN FOR SECOND COMING. The Lord restored the fulness of the gospel for the salvation of mankind, if men would only hearken and obey his voice and the voice of his servants. His Church has again been established in the world, and the Master sent forth his servants to all parts of the earth proclaiming the day of repentance and salvation. These servants have gone forth crying as did the great prophet and forerunner of our Lord in his former coming, "Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." 53.50

They were promised that they should go forth with power and authority, "And the voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days. And they shall go forth and none shall stay them, for I the Lord have commanded them. . . . Wherefore, fear and tremble, O ye people, for what I the Lord have decreed in them shall be fulfilled."53.51 With this commission the servants of the Lord have gone forth with the message of salvation, and where they could not go they have sent the word, so that it has been proclaimed virtually in all parts of the earth.53.52

NEED TO TEACH CHILDREN IN THESE PERILOUS TIMES. There never was a time in the history of the Church when we have been surrounded by so many evils, temptations, and conditions that allure and entice the children of Zion from paths of righteousness as we find today. It behooves each one of us to be on the alert, and constantly keep in mind the fact that we belong to the Church, that the Lord has given unto us the fulness of the gospel with all its promises, and that it depends upon our faith fulness and our obedience and integrity to these principles of truth and to the Church whether or not we reap the blessings.

The Lord, in an early day, had to rebuke some of the leading elders of the Church, because conditions were not as they ought to be in their homes. I wonder if most of us would not receive a like rebuke if the Lord should speak again in like manner. In the 93rd section of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord says, "But I have commanded you to bring up your children in light and truth." 54.53 All through these revelations we find this instruction that the parents are to bring up their children, to teach them in light and truth.

In another section, 68, the Lord says that if parents do not teach their children so that they
 will understand the principle of baptism, and teach them to pray, and to have faith in the principles of the gospel, when they reach the age of accountability (eight years) that he will hold those parents responsible, and if their children, through lack of training, should grow up in ignorance of the truth and deny the faith, that he will require an accounting at the hands of their parents. So you see we all have a very grave responsibility.54.54
