THE PRIESTHOOD AND ITS APPENDAGES

"ALL PRIESTHOOD IS MELCHIZEDEK." How many priesthoods are there? The answer is there is one priesthood, but the Lord divided it into two divisions known as the Melchizedek and the Aaronic Priesthood. We sometimes speak of the Levitical Priesthood which is a part of the Aaronic Priesthood.103.1 The Aaronic Priesthood embraces the offices that have to do with the temporal matters of the Church, the crying of repentance and baptism for the remission of sins. 103.2

When the Lord says there are two priesthoods, he is speaking of divisions of the priesthood. The Prophet Joseph Smith has explained this as recorded in the conference minutes, October 5, 1840: "Its institution was prior to 'the foundations of this earth, or the morning, stars sang together, or the sons of God shouted for joy, and is the highest and holiest priesthood, and is after the order of the Son of God, and all other priesthoods are only parts, ramifications, powers, and blessings belonging to the same, and are held, controlled and directed by it." 103.3

The Prophet also said, "All priesthood is Melchizedek, but there are different portions or degrees of it. That portion which brought Moses to speak with God face to face was taken away; but that which brought the ministry of angels remained."103.4

MELCHIZEDEK PRIESTHOOD INCLUDES AARONIC. When a person holds the Melchizedek Priesthood as an elder, seventy or high priest, he holds the Aaronic Priesthood. When a person is ordained to an office in the Aaronic Priesthood, and then receives an office in the Melchizedek Priesthood, none of the former authority is taken away. The Melchizedek has authority to officiate in the Aaronic.

PATRIARCHAL ORDER PART OF MELCHIZEDEK PRIESTHOOD. The priesthood which prevailed from Adam to Moses was the Patriarchal Order, yet it was only a part of the Melchizedek Priesthood. All of the ancient patriarchs were high priests, but the direction of the Church in those days was by patriarchs.104.5 After the time of Moses, when the Melchizedek Priesthood was withdrawn from Israel, this order as it is called, of Patriarchal Priesthood, did not continue, There came, then, the Aaronic Priesthood, with the prophets holding the Melchizedek Priesthood as high priests. The bestowal of this higher authority, however, had to come by special designation; it was not generally given to the male members of the tribes.

After our Savior established his Church, he placed in it all the officers as we have them today, with presiding high priests at the head, and apostles, patriarchs, high priests (the patriarch being a high priest), seventies, and elders. All priesthood is divine authority, but it is divided into the two grand heads, Melchizedek and Aaronic, although we speak of the order of the evangelist, or patriarch, and the order of the Levites. We could also speak of the order of high priests, or the order of seventies, or of elders, meaning the calling of those who hold these offices. 104.6

POWER AND OFFICES OF MELCHIZEDEK PRIESTHOOD. The Melchizedek Priesthood "holds the right of presidency, and has power and authority over all the offices in the church in all ages of the world, to administer in spiritual things." The First Presidency of the Church are also known as "the Presidency of the High Priesthood," and they "have a right to officiate in all the offices," and they "hold the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the church."

The offices in the Melchizedek Priesthood are as follows: elder, seventy, and high priest, The First Presidency are "three Presiding High Priests." Apostles are also high priests, with the special calling and ordination in addition of apostles, or special witnesses for Christ. They, next to the First Presidency, hold all the keys of authority in the Church and are called to build it up in all the earth. Evangelists, or patriarchs, are high priests with the special ordination as patriarchs, by right of which they bless the people of the Church. The seventy, under the direction of the Twelve Apostles, are the missionaries of the Church. There are seven presidents in each quorum of seventy, and over all the quorums a presiding presidency of seven who are known as the First Council of Seventy. Elders and high priests are appointed to officiate in the ministry in spiritual things in the stakes of Zion, and from among the high priests come the presiding officers of the Church and in the stakes and wards of the Church.105.7

ALL OFFICES ARE APPENDAGES TO PRIESTHOOD. When an elder is ordained, he receives the Melchizedek Priesthood and then the office of elder, seventy, or high priest, as the case may be, and the office which he receives designates the nature of his duties. Not only is the office of bishop and elder an appendage to the priesthood but so is every other office, for they all grow out of the priesthood. The apostle, high priest, seventy, and every other office is an appendage to the priesthood.105.8

The Lord has, himself, declared that all authorities or offices in the Church are appendages to the priesthood.105.9

That is to say, they are circumscribed by priesthood and grow out of it.

Paul has informed us that both the gifts and the offices of the Church, in their fulness, are essential to the welfare of the Church. "For the body is not one member, but many"; and the foot cannot say, therefore, because it is not the hand, it is not of the body; nor the ear to the
 eye, nor the head to the feet. "But now hath God set the members every one of them in the body, as it hath pleased him." "And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member be honoured, all the members rejoice with it."106.10

PRIESTHOOD CALLINGS AND ORDINATIONS

PREREQUISITES TO PRIESTHOOD ORDINATIONS. Before any man is ordained to any office in the priesthood, those who call him should carefully consider the following:

1. Worthiness of the individual to hold the priesthood. 106.11

2. His willingness to serve in the calling whereunto he is to be called, and his previous faithfulness to the Church and to responsibility.106.12

3. He must be sustained by the vote of the people concerned. 106.13

USE OF WORD "ORDAIN" IN EARLY DAYS. When the Prophet received the Presidency of the High Priesthood, the history says that he was ordained. 106.14 Today we would say set apart. They used the term ordain in the early days of the Church for everything, 106.15 even when sisters were set apart to preside in the Relief Society.

President Brigham Young and the other members of the Council of the Twelve had the fulness of the keys and priesthood conferred upon them by the Prophet before his death, so that any one of them could act, each in turn, should he come to the Presidency, and all he would then need would be the setting apart. All of the members of the Council of the Twelve today have had conferred upon them all the keys and authority necessary to be exercised by anyone who might reach the Presidency, and then he would be set apart.

CLASS TEACHERS SHOULD NOT BE SET APART. Today we use the term setting apart when men are appointed to preside in stakes and wards and in auxiliary organizations. There is no reason to set apart teachers in classes or chairmen of groups. If we continue to do this, after awhile some may think these positions have become permanent offices in the priesthood.

USE OF RIGHT HAND IN ORDINANCES. The custom, evidently by divine direction, from the very earliest time, has been to associate the right hand with the taking of oaths, and in witnessing or acknowledging obligations. The right hand has been used, in preference to the left hand, in officiating in sacred ordinances where only one hand is used.

The earliest reference we have to the superiority of the right hand over the left, in blessing, is found in the blessing of Jacob to his two grandsons, Ephraim and Manasseh, when he placed his hand "wittingly" upon the heads of the boys.107.16

Earlier, when Abraham sent his servant to Abraham's own kindred to find a wife for Isaac, he had the servant place his hand under his (Abraham's) thigh, and swear to him that he would accomplish his mission.107.17 Evidently, this was the servant's right hand.

The Lord said through Isaiah: "Fear thou not; for I am with thee: be not dismayed; for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee; yea. I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness."108.18

In the Psalms we read: "The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool."108.19

It is the custom to extend the right hand in token of fellowship. 108.20 The right hand is called the dexter, and the left, the sinister; dexter means right and sinister means left. Dexter, or right, means favorable or propitious. Sinister is associated with evil, rather than good. Sinister means perverse.

We take the sacrament with the right hand. We sustain the authorities with the right hand. We make acknowledgment with the right hand raised.

AN EVANGELIST IS A PATRIARCH. According to the dictionary and in the generally accepted view of the word, an evangelist is "a preacher who goes from place to place holding services especially with a view of church revivals," He is a "preacher of the gospel." The term evangel means gospel, or good news. But dictionaries also contain such definitions as this: "A Mormon officer of the Melchizedek or Higher Priesthood, whose special function is to bless."

The Prophet's explanation in relation to the evangelist is: "An evangelist is a patriarch, even the oldest man of the blood of Joseph or of the seed of Abraham. Wherever the Church of Christ is established in the earth, there should be a patriarch for the benefit of the posterity of the saints, as it was with Jacob in giving his patriarchal blessings unto his sons." 108.21

WHO ARE PASTORS? The dictionary definition of a pastor is a correct one, even from our understanding of this term; it is, "a Christian minister who has a church or congregation under his official charge." The term pastor does not refer to an order in the priesthood, like deacon, priest, elder, seventy, and so on, but is a general term applied to an officer who presides over a ward, branch in a mission or a stake, and it could even be applied to a president of a stake. There are several references to pastors in the Old Testament, particularly in the Book of Jeremiah. I quote one or two of these showing that this is a general term applied to the priests and teachers in Israel and not to an order of the priesthood:

"And I will give you pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding."109.22

"For the pastors are become brutish, and have not sought the Lord: therefore they shall not prosper, and all their flocks shall be scattered."109.23

"As for me, I have not hastened from being a pastor to follow thee: neither have I desired the woeful day; thou knowest: that which came out of my lips was right before thee." 109.24

From these passages you will see that it is clear that the Lord has reference to the priests and rulers over the children of Israel and not to an order, or office, in the priesthood. The Prophet Joseph Smith in the Sixth Article of Faith was following Paul's expression and had reference to those who had jurisdiction over the flocks, or branches, of the Church. 109.25 We can say truthfully that a bishop is a pastor; so is an elder who has charge of a branch of the Church, or a president of a stake who has direction of a number of wards and branches. 109.26

We used to have pastors, so named, in Great Britain; they were men appointed to preside over two or more conferences, now called districts.109.27

PAUL'S TEACHING THAT DEACONS SHOULD BE MARRIED. It was the judgment of Paul that a deacon in that day should be a married man. 109.28 That does not apply to our day. Conditions were different in the days of Paul. In that day a minister was not considered qualified to take part in the ministry until he was 30 years of age. Under those conditions deacons, teachers. and priests were mature men. This is not the requirement today.

There are in all kinds of churches today ministers who are under that age, and there is no requirement in the Church in this dispensation that a person must be a matured man before he can take part in the ministry or hold the priesthood. Nor was it the rule in very ancient times, for we learn that Noah was only 10 years of age when he was given the priesthood under the hands of Methuselah.110.29 John the Baptist was ordained when only eight days old by an angel, "to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, and to make straight the way of the Lord before the face of his people," 110.30 but John did not enter this ministry until shortly before the coming of Christ to be baptized and enter his ministry. John was a few months older than our Savior.110.31

SOME YOUNG BOYS ORDAINED ELDERS. Young men were ordained and sent out to preach the gospel in the days of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Several young men who had not reached their majority, and who were unmarried, went forth to do missionary work with the power of the Melchizedek Priesthood upon them. The Prophet's youngest brother, Don Carlos Smith, was ordained an elder when he was 14 and went out doing missionary work. He converted, through the help of the Lord, Solomon Avery who was a Baptist minister. When he was 19, he was made president of the high priests quorum, which position he held until his death in 1841.

My own Father, President Joseph F. Smith, was called and ordained an elder and sent by

President Brigham Young, when he was only 15 years of age, to fill a mission among the natives of the Hawaiian Islands; and if a missionary was in any manner inclined to be tempted and lose his virtue, surely he had every opportunity among the natives of those islands in that early day. Other young men were also ordained and sent out, under the direction of President Brigham Young. President Anthon H. Lund was ordained an elder when 15 years of age and became a local missionary, in the days of President Brigham Young. Now there would be no logic in refusing to ordain a young, unmarried boy a deacon, if that same boy could be ordained an elder and sent out into the world, away from parents and every good influence and protection, except the guidance of the Lord, to preach the gospel to a benighted people,

Paul's day was far different from our day. Many of the customs which prevailed then cannot be adopted or insisted upon today, but the fundamental principles of the gospel have not changed. 111.32

ANCIENT AND MODERN LEVITICAL DUTIES

DUTIES OF DEACONS AND TEACHERS. In the Aaronic Priesthood, besides bishops, who hold the keys of presidency, we have the offices of deacon, teacher, and priest. Men holding these offices are appointed to assist the bishops in their wards. The duty of the deacon is to assist the teacher and priest, and to be at the service of the bishop when required. 111.33

What is the duty of the teacher? As we read here in section 20 of the Doctrine and Covenants, which was given the day the Church was organized, it is the duty of the teacher to visit the homes of the people, to teach them, to see that there is no iniquity in the Church; that there is no fault- finding one with another, no backbiting, no false speaking one against another, and, more than that, to see that the members of the Church perform their duty. That great responsibility rests upon the teacher. He is to see that the members pray, that they fast upon the fast day, that they are paying their tithing, in the season thereof, that they are attending their fast meetings in the wards, week by week; and all these things are required of the teacher as he visits in the homes of the people. And if the teacher does not see to these things, then the sin lieth at his door. 112.34

DUTIES OF PRIESTS OF AARONIC ORDER. What are the duties of the priest? The duty of the priest is to preach, teach, expound, exhort, baptize, and administer the sacrament. He is to visit the house of each member and exhort all to pray, vocally and in secret, and attend to all family duties. That is the duty of the priest.

Now the good bishops in the wards should see that their priests go into the homes of the people and do this very thing, teaching the members in the spirit of prayer. When they find an individual member of the Church who fails in any one of these particulars, it is the right of these teachers or priests to make the report to the bishop, the common judge. However,
 they are to labor diligently, and with long suffering, in faith and humility, with these members who do not see the necessity of keeping the commandments of the Lord, and after they have done all in their power, and can do nothing further to bring the non-praying members to repentance, the common judge may cite them before him, and he has the right to take action against them for their fellowship, Of course, our duty is to save souls. We must not be hasty in casting any out. So, I say, after the teachers or the priests have done all that can be done, then the drastic measures may be meted out. 112.35

LEVITICAL AND AARONIC DUTIES ANCIENTLY. The tabernacle, sometimes called the temple, was a very ornate though portable building, which the children of Israel carried with them in the wilderness. It was to this temple that Hannah went to pray and where Samuel ministered.113.36 It was the duty of the Levites to take care of this building and keep it in order. They took it apart, carried it and all that pertained to it from place to place as they journeyed in the wilderness, and then set it up again when a new camp was made.

These responsibilities, in some degree similar to the duties of deacons today, were divided among the descendants of the three sons of Levi, son of Jacob. They were Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. The sons of Gershon had charge of "the tabernacle, and the tent, the covering thereof, and the hanging for the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, And the hangings of the court, and the curtain for the door of the court, which is by the tabernacle, and by the altar round about, and the cords of it for all the service thereof."

The sons of Kohath in their assignment cared for "the ark, and the table, and the candlestick, and the altars, and the vessels of the sanctuary wherewith they minister, and the hanging, and all the service thereof." Eleazar, son of Aaron, had charge of this group of Levites, and "the oversight of them that keep the charge of the sanctuary." The sons of Merari had charge of "the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof, and the sockets thereof, and all the vessels thereof, and all that serveth thereto, And the pillars of the court round about, and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords."113.37

In a general way the duties and responsibilities of the tabernacle, and of the preparations for sacrifices, were assigned to the descendants of the three sons of Levi. Wagons and oxen were provided for the Gershonites and the Merarites, but the sons of Kohath, "because the service of the sanctuary belonging unto them was that they should bear upon their shoulders" their burdens -- they had no wagons.114.38 Not only were the Levites appointed to take care of the tabernacle and all that pertained to it, but other similar duties were assigned to them. They could offer sacrifice, although it was Aaron's place and that of his sons to hold the keys of this ministry.

RESTORATION IN THE MERIDIAN OF TIME. According to this assignment and the instructions given to Moses, the priests (i.e. sons of Aaron) and Levites officiated from the day of their appointment to the days of the coming of Jesus Christ. When our Savior came, he restored to the Church all that had been taken away, and once again the fulness of the
 priesthood with all of its blessings was given to men. As Peter said, there existed again a "chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people," but this condition did not continue long before apostasy once more destroyed it all.114.39

ADMINISTRATION OF PRIESTHOOD QUORUMS

PURPOSE OF PRIESTHOOD QUORUMS. Every person holding an office in the priesthood should be enrolled and receive membership in the proper quorum where his membership is recorded. One of the main purposes of a quorum of priesthood is to help every individual member of that quorum in all things pertaining to the quorum -- in his spirituality, in his temporal salvation, in all his needs.114.40

Organization is an essential requirement in the government of the Church. The entire universe is organized on a divine plan. Without organization there would be confusion, chaos, and that would lead to disorganization and destruction.

The quorums of the priesthood are organized for a definite purpose. I have jotted down several of these:

1. To keep the members holding the priesthood active and alert in the performance of every duty which the priesthood requires at their hands;

2. To teach the members how to assume responsibility and magnify their callings;

3. To train them in methods by which they may effectually teach others and officiate in their behalf;

4. To encourage them in their responsibilities pertaining to the salvation of the dead as well as for the living.

A quorum, properly appointed, must seek out the needs of every individual member and attempt to supply these needs that may be discovered, both temporally and spiritually. No quorum of the priesthood is assuming the full obligation placed upon it by the Lord which does not sufficiently extend temporal need. Each member should dedicate himself and use his talent to advance the cause of Zion. He must be loyal and faithful to the Church, to the quorum, to the priesthood in general, to his family and to every divine principle of eternal truth. 115.41

RESPONSIBILITY FOR QUORUM ADMINISTRATION. The responsibility for the success of priesthood quorums in the stake is placed, first, upon the presidency of the stake and, second, upon the presidency of the priesthood quorum. The General Authorities hold the stake presidency, with the aid of the high council, responsible for the condition of the quorums of elders, seventies, and the quorum of high priests. It is the duty of the stake
 presidency to see that these quorums are properly officered with men who understand the nature of their callings and the responsibilities of the priesthood. . . .

Moreover, the presidency of the stake, aided by their high council and the stake priesthood committee, are under the responsibility of seeing that quorums are fully organized, not only with presiding officers, but with live, active committees which are faithfully functioning. Where a quorum of priesthood has failed to function, and has been indifferent to the responsibilities assigned to it, the presidency of the stake will be held responsible first, and then officers of the quorum next. If officers refuse to work, or are incapable, then they should be released, and faithful and willing men called to act in their stead.

BEST MEN TO BE PRIESTHOOD PRESIDENTS. Too frequently in the past, the best material has been taken to officer the auxiliary organizations, and then what was left was considered good enough to officer priesthood quorums. It is hoped sincerely that this day has perished and that no vestige of it now remains. The presidency of the stake should see that the very best available material is called to positions of presidency in priesthood quorums. Auxiliary organizations are the helps to the priesthood in the Church.116.42

RESPONSIBILITY OF QUORUM PRESIDENTS. The responsibility of the quorum president is, as stated in this revelation, to sit in counsel, to advise and instruct and teach those who are under his direction.116.43 The Lord has placed the responsibility for the training and the conduct of the members of the quorum upon the shoulders of the president of the quorum. He has given him two counselors to assist him in that work, This direction and care of the quorum may not be transferred to the shoulders of some other. Men who are the most capable for these positions of presidency should be sought.

Too frequently it is thought that the supervision of a quorum, especially of elders, is not of great importance, but the Lord thinks otherwise, There should be, however, a division of responsibility among the presidency. The presidency should see that the quorum is fully organized and that every man is performing his duty. If there are delinquent or wayward members, these should be labored with until brought to repentance and full fellowship. 117.44

DILIGENT PRIESTHOOD SERVICE REQUIRED

STEWARDSHIP OF PRIESTHOOD BEARERS. It is our duty to save the world. That is our mission, insofar as they will listen unto us and receive our testimony. All those who reject the testimony of the elders of Israel will be held responsible and will have to give an accounting for their stewardship, just as we will give an accounting of our stewardship as elders and teachers of the people.117.45

RESPONSIBILITY OF PRIESTHOOD BEARERS. Never before in the history of the Church has the responsibility which has been given to the priesthood been more necessary of
 fulfilment than today. Never before have we been under greater obligation to serve the Lord, and keep his commandments, and magnify the callings which have been assigned to us.

The world today is torn asunder. Evil is rampant upon the face of the earth. The members of the Church need to be humble and prayerful and diligent. We who have been called to these positions in the priesthood have that responsibility upon our shoulders to teach and direct the members of the Church in righteousness.117.46

EMBARKING IN SERVICE OF GOD. If we do not serve him with all our heart, might, mind, and strength, if we are not loyal to this calling which we have received, we are not going to be blameless when we stand before that judgment seat. It is a very serious thing to hold the priesthood. I wish when our young men were called and ordained. that is. recommended to be ordained to the office of elder in the Church, they could be impressed before they were ordained with the importance of the calling which they are about to receive. 118.47

SAVE PRIESTHOOD MEMBERS FROM SPIRITUAL DEATH. Many wayward souls may be lost, who, with a little help from these committees, could be saved from the spiritual death which awaits them. Spiritual death is the most terrible of all deaths, yet we see our fellow quorum members dying for want of a little sympathetic and brotherly attention. Many of these wayward men, if not all, could be saved by this careful attention. Truly "the worth of souls is great in the sight of God."118.48 To save the souls of those who have strayed from the fold is just as worthy and commendable, and causes just as much rejoicing in heaven, as to save souls in far away parts of the earth.

SOURCE OF PRIESTHOOD RESPONSIBILITY. Brethren of the priesthood, these are your responsibilities. The Council of the Twelve did not place them upon you; the Presidency of the Church did not place them upon you -- it is true that they, or their representatives, called you and ordained you to this ministry -- but the responsibility to perform this labor came to you from the Son of God! You are his servants. You will be held accountable to him for your stewardship, and unless you magnify your callings and prove yourselves worthy and faithful in all things, you will not stand blameless before him at the last day.118.49

HOLDERS OF ALL PRIESTHOOD OFFICES TO BE FAITHFUL. It is a very strange thing that the idea should prevail in the Church that the higher a man advances in authority in the priesthood, the greater is his responsibility to be faithful in keeping the commandments of the Lord, and the less authority which he has, the less is his responsibility to be faithful before the Lord, In other words, if a man is called to act as a bishop, a high councilor or president of a stake, he is expected to walk circumspectly and obediently in the discharge of the office which he holds.

One of the presiding authorities, the apostle, for instance, is expected to be a consistent and faithful Latter-day Saint. He must eschew every evil practice and keep every commandment.

Should he fail, or even should the bishop or the high councilor fail to walk consistently with the commandments of the Lord, the whole Church would rise up and declare that he should speedily be brought into the line of his duty or be relieved of his responsibility.

But if it happens to be an ordinary elder, seventy, or even a high priest, who has not been given special responsibility, the majority of the people of the Church seem to feel that his conduct is not a matter of very serious consequence. It seems that the body of the Church has been trained -- but erroneously -- to think that an elder in the Church, who has not been called to some position of prominence or authority, may be guilty of almost any violation of the commandments and regulations of the Church, and he should not be called into very serious question.

OBEDIENCE REQUIRED OF ELDERS AS WELL AS APOSTLES. What the Lord has revealed in relation to the priesthood teaches us that the elder, even if he is not given some special responsibility, is under just as great a responsibility to be true to every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God,"119.50 as is the man who is called to preside over a stake, or even over the Church. The apostle is under no greater commandment to be true to his covenant and membership in the Church than is the ordinary elder, or seventy, or any other individual holding the priesthood. It is true the apostle has a greater responsibility, or calling, in the priesthood, but no greater responsibility to be true to gospel principles and commandments.

Especially is this so, if the elder has received the ordinances of the house of the Lord. . . .

The punishment for the violation of this covenant of the priesthood will come as readily and as surely upon the ordained elder as it will upon the apostle in the Church, who may turn away into forbidden paths and to the neglect of duty.120.51

USE OF SACRED NAMES

REVERENCE FOR NAME OF SUPREME BEING. In the revelation on priesthood given March 28, 1835, the Lord declared that there are "two priesthoods, namely, the Melchizedek and Aaronic, including the Levitical Priesthood." The first, or greater, is called the Melchizedek Priesthood after the name of the righteous king of Salem because he was such a great high priest. This is done the Lord declares, "out of respect or reverence to the name of Supreme Being, to avoid the too frequent repetition of his name."120.52

From the very beginning of time, the sacred name of the Supreme Being has been held in the greatest reverence and respect by the servants of the Lord, We are informed that the true pronunciation of one of his names by the Hebrews was lost, because they scrupulously avoided mentioning it, substituting in its stead "one or other of the words with whose proper vowel-points it may happen to be written."120.53

One of the commandments of the decalogue is: "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain." 121.54 This commandment he repeated frequently through his servants the prophets, and it is further written in the commandments given to Moses, "He that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, he shall surely be put to death." 121.55

VULGARITY BEGETS BLASPHEMY. There is nothing that should be held in more sacred reverence and respect than the name of the Supreme Being and the name of his beloved Son, our Redeemer. Satan puts it into the hearts of men to blaspheme the name of the Lord, and the more vulgar and obscene a man becomes the greater is his tendency to violate this sacred commandment. It seems a strange thing that characters of this kind are never satisfied to swear in the name of mortal men, but always in the name of Deity, which rebellion seems to be in keeping with their wickedness.

USE OF NAMES OF DEITY WHEN PREACHING. Even in the preaching of the gospel, the elders of Israel should exercise great care not to repeat these sacred names too frequently and needlessly when other terms of designation will suffice. There are occasions when the use of these sacred names or titles may properly be used, and the Lord himself, has given us this privilege, for instance, in the blessings of the sacrament; but it is well for those who address the congregations of the people to use these holy names sparingly when other expressions will suffice. The term Lord whether applied to the Father or the Son is permissible, and in speaking of the Son we may properly refer to him as our Savior or Redeemer and not always by the familiar use of his name.

REVERENCE FOR SACRED PRIESTHOOD TITLES. Reverence should also be given to other sacred titles or names. Frequently we hear the brethren of the General Authorities addressed on the street and in private conversations as well as in public by their titles or the offices which they hold in the priesthood. This should be avoided except at the time and place when such usage would be proper. For example, it is not the best form to refer to a member of the Quorum of the Twelve as Apostle ______________, either in speaking of him or to him. The Lord has given us the general designation of Elder which may be applied to any man holding the Melchizedek Priesthood, and no matter what office a man may hold, it is an honor for him to be so designated and addressed.

It has become customary through long established usage to refer to the first President of the Church as The Prophet Joseph Smith, or Joseph Smith, the Prophet. This is permissible because of the great honor which was bestowed upon him and the great work which he accomplished under the hand of the Lord and the fact that he long since departed this mortal life. If he were here, he would be happy to be called, as he was by members of the Church in his day, Brother Joseph. This was not said in the spirit of familiarity but in the spirit of love and respect.

PROPER TITLES FOR CHURCH OFFICERS. In addressing a member of the First

Presidency, it is perfectly proper to say, President Grant, President Clark, or President McKay, and the same designation should be applied to the President of the Council of the Twelve Apostles. These brethren will take no offense or consider it an act of disrespect if they should be called Brother, for it is also an honor to belong to the brotherhood of the Church and be in fellowship with the faithful members. The proper title by which the members of the Council of the Twelve Apostles and the First Council of Seventy may be called is that of Elder. This title may also be applied to the members of the Presiding Bishopric, although the title Bishop has been used from the beginning and may be without offense, whether applied to the Presiding Bishopric or to other bishops in the Church.

In introducing one of the members of the Council of the Twelve Apostles or of the First Council of Seventy, the brother conducting the exercises in the meeting may say, Elder ____________, or Brother ________________, of the Council of the Twelve Apostles, or of the First Council of the Seventy.

PROPRIETY IN INTRODUCING SPEAKERS. The presiding officer in a meeting when introducing a speaker, especially one of the General Authorities of the Church, should not indulge in flattering remarks or make a long eulogy. What may be said should be brief; if there is occasion to make a remark better to identify the speaker, it should be given as a matter of explanation or identification without any word that may cause embarrassment to the person so introduced. It has happened at times that the brother conducting the exercises when giving an introduction has taken a good part of the time allotted to the speaker. This is a fault frequently indulged in by inexperienced presiding officers. Brief introductions will be appreciated by the brethren, and very brief comments, if any, are necessary at the close of their remarks. 123.56

PRIESTHOOD AND COMMON CONSENT

OPERATION OF LAW OF COMMON CONSENT. No man can preside in this Church in any capacity without the consent of the people. The Lord has placed upon us the responsibility of sustaining by vote those who are called to various positions of responsibility. No man, should the people decide to the contrary, could preside over any body of Latter-day Saints in this Church, and yet it is not the right of the people to nominate, to choose, for that is the right of the priesthood.

The priesthood selects, under the inspiration of our Father in heaven, and then it is the duty of the Latter-day Saints, as they are assembled in conference, or other capacity, by the uplifted hand, to sustain or to reject; and I take it that no man has the right to raise his hand in opposition, or with contrary vote, unless he has a reason for doing so that would be valid if presented before those who stand at the head. In other words, I have no right to raise my hand in opposition to a man who is appointed to any position in this Church, simply because I may not like him, or because of some personal disagreement or feeling I may have, but only on the grounds that he is guilty of wrong doing, of transgression of the laws of the Church
 which would disqualify him for the position which he is called to hold.124.57
