LAW OF PATRIARCHAL LINEAGE

TWO HEREDITARY OFFICES IN CHURCH. The office of Patriarch to the Church is one of two hereditary offices in the Church, the other being that of Presiding Bishop. 160.1 In the case of the Presiding Bishop, however, the Lord has not revealed the line of descent, and since one holding the office of high priest may serve, this order has been followed from the beginning in this dispensation. . . . In case of the Patriarchal office, the Lord has designated the line of descent. By revelation and commandment Joseph Smith, Sr., was called and ordained to this office. 160.2

From the days of Adam the office of patriarch has descended from father to son. Adam is the great Patriarch of the human family and will preside over his posterity forever. 160.3

PATRIARCHAL ORDER: FROM ADAM TO MOSES. The order of this priesthood which was established in the beginning was patriarchal. The authority descended from father to son, and those who held it were high priests. This order of descent from Adam to Noah is given in the Doctrine and Covenants.160.4 Noah, who stands next to Adam in authority, brought this priesthood through the flood, and it continued from generation to generation.160.5 Abraham, the 10th from Noah, received special blessings from the Lord, and the priesthood continued through him and his seed with the promise that all who received the gospel should be counted as Abraham's seed and partake of his blessings. 161.6

The patriarchal authority has come down from Abraham through Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and Ephraim. Why Manasseh, the older son of Joseph, was not chosen we do not know. If we had the full record, this matter would no doubt be made clear. 161.7 All through the centuries from the beginning to the days of Moses, the patriarchal priesthood prevailed. Those who held this authority were high priests.

PATRIARCHAL ORDER TAKEN FROM ANCIENT ISRAEL. When the children of Israel -- the descendants of Jacob, grandson of Abraham -- were in the wilderness, after their
 deliverance from Egypt, the Lord offered them, on conditions that they would serve him, the fulness of this priesthood with all its blessings, and they would have become a nation of priests under this patriarchal order.

However, the children of Israel rebelled; they showed themselves unworthy of this great honor, and the Lord in his anger denied them this fulness of priesthood with all the rites that would prepare them for the exaltation in his presence. When Moses went up into the mount and remained 40 days, the Lord gave him two tables of stone on which were carved his holy commandments, with the promise to Israel of blessings, through their faithfulness, that would permit them "to enter into his rest."

When Moses returned and found the people worshiping the golden calf, the God of the Egyptians, in his anger he threw down the tables and broke them. Then, later, at the command of the Lord, he went back into the mountain and received other tables, also written by the finger of God; but these did not contain the same commandments in all particulars that were on the first. The Lord had eliminated that which pertained to the higher blessings. 162.8

BIRTHRIGHT IN ANCIENT ISRAEL. In this dispensation it was made known to Joseph Smith that the right to hold the keys of this patriarchal office belonged to his father, Joseph Smith, Sr. This authority was conferred upon Joseph Smith, father of the Prophet, by right of his being "the oldest man of the blood of Joseph, or of the seed of Abraham."

It is well understood by Latter-day Saints that the birthright (which usually is conferred upon the oldest son in the family) passed by Reuben, the firstborn son of Jacob, because of his transgression, and it was placed upon the head of Joseph by divine revelation. 162.9 Joseph was the eldest son of Rachel and by long odds the most worthy son of Jacob. Because of his worthiness and his integrity, and, perhaps, the fact that he was the firstborn son of Rachel, he was chosen to occupy this exalted position among the sons of Israel.

However, for reasons which we do not understand for the history of those events is very brief, this authority came down through the lineage of Joseph's second son, Ephraim. It was Ephraim who was called to occupy the position held by his father, and he is spoken of in the scriptures as the firstborn in Israel.162.10 Since that day the record of descent of the patriarchal power is very meager.

LATTER-DAY PATRIARCHAL LINEAGE

JOSEPH SMITH, SR., FIRST LATTER-DAY PATRIARCH. It is sufficient for us to know that in this day the Lord by revelation declared it was the right of Joseph Smith, father of the Prophet, to stand in this important office as the Patriarch holding the keys of this ministry. He was, as we have said, the first man called to occupy this position in this dispensation. 163.11 He was ordained by his illustrious and honored son, Joseph, to this position

December 18, 1833, and held this office with honor and' with the inspiration of the Lord resting upon him, until his death, September 14, 1840, at the age of 69 years. His life was shortened by persecution and mobocracy. 163.12

PROPHET'S BLESSING UPON HIS FATHER. In the blessing pronounced upon his father's head, given December 18, 1833, the Prophet said:

"Three years previous to the death of Adam, he called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, who were all high priests, with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing. And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael the prince, the archangel. And the Lord administered comfort unto Adam, and said unto him: I have set thee to be at the head; a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou art a prince over them forever.163.13

"So shall it be with my father. He shall be called a prince over his posterity, holding the keys of the Patriarchal Priesthood over the kingdom of God on earth, even the Church of the Latter-day Saints, and he shall sit in the general assembly of patriarchs, even in council with the Ancient of Days, when he shall sit and all the patriarchs with him, and shall enjoy his right and authority under the direction of the Ancient of Days. . . .

"Again, blessed is my father, for the hand of the Lord shall be over him, and he shall be full of the Holy Ghost. . . . Behold, the blessings of Joseph by the hand of his progenitor shall come upon the head of my father and his seed after him, to the uttermost." 164.14

HEREDITARY NATURE OF PATRIARCHAL OFFICE. It has always been understood, and so the revelations declare, that this office is hereditary. In a revelation to Hyrum Smith a few days after the organization of the Church, the Lord foreshadowed the coming of this priesthood as it would descend upon the head of Hyrum Smith, and implied that it would be an office which would pertain to his family, in the following words:

"Behold, I speak unto you, Hyrum, a few words; for thou also art under no condemnation, and thy heart is opened, and thy tongue loosed; and thy calling is to exhortation, and to strengthen the church continually. Wherefore thy duty is unto the church forever, and this because of thy family." 164.15

The statement that the duty of Hyrum Smith was to the Church forever, because of his family, evidently conveys the thought that he would succeed to the office of Patriarch and that it should continue in his posterity to the end of time, for, surely, it would have to continue in this way to last forever in the Church upon the earth among mortal men. Then again, the blessing pronounced upon the head of Hyrum Smith's father, was that this calling was to come upon his head "and his seed after him, to the uttermost." And so, down through the history of the Church, this doctrine has been recognized.164.16

HYRUM SMITH GIVEN KEYS OF PATRIARCHAL PRIESTHOOD. Joseph Smith, Sr., was succeeded in this office by his faithful son, Hyrum, who was ordained to this position, January 24, 1841. In the call which came by revelation to Hyrum Smith the Lord said:

"And again, verily I say unto you, let my servant William [Law] be appointed, ordained, and anointed, as a counselor unto my servant Joseph, in the room of my servant Hyrum, that my servant Hyrum may take the office of Priesthood and Patriarch, which was appointed unto him by his father, by blessing and also by right; That from henceforth he shall hold the keys of the patriarchal blessings upon the heads of all my people, That whosoever he blesses shall be blessed, and whosoever he curses shall be cursed; that whatsoever he shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever he shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." 165.17

This blessing pertains to the office and calling of the man who holds the keys of the Patriarchal Priesthood.

HYRUM ALSO GIVEN KEYS OF KINGDOM. The Lord conferred upon Hyrum Smith, however, another important and special honor, in making him as well as Joseph Smith a holder of the keys of authority in this dispensation of the fulness of times. These are the words of that appointment: "And from this time forth I appoint unto him that he may be a prophet, and a seer, and a revelator unto my church, as well as my servant Joseph." 165.18

This was a special blessing given to Hyrum Smith, and in accepting it he took the place of Oliver Cowdery, upon whom these keys had previously been bestowed. It should be remembered that whenever the Lord revealed priesthood and the keys of priesthood from the heavens, Oliver Cowdery stood with Joseph Smith in the presence of the heavenly messengers, and was a recipient, as well as Joseph Smith, of all this authority. They held it conjointly, Joseph Smith as the first and Oliver Cowdery as the second elder of the Church.

HYRUM SMITH: WITNESS OF RESTORATION. Thus the law pertaining to witnesses was fully established, for there were two witnesses standing with authority, keys, and presidency, at the head of this the greatest of all dispensations.165.19 When through transgression Oliver Cowdery lost this wonderful and exalted blessing, Hyrum Smith was chosen by revelation of the Lord to take his place -- the Lord calling him in these words:

"That he [Hyrum Smith] may act in concert also with my servant Joseph; and that he shall receive counsel from my servant Joseph, who shall show unto him the keys whereby he may ask and receive, and be crowned with the same blessing, and glory, and honor, and priesthood, and gifts of the priesthood, that once were put upon him that was my servant Oliver Cowdery; That my servant Hyrum may bear record of the things which I shall show unto him, that his name may be had in honorable remembrance from generation to generation, forever and ever." 166.20

And thus, according to promise, the Lord opened the vision of Hyrum Smith and showed to him those things which were necessary to qualify him for this exalted position, and upon him were conferred by Joseph Smith all the keys and authorities by which he, Hyrum Smith, was able to act in concert with his younger brother as a prophet, seer, and revelator, and president of the Church, "as well as my servant Joseph."166.21

The Prophet Joseph blessed Hyrum as follows: "Blessed of the Lord is my brother Hyrum, for the integrity of his heart. . . . He shall stand in the tracks of his father and be numbered among those who hold the right of Patriarchal Priesthood, even the Evangelical Priesthood, and power shall be upon him.166.22

WILLIAM SMITH NEVER SUSTAINED IN PATRIARCHAL OFFICE. At the time of the martyrdom of Hyrum Smith, his oldest son, John, was but a boy 11 years of age and therefore too young to act in this calling. President Brigham Young said it would have been the right of Samuel, brother of Hyrum, to have received this office, but Samuel died in the year 1844, shortly after the martyrdom.

William Smith was thus left the only surviving brother of Hyrum Smith, and President Young and the apostles said it was William's right, and they therefore ordained him to this office in the summer of 1845, but at the October conference of 1845, the saints rejected him. William Smith, therefore, was never legally installed in this office. 167.23

REBELLION AND EXCOMMUNICATION OF WILLIAM SMITH. There has been some question raised as to the number of men who have held this office of Patriarch to the Church, and some errors have been made in listing them. At the general conference held in October, 1844, President Brigham Young said it was William's right to be ordained to the office of Patriarch to the Church. However, because of the unstable attitude of William, no action was taken at this or at the next conference held in April, 1845, although at each of these conferences William was sustained in his calling as an apostle.

At a meeting of the Council of the Apostles held in Nauvoo, May 24, 1845, after a long consultation with William, in which he apparently humbled himself and promised faithfully to support the apostles, William Smith was ordained to this office of Patriarch to the Church. It was only a few days later, however, or on May 29th, that the brethren were under the necessity of severely rebuking William Smith for his rebellious spirit, and from that time forth until the time of the October conference he continued to manifest a dissatisfied spirit and a disposition to disregard the counsels of the priesthood.

The result was that at the October conference, 1845, he was rejected, both as a member of the Council of the Apostles and as Patriarch, by "unanimous vote." William Smith, therefore, was never sustained in this office by a vote of the people. President Joseph F. Smith maintained most strenuously that, because of this, William Smith should not be classed
 among the Patriarchs holding this exalted position, and for that reason, in speaking of the Presiding Patriarchs, William Smith has not been included.168.24

The offices of Patriarch and Assistant-President were held by Hyrum Smith until the martyrdom. The office of Patriarch was then offered to William Smith, the only surviving brother of the Prophet, and President Brigham Young declared it was his by right. William Smith confirmed the saying of the Lord, "many are called, but few are chosen," 168.25 for he failed to magnify this calling, turned against his brethren, and was excommunicated. He was never sustained by the vote of the people, and therefore never did legally act; he was called, but was not chosen. 168.26

ASAEL SMITH NOT PATRIARCH TO CHURCH. It has also been said that Asael Smith, brother of the first Patriarch, had been ordained to this position, but this is not the case. He was ordained a patriarch, but was never called to the position of Presiding Patriarch, having died in the interval between the rejection of William Smith and the ordination of John Smith, Asael's younger brother.

DESCENT OF PATRIARCHAL OFFICE. John Smith, uncle of the Prophet Joseph, and younger brother of the first Patriarch, was ordained to this position, January 1, 1849; he died in Salt Lake City, May 23, 1854.

After his death the office reverted to the family of Hyrum Smith, his eldest son, John, being ordained February 18, 1855.168.27 He was an inexperienced boy 22 years of age at the time of his ordination, and after he was ordained President Brigham Young sent him on a mission that he might gain experience. He died in Salt Lake City, November 6, 1911, after holding the office for over 56 years.

The fifth Patriarch was Hyrum Gibbs Smith, grandson of John Smith, and the great-grandson of Hyrum Smith. He was ordained under the hands of President Joseph F. Smith, May 9, 1912. He died February 4, 1932, in Salt Lake City.169.28 During the 19 years of his ministry he gave 21,590 blessings which were recorded, or 931 more than his grandfather gave.169.29

PATRIARCHAL OFFICE AND BLESSINGS

PATRIARCH TO CHURCH STANDS AS A FATHER TO ISRAEL. Hyrum Gibbs Smith was a very lovable character, even tempered, fatherly in his advice and instruction, well informed in relation to the principles of the gospel, and admirably adapted to his high and holy calling. He was devoted to his work in the Church. His heart was filled with tender mercy for his fellow beings, and the spirit of blessing, which it was his right to possess, was one of the strongest manifestations of his noble character.

He was called to occupy one of the greatest positions of honor and trust ever conferred upon
 man. This calling came to him by divine right according to the decree of our Eternal Father, and he stood as a father to Israel, holding the keys of Patriarchal Priesthood and blessing, with the right to declare by revelation the lineage of each member of the Church, and to seal upon the head of each a blessing with the power, through faithfulness, to come forth in the morning of the resurrection to enter into glory in the presence of the Lord.

PATRIARCHS TO CHURCH SERVE BY LINEAGE AND WORTHINESS. This does not mean that every man who is ordained to the office of Patriarch receives an office which should descend to his son after him, but that the calling of the man who holds the keys of this ministry and priesthood, other things being in harmony, shall descend upon his posterity after him, by legal and divine right. It always should be kept in mind, that worthiness is one of the essential prerequisites upon which right to this office is based. Only through obedience to gospel truth, and by worthiness in every particular, is a man who is of the rightful lineage entitled to succeed to this exalted office.

A patriarch is a high priest. The first government given to man on this earth was patriarchal, and that order continued throughout all generations, we have reason to believe, until the days of Moses, when the Lord took from Israel the higher blessings of the gospel, as well as the general exercise of the Melchizedek Priesthood, and left the people subject to the law of Moses and under the direction of priests of the Aaronic order.170.30

NATURE AND PURPOSE OF PATRIARCHAL BLESSINGS. The Patriarch to the Church holds the keys of blessing for the members of the Church. He has the authority to seal blessings upon the heads of the members in all parts of the Church, that they may, if they prove faithful, enjoy whatever is pronounced upon their heads and come forth in the resurrection to obtain eternal life. To gain such blessings, however, all the ordinances and covenants belonging to the gospel and to exaltation must by them be received.

A blessing given by a patriarch is intended to point out the path which the recipient should travel. It should be given by the spirit of revelation and should be a great comfort and incentive to the recipient to continue on in faithfulness to the end. The patriarch also holds the key by which the lineage of those whom he blesses may be made known. It is a very important and most holy and sacred calling.170.31

PREPARATION FOR GIVING PATRIARCHAL BLESSINGS. Extreme care should be taken in the giving of patriarchal blessings. They should be given only in the spirit of prayer and humility. Patriarchs should sit down with the candidates for blessings and question them in relation to their lives, what they have done in the Church and otherwise. They should feel of their spirits, discover if they have been active or inactive in the Church, learn all about them that they can; then, relying on the Spirit of the Lord, patriarchs should give them conservative blessings.

CONDITIONAL NATURE OF PATRIARCH'S SEALING POWER. It is reported that some
 patriarchs are blessing members of the Church as follows: "I bless you and seal you up to come forth to your exaltation in the world to come." This is wrong. The patriarch has a right to seal a member up to come forth in the morning of the first resurrection, based upon his or her faithfulness, and that is all.

POWER OF PATRIARCHS TO DECLARE LINEAGE. A patriarch giving a blessing has the right of inspiration to declare the literal descent of the person receiving the blessing; he does not have authority to assign that individual to any tribe. Through the waters of baptism and the priesthood, Church members become heirs of Abraham with all the rights belonging to the children of Abraham through their faithfulness.171.32

If a patriarch gives a blessing and the lineage is not designated, is it considered a patriarchal blessing? Yes. However, a patriarch has the right of discernment to designate the lineage.

If in a blessing the lineage is not given, the person may go to the patriarch and ask for that information, and if the patriarch is so inspired, he may declare it and have it added to the blessing. If the patriarch is deceased, another patriarch could add that part to the blessing.

SACRED NATURE OF PATRIARCHAL BLESSINGS Groups or classes in auxiliaries, seminaries, and the like, should not be sent to patriarchs. Members should go individually. Patriarchal blessings are individual blessings, sacred to those who receive them. It is not intended that patriarchal blessings should become public property.

There is no definite age limit for blessings, but we advise that blessings should not be given to any who are not old enough to understand what a blessing is for. They should at least be old enough to be deacons and sisters of like age. A person should be in the Church at least a year before seeking a blessing.

FATHERS CAN GIVE PATRIARCHAL BLESSINGS. A faithful father who holds the Melchizedek Priesthood may bless his own children, and that would be a patriarchal (father's) blessing. Such a blessing could be recorded in the family records, but it would not be preserved in the archives of the Church. Every father who is true to this priesthood is a patriarch over his own house. In addition, children may receive a blessing by an ordained patriarch. A father blessing his own child could, if he received the inspiration to do so, declare the lineage of the child. 172.33

ADMINISTERING TO SICK

ORDINANCE OF ADMINISTRATION IN FORMER DISPENSATIONS. Administering to the sick has been an ordinance of the gospel practiced from the beginning when the authority of the priesthood has been found on the earth.

The usual procedure is stated by James: "Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. Is any
 merry? let him sing psalms. Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him."173.34

We read in the New Testament how Jesus laid his hands upon individuals and healed them. 173.35 At times, because of the abundant faith of the afflicted, the Savior healed them by just a word, but his command to his disciples was that they should lay their hands upon the sick. This ordinance was not one that was introduced for the first time in the dispensation of the meridian of time, for in the Old Testament are numerous cases of healing. Two very interesting cases are the raising of the widow's son by Elijah173.36 and the similar restoration of the dead son of the Shunammite woman. 173.37

This great gift was manifest after the resurrection of Jesus during the sojourn of his apostles on the earth. Following their passing the spiritual gifts ceased and the anointing with oil and the blessing of the sick came to an end -- not because these gifts were no longer needed, but because faith had departed from the souls of men and the priesthood had been taken from the earth. Henceforth the cry has been heard that these gifts were only intended for the days of the apostles and are no longer needed. Nevertheless, there have been many times when sincere, devout people, who have endeavored to observe the commandments of the Lord to the best of their knowledge, have been blessed and healed through the prayer of faith. The prayers of honest souls who sincerely seek blessings from the Lord are often answered, and the Lord accepts their faith.

ORDINANCE OF ADMINISTRATION RESTORED. In this dispensation the Lord has spoken and given commandment in relation to the administration of the sick in the following words: "And whosoever among you are sick, and have not faith to be healed, but believe, shall be nourished with all tenderness, with herbs and mild food, and that not by the hand of an enemy. And the elders of the church, two or more, shall be called, and shall pray for and lay their hands upon them in my name; and if they die they shall die unto me, and if they live they shall live unto me." 174.38

The detail in anointing and blessing the sick is as follows. Two or more elders should be called for the purpose. One elder should pour the oil from the bottle containing pure olive oil, which has been consecrated, upon the crown of the head of the sick person. (One drop taken from a medicine dropper is improper, nor should the oil be poured from a spoon.) The brother anointing should not seal the anointing but leave that to the second elder who offers the prayer of administration. The sick person should be called by name in the anointing, and it should be done in the name of Jesus Christ and by authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood according to the revelation, and to the end that the sick person may be healed.

After the ordinance of anointing is finished, the elders present, two or more, including the one who anointed, will lay their hands upon the head of the sick and offer a prayer in faith in
 the name of Jesus Christ and by virtue of the priesthood which they hold seal the anointing, If moved upon by the Spirit of the Lord, the brother who is voice may rebuke the illness and bless with life and health. Prayers and blessings for the sick need not be of great length, that which is essential should be uttered and then the prayer closed in the name of Jesus Christ. After the administration is finished, it is wisdom for the elders who officiate not to prolong their visit but cheerfully withdraw.

INSTRUCTIONS ON ANOINTING AND SEALING. The following is taken from the MIA Manual of 1902-3, pages 58-59:

"The ordinance of administering to the sick usually consists of two parts: The anointing, and the prayer of faith, The first usually is performed by one of the elders. The sealing of the anointing is performed by all the elders gathered around the person and laying hands on him or her, one of them offering the prayer. The words to be used are not prescribed. In this anointing it is necessary to use the name of Messiah and to invoke the power of the priesthood, witnessing that the anointing is performed for the purpose of healing. In sealing the anointing the same name and authority should be used, and the statement made that the anointing for the healing of the sick is sealed, the disease rebuked, and the blessing of health promised. Any additions, conditions, or promises that are dictated by the inspiration of the Lord, should of course be set forth in the prayer. Those officiating should exercise the strongest possible faith for the patient's recovery, and place themselves thoroughly under the influence of the Spirit of the Lord because in such cases much depends on the faith of the elders and the spirit that accompanies them. Faith to heal the sick is one of the most desirable gifts of the gospel and should be sought by all the elders; and they should be in readiness at any time to exercise this power in behalf of the unfortunate."

"And these things ye shall not do, except it be required of you by them who desire it, that the scriptures might be fulfilled; for ye shall do according to that which is written." 175.39

PROPER ADMINISTRATION PROCEDURES. If a man were alone with a sick person, should he anoint with oil and give the blessing and seal it by himself? If an elder is alone and no help is available, and he is called on to administer to the sick, he has full authority both to anoint and seal the anointing.

Is it proper to anoint the afflicted parts of the body? No. The anointing should be on the crown of the head. (It could be a matter of impropriety to anoint afflicted parts of the body.)

Is it permissible to administer the oil internally? No. Taking the oil internally is not part of the administration. If persons who are ill wish to take oil internally, they are not forbidden, but many sicknesses will not be improved by oil in the stomach.

Is it proper for an elder to take with him a brother holding the Aaronic Priesthood to assist in administering to the sick? This question has been answered by the First Presidency and

Council of the Twelve as follows:

"It was the sense of the Council . . . that the practice [of administering] be confined to the elders; but in the case of absolute necessity, that is where an elder finds himself in the situation that he cannot avail himself of the company of another elder, he may, if opportunity affords, avail himself of the company of a member of the Aaronic Priesthood, or even a lay member, but for the purpose only of being supported by the faith of such member or members, the elder alone to officiate in the ordinance of administration; or, the elder may administer alone without such assistance of a lay member or one holding the Aaronic Priesthood."176.40

LAYING ON OF HANDS BY WOMEN IN ADMINISTRATIONS. If a man and his wife were alone with a sick person, could he anoint with the oil and then seal the anointing with his wife assisting using the priesthood she holds jointly with her husband? President Joseph F. Smith answered this question as follows:

"Does a wife hold the priesthood with her husband, and may she lay hands on the sick with him, with authority? A wife does not hold the priesthood with her husband, but she enjoys the benefits thereof with him; and if she is requested to lay hands on the sick with him, or with any other officer holding the Melchizedek Priesthood, she may do so with perfect propriety. It is no uncommon thing for a man and wife unitedly to administer to their children." 177.41

When this is done the wife is adding her faith to the administration of her husband. The wife would lay on hands just as would a member of the Aaronic Priesthood, or a faithful brother without the priesthood, she in this manner giving support by faith to the ordinance performed by her husband. The Prophet Joseph Smith said, "Respecting females administering for the healing of the sick, . . . there could be no evil in it, if God gave his sanction by healing; that there could be no more sin in any female laying hands on and praying for the sick, than in wetting the face with water; it is no sin for anybody to administer that has faith, or if the sick have faith to be healed by their administration."177.42 Such an administration would not be by virtue of the priesthood, but a manifestation of faith.

ADMINISTRATIONS AND FORGIVENESS OF SINS. James says when a man administers to a sick person he has power to remit his sins; how does the elder get power to remit sins?

It is not the elder who remits or forgives the sick man's sins, but the Lord. If by the power of faith and through the administration by the elders the man is healed, it is evidence that his sins have been forgiven. It is hardly reasonable to think that the Lord will forgive the sins of a man who is healed if he has not repented. Naturally he would repent of his sins if he seeks for the blessing by the elders.178.43

WOMEN AND THE PRIESTHOOD. There is nothing in the teachings of the gospel which
 declares that men are superior to women. The Lord has given unto men the power of priesthood and sent them forth to labor in his service. A woman's calling is in a different direction. The most noble, exalting calling of all is that which has been given to women as the mothers of men. Women do not hold the priesthood, but if they are faithful and true, they will become priestesses and queens in the kingdom of God, and that implies that they will be given authority. The women do not hold the priesthood with their husbands, but they do reap the benefits coming from that priesthood.

WOMEN NOT TO ANOINT OR SEAL BLESSINGS. The Brethren do not consider it necessary or wise for the women of the Relief Society to wash and anoint women who are sick. The Lord has given us directions in matters of this kind; we are to call in the elders, and they are to anoint with oil on the head and bless by the laying on of hands.

The Church teaches that a woman may lay on hands upon the head of a sick child and ask the Lord to bless it, in the case when those holding the priesthood cannot be present. A man might under such conditions invite his wife to lay on hands with him in blessing their sick child. This would be merely to exercise her faith and not be, cause of any inherent right to lay on hands. A woman would have no authority to anoint or seal a blessing, and where elders can be called in, that would be the proper way to have an administration performed.

REPEATED ANOINTINGS NOT NECESSARY. If a sick person has been anointed and the following day seeks another blessing, it is not necessary to anoint with oil the second time, President Joseph F. Smith has left us this counsel: "In the matter of administering to the sick, according to the order and practice established in the Church, care should be taken to avoid unwarranted repetitions. When an administration is made, and when the blessing pronounced upon the afflicted one has been received, the ordinance should not be repeated, rather let the time be given to prayer and thanksgiving for the manifestation of divine power already granted and realized. No limit should be or can be set to the offering of prayer and the rendering of praise to the Giver of Good, for we are specially told to pray without ceasing, and no special authority of the priesthood or standing in the Church is essential to the offering of prayer; but the actual administration by anointing with oil and by the imposition of hands by those who hold the proper office in the priesthood is an authoritative ordinance, too sacred in its nature to be performed lightly, or to be repeated loosely when the blessing has been gained." 179.44

SICK NOT DEDICATED TO LORD. The elders are to bless and comfort the sick and acknowledge the hand of the Lord in all things; but they are not to dedicate a person to the Lord. In regard to the dedicating of the very sick, or the suffering, to the Lord when they are administered to (thus presumably giving them up to death), and as to the advisability of this custom, we have this definite information from the First Presidency:

"The custom which is growing in the Church to dedicate those who appear to be beyond recovery, to the Lord, has no place among the ordinances of the Church. The Lord has
 instructed us, where people are sick, to call in the elders, two or more, who should pray for and lay their hands upon them in the name of the Lord; and 'if they die,' says the Lord, 'they shall die unto me, and if they live they shall live unto me.'180.45 No possible advantage can result from dedicating faithful members of the Church to the Lord prior to their death. Their membership in the Church, their devotion to the faith which they have espoused, are sufficient guarantee, so far as their future welfare is concerned.

"The administration of the ordinances of the gospel to the sick is for the purpose of healing them, that they may continue lives of usefulness until the Lord shall call them hence. This is as far as we should go. If we adhere strictly to that which the Lord has revealed in regard to this matter, no mistake will be made."180.46

USE OF CONSECRATED OIL

OLIVE OIL: AN EMBLEM OF PURITY AND PEACE. Why is olive oil, instead of some other kind, used in administering to the sick? When was this practice first instituted? By what authority was it instituted?

Oil used in the anointing of the sick and for other holy purposes, including the anointing in the house of the Lord, must be pure oil, free from all unsavory conditions and impure elements. For this reason it is very evident that oil produced from animal bodies could not be used. The purest oils come from the higher forms of plant life, and among these the olive tree stands preeminently first.

The olive tree from the earliest times has been the emblem of peace and purity. It has, perhaps, been considered more nearly sacred than any other tree or form of vegetation by the inspired writers of all ages through whom we have received the word of the Lord. In parables in the scriptures the House of Israel, or the people who have made covenant with the Lord, have been compared to the olive tree.180.47

We, even in this modern day when things are turned upside down, speak of the olive branch as being the emblem of peace, and it is usually portrayed as being carried in the bill of the dove of peace. When the Prophet Joseph Smith sent to the saints in Missouri a copy of section 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants, one of the greatest revelations ever given to man, he said: "I send you the olive leaf which we have plucked from the Tree of Paradise." 181.48

ANCIENT USE OF OLIVE OIL FOR HOLY PURPOSES.

Just when olive oil was first used in anointing we do not know, for the record is silent as to the original use of oil for this purpose; but we do have the word of the Lord given to Israel through Moses some 1500 years before the birth of our Lord, wherein the use of olive oil is commanded for holy purposes, as the following will show:

"And thou shalt command the children of Israel, that they bring thee pure oil olive beaten for the light, to cause the lamp to burn always."181.49

"And of cassia five hundred shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, and of oil olive an hin: And thou shalt make it an oil of holy ointment, an ointment compound after the art of the apothecary: it shall be an holy anointing oil."181.50

"And he made the holy anointing oil, and the pure incense of sweet spices, according to the work of the apothecary."181.51

Zechariah, also, wrote: "Then answered I, and said unto him, What are these two olive trees upon the right side of the candlestick and upon the left side thereof? And I answered again, and said unto him, What be these two olive branches which through the two golden pipes empty the golden oil out of themselves? And he answered me and said, Knowest thou not what these be? And I said, No, my lord. Then said he, These are the two anointed ones, that stand by the Lord of the whole earth."182.52

From these quotations from the scriptures we discover that the pure oil of the olive was commanded to be used in the lamps in the Temple, or Tabernacle, in the wilderness when Israel was waiting to enter the promised land, and also to be used for holy anointing. This practice was continued in Solomon's Temple.

REBELLIOUS ISRAEL DENIED USE OF ANOINTING OIL. It is well known that the oil of gladness, or of anointing, which is spoken of in the Psalms and other scriptures, and with which the kings and prophets were anointed, was the pure oil of the olive which grew abundantly in Palestine. 182.53

One of the curses which Moses predicted would come upon Israel, if the children of Israel turned from the commandments of the Lord, was that they would have olive trees throughout all their coasts, but they should not anoint themselves with the oil, for their olive trees would cast their fruit.182.54

Micah, at a later day, when Israel had turned from the Lord, again warned the people of Israel and said: "Thou shalt sow, but thou shalt not reap; thou shalt tread the olives, but thou shalt not anoint thee with oil; and sweet wine, but shalt not drink wine." 182.55 This was to come upon them as a punishment for their transgressions.

ANOINTING WITH OIL IN MERIDIAN OF TIME. The use of olive oil for the anointing of the sick was in vogue in the Church of Jesus Christ of former days. James says: "Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up: and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him." 183.56

PRIESTHOOD BLESSINGS WITHOUT USE OF OIL. This same practice was instituted in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the beginning and has continued until now, and will continue as an ordinance as long as present conditions endure.

There have been cases, sad to relate, where elders of the Church, through lack of understanding, have refused to administer to the sick under conditions where oil could not be had. It is the privilege and duty of the elders to bless the sick by the laying on of hands, If they have pure olive oil which has been consecrated for this purpose, one of them should use it in anointing the sick, and then they should by the laying on of hands seal the anointing. If no oil is to be had, then they should administer by the laying on of hands in the power of the priesthood and in the prayer of faith, that the blessing sought may come through the power of the Spirit of the Lord, This is in accordance with the divine plan inaugurated in the beginning. 183.57
