CLERGY AND CRITICS FIGHT BIBLE

CRITICS OF BIBLE INSPIRED BY SATAN. The Holy Bible has had a greater influence on the world for good than any other book ever published. It has been printed in more editions and translated into more languages and read by more people than any other book. No other publication has been more severely and critically examined. The reason for the Bible's great influence for good is because it is inspired and contains the word of the Lord delivered to his prophets, who wrote and spoke as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost, since the world began. 184.1

It has drawn the fire of adverse criticism for the self-same reason. Had it not been an inspired record less attention would have been paid to it by the opposing critics, who have drawn their inspiration from the author of evil, who in the very beginning swore in his wrath that he would endeavor to destroy the work of God.184.2

APOSTATE CLERGY RESIST PRINTING OF BIBLE. As late as the 14th century, when the world was dominated by a despotic power that feared not God nor served him, there were few outside of the clergy who were educated enough to read and write. Priests became the lawyers, diplomats, ambassadors, instructors, and prime ministers of the nations. All learned men talked and wrote in Latin, the language of Rome. It is recorded that for centuries a man
 convicted of crime in England, by showing that he could read and write, could claim the benefits of a trial in the ecclesiastical courts, which by long abuse came to mean exemption from the punishment of the criminal law of the land.

With the invention of the printing press learning revived, and during the days of the reformation many among the common people learned to read and write. By that time the books of the Bible had been compiled and several translations had been made in the languages of the people of Europe. Wycliffe's Bible appeared in 1330 and was followed by other translations at a later date both in English and other tongues.

At first there was an attempt on the part of the powerful but corrupt clergy to destroy these copies which were prepared without authority being granted by the great Catholic Church. Before the time of printing a copy of the Bible cost the sum of 500 crowns. Through the aid of printing the price was reduced to five crowns, which made it possible for the people not only to have the privilege of hearing the scriptures read in their native tongue, but also to acquire the understanding by which they could read them for themselves.

MEN BURNED AT STAKE FOR OWNING SCRIPTURES. The English chronicler, Henry Kneighton, many years before had expressed the prevailing notion about the reading of the scriptures, when he denounced the general reading of the Bible, lamenting "lest the jewel of the church hitherto the exclusive property of the clergy and divines, should be made common to the laity." Archbishop Arundel, in England, had issued an enactment that "no part of the scriptures in English should be read, either in public or in private, or be thereafter translated, under pain of the greater excommunication." The New Testament translation of Erasmus was forbidden at Cambridge, and the Vicar of Croyden said from his pulpit: "We must root out printing, or printing will root us out."185.3

In the reign of Henry VIII, the reading of the Bible by the common people, or those who were not of the privileged class, had been prohibited by act of parliament, and men were burned at the stake in England as well as in the Netherlands and elsewhere for having even fragments of the scriptures in their possession.

DEATH PENALTY FOR OFFENSE OF READING BIBLE. For those who were considered derelict in church duties, or heretical in doctrine, edicts were declared, forbidding them to gather in private assemblies for devotion, in various parts of Europe. "All reading of the scriptures, all discussion within one's own doors concerning faith, the sacraments, the papal authority, or other religious matter, was forbidden under penalty of death," writes Motley, in The Rise of the Dutch Republic. "The edicts were no dead letter. The fires were kept constantly supplied with human fuel by monks who knew the art of burning reformers better than that of arguing with them. The scaffold was the most conclusive of syllogisms, and used upon all occasions." 186.4

Continuing this woeful account of conditions in the rebellious Netherlands and other
 countries under Spanish rule, the same author says: "Charles [V] introduced and organized a papal inquisition side by side with those terrible 'placards' of his invention, which constituted a masked inquisition even more cruel than that of Spain. The execution of the system was never permitted to languish. The number of Netherlanders who were burned, strangled, beheaded, or buried alive, in obedience to his edicts, and for the offense of reading the scriptures, or looking askance at a graven image, or of ridiculing the actual presence of the body and blood of Christ in a wafer, has been placed as high as one hundred thousand by distinguished authorities, and has never been put at a lower mark than fifty thousand."186.5

Think of a condition such as this prevailing among those who professed to be the ministers of the word of God and the teachers of the revelations of the prophets! The Lord declared that the people should know his will by the study of the scriptures, and his disciples taught that they were given by inspiration of God and were profitable for doctrine in righteousness, and were written expressly for our learning!187.6

In spite of the strict and horrible ruling in the ages that were dark, the people continued to print, to read, to study, to learn much in regard to the scriptures, until the prediction of the Vicar of Croyden was fulfilled.187.7

BIBLE APPROVED BY LATTER-DAY REVELATION. Today there is more criticism and doubt thrown on the Bible and especially on the writings of Moses, than at any previous time. Higher criticism has endeavored to destroy the authenticity of the five books of Moses and place the writing of them at a much later date. This revelation to Joseph Smith establishes the authenticity of the words of Moses,187.8 and to every true Latter-day Saint the question of the validity and authorship of the Book of Genesis, and other books of the scriptures, is a settled question. The Lord has settled it by new revelation in the dispensation of the fulness of times.187.9

SAINTS HAVE ANCIENT AND MODERN SCRIPTURAL WITNESSES. During the past century and longer there has been a tendency to dissect the scriptures. But we are taught that they are not of private interpretation and cannot be understood except by the light of the Holy Spirit. 187.10 The book of Doctrine and Covenants, one of the precious works, has come from the Lord to us. It is the word of God to us who live now. Therefore, we have three witnesses.

They may assail the Bible, as they do, and endeavor to prove that the writings attributed to different men were not written by them. We leave that to them. They can do as they please with their learning; we will cling to the Bible because we know that whatever errors there are, they are the errors of uninspired men who have done the translating. But they must not and cannot tread upon other ground that we have.

They have assailed the Book of Mormon from an outside standpoint and claim that it was translated, or as they say, written by someone else than Joseph Smith. But we have disproved
 that, and the Book of Mormon comes to us pure, having been translated by divine power, and it contains incontrovertible internal evidence to those who read it and know anything about the power and Spirit of God -- it comes to them with internal evidence of its divinity and they know it is true. Therefore, we have this besides which we have the Doctrine and Covenants, and these three witnesses enable us to occupy a different position from any other religious denomination upon the face of the earth. 188.11

INTERPRETING THE BIBLE

ALLEGORICAL AND SYMBOLICAL TEACHINGS IN BIBLE. Even the most devout and sincere believers in the Bible realize that it is, like most any other book, filled with metaphor, simile, allegory, and parable, which no intelligent person could be compelled to accept in a literal sense. . . .

When the Lord said to Noah, "Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the green herb have I given you all things," 188.12 does any person believe that this permission included the use of unclean animals and every poisonous herb which carries within its leaves or roots the power of agonizing death? Should we not have the liberty to interpret this, as we do similar things in other writings, in the light of wisdom and with a sprinkling of reason, guided by what else may be written in the sacred word bearing upon the subject?

When Jacob blessed his sons and said, "Judah is a lion's whelp, . . . Issacher is a strong ass, . . . Joseph is a fruitful bough" by a well, 189.13 must we he forced to believe that these sons literally became a lion's whelp, a strong ass between two burdens, a serpent, a hind let loose, and a bough of a tree by a well, because a court, in the famous trials in Tennessee involving the teaching of evolution, has ruled that the Bible must be interpreted literally?

David said: "My soul is among lions: and I lie even among them that are set on fire, even the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword." 189.14 Very queer looking enemies were these according to such a ruling. The Preacher said: "A wise man's heart is at his right hand; but a fool's heart at his left."189.15 Must we, therefore, take these sayings literally?

SYMBOLISM AND FIGURES ENHANCE BIBLE. If we are forced by constitutional declaration or court decree, or for any other cause, to interpret the Bible literally in all that is recorded, then Jesus is a lamb,189.16 the Pharisees are whited sepulchers that devour widow's houses, 189.17 the saints are sheep and lambs,189.18 and the unrighteous at the day of judgment are to be turned into goats, 189.19 while the people of the present day are turned into wheat and tares. 189.20

The Lord has not taken from those who believe in his word the power of reason. He expects every man who takes his "yoke" upon him to have common sense enough to accept a figure
 of speech in its proper setting. and to understand that the holy scriptures are replete with allegorical stories, faith-building parables, and artistic speech. Much of the beauty of the Bible, even in the translations which have come to us, is found in the wonderful figures of this kind, which have never been surpassed. For example, read the 19th, the 23rd, and the 24th Psalms; Judah's desperate plea for the liberty of his brother Benjamin; 190.21 the poetic flights of Isaiah, and the Sermon on the Mount.190.22

Where is there a writing intended to be taken in all its parts literally? Such a writing would be insipid and hence lack natural appeal. To expect a believer in the Bible to strike an attitude of this kind and believe all that is written to be a literal rendition is a stupid thought. No person with the natural use of his faculties looks upon the Bible in such a light. 190.23

MANY TRUTHS LOST FROM BIBLE. In no place in the Hebrew scriptures, as the translations have come to us, is there a well defined definition of such terms as soul, second death, eternal punishment, terms over which the religious world contends because of lack of understanding. Why are men without this understanding? Is it not because they proclaim that the heavens are sealed? That there is no more revelation? That the canon of scripture is full, and the Lord has no more doctrine to reveal through prophets for the knowledge and benefit of mankind? Truly do they cry, "A Bible! A Bible! We have got a Bible, and there cannot be any more Bible." 190.24 They have closed the heavens against themselves and say they are in the strait and narrow path while helplessly groping in the dark.

Without doubt these terms were thoroughly understood by the prophets and holy men of old who wrote and spoke "as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." 190.25 It is very probable that the correct interpretation of these expressions, as used by the ancient prophets, was lost in the copying and translating of the scriptures. None can successfully deny that changes were made by translators and scribes, according to their human understanding. We are informed in the Book of Mormon that the Hebrew scriptures went "forth from the Jews in purity unto the Gentiles, according to the truth which is in God," and after they went forth from the Jews many changes were made, and "many parts which are plain and most precious; and also many covenants of the Lord have they taken away."191.26

If the teachers of religion in the various sects are content, under these conditions, to stand united and agreed that the canon of scripture is full, saying "We have got a Bible, and we need no more Bible," they are bound to garner conflicting notions not in keeping with the saving power of the gospel of our Lord.191.27

VERSIONS OF THE BIBLE. We are all aware that there are errors in the Bible due to faulty translations and ignorance on the part of translators; but the hand of the Lord has been over this volume of scripture nevertheless, and it is remarkable that it has come down to us in the excellent condition in which we find it. Guided by the Books of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and the Spirit of the Lord, it is not difficult for one to discern the errors in the Bible.

The Church uses the King James Version of the Bible because it is the best version translated by the power of man.

The revision of the Bible which was done by Joseph Smith at the command of the Lord was not a complete revision of the Bible. There are many parts of the Bible in which the Prophet did not change the meaning where it is incorrect. He revised as far as the Lord permitted him at the time, and it was his intention to do more, but because of persecution this was not accomplished. However, all that he did is very helpful for the major errors have been corrected. 191.28

CHOOSING REVELATIONS FOR PUBLICATION

EARLY PREPARATIONS TO PUBLISH THE REVELATIONS. Shortly after the organization of the Church, the members were desirous of obtaining copies of the revelations given up to that time. In the summer of 1830, the Prophet, by divine commandment, commenced to copy and prepare the revelations, no doubt with the thought in mind of having them published. Some of the elders were carrying copies in their pockets, as far as the Lord would permit them, for there were some revelations at that time they were forbidden to publish to the world.

On November 1st and 2nd, 1831, a conference of the elders was held at Hiram, Ohio, when it was decided that the revelations should be compiled and published. On the first day of the conference the Lord gave approval to this plan by giving a revelation which he called his "preface unto the book of my commandments, which I have given them to publish unto you, O inhabitants of the earth."192.29

While this was not the first revelation given to Joseph Smith, it appears as the first revelation in the Doctrine and Covenants, naturally, as it is the custom to place the preface of any book today in the beginning of the volume. Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer were appointed to carry the revelations to Independence, Missouri, where they were to be published. The Prophet made haste in the choosing and preparation of these revelations so that the brethren could start on their journey to Missouri about the middle of November.

ATTEMPT TO PUBLISH THE BOOK OF COMMANDMENTS. W. W. Phelps, one of the early members of the Church, was by trade a printer. He had gone down into Missouri. The printing press and type were brought down the Ohio River from Cincinnati where it was purchased, and across the country to Independence, and the revelations which had been selected by the Prophet were Set in type, that is, most of them. But this was slow work. We must remember that they were living in pioneer times, that Kirtland was about as far from Missouri as we are here in Salt Lake City from Winter Quarters, from which point the pioneers started on their journey to the Rocky Mountains. We do not stop to think of that, and so it took some time. By the summer of 1833 most of these revelations had been printed,
 but not all.

At that time trouble arose, and a mob destroyed the press, scattered the type, and destroyed most of the copies that had been printed; however, a few were saved. This was known as the Book of Commandments. As I have said, very few of the sheets were preserved so that there are very few copies of the book, so far as it was completed, in existence. I only know of five or six copies that are to be found today.

APPROVAL OF DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS FOR PUBLICATION. In the year 1834, a committee was formed, consisting of the Presidency of the Church, and some others, for the purpose of again preparing the revelations and having them published. This selection of revelations went on, and in 1835 it was presented at a conference of the Church held on the 17th day of August and there was approved. When the Prophet made this selection, he made the statement that he prized these revelations beyond the wealth of this whole earth.

I want to read to you just a word or two of the testimony of the Council of the Twelve in relation to these revelations, which were accepted on August 17, 1835: "We, therefore, feel willing to bear testimony to all the world of mankind, to every creature upon the face of all the earth, that the Lord has borne record to our souls, through the Holy Ghost shed forth upon us, that these commandments were given by inspiration of God, and are profitable for all men and are verily true. We give this testimony unto the world, the Lord being our helper; and it is through the grace of God the Father, and His Son, Jesus Christ, that we are permitted to have this privilege of bearing this testimony unto the world, in the which we rejoice exceedingly, praying the Lord always that the children of men may be profited thereby."194.30

Each man signed his name, beginning with Thomas B. Marsh, then President of the Council, and ending with Lyman E. Johnson, the youngest.

LECTURES AND ARTICLES PUBLISHED WITH REVELATIONS. At this conference it was decided to include in this publication of the Doctrine and Covenants seven Lectures on Faith. These lectures had been given before the schools of the elders in Kirtland during the years 1834-1835. In accepting these seven Lectures on Faith, it was made very clear to that conference that they were not received on a parallel with the revelations, but were accepted as helps in the study of the doctrines of the Church, and so they were added to the Doctrine and Covenants with that understanding.

At this conference two other articles were also received, read, approved, and ordered to be printed in the Doctrine and Covenants, one on marriage and the other on laws and government. These two articles appeared in each edition of the Doctrine and Covenants from the first edition in 1835, until 1876. We should remember that these Lectures on Faith were not revelations and were not considered so in the beginning. These two articles. one on marriage, and the other on laws and government, were not revelations. I want to impress this
 upon you, because this question comes up constantly; especially is it brought up by members of the "Reorganized" Church, who accuse us of taking a revelation out of the Doctrine and Covenants. This article on marriage was not a revelation and I want you never to forget it.

OLIVER COWDERY PREPARED ARTICLE ON MARRIAGE. I hold in my hand a copy of the Doctrine and Covenants published in 1869, one of the last before that article was taken out. Do not forget what I am going to tell you, that at this conference held on August 17, 1835, Joseph Smith and Frederick G. Williams, one of the counselors in the Presidency, were not present; they were in Michigan. That is a matter of recorded history. We know where they were because we have it in the documentary history of the Church. 195.31

So this article on marriage and this article on laws and government in general were written by Oliver Cowdery in the absence of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and the Prophet knew nothing of the action that was taken ordering them printed with the revelations. These were not revelations, never were so considered, were ordered printed in the absence of Joseph Smith, and when Joseph Smith returned from Michigan and learned what was done -- I am informed by my father, who got this information from Orson Pratt -- the Prophet was very much troubled. Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith, my father, were missionary companions; they traveled together, and my father learned a great many things from Orson Pratt of these early days. When the Prophet came back from Michigan, he learned of the order made by the conference of the Church and let it go through.

Now the Prophet did know something about these Lectures on Faith, because he helped to prepare them, and he helped also to revise these lectures before they were published. but these two other articles, he had nothing to do with them.

WHY ARTICLE ON MARRIAGE WAS DELETED. In the days of Nauvoo, the Lord gave Joseph Smith a revelation on marriage; that revelation appears under date of July 12, 1843. That is not the date that the revelation was given, but the date when the revelation was recorded.

That revelation on marriage was not placed in the Doctrine and Covenants until 1876. In the year 1876, the first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants published in the west was published by David O. Calder of the Deseret News.

Orson Pratt, under the direction of the Presidency of the Church, had added to the body of revelations a great many others as we have them now in the Doctrine and Covenants, that were not in these earlier editions, and this section known as section 132, was among those so added. It would not have been consistent to have allowed that article on marriage to stay in when it contradicted the revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith, so they took it out, and very properly. That is a matter of history that we ought to be, familiar with.

FALSE TEACHINGS OF ARTICLE ON MARRIAGE. I want to read from this article on
 marriage to show you that it is not a revelation and could not be: "According to the custom of all civilized nations, marriage is regulated by laws and ceremonies; therefore, we believe that all marriages in this Church of Christ of Latter-day Saints should be solemnized in a public meeting or feast prepared for that purpose," -- (I do not believe that at all. We solemnize marriages in the temple of the Lord, at an altar. We do not have a crowd, and it is not a feast.) -- "And that the solemnization should be performed by a presiding high priest, high priest, bishop, elder, or priest, not even prohibiting those persons who are desirous to get married, of being married by other authority."

I do not believe that. I believe every marriage in this Church should be performed by a high priest who is appointed by the one who holds the keys to perform that ceremony for time and eternity, at the altar in the house of the Lord, and it ought not to be performed anywhere else. Of course they had no temples and no understanding of the ceremonies for time and eternity in the year 1835, so we will have to excuse Oliver Cowdery for that. However this article is not the doctrine of the Church, and cannot be; you can see that.

"We believe that it is not right to prohibit members of this Church from marrying out of the Church, if it be their determination so to do; but such persons will be considered weak in the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ."

Of course we do not believe that we should prohibit people from marrying outside of the Church; we cannot go to that extent and prohibit them from doing it, but we should counsel against it, and teach against it, and try to persuade them not to do that sort of thing.

"Inasmuch as this Church of Christ has been reproached with the crime of fornication and polygamy, we declare that we believe that one man should have one wife, and one woman but one husband, except in case of death, when either is at liberty to marry again." 197.32

FIRST REVELATION OF PLURAL MARRIAGE. Of course there was no doctrine of plural marriage in the Church in 1835, but Orson Pratt said (I get this from my father who was his missionary companion) that the Lord did reveal to Joseph Smith, before 1835, and before 1834, and as early as 1832, the doctrine of plural marriage. The Prophet revealed that to some few of the brethren, and Orson Pratt was one of them. He said the Prophet told him that, but it was revealed as a law or principle that was not at that time to be revealed to the Church, or made public or practiced, but something that would yet come, that was future. I have the confidence that Orson Pratt spoke the truth.

So it would be inconsistent, I say, to keep that article in here, when the revelation known as section 132 came to the Prophet Joseph Smith and was added to the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants.

It is not necessary for me now to go into further detail in regard to the history of these revelations more than to say this, that in 1876 Orson Pratt divided the Doctrine and

Covenants into verses as we have it now. Before that it was not divided; and then it was sent to England to be published -- both the Doctrine and Covenants and the Book of Mormon, as we now have them divided into verses and the Book of Mormon into chapters, also with the footnotes. This was in 1879 when the first editions of the Doctrine and Covenants and Book of Mormon, with footnotes, were published in Liverpool, England. All of the printing of the Church works, after we were driven from Nauvoo, until 1876, was done in Great Britain.

REVELATIONS IN THE DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS

IMPORTANCE AND WORTH OF DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS. The Doctrine and Covenants, that is the title of this book, and how much more significant it is than the Book of Commandments. A Book of Commandments means, if we accept the title at its face value, that it contains only commandments. But this title which the Lord gave when they got out this edition -- let me refer to the title page: "The Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" -- is very significant and tells the story of what this book actually is. It contains the doctrine of the Church; it contains the covenants the Lord will make with the Church, if we are willing to receive them.

In my judgment there is no book on earth yet come to man as important as the book known as the Doctrine and Covenants, with all due respect to the Book of Mormon, and the Bible, and the Pearl of Great Price, which we say are our standards in doctrine. The book of Doctrine and Covenants to us stands in a peculiar position above them all.

I am going to tell you why. When I say that, do not for a moment think I do not value the Book of Mormon, the Bible, and the Pearl of Great Price, just as much as any man that lives; I think I do. I do not know of anybody who has read them more, and I appreciate them; they are wonderful; they contain doctrine and revelation and commandments that we should heed; but the Bible is a history containing the doctrine and commandments given to the people anciently. That applies also to the Book of Mormon. It is the doctrine and the history and the commandments of the people who dwelt upon this continent anciently.

But this Doctrine and Covenants contains the word of God to those who dwell here now. It is our book. It belongs to the Latter-day Saints. More precious than gold, the Prophet says we should treasure it more than the riches of the whole earth. I wonder if we do? If we value it, understand it, and know what it contains, we will value it more than wealth; it is worth more to us than the riches of the earth.

HOW TO STUDY THE DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS. I heard a brother say he could not read the Doctrine and Covenants because it was so much like a dictionary. It is not a consecutive story -- it changes the subject, and so on -- well of course it does.

Many years ago when I was a president in a quorum of seventies -- and in those days we did not have any supervision so far as our study was concerned -- it was decided by that quorum
 of seventies that they would study the Doctrine and Covenants, and I was appointed to be the class teacher. We took it up section by section. You are not going to get all there is out of it in any other way. You may take it up if you want to by topics, or doctrines, that is good; but you are not going to understand the Doctrine and Covenants, you are not going to get out of it all there is in it unless you take it up section by section; and then when you do that, you will have to study it with its setting, as you get it in the history of the Church.

So when we studied the Doctrine and Covenants in those days, we did not take the Doctrine and Covenants for our text book, but we took the Documentary History of the Church. The first volume had just been published, and it contained the greater part of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants, with their setting, so that we got the reasons why this revelation was given, and that revelation was given; and with this background, there was greater interest in the things we were studying than there would have been if we had taken the revelations in some other way. . . .

"SEARCH THESE COMMANDMENTS." Here is the word of the Lord in a commandment to every member of this Church: "Search these commandments, for they are true and faithful, and the prophecies and promises which are in them shall all be fulfilled." 200.33

Search these commandments, that is the thread that runs through this preface to this Book of Commandments. I tell you there is nothing you ever attempted to study equal to this, and you will never find anything quite equal to it. You have only scratched at it; that is all you have done.

Of course it is not my place to dictate to you and tell you what to do, but it is my place to warn the people and tell them the Lord has commanded them to search these things. I am reading this book all the time; scarcely a day passes that I do not read something and ponder over it and the other standards in doctrine. The Lord has given this book to us; it is our book; it contains the doctrines of the Church and the commandments and the covenants. Many of the covenants could not be written and put in a book; you get these in the temple of the Lord; but I am reading these things because I want to know what the Lord has to say, and what he would have me do. It is a wonderful study.200.34

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS FOR WORLD. The Lord has given many revelations in our own day. We have this Doctrine and Covenants full of them, all pertaining unto the Latter-day Saints and to the world. For, this is not our book alone. This Doctrine and Covenants is my book and your book; but more than that, it belongs to all the world, to the Catholics, to the Presbyterians, to the Methodists, to the infidel, to the nonbeliever. It is his book if he will accept it, if he will receive it.

The Lord has given it unto the world for their salvation. If you do not believe it, you read the first section in this book, the preface, and you will find that the Lord has sent this book and the things which it contains unto the people afar off, on the islands of the sea, in foreign
 lands; and his voice is unto all people, that all may hear.201.35

And so I say it belongs to all the world, not only to the Latter-day Saints; and they will be judged by it, and you will be judged by it. We will all be judged by it, by the things which this book contains and by the things which the other books contain which are holy scripture, which the Lord has given unto us; and if we fail to comprehend these things, if we will not search, if we will not take hold on the things which the Lord has revealed unto us, then his condemnation shall rest upon us, and we shall be removed from his presence and from his kingdom. And I say that in all soberness, because it is true.201.36

REVELATIONS WITHHELD BECAUSE OF UNBELIEF. Now the Lord is withholding from us a great many truths that he would gladly reveal if we were ready to receive them. Did you know that a portion of the record from which the Book of Mormon is taken is sealed? The Prophet was not permitted to break the seals, and we will not receive the sealed record until the time comes when the people will show by their faith their willingness to accept it. 202.37

How many have read the Book of Mormon through? How many have made themselves familiar with the things revealed to us in the Doctrine and Covenants regarding what the Lord has said of our duties as members of the Church and what he has said regarding our salvation and exaltation and how it may be obtained? Until we are prepared to receive the things already given, I fear the Lord will hold from us those other things which one time will be revealed. 202.38

If we had on record all that had been written by inspired historians, then we would have the truth concerning the gospel of Jesus Christ in such a way that it would astonish the world. Because of unbelief the Lord withdrew from the people many truths, and so they were left without the knowledge concerning the principles of the gospel and the true Church of Jesus Christ. 202.39

MORE REVELATIONS IN FUTURE. Not all of the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith are in the Doctrine and Covenants. He made a selection for this book by revelation. The Church has had many other revelations, but we have in the Doctrine and Covenants revelations sufficient to bring to pass our exaltation if we will but heed them. When we, the members of the Church, reach the point that we are willing to live by all that the Lord has revealed, he will give us more that can be placed in the Doctrine and Covenants. The Lord is withholding from us great and mighty truths because of the hardness of our hearts. Why should we clamor for more when we will not abide in what we already have? We are led by revelation today just as much as they were anciently.202.40

HOME LIBRARIES

HAVE STANDARD WORKS IN THE HOME. One of the influences in the home that leads
 to faith and prayer and proper religious understanding is to have in the home the standard works of the Church, not hidden, but where they can be found, on a table or some place where they are in evidence and can be referred to, where they will be seen; and then the members of the family ought to be invited from time to time to read them. I go into homes sometimes where they do not have these things. I always like to know, when I go into anybody's home and they have books, what kind of books they have. If I have been in some of your homes, you know that. I take a look at the books you have and find out what it is that you are reading. I am glad to say that in the majority of the houses I find books that can be approved. We ought to have the standard works of the Church, and we ought to encourage the reading of them.203.41

STANDARD WORKS JUDGE TEACHINGS OF ALL MEN. It makes no difference what is written or what anyone has said, if what has been said is in conflict with what the Lord has revealed, we can set it aside. My words, and the teaching of any other member of the Church, high or low, if they do not square with the revelations, we need not accept them. Let us have this matter clear. We have accepted the four standard works as the measuring yardsticks, or balances, by which we measure every man's doctrine.

You cannot accept the books written by the authorities of the Church as standards in doctrine, only in so far as they accord with the revealed word in the standard works.

Every man who writes is responsible, not the Church, for what he writes. If Joseph Fielding Smith writes something which is out of harmony with the revelations, then every member of the Church is duty bound to reject it. If he writes that which is in perfect harmony with the revealed word of the Lord, then it should be accepted. 204.42

HOME LIBRARIES SHOULD BE PROVIDED. It is within our power to guide our youth in their reading and to cultivate in their hearts a desire for good books. It is most unfortunate where a person is not possessed with the desire for good reading. The reading habit, like charity, should begin at home. It is the duty of every parent to provide in his home a library of suitable books to be at the service of the family. The library need not be large, nor the books of the most expensive binding, but there should be a well chosen variety of the most select that can be obtained.

Children should be encouraged in the home to read and be instructed in the value of good books and how to discriminate between the good and the bad in literature. It is far better for a home to be thus provided where the children can be entertained with a good, wholesome story than to more than waste their time playing cards -- a habit that cannot too severely be condemned -- or spending their time in poolhalls or upon the streets in company of evil associates. . . .

Not one of us is so poor but that we are able to purchase a few good books for the home. A small library of the most worthy books in this day of cheap printing may be had for a trifling
 sum. There is scarcely a family in the land that does not spend for amusement, or in pleasure that could be dispensed with, a sum each year that would purchase a suitable course of reading.

I have been in the habitations of some of our people where even the standard works of the Church could not be found, and these are absolutely indispensable to a Latter-day Saint home. There may be some excuse for an absence of the "commonest English classics," but there is no excuse for an absence of the standard works of the Church and the writings of our ablest authors on the principles of the gospel.

POOR LITERATURE TO BE AVOIDED. Many books have been spoiled because of too much padding. Most novels are padded with matter that does not pertain to the theme and clouds the thought and destroys the efficacy of the story. Many of our present day story writers also spoil what they write by the frequent interjection of profanity. The common use of the name of Deity in nearly every exclamation seems to them to be an essential feature to give the proper emphasis and vigor. Many books written by capable and distinguished authors have been marred in this manner.

If authors were more familiar with the commandment, "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain," 205.43 it would greatly improve their works and help their readers in keeping this commandment. Books of this class merit censure, and where this difficulty is very marked should utterly be condemned.

Other books contain problem stories, are sensational, or deal with immoral themes. These should always be condemned. Among a certain class such books are very popular, but they corrupt the morals and appeal to the baser passions of mankind. There are other books that are perhaps free from immoral thought, as we understand that term, but are filled with vulgar slang.

One prominent writer has said: "Slang is to a people's language what an epidemic disease is to their bodily constitution, just as catching and just as inevitable in its course. Like a disease, too, it is severest where the sanitary conditions are most neglected, where there is least culture and thought to counteract it."

DESTRUCTIVE POWER OF BAD LITERATURE. A book may not be classed as bad, but we should ask ourselves if it contains any thought that will benefit us intellectually, morally, or spiritually, if we read it. I do not mean to say that a book written solely to amuse is necessarily bad and to be condemned, for some of our most worthy authors have given to the world good books of this kind that can safely be recommended. But if the aim of a book is not uplifting or helpful to the reader it should be avoided.206.44 There are so many books that have been tried and proved to be good that we need not waste our time with those we may consider doubtful.

"He who writes for fools," it has been said, "finds an enormous audience." The best sellers advertised at times among the popular books are not always the best. Among them we may find the sensational, vicious, and immoral, which poison the mind and destroy the soul. Many of these books are written by contract made between publisher and author at so much per word for the purpose of getting gain. To be sure, they are made attractive and filled with catchy sayings that appeal to the simple minded of that enormous class to which reference has been made.

These books are like spiders' webs, built to inveigle silly flies who know no better than to be ensnared within their meshes. They are sold largely on the strength of the extensive advertising they receive, and while they may pass through several editions while the craze is on, seldom live but a few short years and are soon dead and forgotten. Not so, however, with the mischief they can do, for the impressions on the mind for evil may endure.

READ SYSTEMATICALLY. Desultory reading as a habit is not good. Such reading impairs the power of thought and is enervating to the mind. Reading should be done systematically. Reading that requires study and reflection should not be done in haste. It is better to read a little and understand it than to read a great deal without getting the thought.

We sometimes hear the complaint, "I haven't time." But we all have time to read and study which is our solemn duty. Can we not arrange to find at least 15 minutes in each day to devote to systematic reading and reflection? This would be but a trifling amount of time, yet it would he one hour and 45 minutes in a week; seven and one-half hours in a month of 30 days, and 91 hours and a quarter in the year. This is equal to 11 and one-half days of eight hours each during the entire year. I am sure we can all find more time than that to read, yet this amount is all Dr. Eliot felt was necessary for a man to spend to receive the "essentials of a liberal education" from his recommended five foot shelf of books. . . .

Very few among us read too much; most of us read too little. The Lord has said: "And as all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith." 207.45

VALUE OF READING CLUBS. Reading clubs might be organized with profit. The young men could meet at some selected time and place, and one could read while the others listen. There is virtue in reading aloud; let each boy take a turn. It will teach them to read well, to think more clearly, and properly to pronounce their words. It trains the ear as well as the eye, and then, there is the social intercourse and exchange of ideas, which is a benefit to them. This, of course, must be done under the direction of some responsible person connected with the Mutual work. When a book is read, all who were present at the reading should have credit as having read the book.

There is a verse in the 8th chapter of Nehemiah that has a bearing on this subject. When the

Jews returned from the captivity, we read that the people were called together and Ezra and the priests stood before them to instruct them. This is the passage: "So they read in the book in the law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the reading." 208.46 This verse is a perfect treatise, in a sentence, of the art of reading aloud. Let our young men remember the passage in their reading. See that the books of the reading course are placed in your public libraries and reading rooms. A number of young men forming a reading club may purchase the entire set among them, and the expense will not be very great. It would be well for each home to secure the reading course and that each association also be provided with a set. 208.47
