RESTORATION OF BOOK OF MORMON

INSPIRED NATURE OF BOOK OF MORMON. The Book of Mormon is the sacred history of the ancient inhabitants of the American continent; it contains the predictions of their prophets, the commandments of the Lord to them, and the history and destiny of those ancient peoples. It is the American volume of scripture and is just as sacred and inspired as is the Bible, which contains the sacred records of the Hebrew race on the Eastern Hemisphere.

No other book has been so sharply, bitterly, and relentlessly attacked as the Book of Mormon. Yet, like gold tried many times in the furnace, it has passed through all attacks unscathed. Every weapon raised against it has perished, and the wisdom of the self-righteous who have attacked it has come to naught.

There is an inspiration and feeling of peaceful joy and satisfaction which accompany the sincere and prayerful reading of this book. Its doctrines and literary merit are in keeping with the writings of the Jewish prophets. The sincere student who is willing to put Moroni's promise to the test is forced to say, "Surely this is the work of the Lord and not the work of man, for no man could have written it."209.1

STICK OF JOSEPH IN HANDS OF EPHRAIM. Ezekiel saw in vision the great nation of the Nephites, the house of Joseph, when he wrote by prophecy concerning the joining of the records of Joseph with that of Judah.209.2 . . .

It is very apparent that the Bible is the record, or stick of Judah; moreover, that it does not
 contain a history of the nations which were to come of Ephraim and Manasseh. That stick, or history must be sought for elsewhere. And from whence? It has been declared by some that the Bible as we have it today fulfils this prediction, that this commandment to Ezekiel was a local commandment to him, and he was to write and join the writings of the two nations of Judah and Israel and hold them forth before the people of his day. A careful study of this prophecy, however, reveals that this joining of the records was to be in the latter-day, not in the time of Ezekiel. . . .

One significant expression in the prophecy of Ezekiel is that the stick of Joseph and his fellows was to be in the hand of Ephraim. Ephraim was to stand at the head of the tribes of Israel in the latter-days, according to his birthright. Joseph Smith, unto whom the record of the Nephites was delivered and who translated it, is of the tribe of Ephraim. The Lord so revealed it. So are most of those who have received the gospel in this dispensation. Therefore this stick of Joseph is in the hand of Ephraim and by him has been joined to the stick of Judah, fulfilling the prophecy of Ezekiel. 210.3

The Book of Mormon is the record of Joseph. It contains the history of the descendants of Joseph on this land, both of Ephraim and of Manasseh. It was in the hands of Ephraim when it was given to Joseph Smith, and it is still in the hands of Ephraim when our missionaries go forth proclaiming its truths to the world, for they also are of Ephraim. 210.4

KNOWLEDGE OF CHRIST RESTORED IN BOOK OF MORMON. It was necessary in the restoration of all things that the people of this continent, who anciently had received the favor and blessing of the Almighty, should be brought to light through their history which contained the prophesying and commandments they received from God. Although it should be, as stated by one of their prophets, as a voice speaking from the dead, out of the dust of the ground, they were nevertheless to speak and bear witness for Christ.211.5

In the title-page-preface the promise is made that this record would be preserved to come forth by the power of God to the convincing of the Lamanite, and also the Jew, and also the Gentile, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Throughout the Book of Mormon the prediction is made that this record would be preserved for that purpose and, moreover, to bear witness of the inspiration and sacredness of the Hebrew scriptures.211.6

BOOK OF MORMON FOR ALL NATIONS. The promise was made that the contents of this record would be made known among all nations. Nephi wrote that the day would come "that the words of the book which were sealed shall be read upon the house tops; and they shall be read by the power of Christ."211.7

Joseph Smith and the witnesses to the Book of Mormon were deeply impressed with this fact, for in giving to the world their testimonies they worded their address as follows: "Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto whom this work shall come"; and then follows their positive statements concerning the record. Had it not been for the
 spirit of prophecy they would not have dared to have made their address in such manner, nor would Joseph Smith have dared to have declared that the book would be distributed in all the world as a witness for Christ. He had no power in himself, even with the help of the 11 witnesses, to bring to pass such a bold and remarkable prediction. Had the Book of Mormon been a fraud and these men deceivers, it is very probable that the book would not have been known beyond a radius of a very few miles from Palmyra.

Moroni, when he appeared to Joseph Smith, in September, 1823, told Joseph Smith that his name should be known for both good and for evil among all peoples. Today no one will say that this has not been fulfilled. So also has knowledge of the Book of Mormon penetrated the nations of the earth. Wherever the name of Joseph Smith is known the Book of Mormon is also known. Those who have sincerely read it accept it as a divinely inspired record; among those who reject it, it may be looked upon in ignorance as a cunning fraud. However, the word of the Lord spoken anciently has been, and is still being, fulfilled.211.8

BIBLE TELLS OF BOOK OF MORMON

BOOK OF MORMON FULFILS PROMISES OF JACOB. It is reasonable to believe that if the Book of Mormon contains the message of salvation as given to the ancient peoples of this continent and is a witness for the Bible, there also must be some inspired utterances in the Bible bearing witness to the Book of Mormon. If there were no such references, there would be a serious defect in the testimony of the record of the Nephites.

There is strong presumptive evidence in the blessings given by Israel to his son Joseph, and his grandsons Ephraim and Manasseh, as recorded in Genesis, that they were to inherit a land far from Jerusalem and become a multitude of nations. Joseph was promised that his inheritance should be to the "utmost bound of the everlasting hills"; that he was "a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well; whose branches run over the wall." Moreover, he was to receive a greater inheritance than his progenitors, who were given the land of Palestine. 212.9

The Book of Mormon is the record of the descendants of Joseph who were led across the "great waters to inherit this western land, which land is designated as being choice above all other lands. Surely these blessings could not be realized in Palestine. Joseph and his sons did not become a multitude of nations there; the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh did not receive a more wonderful inheritance in Palestine than any other of the tribes of Israel. There the chief honors were conferred first on Benjamin and then on Judah. Here in America all these promises were fulfilled when the descendants of Joseph possessed the land given as their inheritance. . . .

ISAIAH PROPHESIES OF BOOK OF MORMON. One of the most important predictions regarding the Book of Mormon is that found in the 29th chapter of Isaiah. The prophet here speaks of a people who should be like Ariel, the city where David dwelt. They should have
 heaviness and sorrow and should be brought down to speak out of the ground, and their speech was to be low out of the dust, and their voice was to be as of one that had a familiar spirit. Later in this same prophecy Isaiah refers to the words of "a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed: And the book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I am not learned." 213.10

This prophecy was literally fulfilled when Martin Harris took copies of the engravings of the plates of the Book of Mormon to Professor Anthon in New York. Mr. Anthon answered Martin in almost the language of Isaiah, when he was informed that the book from which the characters were taken was sealed, Said he: "I cannot read a sealed book." 213.11 How remarkable it is that Isaiah said that the words of the book were delivered to one who was learned and that the book was delivered to the one who was not learned. How perfectly this harmonizes with the history of the case respecting Mr. Anthon and Joseph Smith!

At the time this should take place, the Lord was to commence a marvelous work and a wonder because the people drew near to him with their mouths and with their lips honored him, but their hearts were far removed from him and their fear towards him was taught by the precepts of men. The marvelous work has commenced, and of all times in the history of the world, now is the time when the conditions of the people warrant the fulfilment of this prophecy.

NEPHITES: LORD'S "OTHER SHEEP." One other passage of great import, having reference to the people dwelling in America in early times, is the remark of the Savior in that beautiful discourse in relation to his death: "And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd." 214.12

It is thought by some that he had reference to the Gentiles, but he said himself that he was not sent to the Gentiles, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. 214.13 He must have referred to Israelites who were not in Palestine, and the visitation must have been one after his resurrection. There is no reference to such a visit in any of the four gospels, and the remark was made shortly before his death. When the Savior visited the Nephites, he told them plainly that this reference to other sheep was a reference to them; but because of the hardness of the hearts of the disciples in Jerusalem, his Father commanded him to make no further reference to the nation of Nephites while instructing the Jews.214.14

Perhaps this reference to other sheep of the house of Israel and the work of the Lord among them would have been stated more clearly if the people had been willing to understand. For the same reason many references to the Book of Mormon and the people of the Lord in other lands than Palestine were so expressed that their true significance was hidden. The Savior taught in parables many things so that those who were unprepared should not understand. 215.15 Even today the people of the world, unaided by the Spirit of the Lord, cannot see the
 true meaning of these passages of scripture here presented. The reason for the discourses of the Savior in parables is equally applicable in the dispensation of the fulness of times. 215.16

TRANSLATION OF BOOK OF MORMON

EARLY TRANSLATING DONE INTERMITTENTLY. The idea seems to prevail quite generally among members of the Church that the Prophet Joseph Smith spent the greater part of his time between September, 1827, when he received the plates, and the fall of 1829, translating the Book of Mormon.

Because of lack of dates it is impossible to tell exactly how long it took him to complete the translation, but we know from the historical information at hand that there were many days spent in other work, when no attempt was made to translate after that labor had been undertaken. There were times when the Lord commanded him to cease translating. For instance, the Lord said on one occasion: "I say unto thee Joseph, when thou hast translated a few more pages thou shalt stop for a season, even until I command thee again."215.17 The reason given for this is that his enemies were lying in wait to destroy him and the work. Again the Lord said: "Do not run faster or labor more than you have strength and means provided to enable you to translate; but be diligent unto the end." 215.18

PROPHET'S PREPARATION TO TRANSLATE. Joseph Smith received the plates and the Urim and Thummim September 22, 1827. Because of persecution, poverty, and the necessity of "laboring with his hands" for a living, nothing was done towards translating the record that year. However, he was busy studying the characters and making himself familiar with them and the use of the Urim and Thummim. He had a great deal more to do than merely to sit down and with the use of the instrument prepared for that purpose translate the characters on the plates.

Nothing worth while comes to us merely for the asking. All knowledge and skill are obtained by consistent and determined study and practice, and so the Prophet found it to be the case in the translating of the Book of Mormon. It will be remembered that the Lord said to Oliver Cowdery when he desired to translate: "But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind." 216.19 Oliver thought it would be easy, but found it difficult and therefore was content to accept the advice from the Lord and continue as scribe to Joseph Smith.

It was between December, 1827, and February, 1828, that the Prophet copied the characters from the plates; and, in the month of February, Martin Harris carried them to New York to Professor Charles Anthon.216.20 April 12, 1828, Martin Harris commenced to write, and the Prophet to translate, the abridgment giving the history of Lehi and down to the days of King Benjamin. These pages Martin Harris lost, and because of his disobedience he was not permitted to act again as scribe and the Prophet Joseph lost his gift for a season.

OLIVER COWDERY ACTS AS SCRIBE IN TRANSLATING. Oliver Cowdery came to the Prophet at Harmony, Pennsylvania, April 5, 1829, and two days later commenced to write at Joseph Smith's dictation. It must be remembered that they had to commence once more at the beginning and cover the same ground that had been covered in the lost manuscript, but in more detail, for they were now translating the small plates of Nephi.

The translating with Oliver Cowdery as scribe, continued without interruption until May 15, 1829, when these two men having a desire to know something more about baptism went into the woods to pray and received the Aaronic Priesthood from John the Baptist. 217.21 Following this important event, it became necessary for Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery to change their place of residence because of opposition, and they therefore moved from Harmony, Pennsylvania, to Fayette, Seneca County, New York, to the home of the Whitmers.

It was early in June, 1829, that Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris, with Joseph Smith retired to the woods and sought the Lord in prayer and were visited by the angel who revealed to them the plates. It was also on this occasion that they heard the voice of the Lord declaring unto them that the record had been translated by the gift and power of God.

About this time Joseph Smith also writes: "Meantime, our translation drawing to a close, we went to Palmyra, Wayne County, New York, secured the copyright, and agreed with Mr. Egbert B. Grandin to print five thousand copies for the sum of three thousand dollars." 217.22

I think we may conclude that the copyright was not secured until the translation was completed, and these words of the Prophet Joseph indicate that this is the case. The copyright bears the date of June 11, 1829.

TOTAL OF TWO MONTHS SPENT TRANSLATING. After completing the translation it took some time to make arrangements with Mr. Grandin and to raise the sum required to print the book, the funds being furnished by Martin Harris through the sale of his personal property, In the meantime Oliver Cowdery, at the request of Joseph Smith, made a complete copy of the manuscript, and it was this manuscript copy that was taken to the printer, a sheet at a time, until the Book of Mormon was printed. Mr. Grandin commenced the printing in August, 1829, and the Book of Mormon was ready for distribution about the first of March, 1830.

We may conclude from the evidence that the actual time of translating the record, as we have it in the Book of Mormon, was between April 7, 1829, and the first week of June of that same year, or not to exceed two full months.218.23

ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPT OF BOOK OF MORMON. After the plates were translated, the Prophet received a commandment from the Lord that the entire manuscript should be copied, that the copy should go to the printer, and the original manuscript should not be permitted to go out of his hands. . . .

The original manuscript was in this manner carefully guarded, and the copy struck off by Oliver Cowdery was used in the printing of the Book of Mormon. The original was never in the hands of the printer. . . .

The original manuscript remained in the possession of the Prophet Joseph Smith and was by his own hand placed in the cornerstone of the Nauvoo House, October 2, 1841, in the presence of numerous witnesses. . . .

The Nauvoo House, which was begun in the days of Joseph Smith, was never finished, and in the course of time the walls were torn down by Mr. Lewis C. Bidamon, second husband of Emma Smith, and the contents of this cornerstone, which had so long been exposed to the elements, were found to be nearly ruined. Some of the articles, however, were preserved and have been widely distributed.

SCATTERING OF ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPT. President Joseph F. Smith had in his possession Lyman Wight's memorial, and also pages three to 22 of the original manuscript of the Book of Mormon, which are, considering all things, fairly well preserved. These pages from the original manuscript are now in the Church Historian's Office. Elders Andrew Jenson, Edward Stevenson, Joseph W. Summerhays and others also obtained portions of the original manuscript. Some of it, we understand was also in the possession of Joseph Smith of the "Reorganization," but only a small fragment. Thus the original manuscript, that portion that was not destroyed by the elements, has been scattered. . . .

After all, what does it matter what became of the original manuscript of the Book of Mormon? It is valueless, save as a relic. The statement has gone forth that the Church offered a large sum for the printer's copy. No such offer was ever made. The Book of Mormon has been translated into more than a dozen languages, and hundreds of thousands of copies have been published at a price so reasonable that it is within the reach of all -- the same truths being in each copy as are in the original manuscript. If the Prophet had considered the original manuscript of any value as a work of reference, he would not have placed it in the foundation of the Nauvoo House. 219.24

PUBLISHING THE BOOK OF MORMON

JOSEPH SMITH: "AUTHOR AND PROPRIETOR" OF BOOK OF MORMON. The first edition of the Book of Mormon was printed by Egbert B. Grandin at Palmyra, New York, in 1830. The edition was of 5,000 copies and the cost was $3,000. On the title page of this edition the following appears, "By Joseph Smith, Junior, Author and Proprietor," and on the
 next page the copyright appears in full. The expression Author and Proprietor has caused some adverse criticism by enemies of the Church, but in making this statement Joseph Smith was merely complying with the law at that time governing copyrights. This book contains 588 pages and the testimonies of the witnesses are in the back of the book. A few of the copies contain an index but most of them were published without this addition.220.25

SAMUEL H. SMITH'S MISSION AND BOOK OF MORMON. In the first year or two of the existence of the Church, the missionaries were without tracts and other printed information on the principles of the gospel and the restoration and therefore depended almost solely on the Book of Mormon. Each missionary took several copies of the Book of Mormon and tried to dispose of them among the people usually with excellent results.

Among the first missionaries to go out, if not actually the first, was Samuel H. Smith, younger brother of the Prophet Joseph. Samuel carried several copies of the Book of Mormon, but met with indifferences among the people. Finally he reached the home of a Methodist preacher named John P. Greene and tried to interest that gentleman in the story of Joseph Smith and the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. Mr. Greene informed him that he had neither the time to read nor the means to buy the book as he was about to leave on an important preaching tour. However, said he, if Samuel desired to leave a copy of the book he would try to dispose of it for him. The book was left and Samuel promised to call again in about two weeks to see what success had been obtained, and feeling somewhat discouraged departed.

In the meantime Mr. Greene started to read the Book of Mormon, more out of curiosity than from any desire to gain information, for he had no faith in the story that had been told him. The more he read the more he became interested, and when he had finished the book was convinced of its truth. He took the book to the family of John Young, father of Brigham Young, and they read it; it was also read by the Kimball family, and others, with the result that the family of John Young, Heber C. Kimball, John P. Greene (grandfather of Lulu Greene Richards) and others were eventually brought into the Church. So the mission of Samuel H. Smith performed in June, 1830, and which he felt was a complete failure, added to the Church some of the most prominent members that ever embraced the gospel. This identical copy of the Book of Mormon presented to John P. Greene is now in the possession of the writer of this work. 221.26

EARLY EDITIONS OF BOOK OF MORMON. The second edition of the Book of Mormon was published by Parley P. Pratt and John Goodson, at Kirtland. This issue contains a preface by the publishers in which they state that they have "obtained leave to issue 5,000 copies of the same, from those holding the copyright." The third edition was published by Don Carlos Smith and Ebenezer Robinson in Nauvoo, in 1840, from plates made by Shepherd and Stearns of Cincinnati, Ohio. Another edition was printed from these plates in Nauvoo, in 1842.

In 1841 Brigham Young and the apostles who were then in England published the first European edition. In the first three American editions the testimonies of the witnesses were printed in the back of the book, but in the first European edition the testimonies were transferred to the front of the book as they have appeared in all editions since. This issue was to have been of 5,000 copies, but only 4,050 were delivered; the printing was done by J. Tompkins and Co., of Liverpool. The second European edition was published by Orson Pratt, in Liverpool, in 1849.

Elder Franklin D. Richards published the third European edition, in 1852. In this edition Elder Richards numbered the verses in the chapters of the book. In 1879 Orson Pratt published an electrotyped edition of the Book of Mormon dividing the chapters and the verses and adding the footnote references as we have the book today. After these plates were made many editions appeared in Liverpool, which became for many years the publishing headquarters of the Church.222.27

The first edition in the English language to be published by any mission, in the United States, was the Kansas City edition, published by James G. Duffin in 1902. Since that time many editions have been published by the missions and have been sold by the thousands. . . . In 1869 an edition was published in the Deseret Alphabet, under the direction of Elder Orson Pratt, by Russel Brothers, in New York.

The first edition to be published in any foreign tongue was that published by Elder Erastus Snow, in Danish, in 1851. It was published in Welsh, French, German, and Italian in 1852; Hawaiian, in 1855; Swedish, in 1878; Spanish, in 1886; Maori, in 1889; Dutch, in 1890; Samoan, in 1903, and since 1903, in Tahitian, and Armenian, and other foreign languages. 222.28

THE URIM AND THUMMIM

ABRAHAM, ISRAELITES, AND JAREDITES HAD URIM AND THUMMIM. The history concerning the Urim and Thummim, or Interpreters as they are called in the Book of Mormon, 222.29 is not very clear. Abraham had the Urim and Thummim by which he received revelations of the heavenly bodies, as he has recorded in the Book of Abraham.222.30 What became of these after his death we do not know. Aaron also had the Urim and Thummim, and these were, evidently from the reading of the Bible, handed down among the priests of Aaron from generation to generation.222.31 The Lord gave to the Brother of Jared the Urim and Thummim which he brought with him to this continent. These were separate and distinct from the Urim and Thummim had by Abraham and in Israel in the days of Aaron.

The account of this set, in part, is as follows: "And behold, when ye shall come unto me, ye shall write them [revelations] and shall seal them up, that no one can interpret them; for ye shall write them in a language that they cannot be read. And behold, these two stones will I
 give unto thee, and ye shall seal them up also with the things which ye shall write. For behold, the language which ye shall write I have confounded; wherefore I will cause in my own due time that these stones shall magnify to the eyes of men these things which ye shall write. . . .

"And the Lord said unto him: Write these things and seal them up; and I will show them in mine own due time unto the children of men. And it came to pass that the Lord commanded him that he should seal up the two stones which he had received, and show them not, until the Lord should show them unto the children of men."223.32

JAREDITE URIM AND THUMMIM HAD BY NEPHITES. We have no record of Lehi bringing with him to America the Urim and Thummim. The Lord did give to Lehi the Liahona, which was a ball which directed him the way he should go, and writing appeared on it from time to time, but this was not the Urim and Thummim. 223.33 King Mosiah possessed "two stones which were fastened into the two rims of a bow," called by the Nephites Interpreters, with which he translated the Jaredite record, 223.34 and these were handed down from generation to generation for the purposes of interpreting languages. How Mosiah came into possession of these two stones or Urim and Thummim the record does not tell us, more than to say that it was a "gift from God."223.35 Mosiah had this gift or Urim and Thummim before the people of Limhi discovered the record of Ether. They may have been received when the "large stone" was brought to Mosiah with engravings upon it, which he interpreted by the "gift and power of God." 224.36 They may have been given to him, or to some other prophet before his day, just as the Brother of Jared received them -- from the Lord.

That the Urim and Thummim, or two stones, given to the Brother of Jared were those in the possession of Mosiah appears evident from Book of Mormon teachings. The Brother of Jared was commanded to seal up his writings of the vision he had when Christ appeared to him, so that they could not be read by his people. This vision was recorded in a language which was confounded, for it was not to go forth until after the resurrection of Christ. The Urim and Thummim were also sealed up so that they could not be used for the purpose of interpreting those sacred writings of this vision, until such time as the Lord should grant to man to interpret them. When they were to be revealed, they were to be interpreted by the aid of the same Urim and Thummim. 224.37

JOSEPH SMITH RECEIVED JAREDITE URIM AND THUMMIM. The people of Limhi brought to Mosiah a record, "engraven on plates of ore," 224.38 which record Mosiah translated, by the aid of "two stones which were fastened into the two rims of a bow," and which gave an account of the Jaredites.224.39 In translating this record Mosiah kept from going forth to the people that particular part forbidden by the Lord to be revealed until after he was lifted up upon the cross. 224.40 These sacred revelations given to the Brother of Jared were kept from the Nephite people, as well as many other things, until after the resurrection of Christ.224.41 After the appearing of the Savior to the Nephites, the vision of
 the Brother of Jared was revealed to the Nephites. When Moroni made his abridgment of the record of Ether, he copied on his record the vision of the Brother of Jared.224.42

At the command of the Lord, however, Moroni also sealed up the greater things in this vision and also the interpreters -- which were the same "two stones" had by the Brother of Jared -- so that this vision should not be made known even in our day among the Gentiles, in the day of their wickedness;225.43 it could not be revealed "until the day that they shall repent of their iniquity, and become clean before the Lord." 225.44 So we today do not have the fulness of the account written and sealed up by the Brother of Jared and again sealed by Moroni. This part of the record the Prophet Joseph Smith was forbidden to translate. We have, then, received but the "lesser part."225.45

Joseph Smith received with the breastplate and the plates of the Book of Mormon, the Urim and Thummim, which were hid up by Moroni to come forth in the last days as a means by which the ancient record might be translated, which Urim and Thummim were given to the Brother of Jared. 225.46

SEER STONE NOT USED IN BOOK OF MORMON TRANSLATION. We have been taught since the days of the Prophet that the Urim and Thummim were returned with the plates to the angel. We have no record of the Prophet having the Urim and Thummim after the organization of the Church. Statements of translations by the Urim and Thummim after that date are evidently errors. The statement has been made that the Urim and Thummim was on the altar in the Manti Temple when that building was dedicated. The Urim and Thummim so spoken of, however, was the seer stone which was in the possession of the Prophet Joseph Smith in early days. This seer stone is now in the possession of the Church.225.47

While the statement has been made by some writers that the Prophet Joseph Smith used a seer stone part of the time in his translating of the record, and information points to the fact that he did have in his possession such a stone, yet there is no authentic statement in the history of the Church which states that the use of such a stone was made in that translation. The information is all hearsay, and personally, I do not believe that this stone was used for this purpose. The reason I give for this conclusion is found in the statement of the Lord to the Brother of Jared as recorded in Ether 3:22-24.

These stones, the Urim and Thummim which were given to the Brother of Jared, were preserved for this very purpose of translating the record, both of the Jaredites and the Nephites. Then again the Prophet was impressed by Moroni with the fact that these stones were given for that very purpose.226.48 It hardly seems reasonable to suppose that the Prophet would substitute something evidently inferior under these circumstances. It may have been so, but it is so easy for a story of this kind to be circulated due to the fact that the Prophet did possess a seer stone, which he may have used for some other purposes. 226.49
