PERSECUTIONS OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS

PERSECUTION ENDURED FOR GOSPEL'S SAKE. I have visited most Of the scenes of early Church history. I have gone over a good part of the trail which the saints followed when they came to these valleys. I have reflected a good deal upon these scenes, the travels, the hardships, the travails, and suffering and persecutions of these early days; and as I have stood in these hallowed spots and have traversed some of the territory which they passed over, my heart has been touched, but I have realized that it is beyond my power to understand and perhaps to feel all that these good faithful souls endured -- and all for the sake of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

PERSECUTIONS IN NEW YORK, OHIO, MISSOURI, AND ILLINOIS. The Church had its beginning in New York. Persecution came upon the saints from the beginning, and they were driven out. The Lord gave them a commandment to assemble in Ohio. 327.2 They established their headquarters at Kirtland in that state. No doubt they had no intention of leaving when they first went there, but the Lord revealed to them that there was another place, the place which he called Zion, on the borders of the Lamanites,327.3 and so their hearts were turned to that place; however, they never had intended to forsake altogether their headquarters in Kirtland, but persecution came upon them, and they were forced out.

With rejoicing they assembled in large measure in Jackson County where it had been made known to them that the great city, the new Jerusalem or Zion would be built, 328.4 and they rejoiced over it, but they were not privileged to remain there. Their enemies came upon them with hatred and bitterness in their hearts and drove them out.

They moved to another part of the state of Missouri and there again intended and tried to establish themselves, but persecution still followed them, and the hatred of the officials in that state resulted in their banishment and an edict coming from the governor of that state that they would have to leave or be exterminated. They went back eastward, crossed the great river, and made their settlement at Nauvoo, in the state of Illinois. For a season they prospered but not without persecution, not without hatred, and finally that hatred reached its peak, and their Prophet and his brother, my grandfather, were martyred.328.5

HARDSHIPS OF THE WESTWARD TREK. Their enemies thought that would be the end of the Church. The papers so declared it. Their enemies rejoiced, but it did not bring the end. Still the Church grew. So also grew the animosity and the hatred of their enemies, and finally the saints were driven from their homes, robbed of practically all that they possessed and thus set upon their journey to this western land, destitute, in poverty, and the world said they had gone to their destruction, and rejoiced.

I tell you, my brethren and sisters, we do not realize all that they went through -- their hardships, their sufferings, the persecutions, the murders, the drivings that came upon them before they started on their westward journey -- and they arrived in this valley rejoicing. 328.6 It was President George A. Smith who was responsible for the statement that they came here of their own free will and choice -- because they had to; and that is true.

They crossed the plains, many of them pushing handcarts, containing the meager possessions which they had. They traveled the weary miles with sore and bleeding feet, through hardships and suffering which we do not understand, and arrived in this valley of the Salt Lake, and were grateful to the Lord that he had preserved their lives and brought them to a place of peace where they could worship; and all this, if you please, because they loved the truth. . . .

ARE WE WORTHY OF OUR PIONEER HERITAGE? Now I have been thinking, as I have thought many times in the past, of this great legacy which is ours, the great blessings which have come to us, built upon the foundation of persecution, death, hardships, men and women laying down their lives that we might dwell in this land in peace and safety; and how do we feel today about it? Do we keep the Sabbath day holy? Do we pray? Are we grateful in our souls for all that has been done for us by these sturdy people who loved the truth and came here that they might worship God according to the dictates of their consciences? How do we feel?

When I see reports of conditions in this state and surrounding states where Latter-day Saints dwell, the amount of liquor that is consumed, and tobacco that is consumed, and tea and coffee and other things destructive of health, and contrary to the commandments of the Lord, when I see the people violating the Sabbath day and committing all other kinds of sins contrary to that which they have been taught, I wonder if the Lord is pleased with us. 329.7

EXODUS FOREKNOWN

ZION TO FLOURISH UPON THE HILLS. The foreshadowing of this exodus is seen in a revelation to the Church as early as December, 1830, wherein we read: Keep all the commandments and covenants by which ye are bound; and I will cause the heavens to shake for your good, and Satan shall tremble and Zion shall rejoice upon the hills and flourish." 330.8

Again in March, 1831, in a revelation it is written: "But before the great day of the Lord shall come, Jacob shall flourish in the wilderness, and the Lamanites shall blossom as the rose. Zion shall flourish upon the hills and rejoice upon the mountains, and shall be assembled together unto the place which I have appointed."330.9

PROPHET FORETOLD COMING OF SAINTS TO ROCKY MOUNTAINS. The significance of these sayings did not penetrate the minds of the members of the Church at that time, but in 1842, when Nauvoo was only about three years old, the Prophet Joseph Smith recorded in the history, under date of August 6th, the following: "I prophesied that the saints would continue to suffer much affliction, and would be driven to the Rocky Mountains, many would apostatize, others would be put to death by persecutors, or lose their lives in consequence of exposure or disease, and some of you will live to go and assist in
 making settlements and build cities, and see the saints become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains." 330.10

Without question this exodus was constantly in the mind of Joseph Smith, although the members of the Church failed to comprehend the significance of his words in the midst of their surroundings. Perhaps many of them shared the thought expressed by Senator George H. McDuffie of South Carolina, who as late as 1843 when speaking of the occupancy of the western slope said on the floor of the United States Senate:

"Who are to go there, along the line of military posts, and take possession of the only part of the territory fit to occupy -- that part upon the sea coast, a strip less than 100 miles in width? Why, sir, of what use will this be for agricultural purposes? I would not for that purpose give a pinch of snuff for the whole territory. I wish to God we did not own it." 331.11

PROPHET'S PLANS FOR WESTERN COLONIZATION. A few months later, when persecution raged against the saints, a meeting was called by Joseph Smith to consider the exploration of the west. Me records in his journal under date of February 20, 1844, the following:

"At 10 a.m. went to my office, where the Twelve Apostles and some others met in council with Brothers Mitchell Curtis and Stephen Curtis, who left the pinery on Black River, 1st January. They were sent by Lyman Wight and Bishop Miller to know whether Lyman should preach to the Indians, the Menominees and the Chippewas having requested it. . . .

"I instructed the Twelve Apostles to send out a delegation and investigate the locations of California and Oregon, and hunt out a good location, where we can remove to after the Temple is completed, and where we can build a city in a day, and have a government of our own -- get up into the mountains where the devil cannot dig us out, and live in a healthful climate where we can live as long as we have a mind to."331.12

Then under date of Wednesday, February 21, 1844, the Prophet records: "Council of the Twelve met in my office. I insert the minutes: 'At a meeting of the Twelve at the Mayor's office, Nauvoo, February 21, 1844, 7 o'clock p.m., Brigham Young, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, George A. Smith, Willard Richards and four others being present, called by previous notice by instruction of President Joseph Smith on the 20th instant, for the purpose of selecting a company to explore Oregon and California, and select a site for a new city for the saints. Jonathan Dunham, Phineas H. Young, David D. Yearsley, and David Fullmer volunteered to go; and Alphonso Young, James Emmett, George D. Watt, and Daniel Spencer were requested to go. Voted, the above persons to be notified to meet with the council on Friday evening next at the assembly room. -- Willard Richards, clerk.'"332.13

PROPHET'S INSTRUCTIONS TO EXPLORING PARTY. Friday, February 23, the minutes
 say: "Met with the Twelve in the assembly room concerning the Oregon and California exploring expedition; Hyrum and Sidney present. I told them I wanted an exploration of all that mountain country. Perhaps it would be best to go direct to Santa Fe. 'Send twenty-five men; let them preach the gospel wherever they go. Let that man go that can raise $500, a good horse and mule, a double barrel gun, one barrel rifle and the other smoothbore, a saddle and a bridle, a pair of revolving pistols, bowie knife, and a good sabre. Appoint a leader and let them beat up for volunteers. I want every one that goes to be a king and a priest. When he gets to the mountains he may want to talk with his God; when with the savage nations have power to govern, etc. If we don't get volunteers, wait till after the election.' George D. Watt said: 'Gentlemen, I shall go.' Samuel Bent, Joseph A. Kelting, David Fullmer, James Emmett, Daniel Spencer, Samuel Rolf, Daniel Avery, and Samuel W. Richards, volunteered to go."332.14

It should be understood that California and Oregon as comprehended at that time embraced all of this country where we now are in the western part of the Rocky Mountains. It was not the Prophet's intention that they should go down to the coast, and his remarks clearly so indicate, for these explorers were to explore the Rocky Mountains and there seek a site for the building of a city. At that time Santa Fe was the logical point from which to make such a start in this exploration of the west,

JOSEPH SMITH PROPHESIES TRIUMPH OF SAINTS. Saturday, February 24, several brethren called at the home of Joseph Smith and volunteered to join this expedition, and the following day he preached at the temple block where he prophesied that "Within five years we should be out of the power of our old enemies, whether they were apostates or of the world, and told the brethren to record it, and when it comes to pass they need not say they had forgotten the saying." 333.15

During the week following, Ira S. Miles, Almon L. Fuller, Hosea Stout, Thomas S. Edwards, Moses Smith, Rufus Beach and others volunteered to go on this expedition. Monday, March 4, 1844, Joseph Smith wrote a letter to James Arlington Bennett of New York in which he said: "All is right at Nauvoo. We are now fitting out a noble company to explore Oregon and California, and progressing rapidly with the great temple which we expect to roof this season." 333.16

PROPHET PETITIONS CONGRESS FOR RIGHT TO OPEN WESTERN AMERICA. One week later, March 11, the Prophet spent the day in council with the Twelve and others, principally the volunteers of this exploration company, where matters concerning the expedition were considered; and on the 26th of that same month, Joseph Smith addressed a memorial to the Congress of the United States, asking for authority to raise a company of 100,000 men in the United States, to proceed to the west in the neighborhood of Oregon and California, for the purpose of opening "The vast regions of the unpeopled West and South to our enlightened and enterprising yeomanry; to protect them in their researches; to secure them in their locations, and thus strengthen the government and enlarge her border; to extend
 her influence; to inspire the nations with the spirit of freedom, and win them to her standard; . . . to supersede the necessity of a standing army on our western and southern frontiers; to create and maintain the principles of peace and suppress mobs, insurrections, and opposition in Oregon and all lands bordering upon the United States and not incorporated into any acknowledged national government; to explore the unexplored regions of our continent; to open new fields for enterprise for our citizens and protect them therein, ... and exalt the standard of universal peace."334.17

Orson Hyde was appointed to carry the memorial to Washington, This appointment appeared on the record of the city council minutes, with the seal of the corporation, signed by Joseph Smith, mayor, and Willard Richards, recorder. April 25, 1844, Orson Hyde made a lengthy report of his labors in Washington. Orson Pratt was with him, and they drafted a bill to be presented to Congress in which they said their general course would be westward, through Iowa to the Missouri River, thence up the "North Fork of the Platte into the mouth of the Sweetwater River in longitude 107 degrees, 45 minutes west, and thence up said Sweetwater River to the south pass of the Rocky Mountains about 1100 miles from Nauvoo; and from said south pass, in latitude 42 degrees, 28 minutes, north to the Umpaqua and Klamet Valleys in Oregon bordering on California." 334.18

JOSEPH'S PLAN TO PRECEDE EXPLORING PARTY TO WEST. While this expedition was preparing for the journey to the west, the difficulties arose in Nauvoo which culminated in the seizure of the Prophet and his brother Hyrum, and their imprisonment in Carthage, Illinois, in June. Before the Prophet surrendered and yielded to the demands of his accusers and the leaders of what later became the mob which took his life, he crossed the Mississippi River at Nauvoo, with his brother Hyrum, Porter Rockwell, and Willard Richards, with the intention of preceding the exploring company to the west. This action was taken on the grounds that it was Joseph Smith whose blood the mob desired, and if he were out of the way, peace would be restored.

The minutes of these trying scenes are as follows: "Saturday, June 22, 1844. -- About 9 p.m. Hyrum came out of the Mansion and gave his hand to Reynolds Cahoon, at the same time saying, 'A company of men are seeking to kill my brother Joseph, and the Lord has warned him to flee to the Rocky Mountain to save his life. Good-bye. Brother Cahoon, we shall see you again. In a few minutes afterwards Joseph came from his family. His tears were flowing fast. Me held a handkerchief to his face and followed after Brother Hyrum without uttering a word.

"Between 9 and 10 p.m. Joseph, Hyrum, and Willard while waiting on the bank of the river for the skiff, sent for William W. Phelps, and instructed him to take their families to Cincinnati by the second steamboat arriving at Nauvoo; and when he arrived there commence petitioning the President of the United States and Congress for redress of grievances, and see if they would grant the Church liberty and equal rights. . . .

"About midnight, Joseph, Hyrum, and Dr. Richards called for Orrin P. Rockwell at his lodgings, and all went up the river bank until they found Aaron Johnson's boat, which they got into and started about 2 a.m. to cross the Mississippi River. Orrin P. Rockwell rowed the skiff, which was very leaky, so that it kept Joseph, Hyrum, and the doctor busy bailing out the water with their boots and shoes to prevent it from sinking.

MARTYRDOM ENDED PLANS FOR WESTWARD EXPLORATION. "Sunday 23rd -- At daybreak arrived on the Iowa side of the river. Sent Orrin P. Rockwell back to Nauvoo with instructions to return next night with horses for Joseph and Hyrum, pass them over the river in the night secretly, and be ready to start for the Great Basin in the Rocky Mountains. . . .

"At 1 p.m. (Sunday 23rd) Orrin P. Rockwell returned from Nauvoo with a petition from some of the citizens requesting him to come back. It was said that these were saying that it was like the fable, when the wolves come the shepherd ran from the flock and left the sheep to be devoured."

To this accusation the Prophet replied: "If my life is of no value to my friends, it is of none to myself."336.19 This accusation, without doubt, hurt him even more than the assassins' bullets a few days later at Carthage, Illinois. He and his brother Hyrum had been preparing provisions in anticipation of their journey to the west, but this was all changed when this accusation came, and so Joseph Smith and his brother, who so dearly loved him, returned and were taken to their martyrdom. This, of course, put an end to the proposed expedition of exploration, and some months later when the Latter-day Saints were forced by cannon and musket to abandon their homes and take up their journey towards the west, the experience and information which it was hoped would be available from the exploration party obviously was not obtained.336.20

SAINTS AT WINTER QUARTERS

PERSECUTION NOT ALLOWED BY DEATH OF PROPHET. When the enemies of the Church accomplished their wicked purpose in the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum, they were confident that they had brought the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to its end. They were sure that it could not survive and that its members would be scattered to the four winds. They gloated over their murderous accomplishment, but this gloating was of short duration.

To their amazement the members of the Church rallied and continued to build and pursue their daily vocations.

In the eyes of the mob this would not do, and so the persecutions continued with renewed determination. Mob conventions were held, and demands were made that the Latter-day Saints should leave the state of Illinois. It is regrettable to say that these enemies had the sympathy and treacherous aid of Governor Thomas Ford. The saints asked for time to
 dispose of their property and in their petition to their enemies said:

"That we will use all lawful means, in connection with others, to preserve the public peace while we tarry; and shall expect, decidedly, that we be no more molested with house-burning, or any other depredations, to waste our property and time, and hinder our business.

"That it is a mistaken idea, that we have proposed to remove in six months, for that would be so early in the spring that grass might not grow nor water run; both of which would be necessary for our removal. But we propose to use our influence to have no more seed time and harvest among our people in this country after gathering our present crops; and that all communications to us be made in writing."337.21

PERILS OF EXODUS FROM NAUVOO. The request of President Brigham Young and his brethren was granted, but within a week was broken, and the fury of the mob increased as the mob issued an ultimatum that the saints make an immediate removal. Wednesday, February 4, 1846, the first of the saints left Nauvoo and crossed the Mississippi on their way to the West. Others followed as rapidly as they could. It was an extreme winter. They were without sufficient food, clothing, and provender for their teams. Their covered wagons would not successfully shed the snow and rain, and many wagons were without covers. On Sugar Creek a temporary camp was made. On the first night of the encampment, nine infants were born.

President Young spent February 16, 1846, in organizing the camp. March 1st the camp was broken and the journey resumed in cold, stormy weather. Several members of the camp died from exposure. Some 400 wagons, without sufficient teams, had been assembled to transport these miserable exiles. By April the great body of the saints was on its way. Near the Chariton River the exiles were organized into companies with captains over tens, fifties, and hundreds. The apostles were appointed to take charge of divisions.

TEMPORARY CAMPS AT GARDEN GROVE AND MOUNT PISGAH. April 24, 1846, a settlement was selected on Grand River, Iowa, and named Garden Grove. Here a council meeting was held, and 359 laboring men were reported in the camp. From these, 100 were appointed to cut trees and make rails, 10 to build fences, 48 to build houses, 12 to dig wells, and 10 to build bridges. The remaining number were to prepare land for cultivation. A temporary organization to look after the spiritual as well as the temporal needs of this settlement was also appointed.

May 18, 1846, some 27 miles farther west, Parley P. Pratt with his company had camped. It was decided here to make another temporary settlement, and it was named Mount Pisgah. As in Garden Grove, arrangements were made for the convenience of those appointed to remain. These temporary camps were essential to the welfare of the exiles and were organized for the purpose of raising grain and provisions to help the members on their westward journey.

SAINTS LOCATE AT WINTER QUARTERS. On June 14, President Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, and others with the advanced companies, arrived on the banks of the Missouri River, not far from Council Bluffs. The next day a council meeting was held, and it was decided to move back onto the bluffs where spring water could be obtained and there would be protection from the Indians. The brethren found that the Pottawattami Indians were very friendly and their chief showed the saints some favors. The Omaha Indians across the river were not so friendly.

June 29, 1846, a ferryboat was finished on the east bank of the Missouri. The building of this boat was under the supervision of Frederick Kesler, who for many years was the bishop of the Sixteenth Ward, Salt Lake City, and incidentally the bishop of President Joseph F. Smith's family. The next day President Young and others crossed the river seeking a site for the location of the camps of Israel. In early September such a site was chosen and named Winter Quarters. This place was to be the outfitting point for those who were to continue their journey to the Great Basin.

A regular city was laid out according to the plans which were adopted for the settlements of the Latter-day Saints. Several years later, after the abandonment by the saints, the place was named Florence and today is a suburb of the city of Omaha. Winter Quarters, under the direction of 12 men appointed for the purpose, was organized into wards over each of which was a bishop. These bishops so appointed at this early period were Levi W. Riter, William Fossett, Benjamin Brown, John Vance, Edward Hunter, David Fairbanks, Daniel Spencer, Joseph Matthews, Abraham Hoagland, David D. Yearsley, and Joseph B. Noble.

INDIAN OPPOSITION AT WINTER QUARTERS. In a very short period of time, for the settlers labored diligently, Winter Quarters took on the appearance of a city. The houses were chiefly built of logs gathered from the surrounding forest, but some of the saints made their dwellings by making caves. Some trouble arose through the stealing of cattle and horses by the Indians, and this loss the members of this settlement could not afford. Their number of horses, mules, and cattle was too meager and was sorely needed for the ploughing of the land and for the anticipated journey to their promised land in the Rocky Mountains. Most members of the Church are familiar with the story told by President Joseph F. Smith of his encounter with the Indians when he was a herd boy of only eight years, and how through his ingenuity and the blessing of the Lord he saved the cattle but lost his horse and was himself miraculously saved from death. This occurred just out of Winter Quarters.340.22

The Indians felt that the members of the Church who were dwelling on their lands were intruders; no doubt they felt justified in their marauding, done in part at least, in the spirit of retaliation, for the settlers were killing and eating the wild game and cutting the trees to build houses and corrals on these Indian lands. Chief Big Elk tried to restrain his people, but they would not be controlled. President Brigham Young counseled the members of the Church to treat the Indians kindly but was forced to build a stockade around Winter Quarters
 as a protection against Indian raids.

COUNCIL HOUSE AND GRISTMILL BUILT AT WINTER QUARTERS. Knowing the need of keeping the people busy, President Young assigned duties to all, keeping the minds of the saints occupied and thus more contented than if they had idle time on their hands. Of course there were cattle and horses to feed and fields to be cultivated preparatory to a harvest in the rapidly approaching fall.

A gristmill was built, as much to furnish employment as to be of need in the preparation of flour and other grains. President Young said if the saints did not continue to use it, the Indians could. According to Latter-day Saint custom, this mill was built with a condition of permanency although it was known that in a short time Winter Quarters would be abandoned. In addition to the building of houses and a gristmill, a council house was constructed suitable to these primitive conditions, where council meetings, sacrament, and other meetings for the benefit of the settlers at Winter Quarters could be held.

We think today that we have difficulties in housing two and sometimes three wards in one meetinghouse, but these bishops in Winter Quarters had no separate buildings or even houses where two wards could meet with staggered time. Such meetings as were held had to be in this council house or in the open. The duty of the bishops was largely in caring for the members who were under their jurisdiction, temporally and spiritually, without the convenience of separate places of worship. A condition of this kind had prevailed in Nauvoo where many wards were created, but houses of worship were not provided. Notwithstanding this inconvenience, regular meetings were held where the members partook of the sacrament and were instructed.

BRIGHAM YOUNG RECEIVED REVELATION AT WINTER QUARTERS. This council house was used for all general purposes. Dances and other entertainments were held in it. All amusements were opened and closed by prayer. It was at Winter Quarters where President Brigham Young, January 14, 1847, received a revelation of encouragement and direction for the members of the Church, to govern them while on their journeys and encampments preparatory to the settlement in the Salt Lake Valley.341.23

In this word of the Lord, directions were given as to the travels of the saints, their deportment on the way and in their camps. They were taught to be unselfish and helpful to those who were less fortunate, the widows and fatherless, and were given a promise of blessings if they would remain faithful. The original pioneer company was ordered to go in advance with its captains over hundreds, fifties, and tens. The members were instructed and encouraged to "praise the Lord with singing, with music, with dancing, and with a prayer of praise and thanksgiving," and if sorrowful, to "call on the Lord" with supplication, that their souls might be joyful. 342.24

Some thoughtless persons have condemned the pioneers for their dancing and merriment
 while on the plains, but all of this was done by commandment of the Lord and in the spirit of prayer and thanksgiving. Truly it was, as with David of old, "dancing before the Lord" 342.25 and done in the spirit of true humility. Would that all of our dancing and amusement entertainments today could be conducted in like spirit. How much better the saints would be, how much happier than when many of these things are conducted in the spirit of the world.

The saints were told not to fear their enemies, for they were in the hands of the Lord. They were not to harbor feelings of revenge or hatred towards their enemies. The saints were to be tried in all things, and if they would bear chastisement, they would be worthy of the kingdom of God. It was made known to them why the Prophet and Patriarch had to meet a violent death and have their blood shed. The Lord said, "Many have marveled because of his [Joseph Smith's] death; but it was needful that he should seal his testimony with his blood, that he might be honored and the wicked might be condemned." The conclusion of this counsel was: "Be diligent in keeping all my commandments, lest judgments come upon you, and your faith fail you, and your enemies triumph over you. So no more at present. Amen and Amen." 342.26

LIFE AND LABORS OF SAINTS AT WINTER QUARTERS. The principal diet of the people at Winter Quarters in the winter of 1846-47 was corn and pork. These articles could be secured more readily and were brought to Winter Quarters from what was called Upper Missouri, along the western borders of that state. There were very few gristmills in that part of Missouri at that time where the grain was bought.

Some of the brethren found work during these trying months and by that means were able to purchase their meager supplies preparatory to the journey to the Rocky Mountains. Wheat, boiled whole, and corn, such as could be obtained, was ground into meal in hand mills, a few of them being in the camps. In the fall of 1846, in Upper Missouri, wheat sold for 19 to 25 cents and corn for 10 to 12 cents a bushel, but these prices were advanced to twice the price as the saints continued their purchases. While these prices were low, yet they placed a strain upon the pocketbooks of the poor exiles, for their means were woefully deficient. Besides the feeding of the people, cattle and horses had to be fed, and this required grain. Without the abundant mercy and assistance from the Lord these impoverished saints would have perished.

Notwithstanding all their hardships and the poverty of the saints, they were usually happy, for they had the Spirit of the Lord to guide them and they had leaders with indomitable wills and wonderful resourcefulness aided by the help of the Lord. There were a few among them who lacked the faith to continue the journey and fell by the wayside, among them Bishop George Miller and Alpheus Cutler.

After the encampment was made at Winter Quarters, November 1, 1846, Major H. M. Harvey, Superintendent of Indian Affairs, called on President Young at Winter Quarters and stated that he wished the camp to remove from the Indian lands, that the members of the
 camp were burning the Indians' wood, and he had received letters from Washington from the Department of Indian Affairs giving instructions that no white settlers were to be permitted on the Omaha Indian lands without the authority of the government. President Young told Major Harvey that the government had called into the service of the United States Army the most efficient men from the camps of the pioneers, thus weakening and placing extra burdens upon those who remained. This had caused delay. It was later learned that such drastic demands had not come from Washington.

SAINTS SETTLE KANESVILLE. Winter Quarters was not completely abandoned until 1848, and it continued to be the place for fitting out companies for the journey across the plains and mountains to the Salt Lake Valley. Many of the members of the Church had located at Council Bluffs, and those not prepared to cross the plains moved to the eastern side of the Missouri. This new settlement was named Kanesville, in honor of General Thomas L. Kane who had befriended the Latter-day Saints on several occasions. Kanesville became a thriving town before the members of the Church were called to abandon it. During its most prosperous days there were more members of the Church there than in the Salt Lake Valley. A newspaper called the Frontier Guardian was published, with Elder Orson Hyde of the Council of the Twelve as editor. It was at Kanesville that Oliver Cowdery came in October 1848 to plead for admission back into the Church; his request was granted.

CALL OF MORMON BATTALION. Twelve days after the arrival of President Brigham Young on the bank of the Missouri River, Captain James Allen of the United States Army arrived at Mount Pisgah with a call from the government for four or five companies of volunteers to serve in the Mexican War. He was advised to go to Council Bluffs to see President Brigham Young. He arrived there on the 30th day of June and the following day met with President Young and the brethren.

President Young informed him that the volunteers would be furnished. It was moved by Heber C. Kimball and seconded by Willard Richards that a battalion of 500 men be raised, which was carried unanimously at a meeting of the brethren who were called together for this occasion. This necessitated the return of President Young to Mount Pisgah and the sending of letters to Garden Grove and Nauvoo notifying the members of the Church in these places of this action. The calling of this Mormon Battalion and its wonderful march and achievements are well known among the Latter-day Saints, but the true spirit and significance of their march has never received the proper honor and place which it should have been accorded throughout the nation. 345.27
