SETTLING OF UTAH

SAINTS MADE DESERT BLOSSOM AS THE ROSE. A traveler passing through the fertile Utah valleys in a luxurious Pullman car, on his way to the Golden State, volunteered to say as he looked out over the cultivated fields and blooming orchards: "No wonder Brigham Young chose these well watered and beautiful valleys as a permanent home for your people."

It was the spring of the year; the fields were green with the grain of the summer's harvest; the fruit trees along the way were in full bloom, and everywhere, in a land of great fertility, appeared the glorious prospect of an abundant yield. Such remarks are often made by those who hurriedly pass through our State and see conditions as they are today. How very little do they know of the early history of our State, and the almost superhuman struggle of the pioneers to make "the wilderness and the solitary place . . . glad for them," and "the desert . . . rejoice, and blossom as the rose."346.1

It was a very different aspect that confronted the small but determined band of pioneers as they entered the Valley of the Great Salt Lake, July 24th, 1847, and took possession as the first permanent settlers of the great intermountain region. The soil, they found, was hard and sunbaked. There was little vegetation save the stubby growth of saltgrass, greasewood, and sage that covered the Valley, and the few willows and cottonwood trees that stood on the banks of the canyon streams. The scene was most desolate and uninviting.

SAINTS SETTLED A BARREN DESERT LAND. The pioneers attempted to plough, but the ground, unconquered for so many ages, refused to yield to the plowman's share. By diverting the waters of a canyon stream and thoroughly soaking the soil, they were able to turn the earth and prepare it for the limited but extremely valuable supply of seed which they had brought with them. And thus commenced a determined battle with the elements under adverse conditions which was to result in the conquering of the desert and the beginning of our modern system of successful cultivation by irrigation.

It must be remembered that the great Rocky Mountain region and much of the plains to the east, at that time, formed a desert that was unknown save to the trapper and hunter, and to them, little was known of the great possibilities of the intermountain country. The few emigrants who traversed the country, prior to that time hurried on to the great Pacific coast. None thought of occupying the barren and apparently unproductive region of the Rocky Mountains. Bridger, the trapper and scout, was so sure that the Salt Lake Valley would not produce, that he declared he would gladly give one thousand dollars if he knew an ear of corn would ripen in that valley. His view was shared by others who were acquainted with the region.347.2

MORMON PIONEERS DESTINED TO COME WEST. It might be thought by the casual reader of the history of the Latter-day Saints, that their coming into these valleys when and as they did was merely a matter of necessity, without design so far as the purposes of the Lord were concerned. President George A. Smith, one of these pioneers, very frequently stated -- speaking of Latter-day Saints -- "that we came here of our own free will and choice, because we had to."

However, it was the design of the Lord that the Latter-day Saints should possess these valleys of the mountains. It took persecution and the extreme opposition and hate on the part of their enemies to accomplish this end and bring to pass the driving of the members of the Church from their homes in Illinois.

It seems to me that if the Latter-day Saints had been left in peace, without opposition, and the Lord had commanded them to leave their comfortable homes and make the journey across the barren plains and mountains to these valleys that many of them would have refused to come. They were content and comfortable so far as their homes were concerned. They were happy. They had been prospering. They had found the first years of peace in the history of the Church while they sojourned at Nauvoo, even though these years were few.

PROPHETS FORETOLD SETTLING OF SAINTS IN ROCKY MOUNTAINS. During the last two years and more that they dwelt there the hatred of their neighbors became intense. Nevertheless they had built up a city, the largest city in the state of Illinois, a city of power and influence. They had comfortable homes. They were building a magnificent temple in which to worship God, and naturally they desired to stay there, but the Lord had other designs; so also had their enemies.

But it was not this hatred and persecution, and the driving of the saints from the City of Nauvoo and from the State of Illinois, that constituted the greatest factor in their removal and the commencing of their trek across the boundless plains and the seeking of new homes in the valleys of the Rocky Mountains. While persecution and hate were the immediate causes for this removal, yet back in the early days of the Church, as early as the year 1830, and again in the year 1831, the Lord had indicated by revelation that the time would come when they would be established in the mountains.348.3

Isaiah, some 700 years before the birth of Christ, had made that prediction. 349.4 My own grandfather, in the year 1834, while administering to a brother of President Brigham Young, Elder Lorenzo D. Young, predicted upon his head that he would come with the body of the saints to these valleys of the mountains.349.5

FAITHFUL SAINTS FOLLOWED BRIGHAM YOUNG. There were some who feared the hardships of a journey across the plains to a region practically unknown which, Washington Irving said, would never become the habitation of civilization.

These fearful ones sought refuge in their flight from the stricken city of Nauvoo among the settlements of Illinois, Wisconsin and surrounding territory where they were received in peace and without danger of molestation. The great majority of the members of the Church, however. had faith enough to follow President Brigham Young and the Twelve, implicitly believing that the Lord would prepare the way and lead them on the journey to the west. It was the fair weather members, said General Thomas L. Kane, who deserted the Church in its hour of trial and sought refuge among the peaceful communities where anti-Mormon mobs did not control. The staunch and proved members of the Church did not falter, but endured the hardships which they realized were before them in leaving all behind in Nauvoo.349.6

SAINTS CAME WEST TO SERVE GOD. We came into these valleys for one purpose. What was it? The primary purpose was to serve the Lord, to keep his commandments, to worship him in spirit and truth without interference, according to the dictates of our conscience. That was the object which President Young taught the people; the elders taught it, and they were filled with the spirit of faith, and they guided the people.

But as time went on other elements were developed; others came among us, other influences, and see what is the condition today. We are outnumbered by people who love money, who are not a God-fearing people; they are people who love this world, the things of this world, the pleasures of this world, the wealth of this world; and their minds are set upon getting it, and we are following very largely in their footsteps to the displeasure of our Father in Heaven. 350.7

ASSEMBLING ISRAEL'S PIONEERS

GEOGRAPHICAL ORIGINS OF PIONEERS OF 1847. It was July 24th, 1847, when the pioneers entered the Salt Lake Valley. They had made the journey from Winter Quarters on the banks of the Missouri River, to the Valley in about 102 days, building roads, fording streams and cutting a passage through mountain gorges, blazing the way for the companies which were preparing to follow.

The original company was composed of 143 men, three women and two children. Of this number, as far as we can determine, 21 were natives of New York, 14 were natives of Vermont, 11 of Ohio, 10 of Massachusetts, four of Pennsylvania, four of Connecticut, three of North Carolina, two of Illinois, two of Virginia, two of Maine, three of New Hampshire, two of Mississippi, two of New Jersey, three of Tennessee, and one each of Alabama, Indiana, South Carolina, Kentucky and Rhode Island -- 19 states of the Union, a large majority at that time. Five were natives of Canada, four of England and one each of Ireland, Scotland, Denmark, Norway, and Germany.

It is remarkable that without premeditation these pioneers should have been gathered from nearly every state in the Union and the various countries of Europe from whence most of our
 stable immigration has come. It is reasonable to believe that the others, whose places of birth we do not know, were from just as wide a range of territory.

Five days after the arrival of the pioneers they were joined by a detachment of about 150 men from the Mormon Battalion, which served in the Mexican war, and about 50 immigrants from Mississippi. The first few days in the Valley were spent in exploring, surveying and laying out a city; in ploughing and planting, with the hope, although the season was far advanced, of raising a crop before the autumn frosts set in. They ploughed 84 acres and planted them in corn, potatoes, beans and other products of the soil.

ESTABLISHMENT OF SETTLEMENT IN SALT LAKE VALLEY. Monday, August 2nd, the survey of Salt Lake City was commenced, also on the 10th the building of the Old Fort, or stockade, which was erected on the 10 acres now known as Pioneer Park, as a protection against hostile Indians. They also erected 27 log cabins and were engaged in various other pursuits towards the establishment of a permanent home for themselves and the people who were to follow.

Wednesday, August 18th, nearly one-half of the pioneer company commenced to retrace their steps towards Winter Quarters, to assist their families and the exiled immigrants who were on the way to the Valley. These were followed by another detachment from the little band on the 26th. That fall between 600 and 700 wagons and about 2,000 persons arrived in Salt Lake Valley, coming principally with ox-teams.

While crossing the plains the immigrants were organized in companies of tens, fifties and hundreds, with a captain over each. Thus they traveled in organized form and with correct discipline governing all their movements. Each morning at bugle call they assembled for prayer, and in the evening likewise; and notwithstanding the hardships of the journey, they were buoyed up in their hopes of obtaining a haven of rest in the new Zion, where, at least, they would be free from persecution.

A total of 1,891 persons with 623 wagons left Winter Quarters on the Missouri River, May 31, 1848, and arrived in the Valley September 20, following. These were principally from the exiled Latter-day Saints from Nauvoo, with a sprinkling from European countries. At this time there were 450 buildings in the Fort, three saw mills had been erected, a flour mill was in operation and various necessary industries were under way.

NATIONALITIES OF EARLY MORMON CONVERTS. In 1840-50 increased efforts were put forth in proselyting throughout the world; missionary work was vigorously carried on in the British Isles, Germany, Scandinavia, France, Italy, Switzerland, Australia and many other lands, including the islands of the sea, and many converts were made.

In 1849 the Perpetual Emigration Fund Company was organized, the object being to make a systematic effort to assist all who desired help to emigrate from foreign lands to the body of
 the people in Utah. This movement was not inaugurated for speculation, but as a means of helping the poor and the needy to better their conditions in the promised land. Those aided by this fund were expected to repay the amount they borrowed that others might also obtain assistance, thus making the fund perpetual in its working.

Between the years 1847 and 1856, there were 59 companies of emigrants, comprising in all 16,911 souls that sailed from European shores bound for Utah. Five thousand more had previously emigrated, making a total of 21,911. They were principally from the British Isles, Scandinavia, Germany, and Switzerland, with a sprinkling from France, Italy and other nations.

VOCATIONS OF EARLY MORMON CONVERTS. They came from the factories and the mines of Great Britain, the fisheries and the dairy farms of Scandinavia, the workshops of Germany, the vineyards of France and Italy -- from various pursuits and occupations wherein they were unable in the old world, from the scanty pittance they received as wages, to save enough to buy a passage across the sea.

Of the emigration between 1850 and 1860 it has been estimated that 28 per cent were common laborers, 14 per cent miners, and about 27 per cent mechanics. There were also found in these ranks, the merchant, the doctor, the professor, the skilled engineer and artisan, the financier, and the artist. Occasionally there was one possessed of abundance of this world's goods and big enough to share with his less fortunate neighbor, for they were not confined solely to the poor and the needy, the unlearned or the ignorant.

They were gathered from all nations, but they were not the scum of the earth and the moral outcasts of society; they were the very bones and sinews of the nations from whence they came -- the life's blood, the brawn without which nations would perish from the earth. This class, despised and trodden under foot from time immemorial by the haughty, the proud, the titled nobility, but upon whom, nevertheless, the aristocratic population depend for their very existence, are in very deed the salt of the earth. Remember, the scriptures say it was the poor that had the gospel preached to them, and it was the common people who heard it gladly. 353.8

EXTENSIVE SCOPE OF PIONEER IMMIGRATION. These pioneer immigrants, who established the State of Utah, belonged to the great industrial class, honest though generally poor, that laid the foundation of our glorious nation. Among them were men of renown who fought in freedom's cause and stood in the defense of liberty. For in Utah a very large percentage of the inhabitants are descendants of the early Colonial families of New England and the border Atlantic states.

Thus Mormonism took hold of the dependent thousands of poor from all parts of the earth who had embraced the faith and made them virtually independent by placing them on farms and otherwise furnishing them with remunerative employment by which they became
 financially free. In 1880 -- 30 years after the organization of Utah Territory -- the population was 143,963. Of this number 43,944 were of foreign birth. There were 14,550 persons engaged in agriculture, 4,149 employed in various trades and 10,212 in mining, mechanics, and factory activities.

According to the State's report in 1896, the year Utah was admitted into the Union, there were 19,816 farms and of that number 17,584 were free from incumbrance of mortgage and debt, and while conditions have not improved since the advent of the automobile and modern methods of extravagance, even today the great majority of the Latter-day Saints dwell in their homes with clear titles.

EARLY MORMON COLONIZATION

ORDERLY NATURE OF MORMON COLONIZATION. Within two years after Salt Lake City was founded, the immigration had become so great that the population could not be supported. Many parties were sent out, principally to the north and south, to form new settlements -- not merely in the vicinity of Salt Lake City, but to the remote parts of the territory, which at that time extended from the borders of Nebraska and Kansas to California, east and west, and from Oregon to New Mexico, north and south. Exploring parties were sent in advance and when a site was selected a large company of volunteers followed to make the permanent settlement.

In these companies care was taken that there should be a proper representation of craftsmen, that the needs of the new colony might be met; there were skilled carpenters, masons, millwrights, blacksmiths, cobblers, etc., in each company, and each individual was given some specific work to do. All performed their portion of the labor in harmony with the plan arranged. Every man was supplied with all necessary tools, a gun and other portable necessities, for individual protection and labor; ploughs, seeds and the required number of animals for ploughing, ditch building and other purposes were also provided.

This labor was performed on the co-operative plan and all shared alike according to their respective needs. They were happy notwithstanding the rigorous toil required to subdue the desert places, and, as it has been written of them, they "made more progress and suffered less privation in reclaiming the waste lands of the wilderness than did the Spaniards in the garden spots of Mexico and Central America, or the English in the most favored region near the Atlantic seaboard." But let it be understood this was not accomplished without severe suffering.

WHY MORMON COLONIZATION PROSPERED. The reason they were able to obtain such excellent results is that they had a perfect organization and were loyal and obedient to the authority over them, which naturally resulted in complete operation and unity of purpose. Then, again, their ideas and desires were one -- they were united. They had not come into this promised land for worldly aggrandizement; they were not like the Spaniards, seeking for
 gold, but to build and establish permanent homes where they could dwell in peace and unmolested worship God according to the dictates of their conscience.

As immigrants arrived in Salt Lake City, from the several states or from foreign shores, they were sent out to colonize and blaze the way for others to follow. Men taken from the looms of England, the shops of Germany and from various other dependent occupations in the cities and towns of Europe, were under the necessity of practically changing the nature of their lives. They were sent out to reclaim the desert wastes and to till the soil and were thus transformed into successful and independent farmers, stockraisers, blacksmiths, and were made free landholders in a land of liberty.

It mattered not if these settlers came from the four corners of the earth, speaking various languages and with trades and occupations as far apart as the two poles, new conditions coupled with the same religious views soon welded them together into one race and people. They learned to think and to speak alike; their aims were the same, their desires mutual; and each was brought by common interest to understand the viewpoint of the rest. Thus they lived in harmony, and each was interested in the progress and welfare of the whole community. Such conditions caused them to forget their nationality, for they became absorbed by their environment, truly becoming a part of the very soil on which they dwelt. They were and are loyal to their adopted country. Hyphenated Americans are practically unknown in the Mormon settlements of the Rocky Mountains.

BEST BLOOD OF MANY NATIONS ASSEMBLED IN UTAH. As England was made the great world power that she is by conquest and mingling of Norman, Saxon, and Dane with the native tribes of the British Isles, so also our country has partaken of the best life blood of many nations, which has, through intermarriage made her strong.

Likewise in Utah the amalgamation of the races has been even more complete than in the nation at large; for Utah has drawn on nearly every nation under heaven, sifting and gathering from them of their best, and, due to the peculiar circumstances that prevail and unity of purpose, is moulding out of the mixture of blood a new race typically American. Her people are strong, mentally, spiritually, and physically. Battling with the elements and contending with many difficulties have made them so.

In patriotism they are the peers of any. They believe this is the land of Zion, a land preserved by the great I Am as an abiding place for the pure in heart. It is to them a land of refuge and liberty to the oppressed of the nations, who have come to a "land choice above all other lands," and to a nation raised up, directed and preserved by Divine Providence. 357.9 To this land they have come from all parts of the earth, with gladness and with "songs of everlasting joy," to obtain an inheritance for themselves and children that shall endure forever. 357.10

PIONEER CO-OPERATIVES AND HOME INDUSTRY

HOME INDUSTRY FLOURISHED AMONG PIONEERS. In the early days of the Church in these valleys, great stress was placed upon industry by President Brigham Young and the other brethren, and it was necessary because our forefathers came here with nothing. They had to work. They had to be industrious. It was essential that they produce the things they needed, and therefore counsel to that extent and in that direction was given to them constantly that they should be industrious. They were taught not to be proud in their hearts. They came out here where they could worship the Lord their God and keep his commandments. They were told to be humble as well as to be diligent. They were to make their own garments, and they were to be plain. 357.11 Oh, I wish we could remember that. I am sorry that we have forgotten.

And President Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and others of the brethren in those early days taught the people and prevailed upon them to start industries throughout this country; to raise sheep, to gather the wool, to make their own clothes out of that wool; to plant cotton that they might have cotton also to make clothing; to plant flax that they might get linen; to build tanneries that they might tan the hides and make themselves leather, and a thousand other things. We used to have some of these industries here among us, and would still have them if we had been willing to adhere to these counsels that had been given to us in those early days by the authorities of the Church, which we do not do.358.12

HOME INDUSTRY: BULWARK OF STABLE ECONOMY. The early settlers were taught by their leaders to produce, as far as possible, all that they consumed, to be frugal and not wasteful of their substance. The establishing of home industries was the text of many a sermon, and following the advice of President Brigham Young to draw from the native elements the necessities of life, to permit no vitiated taste to lead them into expensive indulgence, and "to let home industry produce every article of home consumption" -- they engaged in the establishment of many useful and necessary industries. Woolen mills, tanneries, ironworks, sawmills, gristmills, potteries and other industries were established. The people learned to manufacture the articles they used and to raise the provisions they consumed. Their clothing, though plain, was durable and the workmanship of their own hands, and of it they were not ashamed.

We are told that "necessity is the mother of invention." The fact that the people of Utah were at that early day isolated by more than 1,000 miles from the borders of civilization made it necessary for them to be producers of most that they consumed. Alas, in this one particular, in later years after the advent of the continental railroad, this condition was somewhat changed, and not for the betterment of the people. Not that the railroad was not a great boon, but it was so much easier to buy articles from the east than it was to manufacture them, and therefore, instead of raising that which they consumed and manufacturing their own apparel, they commenced to receive supplies, in many instances inferior, from abroad.

CO-OPERATIVE MORMON ENTERPRISES. From the time of laying Utah's foundation to the present, co-operation has been a strong feature in every Mormon community, and while
 this condition has been marred by the closer communication with the outside world and the influx of people of divergent views, yet to a large degree it continues. In pioneer days houses were built, ditches were dug, fields planted, reservoirs constructed, and various other community interests cared for on the co-operative plan, without the aid of money, There was no money to be had, and such was the interest of the individual in the welfare of all that his time was given gratis in such necessary labor, for he realized that he was bound to reap his portion of the benefits of his toil.

Today it is largely the case that a man who gives his time, even though it be in some labor from which he will receive his portion of the reward, feels that he must be given some monetary consideration for the time he spends. And, thus, due to labor agitation and closer contact with the outside world, with its customs, theories, and established institutions, this excellent and neighborly co-operative system, to a great degree, is changed.

These modern conditions tend to destroy the unity of spirit and common interest of the individual in the well being of the community and to narrow down the liberal spirit in which each member showed his love for his fellow man. Self aggrandization has increased; community interest and neighborly love have correspondingly diminished.

Yet, under prevailing conditions, it is hard to see how things can be different in our larger cities where the people are of all religious views and have few interests in common. Co-operation cannot dwell where there is no union -- where the people are not one in thought, one in purpose and desire, and where each refuses to labor unselfishly in the common interest of all, or, where the love of money and worldly gain is paramount. In the distant settlements, however, of the Latter-day Saints, and even with exclusive organizations in Salt Lake City, co-operation still exists. 360.13

PATRIOTISM AND LOYALTY OF SAINTS

MORMON BATTALION AND PATRIOTISM OF SAINTS. There is not a more patriotic people in the United States than the Latter-day Saints, for they have been weighed in the balance and not found wanting. One of the first things the pioneers did, on entering the Valley of the Great Salt Lake, was to unfurl the Stars and Stripes from Ensign Peak and take possession of the land in the name of the United States, this country at the time being at war with Mexico. Even while the exiled Saints, who had been forced from their homes without one protecting word or action from the government in their behalf, were on their westward march, in the depths of poverty, they raised a battalion to serve in the Mexican War. These troops loyally and cheerfully volunteered and performed their labors faithfully and well.360.14

Thomas H. Benton, principally, and others associated with him -- Thomas H. Benton was from the State of Missouri and a very bitter enemy of the Latter-day Saints -- prevailed upon the President of the United States to make this trial of the Mormon people who were in the
 wilderness, asking for a battalion of 500 men. Mr, Benton felt, I am sure, positive in his own mind that under the conditions President Brigham Young would refuse, and with that refusal he would place himself apparently as an enemy of the United States, and further persecution could be heaped upon the Latter-day Saints resulting in their destruction.

But the battalion was raised. There was no opposition. President Young said if he could not raise men enough, he would arm the women, but the government should have its battalion. And so it was furnished, and made its march to the Pacific coast. 361.15

BE SUBJECT TO THE POWERS THAT BE. Any member of this Church who will not sustain the established laws of the land is not only disloyal as a citizen of the government, but he is disloyal to his Church and disloyal to God. We should understand it, and above all else we should be law- abiding and live in righteousness with each other, with our neighbors, and worship the living God in the spirit of truth and righteousness and at the same time have loyal hearts to the nations which bear rule and will bear rule until he comes whose right it is to reign. 361.16

EARLY DAY ANTI-MORMONS IN UTAH. There was in Utah a class of individuals who spent the greater part of their time in circulating wicked and malicious reports about the saints, threatening their lives, committing crimes and attempting to make the saints their scapegoats.

The officers of the law were general government officials appointed by the President of the United States, and I am sorry to say, some of these were among the chief villifiers of the people. The most damnable and bloodthirsty falsehoods were concocted and served up to the people of the United States to stir them up to anger against the despised Mormons.

Almost every crime that was committed within 1,000 miles of Salt Lake City was charged to the leaders of the Mormon people and became the foundation of a multitude of anti- Mormon publications that still flood the world. Because of these false and highly colored tales, in 1857 the government of the United States sent an army to suppress in Utah a rebellion that never existed, and forced the saints to defend themselves. When the government found out how it had blundered, it was humiliated.362.17
