“The Doctrine of the Father,” page 20: Start by asking family members to share what they know about the nature of Heavenly Father. Discuss the article, summarizing the points made in each section that give insight into who God the Father is. Consider concluding with your testimony of the love of Heavenly Father and His Son, Jesus Christ.

“This Is Your Work,” page 42: First, read the sidebar titled “What Can I Do?” and choose one of the ideas that will help your family get involved in family history and temple work (see also lds.org/familyhistoryyouth). During family home evening, read the article with your family and then ask what blessings Sister Beck promised to those who engage in this important work. Carry out the idea you planned and consider continuing this project in weeks to come.

“The Tender Mercies of the Lord,” page 48: Read the story of the young family who received a special Christmas card and the story of the priesthood leader who learned the names of the youth in his stake. Ask family members to think of tender mercies they have received from the Lord. Consider asking, “What are tender mercies? Who receives tender mercies? How can you show gratitude for the tender mercies you receive?” You may want to follow up with Elder Bednar’s answers to these questions from the article.

“Unplugged,” page 61: Read what these children and their families are doing to consume a healthy amount of media. You may want to discuss how your family keeps a healthy balance of TV, computer, and other “screen time.” In the October 2011 general conference, Elder Ian S. Ardern of the Seventy spoke about using various technologies wisely: “As good as these things are, we cannot allow them to push to one side those things of greatest importance” (“A Time to Prepare” Liahona and Ensign, Nov. 2011, 32). Consider making goals similar to those in this article to make your home a place where the Spirit can dwell.

I really wanted to have an effective family home evening lesson each week, but figuring out a topic and preparing a lesson were always challenges for me.

One Monday I realized that I had forgotten to prepare a lesson. But then I realized a hidden blessing of being a Primary teacher. I had recently been called to teach the five-year-olds and had just taught a lesson the day before. I decided to use an abbreviated (and age-appropriate) version of what I taught on Sunday for FHE. That Monday night we talked about obedience, and I retold three stories I had shared the previous day in Primary.

Adapting my Primary lesson to my family has been a great way for me to accomplish my goal of having a well-prepared and effective family home evening lesson each week.

Christina Sherwood, Arizona, USA
