Lucy Mack Smith, Scot Facer Proctor, Maurine Jensen Proctor, Revised and Enhanced History of Joseph Smith By His Mother (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1996)

Editors' Introduction

It was the bleak midwinter of 1844-45, only months since her sons Joseph and Hyrum had been murdered by a gloating mob at Carthage Jail, when Lucy Mack Smith sat down to tell her life story to a twenty-three-year-old scribe named Martha Jane Knowlton Coray. Lucy was sixty-nine years old, afflicted, as she said, "by a complication of disease and infirmities" and still aching with loss. In the fall of 1840 she thought she had experienced the most misery she would ever know. She recalled: "I then thought that there was no evil for me to fear upon the earth more than what I had experienced in the death of my beloved husband. It was all the grief which my nature was able to bear, and I thought that I could never again be called to suffer so great an affliction as this." But time had proven her wrong. Her nature would be called upon to bear more. On a June night in 1844, word had come to Nauvoo that her two sons had been murdered, and thirty-three days later another son, Samuel, would languish and die of complications arising from being chased on horseback by the mob. Of her six sons who had lived to maturity, five were gone, and with the exception of some sons-in-law, Lucy's family was reduced to widows and fatherless children.

These weren't her only losses. Once her son Joseph had received a heavenly vision and had learned that he was the prophet to restore the gospel in the latter days, trial had plagued Lucy. She had lost her farm in New York; she had seen her husband imprisoned; she had trudged through an incessant rain on the way to Missouri that reduced her to near death; she had seen soldiers whoop and holler as they dragged her sons to jail with a death sentence on their heads. Of the endless grief, she said: "I often wonder to hear brethren and sisters murmur at the trifling inconveniences which they have to encounter . . . , and I think to myself, salvation is worth as much now as it was in the beginning of the work. But I find that 'all like the purchase, few the price will pay.'"

It was a woman who not only was willing to pay the price for her religious convictions, but already had, who sat down with the scribe that winter in Nauvoo. Thus, her history rings with sincerity and deeply felt emotion. However much others may have doubted and harangued her son Joseph, Lucy had no doubt that he was exactly what he claimed to be-a prophet. She had a remarkable story to tell and she told it remarkably-with passion, candor, and fluency. Apart from anything else, it would be a wonderful story for generations of readers, but beyond that, it gives a personal glimpse of Joseph Smith seen nowhere else. Here is Joseph dealing with excruciating pain during a crude operation on his leg, sick with misery at Martin Harris's loss of the 116 pages, laying a cloak down on the hard floor night after night to give someone else his bed in Kirtland. Through Lucy's recollections, we enter the Smith family home, hear their conversations, watch a young boy beginning to understand that he has a profound destiny. It is a rare thing to have a sustained narrative from the mother of a man who has had such a significant impact on the world.

What's more, we come to know Joseph better in these pages because we come to know Lucy. To understand the mother is to understand something more about the son. They share the same native flair for expression, the same courage in the face of opposition. They are both high-spirited, deeply loyal to their beliefs, hardworking, and intelligent. Most of all, they share a passion to understand who God is and what he expects of them. When Lucy was a young married woman, sick and apparently dying, she made a covenant with God: "I covenanted with God that if he would let me live, I would endeavor to get that religion that would enable me to serve him right, whether it was in the Bible or wherever it might be found." For Lucy, this began an intense search for the true religion that is echoed in her son's similar yearnings. Joseph is certainly a product of the mother and home from which he came.

The Preliminary Manuscript

It is not entirely clear who motivated the creation of Lucy Mack Smith's history. In January 1845, she wrote to her son William that she was constantly answering questions on "the particulars of Joseph's getting the plates, seeing the angels at first, and many other things which Joseph never wrote or published," and she had "almost destroyed her lungs giving recitals about these things." She "now concluded to write down every particular." In her rough preface to the work she also states that she has been induced to write because "none on earth is so thoroughly acquainted as myself with the entire history of those of whom I speak." But it is also evident that at the same period Church historian Willard Richards and his staff were working on the Church history up to Joseph's death, and they gave encouragement to Lucy to supply the background only she could give. In that same letter to William, she said, "I have by the council of the 12 undertaken a history of the family that is my father's family and my own."

At any rate, sometime in the early winter, Mother Smith approached Martha Jane Knowlton Coray to be her scribe. Martha Jane's husband, Howard, remembered the event: "In the fall of 1844, I procured the Music Hall for a school room: it was large enough to accommodate 150 students; and I succeeded in filling the room. . . . Sometime in the winter following, Mother Smith came to see my wife, about getting her to help write the history of Joseph; to act in the matter, only as her, Mother Smith's, amanuensis. This my wife was persuaded to do; and so dropped the school."

Martha Jane's background suited her for the job. She had developed the habit of recording and preserving Joseph Smith's speeches in Nauvoo. In fact, her daughter Martha Jane Coray Lewis later noted that Wilford Woodruff "consulted her notes, when he was Church Historian, for items not to be obtained elsewhere." This superior note-taking ability was a great help to Lucy, who could write but was, during the production of the work, according to Martha Jane, "in a very low state of health, at times suffering great pains with rheumatism, and often suffocated with an affection of the chest."

Ailing or not, Lucy wanted to get this history down, and it appears that she dictated her story to Martha through that winter, who wrote it with clear penmanship, excellent spelling, and little punctuation. Of course, whenever a second person is involved in a work the question arises: What part of the product reflects the personality and style of the author and what part the influence of the scribe? Martha Jane supplies the answer to this. She wrote Brigham Young that because of her practice at note taking, "this made it an easy task for me to transmit to paper what the old lady said, and prompted me in undertaking to secure all the information possible for myself and children. . . . Hyrum and Joseph were dead, and thus without their aid, she attempted to prosecute the work, relying chiefly upon her memory, having little recourse to authentic statements whose corresponding dates might have assisted her." Martha Jane's husband, Howard, seconds his wife's description of her role in the project. As quoted earlier, he said she served "only as her, Mother Smith's, amanuensis."

Thus, what Martha wrote down appears to be the raw, unedited Lucy, a reflection of her intellect and heart. What she expressed was her life as she saw it and the part that her family had played in bringing forth the Book of Mormon and the restored religion. It was not originally what it has long been titled, History of Joseph Smith by His Mother, Lucy Mack Smith. It was instead "The History of Mother Smith, by Herself," a family history, a story of drama, spiritual adventure, and pathos, but most of all a personal story. Thus, without hesitation, she shared intimate details, probed feelings and made assessments, felt free to soliloquize. She was frank, for instance, to say that she looked forward to standing at the bar of God, where, after a lifetime of persecution, justice will finally reign and her persecutors will be brought to task. And though she shared her suffering, she was not full of self-pity, but rather grateful to be the mother of a prophet and part of a transcendent work.

The material that was dictated to Martha is found in two major places. First, there is an early notebook, a sixty-four-page manuscript that contains a number of jottings: notes on the early Christian martyrs (and it is clear to see why Lucy would be interested in these), notes on Samuel Smith's mission, an account of her journey to Missouri, excerpts from John Smith's diary, and some chronological data. Second is the Preliminary Manuscript, which includes approximately 210 pages of foolscap paper as well as several fragments and torn sheets. Though there are some major gaps, this material is mostly chronological, with an occasional correction and sometimes additional notes added between the lines. Observing this, it appears that Martha wrote down Lucy's dictation and then read it back to her for correction. This Preliminary Manuscript only surfaced in the 1960s in the LDS church archives.

During 1845, Howard Coray turned over his school to others and joined his wife, Martha Jane, in a labor to revise the Preliminary Manuscript. Howard had been one of Joseph Smith's clerks, whose assignment included compiling the official historical record of the Church. Together they substantially revised the Preliminary Manuscript. This was not merely a job of correcting grammar or changing and clarifying confusing chronologies. It has been suggested that "about one-fourth of the revised manuscript is not in the preliminary draft, while approximately ten percent of the earlier manuscript is omitted from the revised manuscript." What was added in the revision was information designed to make it a more balanced and complete history, as well as expand the information on Joseph and the formation of the Church: for instance, Joseph Smith's own version of the First Vision and Moroni's first visit were included. Additional information was added from "The History of Joseph Smith" published earlier in the Times and Seasons. Gaps were filled, necessary explanations added. While Mother Smith was probably frequently consulted during the entire composition, and she clearly gave her approval to the final version, certainly her biggest contribution had already passed.

It is not surprising, then, to observe that while the revised version had strengths lacking in the Preliminary Manuscript, it is also further from Lucy's own voice. The Corays deleted many of her soliloquies, they axed intimate details of family life and affections, they sometimes avoided emotion, they polished her phrases. Unfortunately, comparing the Preliminary Manuscript with the revised version, it is clear that this is not always a favor. The Corays' edits led to a more fussy, formal speech pattern than Lucy is given to. Ironically, their changes sound old-fashioned to the modern ear, as opposed to Lucy's more direct speech. But it is the moving from Lucy's perceptions and feelings that is the greater loss.

The work of revision appears to have been finished by the end of 1845, for on the afternoon of November 19, 1845, the Twelve discussed the need to "settle with Brother Howard Coray for his labor in compiling" Lucy's history, and a settlement was made in January 1846. The Twelve's financial support and long interest in the project certainly made them feel that the Church had a vested interest in it.

Though Lucy was anxious that the manuscript be published, the end of 1845 found the Church with two other projects that consumed the energies and resources of the Saints. Their enemies had never let off the persecution. They had formed "wolf packs" to hunt the Saints; they had burned homes beyond Nauvoo, sending a flood of refugees into the city; they had harassed the Twelve with lawsuits; and now Nauvoo had been turned into a workshop to build wagons to flee the city. Packing to leave everything they owned while they continued to build a temple absorbed the Saints that winter, and Lucy's manuscript naturally took a backseat.

The Corays had created two handwritten copies of the revised manuscript. One was given to Mother Smith and the other retained by the Church and taken west.

The Controversy over the 1853 Publication

For eight years the manuscript remained unpublished, pushed aside by other priorities. President Joseph F. Smith, Lucy's grandson, summarizes its history: "Lucy Smith died near Nauvoo, May 5, 1855; but years prior to this date, some of her effects were left in the hands of her son, William Smith, among them being the manuscript copy of this history. From William (who was the last surviving brother of the Prophet . . .) the document fell (surreptitiously it is declared by George A. Smith) into the hands of Isaac Sheen, who was at one time a member of the Church, in Michigan. When, in September, 1852, Apostle Orson Pratt went on a mission to England, he called on Mr. Sheen on his way East, and being shown the manuscript copy, he purchased it for a certain sum of money, took it to Liverpool with him, where, without revision and without the consent or knowledge of President Young or any of the Twelve, it was published under his direction in 1853."

Martha Jane's account of what happened to the manuscript includes at least two other people. She wrote: "The first copy fell into the hands of Mr. Arthur Milliken, Mother Smith's son-in-law, and went from him, I hear, to A.W. Babbitt, Esq., and afterwards came into possession of an Editor named Sheen, and was sold by him to Elder Orson Pratt who took it to England and published it in its crude state."

The 1853 edition of Lucy Smith's history was called Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and His Progenitors for Many Generations and quite faithfully followed the Corays' revised manuscript. It was a popular book among the British Saints, and in 1854 became available in Great Salt Lake City to the applause of the Deseret News: "This new and highly interesting work should be possessed by all Saints who feel in the least degree interested with the history of the latter-day work."

But George A. Smith, Lucy's nephew and the Church historian, had some major reservations about the book. In an 1859 letter to another nephew of Lucy's, Solomon Mack, he raised his concerns, suggesting that the "shocking massacre" of her two sons had affected her mind. "Although she endured this privation in a manner truly astonishing to her friends, yet we could not conceal from ourselves, that these terrible blows had made visible inroads upon her mind, as well as upon the bodily strength. . . . In the last fifteen years she got events considerably mixed up. . . . I would be pleased to learn your opinion of Mother Smith's history of her family, as far as you are acquainted with it." Brigham Young and his counselors expressed a similar reservation, saying that when the history was written, "Mother Smith was seventy years old, and very forgetful." They suggested that "her mind had suffered many severe shocks" and that "she could, therefore, scarcely recollect anything correctly that had transpired."

As George A. Smith continued to study the book and compared it to other sources, he began to feel there were factual mistakes, or at least the need to double-check stories for accuracy. For instance, in Lucy's history she tells a story about how three strangers showed up unexpectedly and spread David Whitmer's fields with plaster of paris, thus allowing him to leave for Harmony to meet Joseph Smith for the first time. George A. wrote to David Whitmer to verify the story, but received no response. In the early months of 1859, George A. and assistant historian Wilford Woodruff continued to write inquiries to check the details of the book for accuracy.

Thus, questions about the book had been simmering in the minds of the Brethren for several years before 1865, when Brigham Young decided to recall it. In a rather dramatic gesture the First Presidency said, "We wish those who have these books to either hand them to their Bishops for them to be conveyed to the President's or Historian's Office or send them themselves, that they may be disposed of." The First Presidency's worry seemed to be over perpetuating inaccuracies that they were certain dotted Lucy's history. "We do not wish incorrect and unsound doctrines to be handed down to posterity under the sanction of great names," they wrote, "to be received and valued by future generations as authentic and reliable." Brigham Young did not wish to suppress the book permanently, but to revise it and reissue it in what he hoped would be a more correct form.

In a journal entry, Wilford Woodruff detailed what President Young's intent was: "He said he wished us to take up that work and revise it, correct it; that it belonged to the Historian to attend to it; that there was many false statements made in it, and he wished them to be left out, and all other statements which we did not know to be true, and give the reason why they are left out." Though it is not entirely clear what "false statements" leaped out at Brigham Young, many of his concerns clearly came from doubting Lucy's capacity at her advanced age and given her ill health to get the story straight.

Time and scholarship would show that this assessment was refutable. Those who visited Lucy in Nauvoo during the last years of her life often reported her to be alert and mentally acute. Artist Frederick H. Piercy, who drew scenes of the Mormon trail still in use today, stopped by the Mansion House, and carefully observed Lucy. "I could not fail to regard the old lady with great interest. Considering her age and afflictions, she, at that time, retained her faculties to a remarkable degree. She spoke very freely of her sons, and, with tears in her eyes, and every other symptom of earnestness, vindicated their reputations for virtue and truth."

Enoch Bartlett Tripp, visiting her in November 1855 in one of the last months of her life, also commented on her memory: "I called upon the Prophet's Mother and found her in a lonely room in the eastern part of the house in her bed and very feeble. Upon approaching her bedside and informing her who I was, she arose in her bed and placing her arms around my neck kissed me exclaiming, 'I can now die in peace since I have beheld your face from the valleys of the mountains.' She made many inquiries after the Saints and remarked that she took much comfort in riding out with me and my wife in the days that I taught school here."

Far more significant than the anecdotal reports, however, are the modern studies conducted by Richard Lloyd Anderson on Mother Smith's history. Checking other journals, newspaper accounts, non-Mormon church records, vital records, and independent recollections for verification, he found that the great majority of what Lucy states tests very well. He noted: "The preliminary and finished manuscripts give about 200 names. With the exception of a small percentage of indefinite names, nearly all can be verified, including some spectacular memories clear from her New England childhood. Her percentage on dates is not as good, probably reflecting her interest in people more than calendar years-yet when mistaken, she is typically within a year or two of the precise time. Obviously an event itself was more vivid in her mind than the exact point of its occurrence. So Lucy's history is reliable but not an infallible source. How to tell? To reiterate a critical point, she will be a prime source when speaking from personal observation and only secondary when relaying what others have told her."

Beyond accuracy, other factors influenced the 1865 recall of the book. Living in a time as we do today when succession in the Church Presidency is calm and orderly, the death of a prophet signaling a predictable change, it may be difficult to imagine the splintering, confusion, and emotion that followed the death of Joseph Smith for the everyday Saint. Claims and counter-claims to the Presidency divided parts of the Church, and though the vast bulk of the members followed Brigham Young, fragmented groups congregated around others like Sidney Rigdon, James Strang, and Lyman Wight.

Since William Smith, Joseph's brother, had made his own rival claim to be Joseph's successor, Lucy Smith's positive portrayal of him in her history probably concerned Brigham, and stood as just another evidence to him that the book contained distortions. Through Lucy's eyes we see William as a valiant missionary, a fighter for the restored gospel, and a recipient of revelation in a dire moment in Missouri. In reality, William was volatile, unstable, and controversial. He had a checkered past, having often been at odds with his prophet brother. Disagreeing with Joseph during a meeting in Kirtland, enraged William attempted to throw him out and inflicted him with an injury that Joseph felt occasionally the rest of his life. During the dark days at Far West when Joseph was taken to Liberty Jail, William exclaimed, "Damn him, Joseph Smith ought to have been hung up by the neck years ago and damn him, he will get it now anyhow." In his last encounter with Joseph in spring 1844, William asked him to give him a city lot in Nauvoo near the temple. Joseph said he would do it with great pleasure if he would build a house and live upon it there, but he would not give him this lot, worth one thousand dollars, to sell. William agreed to the terms, and within hours an application was made by a Mr. Ivins to the recorder to know if that lot was clear and belonged to William, for the Prophet's brother had sold it to him for five hundred dollars. Joseph, hearing this, directed the clerk not to make the transfer, and William's last words to Joseph were threatening.

After the death of his brothers, a somewhat humbled William petitioned to be ordained the Presiding Patriarch of the Church, a position he had legitimate claim to as the oldest lineal descendant of the Smith family. He was ordained to that position on May 25, 1845, but within a few days he claimed this gave him the right to succeed Joseph as the leader of the entire Church, and by October 1845, he was excommunicated. An aspiring man has to find a home for his aspirations, and William went looking. Expelled from the Church, he temporarily became a leader with James Strang's group. Excommunicated there, by 1850 he began teaching that legitimate leadership for the Church had to come from within the Prophet's immediate family. Since Joseph Smith III was too young, he suggested he should be sustained as president pro tem, "guardian of the seed of Joseph," until the boy came of age. By 1854 he was seeking to be restored to his former position as an Apostle in the Church, and then after 1860, when Joseph Smith III was sustained as president of the Reorganized Church in Plano, Illinois, he hoped to find a high office in the new organization.

Given this background, no wonder the First Presidency's 1865 recall of Lucy's book was so strong in singling out William: "Those who have read the history of William Smith, and who knew him, know the statements made in that book respecting him, when he came out of Missouri, to be utterly false." The timing of the recall was probably also significant, coming so soon after Joseph's sons had newly organized a church and were advancing succession claims. Brigham didn't want Lucy's book to bolster their effort. He may have felt the same way about the book's rosy portrayal of Emma, who supported her sons in the Reorganized Church.

Finally, the book was recalled because the printing by Orson Pratt was seen as unauthorized by the Church, which had some claim to the material, having paid the scribes. The Church leaders felt that they should be able to control its editing and publication, an idea underscored by an error that appeared in Orson Pratt's preface to the 1853 edition. He believed and said that "the following pages, embracing biographical sketches and the genealogy of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and his Progenitors, were mostly written previous to the death of the Prophet, and under his personal inspection." Since this was not the case, the Brethren saw this as an example of the inaccuracies that blighted the work, the laxness of Orson Pratt for publishing it without permission, and a justification for why the work needed to be carefully verified and checked before it was republished.

Revising the 1853 Edition

After the recall, President Young appointed a revision committee consisting of George A. Smith and Judge Elias Smith, both cousins of the Prophet and men who were thoroughly knowledgeable in Church history. George A. had been studying the book for years, and Elias had been an editor of the Deseret News. They poured over the book, consulted with others, made deletions and corrections right in the text and in the margins of copies of the book, and completed the work to the satisfaction of President Young. Ironically, after the storm that had whirled around Lucy's history, only a small amount of the material was changed, and then not significantly. She had not been in the great error previously assumed.

According to Howard Searle these changes primarily included the following: "(1) Several favorable references to William Smith were deleted or changed. (2) Six out of eighteen references to Emma Smith were omitted, although the deletions appear rather incidental. A glowing eulogy of Emma . . . was left intact. (3) Many corrections were made in dates and names, especially in the genealogical data of chapter nine. (4) Some misstatements and misconceptions of Mother Smith were corrected. Her exaggerated role in the construction of the Kirtland schoolhouse . . . was revised in both copies of the history which were used by the revision committee. (5) Some profanity and gross statements [made by the Missouri persecutors and reported by Hyrum to a court of law] were edited out of the history. (6) Words were changed to clarify meaning and improve the grammar. (7) A few additions were made to expand parts of the narrative. . . . (8) Statements that seemed unfavorable to the image of Joseph Smith or the Church were omitted. (9) Some references of purely family interest were left out."

The version containing George A. and Elias Smith's revisions lay essentially forgotten until 1901, when the General Board of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association sought to publish it in their monthly magazine, the Improvement Era. President Lorenzo Snow gave his permission as Church President just before he died in October 1901, and the series began in the November 1901 magazine and continued through the next year. Lucy's grandson Joseph F. Smith, who had become the prophet, wrote a preface for the history: "By the presentation of this work to the public, a worthy record is preserved, and the testimony of a noble and faithful woman-a mother indeed, and heroine in Israel-is perpetuated." A new generation, who did not face the pressures and dissensions of the old, brought a new outlook to the history.

Finally, in order to give Mother Smith's history a wider audience, it was published again as a book in 1945, edited by Preston Nibley, assistant Church historian, who made very few changes but added a few footnotes for the sake of context. Today's reader can find both the 1853 and 1945 editions in libraries and bookstores.

When Lucy sat down with Martha Jane, she certainly had no idea of the controversy that would sizzle around the simple recounting of her life's story, and the sets of hands it would pass through before it was enjoyed by a large audience. But it may not have surprised her either. Life had taught her that good things always come with a cost.

Why This Edition?

From the time the Corays first took the Preliminary Manuscript and edited it into what became the 1853 edition, the history has been moving farther away from Lucy's own voice. This 1996 edition is an attempt to lessen the distance, while adding photographs, extensive endnotes to provide texture and context, easy chapter headings, appendices, and an index for quick reference. In this edition, Lucy's voice is heard more clearly, her sentiments and perceptions explored more openly than ever before, because the Preliminary Manuscript is the foundation of the text. While the 1853 version was used in this book to supply structure, chapter divisions, and some transitions, as well as to fill in missing gaps not available in the Preliminary Manuscript, the flow of language is essentially Lucy's own. Sometimes this means very little change from the 1853 edition; sometimes the change is vast.

The 1853 edition often changes her voice, not allowing the full expression of her feelings about matters important to her. For instance, when Lucy was a young married woman searching for the truth, she went to the Presbyterian church and came away disappointed. In the 1853 edition it is recorded:

I heard that a very devout man was to preach the next Sabbath in the Presbyterian Church; I therefore went to meeting, in the full expectation of hearing that which my soul desired-the Word of Life. When the minister commenced speaking, I fixed my mind with deep attention upon the spirit and matter of his discourse; but, after hearing him through, I returned home, convinced that he neither understood nor appreciated the subject upon which he spoke, and I said in my heart that there was not then upon earth the religion which I sought.

The Preliminary Manuscript reads with more passion and intimacy:

At last I heard that one noted for his piety would preach the ensuing Sabbath in the Presbyterian church. Thither I went in expectation of obtaining that which alone could satisfy my soul-the bread of eternal life. When the minister commenced, I fixed my mind with breathless attention upon the spirit and matter of the discourse, but all was emptiness, vanity, vexation of spirit, and fell upon my heart like the chill, untimely blast upon the starting ear ripening in a summer sun. It did not fill the aching void within nor satisfy the craving hunger of my soul. I was almost in total despair, and with a grieved and troubled spirit I returned home, saying in my heart, there is not on earth the religion which I seek.

The 1853 edition sometimes ignores emotion as if it were somehow embarrassing, editing out valuable detail about the feelings of the Smith family as they cope with their challenges. In the Preliminary Manuscript Lucy describes the exhaustion and anxiety of her husband when the doctors come to operate on little Joseph, after the boy has suffered weeks of anguish from a pain in his leg. This paragraph is entirely deleted from the 1853 edition:

My husband, who was constantly with the child, seemed to contemplate for an instant my countenance; then, turning his eyes upon his boy, at once all his sufferings together with my intense anxiety rushed upon his mind. He burst into a flood of tears and sobbed like a child.

Also missing from the 1853 edition is the expression of affection from Joseph Smith Sr. toward his children when they are reunited in Palmyra after some months' separation. The 1853 edition tells of Lucy and her children arriving in Palmyra

with a small portion of our effects, and barely two cents in cash.

When I again met my husband at Palmyra, we were much reduced-not from indolence, but on account of many reverses of fortune, with which our lives had been rather singularly marked.

She gives us a more personal picture in the Preliminary Manuscript:

I then proceeded on my way, and in a short time I arrived in Palmyra with a small portion of my effects, my babes, and two cents in money, but perfectly happy in the society of my family.

The joy I felt in throwing myself and my children upon the care and affection of a tender husband and father doubly paid me for all I had suffered. The children surrounded their father, clinging to his neck, covering his face with tears and kisses that were heartily reciprocated by him.

We all now sat down and maturely counseled together as to what course it was best to take, and how we should proceed to business in our then destitute circumstances.

In the Preliminary Manuscript Lucy periodically stops her narrative to give us a soliloquy. For the most part these were deleted, shortened, or severely edited for the 1853 edition until her voice in these is sometimes hardly recognizable. For example, one night during the printing of the Book of Mormon, Lucy hid the manuscript in a chest under her bed to keep it from the clutches of conspiring men who had determined to steal and destroy it. Lying there upon the record, the important scenes of Lucy's life began to play before her eyes. Cut from the 1853 edition is this insight into Lucy's spirituality:

At last, as if led by an invisible spirit, I came to the time when the messenger from Waterloo informed me that the translation was actually completed. My soul swelled with a joy that could scarcely be heightened, except by the reflection that the record which had cost so much labor, suffering, and anxiety was now, in reality, lying beneath my own head-that this identical work had not only been the object which we as a family had pursued so eagerly, but that prophets of ancient days, angels, and even the great God had had his eye upon it. "And," said I to myself, "shall I fear what man can do? Will not the angels watch over the precious relic of the worthy dead and the hope of the living? And am I indeed the mother of a prophet of the God of heaven, the honored instrument in performing so great a work?" I felt that I was in the purview of angels, and my heart bounded at the thought of the great condescension of the Almighty.

Thus I spent the night surrounded by enemies and yet in an ecstasy of happiness.

Finally, the 1853 edition occasionally deletes an incident or description that completes the picture Lucy is painting. For instance, Lucy tells of the pitiful conditions of the refugees who fled to Far West when the militia had driven them from their homes in outlying areas. In the 1853 edition she says:

It was enough to make the heart ache to see the children, sick with colds, and crying around their mothers for food, whilst their parents were destitute of the means of making them comfortable.

This is a poignant scene by itself, but the Preliminary Manuscript adds a heartrending note.

It was enough to make the heart ache to see children in the open sun and wind, sick with colds and very hungry, crying around their mothers for food and their parents destitute of the means of making them comfortable, while their houses, which lay a short distance from the city, were pillaged of everything, their fields thrown open for the horses belonging to the mob to lay waste and destroy, and their fat cattle shot down and turning to carrion before their eyes, while a strong guard, which was set over us for the purpose, prevented us from making use of a particle of the stock that was killed on every side of us.

Thus, using the Preliminary Manuscript as the major source of text, this edition gives us a fresher, keener view of Lucy and her response to the momentous events of the Restoration. At the same time, using the structure and chronology of the 1853 edition allows the history to transcend the limitations of an occasionally confusing, occasionally spotty oral history (as oral histories tend to be). Where Lucy is incorrect in dates or names, corrections have been made in the text and the changes often footnoted. No attempt has been made to restate her sentences in more polished prose or improve her vocabulary. She stands well on her own and thus the edits are light. Where transitions or explanations are necessary and not available in the Preliminary Manuscript, the 1853 text has been used. However, to save the text from becoming tedious, every shift between the Preliminary Manuscript and the 1853 edition has not been noted. The motivation was to find Lucy buried in the material, be true to her voice, and at the same time create a book that was accessible and inviting to a wide audience.

A Note on the Notes and Other Features

The endnotes in this book have been designed to add context, color, and texture to Lucy's story as well as to note significant differences between the Preliminary Manuscript and the various editions. They will add so much to a reader's understanding of the events Lucy describes, it is tempting to attach a sign that says "Read Me" to each one. The notes include anecdotes that expand with detail or with another point of view the event she describes. For instance, Lucy gives us a tragic picture of Joseph being dragged by the militia from his family at Far West, and in the notes Parley P. Pratt relates his personal heartrending experience, side by side with Joseph. The notes also include facts that make the background clearer. For instance, when Lucy and her family make their desperate journey from Kirtland to Missouri, the notes give a vivid picture of how many little children were in tow, a detail that adds pathos to their miserable circumstance. (For quotations that appear in the notes, spelling and punctuation have sometimes been standardized to facilitate readability.)

The photographs in this edition are pictures of the places Lucy describes as they appear today. They are included to add a visual dimension to the story. The maps have been added to give the reader a sense of location and proximity.

In the 1853 edition, chapter 9 was a genealogy of the Smith and Mack families. In this edition, the corrected contents of chapter 9 have been included in an appendix; a second appendix containing a simplified genealogy chart has been added for quick and easy reference. A third appendix presents a chronology of key events in the Joseph and Lucy Smith family, with emphasis on Joseph Smith Jr.

If Lucy Mack Smith's history is one of the priceless treasures of Church history, it is not just because her son Joseph was a prophet who restored the ancient gospel. It is also because her own life teaches us new dimensions of faith and courage. Her fervent outreach for the Lord was continually answered with blessings on her head. If her sons in Missouri are ailing with cholera, she prays them well. If at Far West she is tormented with worry about her sons' being murdered, she receives divine assurance that drives the anguish away. Her statement at Buffalo Harbor captures it all. When she and eighty Saints are blocked from leaving the harbor by ice that is twenty-feet thick, she tells the Saints that the Lord can make the way open for them. She asks them, "Where is your confidence in God? Do you not know that all things are in his hands, that he made all things and overrules them? . . . Now, brethren and sisters, if you will all of you raise your desires to heaven that the ice may be broken before us, and we be set at liberty to go on our way, as sure as the Lord lives, it shall be done." That instant, the ice burst like thunder, and it was done. It was the kind of faith and super-faith that makes her story timeless, and vital for all generations of the Church.

Scot Facer Proctor

Maurine Jensen Proctor

Editors

Salt Lake City, Utah

Tuesday, May 14, 1996

Commemorating the 140th Anniversary

of the Death of Lucy Mack Smith, May 14, 1856

Notes

1996 Bookcraft
