For the information of the members of the Church, the First Presidency has issued the following statistical report concerning the growth and status of the Church as of December 31, 1980. (Membership figures are estimates based on 1980 reports available prior to conference.)

Number of stakes of Zion

Number of full-time missions

Number of independent branches in stakes

Number of mission branches

(These statistics reflect an increase of 1,105 wards and branches during 1980.)

Number of countries with organized wards or branches

Total membership reported by stakes, missions, and Church offices at the close of 1980

Children of record baptized

(This convert baptism figure is an estimate based on 1980 reports received at Church headquarters prior to conference.)

Birthrate per thousand

Number of persons married per thousand

Death rate per thousand

Names cleared in 1980 for temple endowments

Numbers of endowments performed during 1980:

Temples in operation

Temples planned or under construction

(There were 89,100 more endowments done in 1980 than in 1979.)

(An estimated increase of 42,000 priesthood members during 1980)

Full-time missionaries

Total enrollment during 1979–80 school year:

Seminaries and Institutes, including special programs

Church schools, colleges, and continuing education

Persons assisted with cash or commodities

Persons assisted by LDS Social Services

Persons placed in gainful employment

Man-days of labor donated to welfare services

Commodities distributed from storehouses in pounds

Elder William H. Bennett, emeritus member of the First Quorum of the Seventy; William Pakimana Taurima, president of the Gisborne New Zealand Stake; Thomas Lee Chappell, president of the Loa Utah Stake; Donald Leon Hansen, president of the San Bernardino California East Stake; Clara Alberta Wright Moyle, widow of Henry D. Moyle, former First Counselor in the First Presidency; Betsy Hollings Richards, widow of George F. Richards, former President of the Quorum of the Twelve; Edgar B. Brossard, former member of the United States Tariff Commission for 36 years; Leona Holbrook, president of the American Association for Health, Physical Education, and Recreation, and former member of the U.S. Olympic Committee and participant in the International Olympic Academy; Junius M. Jackson, former president of the Church Genealogical Society; Pearl B. Johnson, secretary to members of the First Presidency or Quorum of the Twelve for over forty years and former member of the YWMIA General Board.
