I was baptized a member of the Church in 1986, and A Liahona (Portuguese) has been a part of my life since then. It has helped me at those moments when I have found myself spiritually weak. I have been able to feel its power in missionary work, during visits as a home teacher, and with my friends who have not yet had the opportunity to know the true gospel.

I am especially grateful for the publication of the article “The Significance of Tithing Settlement” in the December 2000 issue. This article has helped me hold successful tithing settlement interviews in my calling as bishop.

Amarildo Martins,
Parque Dorotéia Ward, Diadema Brazil Stake

After reading the Liahona (Ukrainian), I felt the Holy Ghost so strongly that I wanted to share my testimony. Sometimes it seems that my spiritual trials are insurmountable. I’m the only member of the Church in my family, and my friends don’t like the Church and its standards. Unfortunately, I have not been able to change their opinion.

I know there are a lot of people like me. But I also know that Heavenly Father loves all of us and wants us to be strong. When I’m discouraged, I think about how greatly Heavenly Father has blessed me. He always hears my prayers and helps me, sometimes through friends and relatives, sometimes through the Liahona. There are many wonderful testimonies and stories in this magazine. When I read it, my testimony grows.

Yelena Sivoplyas,
Chernihiv Tsentralny Branch, Ukraine Kyiv Mission

Your magazine is a real miracle in my home. Every time I bring a new Liahona (Russian) home, it disappears! The next day my father, who is not a member of the Church, says he has taken it to work and has read everything in it and liked it very much. Or my mother, also not a member, says she could not stop reading it all morning. She was particularly interested in the article “Japan: Growing Light in the East” in the March 2001 issue. I thank you for this miracle. It gives me strength to continue working with my family.

Mariya Konovalova,
Kurgan Tsentralny Branch, Russia Yekaterinburg Mission
