I would like to thank you for the wonderful series of articles on the Ten Commandments in the 1998 magazines. Each article moved me deeply, gave me more understanding of the particular commandment, and showed me the depth and variety of insights contained in the gospel. I am thankful that the authors of the different articles are willing to share their knowledge with us. They help us all to increase in wisdom and knowledge.

Esther Hofbauer,
Vienna Third Ward, Vienna Austria Stake

We have been members of the Church since 10 January 1975. We were the first family baptized in the Siracusa Branch.

From 1975 until today, La Stella (Italian) has been another help to learn about God the Father, Jesus Christ, the Holy Ghost, the Church, and the plan of happiness. From its first format, which consisted of a few pages, a few photographs, and a few illustrations, La Stella has, over time, grown in its size, thickness, and all other additional facets, becoming more beautiful and attractive. One thing is certain: La Stella is still the same in its profound and marvelous content, be it written by the prophets and apostles or by Saints scattered all over the world. La Stella will always be a source of instruction, study, reflection, inspiration, and revelation.

We are thankful to the First Presidency, the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and the staff for such an inspiring magazine.

Roberto and Giovanna Marino,
Siracusa First Branch, Catania Italy District

Whenever I have a chance to read the Liahona (Spanish), I turn to the First Presidency Message. How blessed we are to be able to read these words of wisdom from our prophet. These articles have helped me a great deal in my personal life, and I have also put them into practice in our family home evenings. We enjoy the spirit they bring and the happiness we feel knowing that we have access to the blessings of heaven.

The best gift I can give my friends is a subscription to the magazine so that they, too, can receive help from and knowledge of Jesus Christ.

Angie Herreria,
Flor de Bastión Ward, Guayaquil Ecuador Pascuales Stake

Thank you very much for the Liahona (English). When it comes, everything else has to wait. Its articles are informative, uplifting, and educational; they confirm my faith. I look forward with much anticipation to each coming issue. At last there’s something I can believe in.

Frezer D. Tavas,
Damortis Ward, San Fabian Philippines Stake
