My wife, María, and I were baptized in 1978, and we found great happiness in the true Church. In 1986 we were able to travel to the Buenos Aires Argentina Temple and be sealed to our three children for eternity.

In 1988 María became pregnant with our fourth child. She soon became very sick, and we worried how the illness would affect her and the baby. When we initially feared that María had suffered a miscarriage, a doctor assured us that everything was normal. But María’s health steadily declined. One day she mentioned she had a feeling she would soon leave this life. I’d had a similar feeling, but I told her not to think of such things.

In September, we went to the doctor for her regular checkup. The doctor decided to admit María into the hospital; our daughter was born soon after—a month early. Although the baby had respiratory problems, we knew her birth was a miracle.

My wife, however, experienced serious complications and had to be operated on twice after the delivery. She received a priesthood blessing and seemed to be progressing well. But just a month later, her health rapidly declined.

On our 15th wedding anniversary, María and I read the scriptures together, and she shared her testimony of the gospel with me and asked me to take good care of the children. Then she began to have difficulty breathing and could no longer speak. As I sat at her bedside, I prayed to the Lord that His will might be done. But still I felt desperate. I questioned, “Why take someone so young? Why must we be separated?”

Some branch members came, and we gave María a blessing. I don’t remember what was said, but at the end of the blessing, the desperation finally left me and I became calm. When she took her last breath, a great peace came over me. A soft voice whispered in my ear to remember the covenants we made in the temple when we were sealed. I knew I would see her again.

I share my testimony that God lives and communicates His love and comfort through the Holy Ghost. He does work miracles.
