Our Answer

Perhaps one of the most difficult parts of truly repenting is being able to eventually feel that we have been forgiven. Sometimes, because we remember the sin and still feel sorrow for it, we assume that the Lord has not forgiven us. Fortunately, the process for obtaining the Lord’s forgiveness is quite straightforward:

“Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord, remember them no more.

“By this ye may know if a man repenteth of his sins—behold, he will confess them and forsake them” (D&C 58:42–43; emphasis added).

Confessing sins is often difficult and requires great humility, particularly if we need to confess our wrongs to our bishop or branch president or to someone we have injured. Sins that are serious enough to affect our fellowship or membership in the Church need to be confessed to the bishop or branch president (see Marion G. Romney, in Conference Report, October 1955, 125). But acknowledging our sins demonstrates to the Lord, to ourselves, and to any we have offended that where possible we desire to repair the damage we have caused and make things right again.

As difficult as confessing sins may be, forsaking them can be even more difficult, especially if we have repeated the sin over a long period of time. But abandoning our sins is proof that we are changed inside, that we desire inner peace and purity more than we desire any momentary pleasure or advantage that our sinful behavior may bring us.

If we successfully meet the requirements the Lord has established—confessing sins and forsaking them—the Lord will forgive us. But beyond this, we can also know in our hearts that we have been forgiven when we feel the peace of conscience experienced by the people of King Benjamin: “The Spirit of the Lord came upon them, and they were filled with joy, having received a remission of their sins, and having peace of conscience” (Mosiah 4:3). This healing influence of the Holy Ghost cleanses and comforts the truly penitent.

President Harold B. Lee told of a young man who was concerned about this very question: “Some years ago, President [Marion G.] Romney and I were sitting in my office. The door opened and a fine young man came in with a troubled look on his face, and he said, ‘Brethren, I am going to the temple for the first time tomorrow. I have made some mistakes in the past, and I have gone to my bishop and my stake president, and I have made a clean disclosure of it all; and after a period of repentance and assurance that I have not returned again to those mistakes, they have now [judged] me ready to go to the temple. But, brethren, that is not enough. I want to know, and how can I know, that the Lord has forgiven me, also.’

“… As we pondered for a moment, we remembered King Benjamin’s address contained in the book of Mosiah. … There was the answer.

“If the time comes when you have done all that you can to repent of your sins, whoever you are, wherever you are, and have made amends and restitution to the best of your ability; if it be something that will affect your standing in the Church and you have gone to the proper authorities, then you will want that confirming answer as to whether or not the Lord has accepted of you. In your soul-searching, if you seek for and you find that peace of conscience, by that token you may know that the Lord has accepted of your repentance” (“‘Stand Ye in Holy Places,’” Ensign, July 1973, 122).

We may never forget our mistakes. This is actually a blessing from the Savior; it is a way of reminding us that the experience was painful and that we should not repeat our transgressions, for “unto that soul who sinneth shall the former sins return, saith the Lord your God” (D&C 82:7). But when we are forgiven, our past sins are no longer a part of us. We are free from them. We may have to suffer some of the long-lasting consequences, but we will no longer feel weighed down by guilt or regret.

To learn more about being forgiven, turn to the scriptures; find references under the topics forgiveness and Atonement in the Guide to the Scriptures. Counsel with your bishop or branch president. Then get on your knees and ask if you have done everything necessary to make your repentance complete. The Lord will help you find the peace you seek.

Readers’ Answers

Satan tries to make us feel that our sins are too serious to be forgiven, but our Father in Heaven is merciful. He will free us from the chains of transgression if we follow the path He has outlined.

Berta M. Chávez,
Santa Fe Ward, Comayaguela Honduras Country Stake

We can know we have been forgiven when we feel our souls healed through the power of the Atonement. We can feel as the people of King Benjamin did when they received a remission of their sins.

Koffi N’Goran Gerard,
Sogefiha Ward, Abidjan Ivory Coast Stake

I was less active for 10 years. Today I am happy, and I thank Heavenly Father for forgiving me. Through repentance, faith, patience, prayer, and church attendance, I know I have been forgiven, because I feel the Holy Ghost with me again and I feel joy.

Claudia Rodrigues Gruber,
Innsbruck Branch, Salzburg Austria Stake

Jesus Christ said, “Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. … For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light” (Matt. 11:28, 30). If you still carry feelings of guilt after you have repented, you haven’t received the peace you are promised. One of Satan’s greatest tools is making you believe that you still haven’t been forgiven of your sins or that you can never receive forgiveness.

Elder Ilunga Mbidi Kiluwe,
Democratic Republic of Congo, Kinshasa Mission

Repentance is the sweetest gift—it ennobles our souls and unites us with the Savior. When my life is filled with peace, tranquility, and lasting joy, I know the Savior has forgiven me. When the constant companionship of the Spirit helps me flee from sin and when the image of Jesus shines in my countenance, then I know that God has forgiven me and that I have forgiven myself.

Janeth Viafara Borja,
Villa del Lago Ward, Cali Colombia Americas Stake

Read the scriptures, cease doing what you did wrong, forgive others, bear your testimony, and, finally, pray and ask God if you have been forgiven. I know from personal experience that if you have been forgiven, Heavenly Father will give you a calm, peaceful feeling in your heart through the Holy Ghost.

Juliana Lazzarotti Oliveira,
Santa Clara Branch, Coimbra Portugal District

Moroni 8:26 [Moro. 8:26] says that when you receive a remission of your sins, you receive a visitation of the Holy Ghost. When we feel the Spirit of God, we obtain His hope, comfort, and love.

Masaki Keikyu,
Gokiso Ward, Nagoya Japan Stake
