“What do these scriptures teach us?” Daddy asked as he closed his Book of Mormon.

Four-year-old Tyler piped up, “Jesus said we should pray always.”

“That’s right, Tyler,” Daddy said. “Do you think you can have a prayer in your heart all day today? But don’t just pray for yourself; look for others who need blessings and pray for them, too. We’ll pray for them again when we have family prayer tonight.”

Mommy stood up. “It’s time to get the breakfast dishes done and for Daddy to go to his office.”

As Daddy walked to the front door, Tyler followed and grabbed his hand. “Daddy, I’ll try my best to find someone who needs my prayer today.”

Daddy gave Tyler a hug. “Good! I’m sure that will make Heavenly Father happy.”

Later that morning, Tyler went with Mommy to take books back to the library. He saw a lady holding a baby. The baby wouldn’t stop crying, no matter how her mom tried to soothe her. The baby looked as though she could use Tyler’s prayer. Tyler prayed in his heart, “Please, Heavenly Father, bless the baby to be happy and quiet.”

After lunch, Tyler went outside to ride his tricycle. The people who lived next door waved to him. Tyler saw Mr. Radcliffe helping his wife climb out of her wheelchair and into the car. “Heavenly Father,” Tyler prayed, “I like the Radcliffes. Please bless Mrs. Radcliffe to get well.”

That afternoon the doorbell rang. The piano tuner had come. Tyler liked to watch him use his tools to tune the piano. Tyler asked Heavenly Father to bless the piano man to do a good job.

Before Tyler’s bedtime, his family gathered for their evening prayer. “Did you find anyone to pray for today?” Daddy asked Tyler.

“I found three people who needed my prayers—a baby, Mrs. Radcliffe, and the piano man,” Tyler reported.

“That’s wonderful, Tyler!” Mommy said. “I’m sure Heavenly Father heard your prayers, and He will answer them.”

“Tyler, will you please say the family prayer tonight?” Daddy asked.

As Tyler prayed, he remembered to ask another blessing on the people who had needed his prayers that day.
