Anne Osborn Poelman, Simeon Solution: One Woman's Spiritual Odyssey ( 1994)

Introduction

As a very young child I wanted to know: Is there a God? If there is, does he truly care about his creation and his children? Does God know me, even if I don't know him? Is he aware of and interested in me as an individual? Does he still work miracles? Would he work them in my life?

I don't really think I was unusual. We all want answers to our most deeply felt questions. Each of us is born with an innate longing for our eternal, spiritual home. Life itself is largely an ongoing search for eternal verities.

This book is in part an autobiographical account of my own personal spiritual odyssey. The events related here actually happened. In some instances I have changed the names of certain individuals to preserve their privacy. Writing from the perspective of years or even decades after the dialogues transpired, it is difficult to quote them exactly. I have nevertheless attempted to convey the content and spirit of the interchanges as they took place.

In this book I will share with you how I learned that there is indeed a God, a loving Heavenly Father who is actively and intimately involved in our lives—who knows and cares about us individually and personally.

I will also tell you how I discovered the Lord's church, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and how my faith in its fundamental, straightforward teachings evolved and grew. And finally, I'll share the "Simeon Solution" with you. These simple, gospel-centered principles have given me the confidence to face life's inevitable challenges with equanimity. In the midst of disappointment and uncertainty, we can create our own spiritual "places of safety" that provide a sure haven from the storms of personal adversity.

Please make no mistake about it: This book is written squarely from the center of the Latter-day Saint mainstream. If you are searching for a feminist perspective, look elsewhere. If you hope to find a closet Church rebel, you'll be gravely disappointed.

If what you really want is the perspective of an LDS professional woman who believes that quiet accomplishments speak volumes more than strident polemics, a person who knows that Church members aren't perfect yet is totally committed to the Church, and who trusts implicitly in the eternal perspective, read on. This book is for you.
