Anne Osborn Poelman, Simeon Solution: One Woman's Spiritual Odyssey ( 1994)

Chapter 1

The Simeon Solution

It had been one of those golden evenings. You know the kind: seamless. The dinner guests rave enthusiastically about the food, cheerfully help clear the table afterward, then move into the living room where they relax and chat amiably in front of the fireplace. It's snowing outside, adding a snug, cozy feeling to the gathering. Maybe it doesn't snow in your part of the world. Maybe you don't have a fireplace or a living room either. But such friends and such gatherings are universal regardless of the specific setting.

It started innocently enough. The conversation drifted imperceptibly away from comfortable, safe topics toward more controversial ones. In retrospect, it's hard to define precisely when the friendly discussion we had been having edged over the border into outright disagreement. Perhaps it started with a frank but well-intentioned question from one of our guests, an accomplished professional woman who was not of our faith. She was curious as to how we Mormon women felt about not holding the priesthood. Did we feel slighted? Unequal? Oppressed?

The questions exposed some of the fissures that exist among women in the Church. No stock, flippant answers such as, "The only priesthood I want to hold is in my arms!" were forthcoming. The responses from the group were candid, deeply felt, and as varied as the women sitting in the room. They covered a broad spectrum that ranged from a historical, contextual perspective to one opinion that Church women ought to press forcefully and publicly for a policy change.

By nature moderate, I seemed to occupy the philosophical middle ground. "Well," I interjected, "I think it's important to look at things from an eternal perspective. One of the things that's very meaningful to me is what I've learned in the temple from the covenants we make there. I think no religion holding as one of its fundamental tenets that the seed of godhood is in every man and every woman and that neither can achieve it without the other could by any reasonable, fair definition be called sexist."

That response precipitated another round of spirited discussion. When the conversation finally subsided a bit and I could express a rejoinder, I decided to try another approach and focused on feelings rather than intellectual argument.

"I'm not sure exactly how to put this. You may think my view is rather simplistic. But to tell you the truth, the whole issue of women and the priesthood really isn't very high on my spiritual 'worry list.' I don't know precisely why modern-day women in the Church don't hold priesthood offices. Quite frankly, it doesn't bother me. I'm not even sure it's relevant."

That provoked expressions of surprise. I continued, "I know the gospel is true. I also know the restored Church is the Lord's church. And I really believe that if and when it's appropriate, any changes will be made by revelation through the prophet. In the meantime I'm content. I can put issues like women and the priesthood on my spiritual back burner."

One of the men, a well-known and highly respected local physician, had been listening to the interchange quietly. Up to that point he hadn't said a single word. He finally spoke up and added thoughtfully, "Annie, I think I understand and agree with you. What you just said is an example of the Simeon Solution."

"What solution?"

"Simeon was the old high priest spoken of briefly in the second chapter of Luke. At the time of the Savior's birth, Judea was occupied by the Romans. The suffering, conquered Jews yearned for the long-promised Messiah, their King of kings, to come and liberate them from the cruel oppressors. Among the Jews living in Jerusalem was Simeon, a just and devout man, who had also patiently waited his entire lifetime to behold the Messiah. He had been told by the Holy Ghost that he would not die before he had seen the Lord's Christ."

He paused a moment, reflecting. "I'm sure Simeon must have had his moments of uncertainty and doubt. But he kept the faith, believing the ancient prophecies and trusting in the revelation of the Holy Ghost. Finally one day Simeon was prompted by the Spirit to go to the temple. While he was there, the Savior's parents arrived bearing the child Jesus. I suppose Joseph and Mary were humble working people who otherwise might have gone unnoticed. But not by Simeon, who instantly recognized Jesus as the promised Messiah.

"The old priest tenderly took the child in his arms. With a heart overflowing with joy and gratitude, he praised God and said, 'Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word: For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou hast prepared before the face of all people; a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel' (Luke 2:29-32).

"Before that glorious experience in the temple, Simeon had walked by faith alone. After waiting an entire lifetime, at last he knew for a certainty that what he had believed and trusted for so many years was true."

The room was completely quiet as we all sat silently pondering his remarks.

He continued: "Faith really does precede the miracle. Faith is the precursor of knowledge. Whenever I encounter a question to which I can find no immediate answer, I adopt Simeon's attitude. I put those issues in the eternal context. I try to wait patiently, in trust and faith. That's what I call the Simeon Solution."

A mental light clicked on and I felt a surge of excitement at the verbalization of a concept I had struggled to express. My friend had put into simple, understandable, and scripturally based terms a process I had been working out for many years through personal experience: the Simeon Solution.

Simeon had indeed kept the faith, waiting most of his life in trusting patience before he beheld the long-awaited Messiah. Simeon was unwavering in his confidence that in due time the ancient prophecies would come to pass and the Lord's personal promise to him would be fulfilled.

Had doubting colleagues challenged the old priest before the momentous event occurred, he might well have answered in the following manner: "No, I haven't seen him—yet. I don't really know why. I don't know all the answers, at least not now, but I believe in the teachings of the prophets with all my heart. I know the scriptures are true."

Whenever I come face-to-face with a contemporary social issue, a practical problem, or even a doctrinal dilemma that bothers me and for which I have no immediate answer, I adopt what our dinner guest so aptly termed the Simeon Solution. Simeon's example gives me the patience and perspective to put unresolved issues temporarily aside. I don't ignore or forget them; I simply move them to a spiritual "back burner." I've learned I don't have to have immediate answers to all my concerns and questions.

With time and experience, I have gradually developed and expanded the concepts my friend and colleague first called the Simeon Solution. Plainly stated, these are:

Sounds simple? It is. It isn't fancy. It isn't sophisticated. It certainly isn't complicated. Some might even say it's too basic, but I don't think so. It really works. After all, the concepts are neither new nor revolutionary. In instructing his people, King Benjamin taught that salvation comes to him who puts his trust in the Lord, is diligent in keeping his commandments, and continues in the faith (see Mosiah 4:6).

I believe that every one of us has a real purpose and mission in life. Each of us is truly special, with a unique and important role to fill. The Lord is aware of us. He knows us intimately and individually. He's in charge. He can work miracles, both small and large, in our lives. When we feel anxious, uncertain, or even fearful, our knowledge that the Lord understands, cares, and will guide us—sometimes in ways we may recognize only in retrospect—can give us hope, reassurance, and the confidence to cope with adversity.

In this book I will share with you some of my experiences as they illustrate the peace of mind and spirit so aptly expressed by this wonderful concept: the Simeon Solution. I hope it will be as helpful to you as it has been to me.
