Anne Osborn Poelman, Simeon Solution: One Woman's Spiritual Odyssey ( 1994)

Chapter 2

A Spiritual Beacon

The big Delta jet, scheduled from Atlanta to Amsterdam, was already more than an hour late. It slowly inched its way up the long line of planes waiting for takeoff clearance from air traffic control. To the west, the wind picked up sharply in advance of a rapidly approaching storm. Just as our long overdue plane finally reached that magic "Number One for Takeoff" designation, the wind suddenly shifted and veered into an entirely new direction.

The plane's intercom crackled to life and the pilot announced with weary resignation, "Sorry, folks, but the control tower has just advised us we need to take off from the opposite end of the runway. So it's going to be a few more minutes."

As if in some elaborately choreographed ballet, the entire conga line of waiting planes wheeled and slowly lumbered down the taxi strip toward the other end of the runway. By the time we were repositioned a towering mass of thunderclouds was boiling furiously over the horizon, racing toward the airport. In a spectacular pyrotechnic display, lightning cracked from the dark underbelly of the clouds and licked the ground hungrily.

The storm struck the airport with short-lived but ferocious intensity. Rain, then hail rattled and bounced along the plane, caroming off the fuselage at crazy angles as the long-suffering passengers cringed inside the stuffy, crowded cabin. An inevitable additional delay ensued while the swiftly moving front passed directly overhead, moved east, and finally blew past the airport toward the distant sea.

The sky, already storm darkened, quickly faded and night fell with the sudden sharpness of a descending guillotine. At last cleared for takeoff, our fully loaded plane slowly accelerated down the runway and lifted off.

After a steep climb and a couple of gradual, lazy circles, we were finally on our way. My husband, Ron, and I were on the initial leg of a round-the-world trip during which I would teach and lecture to medical colleagues while Ron, as a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy, had goodwill meetings with various government officials in India, China, and Southeast Asia. En route at last, we heaved a relieved sigh, leaned our seats back, and settled in for the long overseas flight.

The plane thundered eastward into the foreshortened Atlantic night, occasionally shuddering as powerful gusts from the violent storm raked the fuselage. The seat belt sign remained illuminated most of the time as the captain tried first one altitude, then another, in a vain search for smoother air. Even the cabin crew, navigating the aisles on flight-hardened legs, lurched and staggered as the plane was tossed and buffeted by the unusually heavy winds.

The much delayed dinner, desiccated beyond recognition in the galley's warming ovens, was finally served. The dishes tinkled a monotonous tune as they too danced with the turbulence. We drank only water and ate little, sticking with our long held motto, "Don't waste good calories on bad food."

The meal's remnants were finally cleared and the in-flight movies began. The offerings were banal and uninteresting so we tried to read. Impossible. The plane's nearly constant vibrations in the unsettled air were making us a bit queasy. So we turned out the lights, rolled up in the undersized blankets, squirmed into as comfortable a position as possible, and tried to make the best of a difficult situation.

We dozed fitfully, changing position as aching muscles cried out for periodic relief. The plane finally outran the storm and the engines quieted into a dull, steady drone.

After a seemingly interminable few hours, the bleary-eyed passengers were aroused by another cockpit announcement: "Folks, due to unexpectedly strong tailwinds, we've made up quite a bit of time. We're now only about forty-five minutes behind schedule."

A weak cheer went up from the exhausted passengers. A few people clapped halfheartedly.

The captain continued, "However . . . "

An apprehensive silence settled over the cabin.

"I've got good news and bad news."

Ron and I turned to each other and said simultaneously, "Tell us the bad news first!"

As if in obliging reply, the captain declared, "I'll give you the bad news first. Schipol International Airport in Amsterdam is reporting very dense fog."

Loud groans erupted from irritated passengers who had been taxed beyond the limits of ordinary endurance.

The captain interrupted the chorus of complaints, as if he could hear the expressions of displeasure through the closed cockpit door. "Wait a minute! Now let me tell you the good news. As you know, Schipol is the major air hub for continental Europe. It's often fogged in. But," he added, "it's equipped with the world's most up-to-date electronic instrument-guided landing system. That means planes with advanced avionics such as ours can be landed there in virtually zero-zero conditions: in other words, no ceiling with an 'R.V.R.'—Runway Visibility Range—down to 300 feet or less."

A cautious hope began to dawn.

The captain continued. "This Instrument Landing System, I.L.S. for short, can just about land the plane itself. We lock onto the ground based homing signal and our three onboard autopilot computers pretty much do the rest. So we're going to go right straight in!"

He concluded, "Every other plane will be doing exactly the same thing, timed and spaced perfectly. We've done this hundreds of times. It's actually quite routine. In fact, you probably won't see the ground until we touch down and start taxiing toward the terminal."

Ron raised the window shade. Sure enough. In the thin, gray light of early dawn, all we could see was an impenetrable fog.

"Ertensoep," Ron muttered, recalling long dormant Dutch from his missionary days in the Netherlands.

"What?" I exclaimed.

"Pea soup," he replied. "It's as thick as pea soup."

I smiled a bit nervously. "I've never done this before."

"Well, neither have I. But, fortunately, the pilot has!"

We felt the telltale whine and thump as the landing gear was deployed, then sensed a subtle change in engine pitch as the plane descended on its final approach.

It was one of the gentlest landings I've ever experienced. The wheels brushed the runway, then firmly bit into the tarmac as the jet's reverse thrusters roared. The plane braked smoothly and coasted slowly up to the gate. No sweat.

"Good landing," I mumbled to Ron in grateful relief. We gathered our overcoats and carry-on bags. As we filed toward the hatch door, I spied the captain.

"Nice landing," I repeated.

He was casual, almost nonchalant. "Thanks. But the I.L.S. computers really did it all."

"Could you see?"

"Not a thing. Fog was too thick. In fact, you passengers could see before we could. The cockpit's still up in the soup when the rear wheels touch down."

I persisted. "But what about the landing beacon? Don't you have some sort of a screen or something so you can see it?"

"Oh, that. Sure," he replied matter-of-factly. "It's a computerized electronic display. Shows our position, proper flight path, and exactly where the center of the runway is. Autopilot flies the plane right down the thing."

Amazing. I shook my head in wonder as we hurried through the jetway in the customary mad dash for Passport Control and Baggage Claim.

Ron and I have discussed that experience many times. It was certainly unnerving to sit in the cramped, confined cabin during that long, stormy flight, then to land when we couldn't even see the ground.

Our apprehension clearly wasn't shared by the captain. He could see the beacon that was completely invisible to us. He trusted the accuracy of the I.L.S. system and the reliability of his onboard computers. "Integrity" is the interesting avionics term that means the pilot of an aircraft can be confident the guidance is valid. Though nearly flawless, even the most advanced precision landing systems don't have absolute "integrity." Nevertheless, the strong, ceaseless signals from the electronic beacon on the ground guided our plane more surely than the pilot's own visual sightings could ever have done.

So it is with the influence of the Holy Spirit. Its "integrity" is perfect. It will not fail us if we lock onto its homing beacon. We can indeed land safely, time after time after time.

As I look back on the critical periods in my life, I realize that the most important decisions I've ever made have been guided not by intellect or reason, but by some inner spiritual prompting. Even when I was a child, many years before I joined the Church, it was this way. For lack of a better term I once called that clear but indefinable internal beacon "instinct." I now recognize it for what it was: the promptings of the Holy Spirit. The Lord knew me, even if I didn't really know him.

Trusting implicitly in the light of Christ, using it as a spiritual "navigational aid" to move unafraid and with confidence through life's many foggy moments, is an inestimably precious spiritual gift. Though I didn't know it at the time, to maintain trust in the midst of ambiguity and uncertainty, to "stay the course," is an essential part of the Simeon Solution. It was the first part I learned: to use our spiritual landing beacons even if we can't see the land itself.

For centuries prior to the advent of modern navigational aids such as the I.L.S., the satellite based Global Positioning System, and L.O.R.A.N. (LOng Range Aid to Navigation), simple beacons were used to mark safe deepwater channels as well as denote natural hazards. Lighthouses were built at strategic locations and generations of faithful keepers maintained their lonely vigils so sea-weary sailors could chart their positions.

Many of those old lighthouses still exist today. Although some have been abandoned or transformed into museums, others still serve their time-honored duty. Their beacons sweep ceaselessly, piercing night and fog to guide marine traffic.

The Holy Spirit is likewise a beacon. Its light can penetrate the densest, most perilous fog. Through its promptings we can be warned of life's shoals and reefs, those temptations that would lure us into dangerous waters. The Holy Ghost stands a tireless sentinel to show us the way to personal spiritual safety.

Once we have felt the sure inner beacon of the Holy Ghost and have recognized that still, small voice, we need to relax, trust those spiritual instincts, and rely on the celestial guidance system. It will bring us safely and surely home.

But, you might well ask, what if someone doesn't have that particular gift, the gift of inner spiritual certitude?

When we were flying through the dense fog towards Schipol Airport, we certainly couldn't see the I.L.S. beacon that was guiding us toward a soft, safe landing. But the captain could. He could see it on the screen, as plain as anything.

Next time I won't worry. I'll trust the pilot. He knows, and that's enough for me. In fact, the scriptures clearly tell us that, in the absence of our own personal knowledge and experience, to believe on the words of those who do know and see clearly is in itself a spiritual gift (see D&C 46:11-14).

Now let's suppose for a moment that you do have that inner spiritual beacon. You have felt the strength of its powerful signal. It has guided and comforted you on more than one occasion. What if all of a sudden, right in the middle of some horrifically important, highly critical time in your life, just at the time you need it most, it shuts off! Blank screen. No signal.

You pray in desperation, pleading for guidance. Nothing. Cosmic silence. What do you do? Panic? Abandon your prayers in disillusionment? Of course not. First of all, the signal itself—that is, the prompting of the Holy Ghost—never shuts off although our own spiritual receptors, our personal "electronic display screens," may at times become temporarily disconnected.

What should we do? If our spiritual receptors are dysfunctional because of unresolved transgression, the answer is obvious and the pathway to repentance clearly marked. However, the question becomes even more poignant when we're living the gospel as best we can, keeping the commandments, and faithfully serving the Lord. If the heavens are strangely silent and our righteous prayers seem to go unanswered, what then?

What would that airline captain have done if the I.L.S. system had suddenly, inexplicably shut down when the plane was on final approach? Crash in the fog? Fortunately, that's highly unlikely.

I recently asked an experienced pilot what might happen in such a circumstance. "Well," he replied, "The routine procedure would be to abort the landing and perform what we call a 'go-around.' We put the plane in a steep emergency climb and circle around for another attempt."

That makes sense. Give it some time, circle around once or twice to get your bearings, and then try again.

"Are there other options?" I persisted. "Like maybe take the last known instrument readings and compute the landing approach from that?"

He grinned. "That's not exactly the recommended first choice! Everything's happening so fast. But we do have what we call the 'scoreboard,' which shows the last available information. You could probably do it from that if you absolutely had to."

That backup scenario is also intriguing: The pilot quickly takes the last clear reading from the system before it shut down, extrapolates the coordinates from there, and stays the course.

One of life's universal, most important mortal experiences is learning to live by faith and "fly in the fog." As a new convert to the Church, I was deeply moved by the account of Lehi's dream in the Book of Mormon (see 1 Nephi 8:1-33). I imagined myself as one of the "numberless concourses of people" who were pressing forward, striving valiantly first to find, then stay on the path that led to the tree of life. I could almost feel their growing alarm and ensuing despair as an "exceedingly great mist of darkness" arose and completely enveloped them.

Some became confused and were overcome by the dense, vaporous darkness. Many stumbled and wandered off the narrow path, losing their way. I hoped I wouldn't be one of that unfortunate group.

Others, surrounded by the same seemingly impenetrable fog, caught hold of an iron rod that ran along the path. Using the rod as a guide, they continued to press their way forward through the darkness "even until they did come forth and partake of the fruit of the tree."

However, some who had tasted the fruit then became distracted by the scornful scoffing of onlookers. Ashamed, they turned away and they too became lost. I winced and fervently hoped I wouldn't be one of that group either.

The final group, also blinded by the dark mists but clinging to the rod that guided the way, pressed forward to reach the tree. Refusing to become distracted, and ignoring the taunts of others, they fell down in gratitude as they reached their objective and thankfully partook of the fruit. I vowed I'd try to become part of that faithful group.

There surely will be times in each of our lives when we can't see the pathway, when everything around us feels confused and uncertain. We will indeed be surrounded by our own personal "mists of darkness." During those challenging, unsettling times, it is essential to navigate by faith, relying on the guidance of the Holy Ghost. If in times of crisis you can't sense the celestial homing beacon, recall the last time you felt that inspiration and, using that experience as a spiritual "marker buoy," extrapolate your course from there.

Once you've set your own course, ask the Lord for reassurance that you're headed in the right direction. The peace, serenity, and quiet confidence that washes over us when we're on the right "flight path" is in itself an answer to heartfelt prayer.

The Lord sometimes leaves us to struggle a bit, learning to work out the answers to our dilemmas ourselves. "But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right" (D&C 9:8; italics added).

Finally, personal revelation is not constant. As Elder Dallin H. Oaks has said, "We believe in continuing revelation, not continuous revelation. We are often left to work out problems, without the dictation or specific direction of the Spirit. That is part of the experience we must have in mortality" (Teaching by the Spirit, 1994 New Mission Presidents' Seminar).

I suspect that Simeon's revelation that he would actually behold the Savior may have come to him only once. Then he apparently spent a lifetime in trust, believing and staying the course extrapolated from the glorious but long-ago experience. Following Simeon's simple but effective example can bring peace and fulfillment into our lives.
