Anne Osborn Poelman, Simeon Solution: One Woman's Spiritual Odyssey ( 1994)

Chapter 3

Roots

For better or worse, our adult selves often strongly reflect our origins and childhood experiences. My own roots are in Culver, Indiana, one of the thousands of small towns that dot the rural American landscape.

Growing up was a sometimes delightful, often painful process that in my case was accentuated by our small community's social hierarchy. Our town was then—and remains to this day—a study in stark contrasts. It is rescued from Midwestern ordinariness by a beautiful nearby lake and a renowned private secondary school, Culver Military Academy.

Since the early 1900s, Lake Maxinkuckee has been a favorite summer vacation spot for monied families and wealthy suburbanites from Chicago, Detroit, Fort Wayne, and Indianapolis. Many of those families had for generations sent their sons (and, much more recently, their daughters) to the Academy.

Socially, Culver was divided into five distinct entities. At the pinnacle were the elite, "old money" Lake families. Next, clinging a bit precariously to the social apex firmly occupied by those blue-blooded families, were the "new rich." These were big-city lawyers, stockbrokers, medical specialists, and investment bankers whose own skills and productivity had earned them the rewards and social perquisites of a Lakeside weekend retreat. They built large, ostentatious new homes next to the rambling, slightly tatty but respectably chic "cottages" of the Old Families.

Next on the social totem were the Academy faculty, a number of whom had Ph.D. or master's degrees from Ivy League schools. Salaries were low but the prestige accorded faculty members made up for their relatively penurious circumstances.

Below the Academy faculty were the native townspeople, unimaginatively nicknamed "Townies." Most were hardworking, ordinary folks who provided essential services to the Academy and Lake populace: stuff like plumbing, laundry and dry cleaning, and secretarial services. Others were small businessmen, proprietors of struggling enterprises with hopeful names such as "The Don Trone Shoppe" and "Quality Grocers."

At the very bottom of Culver society were the farmers. Hardy, fiercely independent folk with sunburned, weathered faces, they lived outside the town at addresses like R.R. (for "Rural Route") #2 and County Road 17. Their habitual dress, faded and worn denim overalls called "Can't Bust 'Ems" (for the logo embossed on their copper buttons), would decades later be considered quite chic. But in those days they were decidedly unfashionable—especially as they often smelled faintly of the morning's chores!

I was a Townie. Translated, that meant the next-to-bottom rung of the social ladder. Fitting this all together reminds me of a cartoon I once saw of two congressmen standing outside the Capitol Building in Washington. One is saying to the other, "No, I'm not a member of the In Group. But the Out Group has an In Group, and I'm a member of that!"

In fact, I wasn't even in the In Group of the Out Group (i.e., the Townies). Growing up, I was definitely a tomboy. I climbed trees and played basketball with the boys. I was also big. Nearly five feet ten inches tall by the time I reached junior high school, I was usually the biggest kid in my class. Not the biggest girl—the biggest kid!

I was plain. And worst of all, I was smart. That was the real social kiss of death. I was always chosen first for athletic games but was dead last on the unwritten but immutable date-bait rankings. Sure, I was named "Most Likely to Succeed" in the yearbook. True, my academic achievements were occasionally written up in the town's tiny weekly newspaper, the Culver Citizen. But I was never mentioned in the school's social columns.

All of us are, to a greater or lesser degree, haunted by memories of failure. I'm sometimes asked, "Did you ever fail at anything?" The answer is a definite yes. When I flat-out flunked a course in biostatistics during medical school, I was left with some rueful embarrassment but no residual psychic scars. By contrast, the result of a hopeful but misguided attempt at social success remains vividly etched in my memory.

As a child I wanted absolutely more than anything in the world to be a cheerleader. I yearned for the automatic prestige and virtually guaranteed social acceptance that accompanied membership in that elite group. So in tenth grade I decided to try out for the junior varsity ("jayvee") squad. There were only sixteen girls in our entire class. Eight were trying out for the jayvee squad; four would make it.

The cheerleader selection committee was composed of two teachers and all the boys on the jayvee basketball team. Confident of their own status (almost by definition, "athlete" seemed to mean "cool"), the boys expressed their superiority in the kind of mocking teenage cruelty that reached its zenith during the annual cheerleader tryouts.

The hopeful girls first lined up for physical inspection as the initial groupings were customarily made according to height and appearance. I was at least four inches taller than the next-biggest girl. Strike one.

Mixing and matching candidates, the committee next asked various combinations to lead practice cheers. The jayvee basketball team formed a makeshift "pep club." They were supposed to chant loudly as the girls pranced around on the gym floor. When my turn finally came, they didn't yell. They didn't chant. They snickered. I do have to admit that I didn't have the requisite crispness and smartness to my movements. I was undeniably enthusiastic but a bit awkward. Strike two.

I later learned that some of the girls always fudged the rules by practicing together prior to tryouts so they would look especially sharp. I hadn't been invited to those private rehearsals. Strike three.

One by one, the Chosen were motioned out of the lineup. As they shrieked with joy, the rest of us stood forlornly in the background and then silently filed out of the gymnasium. As I passed, one of the team members (who I had secretly always wished would ask me for a date but who of course never did) looked directly at me and scornfully laughed out loud.

I was humiliated. I felt ugly, inadequate, and undesirable. More than thirty years later, that memory is still incredibly vivid. The whole cheerleading experience severely damaged my self-esteem and left feelings that I would struggle with for years. It inflicted a wound that would heal only with the help of the gospel perspective.

A few years ago I saw the same basketball player at a high school reunion. His athletic physique and teenage good looks had eroded considerably with age. I'm ashamed to admit it, but I felt a rush of secret satisfaction! I was only fifteen when I made my failed try for the cheerleading squad; my girlish humiliation was, I think, understandable. But my uncharitable reaction as a grown woman was truly immature. I hadn't yet learned the patience and forbearance and their by-product of forgiveness that are part of the Simeon Solution.

During a more recent visit to my hometown, I decided to stroll by the old school. The building itself had been demolished years before. Several school districts, including our own Union Township, had been consolidated into a spanking new, modern campus constructed on the edge of town. Only the old gymnasium remained, now in use as part of the elementary school complex.

It was early summer and school was out. Surprised at my sudden diffidence, I timidly tried the gym door. It clicked open. I stepped inside and thirty-five years instantaneously vanished. I stood there overwhelmed by a flood of memories.

The silence was deafening. Sunlight filtered through the high, opaque windows. Dust motes twinkled, then hung motionless, suspended in the flat, stale air.

At first I could scarcely believe it was the same place. I remembered it as a huge, cavernous auditorium. It wasn't.

It's so small! I thought, astonished.

Then, It seems so insignificant.

Why did something so minor seem like such a big deal? I asked myself.

The answer came from deep inside my soul. Then I hadn't known who I really was. I sought approval and validation from external sources. Now, thirty-five years later, I do indeed know who I am, what I believe, what I stand for.

Who am I? A Latter-day Saint woman with a deep, abiding testimony of the gospel. I'm a wife, the eternal companion of my beloved husband and best friend. I'm a doctor and a healer. All three roles complement and enhance each other.

What do I believe? It's really quite simple and straightforward:

Those principles form the bedrock foundation of my belief. They are sufficient. To be sure, our religion involves more complex concepts and doctrinal subtleties. But by focusing on the fundamentals I have become—and remain—firmly rooted and grounded in the faith. Moreover, I feel comfortable and confident in that faith.

Do I know all the answers to all my questions? Certainly not! But that really doesn't concern me. I refuse to be distracted by peripheral issues and the doctrinal sidebars that some would use to weaken our testimonies of the gospel. To those I apply the Simeon Solution: I have full trust that if and when the answers come, they will be in perfect harmony with what I already know. And what I know is, quite simply, that the gospel is true. There is great peace and serenity in that very simplicity.

So, with those basic concepts firmly embedded in my soul, I made one last pilgrimage on that return visit to my old hometown.

A couple of years before those traumatic cheerleader tryouts, I had borrowed my brother's pocketknife and climbed a towering, smooth-barked Indiana sycamore. There, in a secret childhood ritual never shared with anyone else, I had carved a heart with my initials and the basketball player's.

I found that old tree once more. I hesitated, then with some misgivings climbed its dizzying heights and searched. Yes. The roughly carved heart was there, faint but still visible. And I realized with a surge of gratitude that though the scar in the tree remained, the wounds in my own heart and psyche had healed.
