Anne Osborn Poelman, Simeon Solution: One Woman's Spiritual Odyssey ( 1994)

Chapter 4

Ugly Duckling

Recently several of my women colleagues and I were discussing the painful rites and rituals of teenage passage. I ruefully recounted the cheerleading episode, noting how only time, distance, and religious perspective had helped heal the wounds inflicted by that experience.

Mary, a strikingly handsome woman now in her early forties, waited until I concluded and then flatly stated, "When I was growing up I was ugly too."

We all chimed in, "No, you weren't ugly. You just thought you were ugly!"

"No," she corrected, "I really was ugly."

"Did you wear glasses?" another colleague asked, as if that explained everything.

"Yes. They were thick, pointy ones that turned up on the sides and had rhinestone frames. I had mousey brown hair. And on top of everything else I wore braces on my teeth and had pimples!"

"Don't you feel attractive now? You really are beautiful," I observed as the others nodded emphatic agreement.

"No. And I don't think I ever will."

Another woman present in that gathering is a brilliant physician and highly successful businesswoman. She always dresses superbly and has a sparkling personality.

"Peggy," I mused, "you look like what I wanted to be when I was growing up. You know: You're blonde. You're petite. You're cute. When we had our 'fifties party several years ago you could still fit into your poodle skirt!"

"It wasn't like what you think at all," she replied. "The boys called me Frigid Fritsche. It was awful."

We were astonished. "Why?"

Peggy grew serious. "If you're blonde, petite, and cute, the boys assume you're good for only one thing."

We all nodded knowingly.

"And when you don't 'put out,'" she continued, "you're not good for anything. They taunted me."

That was a revelation to me. How could being cute possibly be a burden? Indeed it can be, and a heavy one at that. Hard to believe though it is, perhaps being pretty while you're growing up is in some ways even more difficult than being plain. The unspoken assumption seems to be that anyone who is truly attractive can't really have brains—that would be too unfair, wouldn't it!

My younger sister, Lucy, was cute too. She had dates—lots of them. Miracle of miracles, she even dated Academy boys! She was a cheerleader. She was a frequent item in the school paper gossip columns. She was popular. I envied her.

Lucy has told me she was halfway through medical school before she really realized she also had brains. As a child she felt strongly reinforced by friends and family for being cute, not smart. I didn't know how she really felt until many years later.

As adults Lucy and I have become very close friends and colleagues as well as sisters. One evening we were talking about self-image and growing up. In a burst of candor I exclaimed, "Lucy, when we were growing up you made me feel ugly, ugly, UGLY!"

She replied heatedly, "Annie, when we were growing up you made me feel stupid, stupid, STUPID!"

I stared at her dumbfounded. For a moment neither of us said a word. Then we both burst into tears and hugged each other.

"Lucy, you're definitely not stupid!"

"Annie, you're really beautiful!"

My sister and I helped each other realize we really were okay. Lucy is now a nationally recognized professor of pediatrics, has been named to a number of high-level government advisory councils and committees, presently serves as associate vice president for health sciences at the University of Utah, and has been nominated for the presidency of a major university in the Midwest.

Lucy, dumb? Hardly! Yet despite her notable professional successes, I suspect somewhere deep inside her still dwells the teenage girl who felt valued for beauty and whose brains were largely unrecognized. I do know that for many years way down inside me was the insecure, plain, small-town girl who felt like an ugly duckling.

Such feelings seem, in varying degrees, to be almost universal. We may not all feel physically unattractive; some may feel dumb, inadequate, or just plain ordinary. Others, burdened by guilt or unresolved transgression, may feel spiritually disfigured.

Perhaps you or one of your children was the only one not invited to a popular classmate's birthday party. Perhaps you were always the last one chosen in playground games. Or maybe you overheard a whispered comment that undermined your self-image. Seemingly secure people often suffer feelings of inadequacy and unacceptability—even cheerleaders and athletes!

Men often feel that way, too. My husband, Ron, by anyone's standards a handsome, distinguished-looking man (I admit I'm prejudiced, but I have lots of independent verification of this), grew up in a family so poor they didn't live on the "wrong side" of the railroad tracks, they literally lived in between two sets of tracks!

Ron's father, Hendrik, the son of working-class immigrants, had to leave home in order to attend high school. Hendrik's father regarded education beyond the legally mandated eighth grade as an unnecessary indulgence. Hendrik finished high school but college was a dream beyond hope.

Despite his humble origins, Hendrik Poelman served many years as a bishop and in a stake presidency. His gentle and loving nature, innate spirituality, and gift of discernment blessed the lives of countless Latter-day Saints. I never knew Henry Poelman; he died many years before Ron and I were married. I'm sure I would have liked him. Because he was so accepting of others, I think he would have liked me too.

When Ron was still in grade school, Hendrik Poelman moved his young family into a one bedroom home in central Salt Lake City. It was barely inside the boundaries of the East High School district, an area that encompassed the comfortable, upper middle class neighborhoods surrounding the University of Utah. Most East High graduates went on to college; many received advanced degrees.

Although he couldn't afford to send his own children to the University, Hendrik Poelman cherished the ideal of higher education. He wanted his family to associate with people who valued education and self-improvement.

The Poelman home was a humble one. The parents and baby occupied the sole bedroom; the three older boys slept on a screened-in porch. As Ron puts it, "In the summertime it was adventuresome; in the winter it was character building!" By modern standards, the family income was well below the poverty line. No time or money was available for athletics or after-school activities.

Ron went to work at age ten selling magazine subscriptions. By age twelve he had a paper route. At fourteen he got a job at the old Dunford Bakery. Mondays through Fridays, Ron arose at three A.M., worked for four hours, then returned home and dressed for school. After school he worked at paper routes and a variety of miscellaneous jobs. Ron recalls pushing his bicycle heavily laden with magazines up the long hill past East High, his eyes lowered in hopes that the football players and cheerleaders wouldn't notice him.

Ron was tall and darkly handsome. Trust me; I've seen his high school yearbooks! He was an honor student, bright and hungry for knowledge. But he never felt popular. He was self-conscious, acutely aware of his serviceable but decidedly unfashionable hand-me-down clothes.

Hmmmm. Ronald Poelman, ugly duckling?

Before our marriage, I was the University's faculty adviser to Mortar Board, the national honorary society for student leaders (read: Big Women on Campus). When I told the girls Ron and I were engaged, they were excited for me and enthralled with our whirlwind romance. Several of them exclaimed, "My mother went to school with Elder Poelman and has talked about him for years! She thought he was a real dreamboat. But he never ever asked her out."

I told Ron. He was completely surprised. "Me?" he exclaimed. "Why didn't they ever tell me!"

Case in point: The handsomest of all the General Authorities (at least to me) clearly felt like an ugly duckling.

I then asked him, "How do you feel now, after all these years?"

"It's hard to describe. In some respects I still don't feel particularly attractive. But in others, I feel like the fairy-tale ugly duckling that grew up into a swan."

"Why?"

He answered simply, "Because you love me. And because I know my Brethren do too."

Ugly duckling images may persist long past childhood, their subliminal whispers still a potent influence on adult self-image. We may never completely rid ourselves of the insecurities generated by those ancient feelings, but we can put aside old hurts and limit their detrimental effects on our current behavior.

How can we mute the ability of such powerful memories to wound anew? One way is by placing them in eternal perspective. In retrospect, my failure to make the jayvee cheerleading squad seems almost laughably insignificant and my emotional reaction amazingly immature. The Adult Annie says, with a mental shrug, "No big deal, really."

The Teenage Annie protests, "But at the time, it seemed like a monumental catastrophe!"

The operative word here is seemed. In his introduction to The Story of Philosophy, historian Will Durant wrote: "So much of our lives is meaningless, a self-cancelling vacillation and futility; we strive with the chaos about us and within; but we would believe all the while that there is something vital and significant in us, could we but decipher our own souls. We want to understand. . . . We want to seize the value and perspective of passing things, and so to pull ourselves up out of the maelstrom of daily circumstance. We want to know that the little things are little, and the big things big, before it is too late; we want to see things now as they will seem forever—'in the light of eternity'" (Garden City, New York: Garden City Publishing, 1943, p. 1; italics added).

How can we know which things are inconsequential and which are truly important? The prophet Jacob answered that question succinctly: "The Spirit speaketh the truth and lieth not. Wherefore, it speaketh of things as they really are, and of things as they really will be; wherefore, these things are manifested unto us plainly, for the salvation of our souls" (Jacob 4:13; italics added).

If we are spiritually sensitive, we can know that the little things are indeed little and the big things are big. Part of the Simeon Solution is learning to put our experiences and choices into eternal perspective. Childhood memories, although not erased, no longer loom so large.

The converse is also true. Many dilemmas that perplex and discourage us today may, with the wisdom of perspective, seem comparatively insignificant tomorrow. Today's concerns often evaporate when viewed with hard-won future maturity.

One way to overcome negative experiences (from childhood or adulthood) is to seek surroundings and circumstances that encourage and uplift rather than undermine and destroy. For example, I always feel terrific after I've taught our ward's Gospel Doctrine class. I work hard to make the lessons both informative and inspiring; in turn the class members, most of whom are older and more experienced than I am, express their appreciation and enthusiasm for my efforts and their affection for me personally.

Another great, healing step is to love and serve others. If we strive to enhance the self-image of others rather than focus intently on our own inward esteem, we will surely find a spiritual "balm of Gilead."

As we lift and encourage others, we ourselves are also lifted. As we seek to build others through selfless service, we in turn are built. "Wherefore, he that preacheth and he that receiveth, understand one another, and both are edified and rejoice together" (D&C 50:22). As we edify each other, our souls soar in mutual rejoicing.

When suffering personally, if we notice the suffering of others and succor them, we in turn are succored by the Savior.

Even the Savior, the Creator and Redeemer of the world, likely experienced "ugly duckling" feelings. After all, the scriptures tell us that he had "no beauty that we should desire him" (Isaiah 53:2) and that he would actually experience the feeling of our own human infirmities: "For we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin" (Hebrews 4:15). And "He will take upon him their infirmities, that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities" (Alma 7:12).

He who was despised, mocked, and rejected of men overcame the bonds of death and rose triumphant to become Lord of lords and King of kings, the Savior and Redeemer of the World, our teacher, exemplar, and friend. Whenever we feel lonely, discouraged, or even depressed, there is surely One who understands.

The Savior himself knows what we know, has experienced what we experience, and indeed feels what we feel. Knowing that fact can comfort us and give us hope, enabling us to put aside old hurts and look to the future with confidence. Confident and assured in the Savior's love, we can remain focused, rooted, and grounded in the gospel fundamentals. If we focus on the fundamentals and keep the Lord's commandments, we will be prepared to hear and heed the promptings of the Spirit as the Lord guides and directs us. Then miracles can happen in our lives.
