Anne Osborn Poelman, Simeon Solution: One Woman's Spiritual Odyssey ( 1994)

Chapter 5

Belonging

In the popular musical West Side Story, ill-fated lovers make plans to escape from their conflict-filled environment to a place of peace and safety. The poignant song they sing, "There's a Place for Us," expresses the deep yearning we all feel to find a place where we can truly be accepted, where we really belong.

After the cheerleading debacle, the door I had hoped would open into the wonderful world of social acceptance was summarily slammed shut. Once the initial humiliation wore off a bit, I decided to focus on my strengths instead of wistfully wishing for attributes (namely cuteness and popularity) that I didn't possess. I redoubled my efforts in one arena where I knew I might truly excel: using intelligence.

It wasn't easy. As was true of many rural towns, the Culver public schools combined kindergarten through twelfth grade. Our tiny high school was housed in an antiquated building with woefully inadequate facilities. Tax revenues were low and budgets were tight.

In those days all the children of similar age were in the same class. There were no advanced placement courses and each class plodded along at a snail-like pace, only as fast as the slowest student could manage.

Mom and Dad augmented our uneven education with frequent trips to Chicago and its wonderful public museums, designed summer reading projects for us, and helped me build a rudimentary laboratory in our family's single bathroom. The core of my laboratory was an old chemistry set purchased from a mail-order catalog and some discarded glassware scavenged from high school science classes. It was spartan but I was very proud of it.

The little bathroom laboratory hummed with activity. I built a crude Wilson cloud chamber to look for subatomic ("cosmic") particles, but my real love was the biological sciences.

It was a wonderful time to be a science nut. The late 1950s and early 1960s have accurately been called the golden age of biochemistry. Watson and Crick deciphered the structure of deoxyribonucleic acid, the double helix molecule that holds the entire human genetic code in a space far smaller than the head of a pin. "DNA" became a household word as discoveries tumbled forth from laboratories in Boston, Bethesda, and Cambridge, England. I was entranced by the majesty, mystery, and elegant simplicity of the fabulous molecule.

Time magazine and more serious, semiprofessional publications like Scientific American ran feature articles on the human body and its intricately choreographed Mardi Gras of cells. Eager to learn everything I could, I devoured every available magazine and scoured the local public library for more. After I quickly exhausted more conventional sources, I discovered a course catalogue from Purdue University. It was a couple of years out of date but sure enough, a course on nucleic acids was listed under the biochemistry department! Too innocent to know from its triple digit course number that it was a graduate seminar meant for Ph.D. students only and that unsolicited inquiries are sometimes ignored, I wrote to the professor who taught the course. I told him of my interest in the subject, explained the limited resources available to a small-town high school student, and asked for more information than could be found in the magazines available in local libraries.

To my delight—and the professor's credit—he responded to the letter by sending me a substantial packet of reading materials. A warm correspondence ensued and he invited me to visit his campus laboratory. I was thrilled!

There was only one minor problem. The university was eighty miles away. I was only sixteen years old and had just received my driver's license. To this day I still can't believe my parents actually did it, but they let me skip school and drive the family station wagon to Purdue's main campus in West Lafayette, Indiana. Perhaps they knew instinctively how important this opportunity was to me.

I hardly slept the night before the trip and woke long before dawn. My father gave me directions (which turned out to be reasonably good but not perfect, resulting in an unplanned detour or two) and, in case I stayed late, arranged an overnight room for me in the Student Union.

Professor Axelrod was waiting when I arrived. He welcomed me enthusiastically and spent the entire day showing me around the Life Sciences complex. He treated me like visiting royalty! As we relaxed in his office at the end of that long but exhilarating day, I felt bold enough to ask him a pointed question. "Dr. Axelrod," I said, "you've just spent an entire day with me. You don't even teach undergraduates, only advanced graduate students. Why would you spend so much time with a high school student who knows very little about biochemistry?"

He grew quiet and contemplative, leaning back in his chair with a faraway expression. A smile flickered across his face at some distant memory.

I waited.

"Well, Anne," he finally replied, "I guess it's because I feel an individual can only discover science once. We experience the thrill of that discovery just once. The only way anyone can ever recapture those feelings is by helping someone else, like an Anne Osborn, find the same thing."

I've never forgotten his words. How true! And it doesn't matter what that shared experience is. It can be something as simple as teaching a child to swim or ride a bicycle without training wheels. Or it can be as profound and eternally significant as sharing the gospel with someone who hears the marvelous message of the restored Church for the very first time.

I spent the next summer on the Purdue University campus as one of eighty high school students in a program sponsored by the National Science Foundation designed to interest young people in scientific research. Forty of us were at Purdue studying biological sciences; another forty were at Massachusetts Institute of Technology studying physical sciences and mathematics.

It was tough. Everyone was bright, competitive, and extremely hardworking. We spent the mornings in classes taught by full professors who were experts in their fields. In the afternoons each student worked in a laboratory doing a basic research project. I did experiments in Dr. Axelrod's laboratory. Three evenings a week we had seminars. The rest of the time—what there was of it—we had free for study and social activities.

To my astonishment, I actually was one of the more popular girls. Imagine that! I had dates galore. I discovered you don't have to be a cheerleader to be socially successful. Just find a group of people who share your goals, interests, and, most importantly, strong, positive values. Among my fellow NSF students brains were admired, not scorned. Good grades were a mark of achievement. Achievement was valued, not denigrated.

The summer science school was one of the watershed events in my life. For perhaps the very first time I felt good about who I was, appreciated and accepted for the real me. I also began to have an inkling—just a glimpse, mind you, not yet a really strong sense—of how I might use the gifts I did have (not the ones I wished for but didn't possess) to serve others.

We all need to learn who we are and where we belong. But that personal revelation may dawn gradually, evolving over many years and through varied experiences.

I have asked Ron when he first felt that he was no longer an outsider, that he truly belonged. His answer was immediate and simple: "On my mission."

"Why then?"

"Because the other elders had the same goals and values I did. To learn. To serve. To be faithful. Those things weren't regarded as goody-goody, they were just simply good."

I understood. After all these years, those missionaries still get together. They really enjoy each other's company. I've met many of them and they are as disparate a group as I can imagine. Some are city folks. Others come from rural areas. Their occupations vary from skilled manual labor to academic and professional pursuits. They cover the whole political spectrum. But three things bind them undeniably together: their love for each other, their knowledge that the gospel is true, and their shared commitment to the Church.

Although it is undeniably painful to feel like an outsider, an "ugly duckling," the glorious joy of belonging can lift you far beyond that pain. If you haven't found the comfort and satisfaction of acceptance, be patient. There are people like you out there somewhere—especially in the Church.
