Anne Osborn Poelman, Simeon Solution: One Woman's Spiritual Odyssey ( 1994)

Chapter 6

The Quest Begins

Small rural towns are filled with churches. Culver, my hometown, had at least a dozen different varieties: Methodist, Lutheran, Evangelical United Brethren, Episcopalian (very "high church," theologically neutral, and thus appropriate for the Academy students and faculty), and, of course, Roman Catholic.

The Osborns were all staunch Methodists. My mother chaired the building committee for the new church, a lovely Williamsburg colonial-style structure. My father was the lay leader. They were steadfast, loyal pillars of the church.

I loved the Culver Methodist church. It was homey, warm, and comfortably, predictably familiar. Yet I somehow sensed something was missing, although I wasn't sure what it was. I don't know whether Mom and Dad knew then how I felt. I suspect maybe they did but we didn't discuss it.

In the long-standing Protestant tradition, ministers came and went every four or five years or so. Some were wonderful, truly Christlike men. Others weren't particularly exemplary. One, a troubled and angry man who openly and publicly doubted the divinity of Jesus Christ, eventually left the ministry to become a clinical psychologist.

Church attendance—and therefore the church's financial fortunes—waxed and waned according to the minister's popularity. Faithful members (like my parents) attended regardless of who occupied the pulpit. Others, disliking the sermons or personal style of a particular minister, would leave in a huff and refuse to attend meetings or contribute until a new pastor arrived.

My brother, sister, and I went to Sunday School each week. Religion both fascinated and unsettled me. Filled with some vague, indefinable longing as well as intense curiosity about all beliefs, I read every book on religion in the town library. I peppered our minister and the Sunday School teachers with incessant, pointed questions. Most of the time they couldn't answer them; they were usually at a loss to explain what I thought were fundamental inconsistencies in the accepted dogma.

To my parents' distress, I eventually struck up a friendship with the local Catholic priest. We spent long hours discussing and arguing theology. Had Mom or Dad asked, I could have told them the major reason was because Father Lenk was the best educated and most knowledgeable of all the local clergy. But he didn't have the answers I sought either.

When I finally left our small town for far-off California to attend Stanford University, I was determined to continue my odyssey, my search for some as yet undefined personal Holy Grail. I visited a number of churches and briefly joined the popular First Methodist Church of Palo Alto.

I became increasingly dissatisfied with the thin theological soup served up each Sunday in the local churches. As was true of many liberal mainstream Protestant denominations in the 'sixties, the "God is dead" (or if not dead, at least irrelevant) refrain drowned out songs of faith while the major pulpit messages seemed to center around the popular cause of the week. One week it was the Vietnam War. Another time it was environmental concerns. On still other occasions some social cause occupied center stage. Although I very much enjoyed the personal associations with other members, I eventually gave up and stopped going to church altogether.

During the remainder of my undergraduate days at Stanford and my Ph.D. program at Harvard, I attended church only when I returned to Culver, largely out of courtesy to my parents and the desire to see our longtime friends and neighbors.

Except for the famed Tabernacle Choir I had heard little about the Mormons. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints received only a little space in one of my favorite childhood references, Life magazine's book on The World's Great Religions. Brigham Young, the "Great Colonizer," was briefly mentioned in our high school history text. Joseph Smith's name never even appeared.

I had visited lots of different churches but certainly had no intention of ever visiting the Mormon church. My sole encounter with the Mormons had been during a cross-country automobile trip when my sister and I stopped overnight in Salt Lake City on our way to California. During a hurried, self-guided tour of Temple Square just prior to its evening closing, I had formed two distinctly amusing but quite erroneous impressions of the Mormons: They revered golden sea gulls and worshipped somebody named Joseph Smith!

I do remember one odd thing about that brief first encounter with the Mormons. A large crowd had gathered in the Assembly Hall on Temple Square for some sort of meeting. It was a balmy autumn evening so my sister and I stood outside the door and peeked in. One by one a number of young people—even younger than we were—stood confident and unafraid in front of the congregation. With obvious emotion, each spoke of his feelings about his faith. The word testimony was mentioned frequently, something like, "I know the Church is true." Lots about Jesus Christ.

I felt vaguely disturbed. Something was definitely happening there. I didn't know what it was and it bothered me.

Despite the earnestness of the speakers, there seemed to be a certain repetitiveness in what they were saying. After a while we left. In the press of beginning the autumn quarter at Stanford, I soon forgot about the experience.

Senior year was filled with coursework, a time-consuming honors research project, and application to graduate schools. Religion became the farthest thing from my mind. In the era of the Berkeley free speech movement and the nascent Vietnam War protests, religion was decidedly unfashionable anyway. Liberation theology was the only socially acceptable theology in the student lexicon.

After graduating from Stanford I spent a year in the psychology Ph.D. program at Harvard University. My doctoral research project was at Massachusetts General Hospital. One day in late autumn I was crossing from the Charles Street subway station toward the hospital. It suddenly struck me, as clearly as if I'd heard it spoken aloud, that I was in the wrong place doing the wrong thing.

I was so startled at the thought that I stopped abruptly and stood immobilized. The thought came to me: I should go to medical school. And at only one place—back at Stanford.

I had no idea what was happening. How could I know, with such absolute, undeniable certainty, that it was the right thing to do? It wasn't rational. It wasn't logical. It just felt right.

I'd never even considered medical school. I regarded the Stanford premeds as a bunch of ego-driven, hypercompetitive, narrowly focused prima donnas. Me? One of them?

I first called my parents. I didn't know much about medical school except that it was long, hard, and very expensive. I knew I would lose my graduate school fellowships and would need financial support from the family.

Once my parents recovered from their initial shock at the surprise announcement, Dad gulped and said quietly, "Well, Annie. That's quite a change. But we're behind you one hundred percent. I've always told you we would provide as much education as you wanted and needed."

Bless him. He trusted me. And I trusted my instincts.

Although I didn't recognize it until many years later, what I had experienced and called "instinct" was really the prompting of the Spirit. The Lord was aware of me even if I wasn't aware of him.

I telephoned my senior thesis adviser at Stanford and told him of my proposed change in career plans. He was surprised but said he'd see what he could do. For starters, he promised to speak with the Dean of Admissions in the medical school.

The adviser returned my call the next day. "I spoke with the Dean and he looked at your academic transcript. You haven't taken all the prerequisites."

"No," I admitted.

"You haven't taken the MCAT (Medical College Admissions Test) either."

"No, but I did pretty well on the Graduate Record Exam," I answered hopefully.

He harrumphed, "Doesn't count," and continued. "You haven't even filled out an application."

"I'll send one in right away."

"Too late. The deadline was six weeks ago." He paused, then asked, "Just why do you think you want to do this? It seems like a very abrupt decision."

I felt desperate. How could I possibly explain? "I—well, you might not believe . . ." I stammered.

"Never mind," he replied. "I was just upset that you'd give up working toward a Harvard Ph.D. The Dean said it was highly unusual but, on the basis of your undergraduate record, they'll admit you anyway. Just get the prerequisites finished by the time you show up here in September."

I whooped with excitement. "All right!"

I could feel his grin over two thousand miles of telephone wire. "Oh, and by the way," he added, "you need to take the MCAT. Just for the record. Won't matter anyway but we don't want the Dean to look foolish if anyone ever asks!"

A bit dazed by the abrupt change in direction, I added chemistry to my already full load of graduate courses, went to Boston University night school for physics, and took a full year of organic chemistry in a concentrated, eight-week summer course. I finished just in time to drive to California and register for the fall quarter of medical school.

At the time, I didn't recognize that whole episode for what it was: the Lord working a genuine miracle in my life. It was, especially in retrospect, an astonishing experience. Now having been on a medical school faculty for twenty years, I know things like that simply don't happen. But it did. How? It certainly wasn't my own doing. I have only one satisfactory explanation: The Lord guides and prompts us, sometimes without our even recognizing his influence for what it truly is. If it's right, the Lord will open the way.

Our Heavenly Father does indeed take an active interest in his children's lives. The Creator of a million million galaxies and worlds without number is aware of each one of us. The Savior told his disciples that the very hairs of their heads were all numbered (see Matthew 10:30). Imagine that! The Lord is intimately involved in the details, not just the general scheme of things.

The concept that the God of the universe can and does make us individual objects of divine attention, even intervention, is staggering but true. The Lord didn't set the galaxies in motion and then retire to some remote corner of the universe to observe his handiwork.

I didn't know it at the time, but the first simple principle of the Simeon Solution clicked subconsciously into place:

The Lord is in charge. He knows us and our needs far better than we do. If we will just put our trust and confidence in him, Heavenly Father can work in our lives to make extraordinary things happen.
