Anne Osborn Poelman, Simeon Solution: One Woman's Spiritual Odyssey ( 1994)

Chapter 7

Meet the Mormons

The first two years of medical school passed in a blur. We were immersed in biochemistry, physiology, gross anatomy, and other required classes with little time for anything other than our demanding studies. Sundays were prized as "catch up on sleep" days. Nobody that I knew ever went to church.

My long dormant interest in religion was eventually revived when I discovered, quite by accident, that one of the best and most beloved professors in the medical school was a Latter-day Saint. This man, highly respected in his field, won the students' affection with his devotion to teaching and to his family, as well as with the exemplary way he conducted his life.

I'd never personally met a real live Mormon before. I was curious. And puzzled. An internationally acclaimed scientist who worshipped sea gulls and somebody named Joseph Smith? It just didn't fit. I was too embarrassed to ask how he managed to accommodate such apparently incompatible beliefs.

I eventually forgot about the whole thing.

During the brief summer break prior to beginning the third year's grueling rotations through surgery, pediatrics, internal medicine, and other clinical specialties, I volunteered to teach water safety instructor classes for the American Red Cross. The Red Cross National Aquatics School was an intensive, two-week course held annually at a YMCA camp in the high Sierra mountains. Between two and three hundred college-age students from throughout the country gathered there as soon as school was out to obtain Water Safety Instructor and First Aid certification before going to their summer jobs.

The faculty was a heterogeneous group. Some were professional Red Cross staffers; others, many of them coaches and physical education teachers, were volunteers. Most had been doing this for years. There were a few "greenies." I was most definitely among the latter.

One of the experienced hands was an older man from southern California who impressed me with his gentle demeanor and quiet dignity. The lucky students who were in his First Aid classes adored him.

Early June was unusually hot and dry that year. One day during the lunch break, another faculty member got up to get refills on drinks and was taking requests. He looked at the older man and grinned mischievously. "Well, Max!" he said. "How's about I get you a glass of nice cold iced tea?"

Max smiled. "Thanks for the offer. You know I don't drink coffee or tea. But I'd sure like another glass of milk!"

I was surprised. I guessed Max was in his mid-sixties. What was a man his age doing drinking a quart of milk each meal? Distinctly abnormal, I thought.

One of the other faculty members leaned across the table and whispered loudly, "Oh, don't mind old Max. He doesn't drink tea because he's one of those crazy Mormons!"

Crazy? Somehow I didn't think so. Different? Definitely. He didn't smoke; he didn't drink alcohol, coffee, or tea. But the only two Mormons I knew, Max and the medical school professor, were exemplary men. However odd their beliefs might have seemed, their faith evidently made a tremendous difference in the way they lived and interacted with others.

After lunch I drew him aside. "Max," I said, "I understand you're a Mormon."

"That's right," he answered.

"Well," I continued, "I don't know anything about the Mormon religion. In fact, I only know one other Mormon—one of our professors at the medical school belongs to your church. I admire both of you very much. I want to know what makes the difference in your lives."

"It's our faith," he replied quietly.

"I thought that might be the case. Would you mind telling me something about your church and how it's different from other churches?"

Unlike most other Mormons I've known since then, he didn't immediately launch into a discussion about the Church. "Why do you want to know?" he asked cautiously.

I was a bit taken aback. I hadn't anticipated such a question. "I'm not really sure," I confessed. "I grew up in the Methodist church. I liked it but always felt something was missing. I've visited a bunch of other churches but they all seem the same. I feel like I'm being preached at, prayed at, sung at. I finally gave up looking."

Max must have decided that my interest was sincere and that my intent was not to poke fun at or ridicule his beliefs. So every night after supper the two of us sat out on the porch of the main lodge. While everyone else played volleyball or tossed horseshoes, we discussed religion.

He told me about angels, buried gold plates from a long vanished civilization, and a boy-prophet named Joseph Smith. I don't mind telling you, it seemed really strange. Unbelievable. But what kept piquing my interest was the deep, undeniable effect their religion seemed to have on the only two Mormons I had ever known. That—and their sincerity—I couldn't deny.

The two-week camp passed swiftly. Before I knew it, it was time to leave. As I was packing my gear, Max came to say good-bye. I could tell by his expression that something more was on his mind.

He came to the point quickly. "Anne, when you get back to Palo Alto and Stanford, you ought to look up the local Mormon church and try it out."

It would have been impolite to express my profound skepticism, so I kept silent.

Max grew serious. "Go," he said firmly, then looked me straight in the eye. "I've never been to Palo Alto. Don't know anything about it. But I'm going to make you two promises. The first is this: If you visit the Mormon church you'll find the most wonderful group of people you've ever met. In fact, you'll feel like you've known them all your life."

I listened intently as he continued.

"And the second is: if you go, and go with an open mind," he emphasized, "you'll find a faith with depth and meaning and joy greater than anything you ever believed was possible."

Wow. Those were two really big-time promises.

During the long drive from the Sierras back to Palo Alto, I couldn't get Max's promises out of my mind. That last conversation bothered me, as he had evidently intended. It even scared me just a little.

In retrospect, I think I know why I felt that small, icy trickle of fear. On the one hand, if I did go and the Mormon church was just like all the others, I'd be disappointed once again. On the other—and I think this really was the scariest part—if what Max had said was true and the Mormon church was indeed all he'd promised it would be, I would have some major, life-changing decisions to make.

The whole dilemma made me feel profoundly uneasy. The combination of hope and curiosity finally got the best of me, and I decided I would try it out. The easiest way would be to call the professor at his office and ask if I could go to church on Sunday with his family. No luck. His secretary told me they were gone for the summer and wouldn't be back in town until September.

Somehow I just couldn't wait three months. So I pulled out the Palo Alto telephone directory.

Found the Yellow Pages.

Looked up "Churches."

No "Mormon Church."

An unexpected rush of disappointment. Then I remembered that the correct name was The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Turned the page back.

And groaned inwardly. Now I found more than I'd bargained for. There were lots of "Mormon" churches listed. Two in Palo Alto. Two at Stanford. Another in nearby Menlo Park. A couple more in Redwood City. How was I supposed to choose?

I finally decided the logical thing was to pick one where I knew the streets and could at least find the place. Menlo Park. There were two numbers listed; heart inexplicably pounding, I called the first one. No answer.

Sigh of relief. "Lord," I thought silently, "you know at least I tried!"

But I didn't feel good about letting it go. So I tried the second number (which I now know was the bishop's home phone).

A childish voice said, "Hello?"

"Is your daddy home?" I inquired.

"No."

"Is your mommy home?"

"No."

I was getting desperate. "Well," I continued, "how about a big brother or sister?"

"No. They're outside playing."

Giving up, I finally got more specific. "I need some information about the Mormon church."

"Well," the small voice answered slowly, "we don't drink coffee or tea . . . "

I almost had to pick myself off the floor, I laughed so hard. "I know you all don't drink that stuff," I was finally able to reply. "What I really want to know is what time you and your family go to church on Sunday morning."

"Well," the voice said, "my daddy goes at six o'clock!"

I almost hung up right then and there.

The voice continued. "My big brother goes at nine."

"What about you and your mother and your big sister?"

"Oh!" the voice replied confidently. "We go at ten-thirty!"

That was more like it. I decided that was when I probably ought to show up.

Sunday dawned bright and clear, a truly gorgeous summer day. I almost chickened out, using the easy appeal of a long walk or bicycle ride as a handy excuse. But the more I thought about not going, the worse I felt.

"Oh, what the heck?" I finally thought. "The worst that could happen is I could waste a nice Sunday morning." Bathed and dressed, I headed for the Menlo Park "ward," timing my arrival just prior to 10:30 A.M.

Max had given me rather specific instructions for such an occasion. "When you go the first time," he'd said (and I guess he knew I would), "you ask to see a man they call the 'bishop.' Tell him you're not a Mormon but want to know something about the Church."

That made me suspicious. I was dead certain I would be surrounded by eager Mormons, salivating at the prospect of a fresh convert. So I decided I'd fool them. I wouldn't say anything to anybody. I'd sneak in the back and spy on them—see how they behaved when they didn't know someone was watching!

I parked and went into the building at precisely 10:30. I was astonished. No one was in the chapel. Everyone was in the foyer, talking, laughing, and hugging. Kids were running around with handfuls of Cheerios. I'd have put the background noise level at about forty decibels at least. It was chaotic, but it was a warm, friendly, even inviting kind of disorder.

Sticking to my original plan, I said nothing to anyone and slipped into the back of the chapel so I could sit on the last row and observe the proceedings.

More surprises. There was no altar. No cross, either. No collection plates. No candles. No dignified minister in clerical collar and black robe. A couple of men in business suits, a nicely dressed young woman, and a child occupied the elevated pews that faced the congregation.

The service (which I later discovered was the Sunday School opening exercises) began unceremoniously with some informal announcements and a hymn (thankfully it was one by Charles Wesley; being an old Methodist, I knew it by heart). Then the child gave a scripture reading and the young woman followed with a brief but excellent talk. Everyone sang another hymn, this time written by someone named Pratt. It was totally unfamiliar but inexplicably moving.

Finally young men conducted something I recognized as similar to communion: the sacrament. Uncertain whether it was appropriate to participate, I passed it up, feeling a wistful pang.

As I sat there alone, observing the amateur-led worship service, I felt strangely touched. A tear came to my eye and burned its hot furrow down my cheek. Filled with conflicting feelings and embarrassed at this unexpected rush of raw emotion, I was seized by an intense desire to escape. Get out of there!

I stood up suddenly and ran out the back door to the parking lot, intending never to return to that strangely evocative place.

And stopped.

A voice inside my mind said, as clearly and distinctly as if it were an auditory experience, "Anne, turn around and go back!"

I did. In that moment my life changed instantaneously and would never again be the same. Ever.

I look back on that experience as the central event, the defining moment of my life, the fulcrum on which everything else subsequently rests. Had I ignored that still small voice or convinced myself it was the product of an overactive imagination, the things I now hold most precious and dear in my life might never have happened.

So, even unrecognized and unarticulated at the time, another principle of what would eventually become the Simeon Solution was added to the first:

Listen to and heed promptings from the Holy Ghost! If we're open to those spiritual impressions, the Lord will guide our lives. We can trust him. He will open the right doors, at the right time, and in the right sequence.
