Anne Osborn Poelman, Simeon Solution: One Woman's Spiritual Odyssey ( 1994)

Chapter 9

No More Strangers

The baptismal date was set. As the designated day drew closer, I felt unexpected yet understandable discomfort. This was going to be a major change in my life. Was it really the right thing to do? Increasingly uncertain and anxious, I wondered if this were the Lord's way of warning me about an impending mistake. Not so, the alarmed elders said as they tried unsuccessfully to reassure me. They explained it was merely Satan's influence, a last-ditch attempt to dissuade me from selecting the right path.

Attributing such doubts to a malignant adversary, whatever the name, was an easy, convenient explanation for the elders. It was singularly unhelpful for me. "The Devil made me do it!" was a hackneyed line from tired old comedy routines that I'd never found particularly amusing. In a holdover from my liberal Protestant days, I wasn't convinced such a being even existed. I'd been taught that evil was merely the absence of good and that only the ignorant or unsophisticated believed that satanic beings were actual entities.

My commitment wavered as the good feelings that had once felt so strong evaporated like water on a hot summer sidewalk. I was sorely tempted to call the whole thing off. Uncertainty seemed to feed on itself as I began to worry about all the things I didn't know about the Mormons and their beliefs. First one question, then another arose as nagging doubts sprouted and grew like weeds in an abandoned garden.

It really didn't seem fair. After all, I had made my decision once, hadn't I? And felt it was right. That should have been sufficient. I hadn't expected to be assailed by second thoughts. My prayers for help seemed to go unanswered as I felt I had been left very much alone to struggle with indecision and doubt.

Longing for reassurance, I once again turned to the scriptures. I reread Alma 32, this time focusing on the later verses. There was no question in my mind that I had felt peace and inner rejoicing as the desire to believe worked deep within my soul. As I had nurtured that embryonic faith by study and prayer, it had indeed sprouted, grown, and begun to bear fruit. I did feel that the word was a good seed, that it was even beginning "to be delicious unto me." Then that wonderful feeling seemed to vanish into thin air. What had happened?

Almost by accident—or so it seemed—I stumbled across Alma's earlier words to the recalcitrant Nephites. When he asked those who had once experienced a change of heart, "If ye have felt to sing the song of redeeming love, . . . can ye feel so now?" (Alma 5:26) it seemed as though the revered prophet were speaking directly to me across the chasm of millennia. I realized I had indeed experienced a profound change of heart. I recalled what that joyous, wonderful "song of the heart" had once felt like.

The more I thought about it, the more I realized that finding the Church and the gospel wasn't really a discovery after all. It wasn't new. Quite the opposite: It was more like recognizing something I'd actually known for a very long time, maybe even eternities.

It was true that I didn't know everything, nor did I have the answers to all my questions neatly delineated. But the fundamental pieces were all in place and they were consistent. I realized I did have a firm, undeniable testimony that God lives and that Jesus is the Christ. I knew that Joseph Smith was indeed a prophet of God, that the Book of Mormon is the word of God, and that the Church is true. For heaven's sake, what more did I truly need?

The clear, calm confidence I had felt when I initially decided to join the Church returned. Two weeks after the young elders began teaching me the missionary discussions, I was baptized.

Baptisms are exhilarating, joyous events. To my surprise, this very special occasion was literally as well as figuratively regarded by my new ward friends as a birthday celebration. There were even very nice gifts: personalized scriptures, a pocket hymnal, and a number of books that formed the nucleus of my growing Church library. Even Tish was remembered with a gaily wrapped box of her favorite dog biscuits!

I half expected that after all the whoop-de-do was over and another convert was checked off on some imaginary missionary score sheet, things would return to normal and I would be left to fit in as best I could. Not so. That ward truly followed Moroni's admonition: "And after they had been received unto baptism, and were wrought upon and cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost, they were numbered among the people of the church of Christ; and their names were taken, that they might be remembered and nourished by the good word of God, to keep them in the right way, to keep them continually watchful unto prayer, relying alone upon the merits of Christ, who was the author and the finisher of their faith.

"And the church did meet together oft, to fast and to pray, and to speak one with another concerning the welfare of their souls.

"And they did meet together oft to partake of bread and wine, in remembrance of the Lord Jesus" (Moroni 6:4-6; italics added).

In the weeks after my baptism, I received follow-up doctrinal discussions with the missionaries and attentive personal visits from my new "home teachers" and "visiting teachers." Frequent invitations to family dinners and ward social activities helped make me feel an integral part of the Church. I was asked to speak in sacrament services and other meetings throughout the stake.

A few days after I was baptized, I received a call from the ward clerk. The bishop wanted to see me. Too new in the Church to know that such requests usually elicit curiosity, perhaps even a twinge of anxiety, I showed up at the appointed time.

After greeting me warmly and inviting me to sit down, the bishop came straight to the point. "Sister Osborn," he said with a smile, "after prayerful consideration, the bishopric is calling you to teach the Sunday School class for sixteen year olds."

I was completely taken aback. "I'd be happy to do whatever I'm asked," I replied, surprised. "But I really don't know all that much about the Church as yet. How can I teach what I don't know?"

"You love the Lord. You know the basic principles. I think you'll be a wonderfully enthusiastic teacher. That's sufficient. Besides which," he grinned, "this is a real lively group of kids. They ask lots of questions. You can all study and learn together!"

And so we did. We were a classic example of the scriptural admonition, "Wherefore, he that preacheth and he that receiveth, understand one another, and both are edified and rejoice together" (D&C 50:22).

As I reflect on those weeks and months after my baptism, I realize what a critical, even vulnerable time that is for a new convert. It is important to become integrated into the ward family. Prompt calls to serve in an appropriate capacity surely help. The spiritual seeds that have been so successfully planted must also be carefully tended and nurtured by both the new member and the local congregation. As the winds of adversity blow—and they surely do—even the most spiritually fertile topsoil can be swept away by a storm of opposition. Left untended, those tender young plantings of spiritual rebirth will struggle and may even wither from neglect.

I was fortunate. I was not only numbered among the Saints, I was also nurtured, encouraged, and accepted.

I felt wonderful. I belonged. Max was right; I really did feel as though I'd known these people all my life. I was, to paraphrase Paul, no more a stranger but a fellow-citizen of the household of God (see Ephesians 2:19).

Perhaps inevitably, the postbaptismal period was not without its challenges. There were lots of "ups." Some hurdles. And a few "downs" (more about those later). The only thing that made me really uneasy was the potential reaction of friends and colleagues. Most of all, I worried about my family. We were very close and I loved them very much. Would they understand? I decided to wait until I was home on vacation to tell them about my newfound faith, hoping the good effect I felt the Church was having in my life would be readily apparent.

It wasn't, at least not initially. They were all understandably concerned at this sudden, completely unexpected development. Although my brother and sister-in-law joined the Church soon after I did, acceptance and approval from other family members evolved more gradually as they observed the positive effects of the gospel in my life.

A foretaste of possible adverse reactions from colleagues and friends came within a week of the baptism. One morning I found a pink message slip in my mailbox at the medical school. An ominous sign. The only other time I had received one was when I had flunked the biostatistics course.

I swallowed hard. The message was from my faculty adviser. "See me ASAP," it read. Nothing else.

I spent an anxious morning before I could break away from my duties for lunch. I half ran, half walked to his office and knocked, almost hoping he would be away. He wasn't.

"Come in!" his gruff voiced boomed. "You have a minute?"

I nodded.

"Well then, sit down. We need to talk."

I sat.

He paused a moment, frowning. "How are you doing?" he said. "I haven't seen you much this summer."

"I've been really busy, what with studying for the National Board Exams and then with clerkships starting."

"Yes, yes, I know," he said impatiently. "What I really mean is, are you okay? Is everything all right?"

I gave a silent, inward sigh of relief. It wasn't about some performance deficiency after all. "Yes, I'm just fine. Really."

He pressed. "You're not in any trouble?"

I was puzzled. "No, of course not."

"Did somebody, uh, your boyfriend, you know—jilt you or something?"

What a strange question. I appreciated his obvious concern but it really wasn't any of his business. "No. I'm not even dating anyone steadily now."

He paused, making up his mind, then forged ahead. "I heard a rumor about you."

I still didn't get it. "What kind of rumor?" I asked warily.

"Well," he answered uncomfortably, "that you'd sort of gone off the deep end."

"Well, I haven't!" I replied somewhat testily. "I don't have a clue what you're talking about."

He got specific. "I heard you went and joined some kind of religious cult."

Now I got it. "I joined the Mormon church, if that's what you mean. And they're not a cult," I emphasized.

He was clearly unconvinced. "Why would you do such a thing?" he persisted.

Perhaps it was foolish to respond the way I did. But I was so excited and enthusiastic about my newfound faith that I couldn't help myself. Naively expecting him to share my joy, I briefly told him about my experience with the Church, concluding with hearing that inner voice.

He pounced. "Aha!" he exclaimed almost triumphantly. "A voice, you say!"

"Well, not an actual, audible voice or anything like that," I said hastily. "It was more like a still, small 'something.' You know, an impression. Like a whisper. Something I felt deep inside myself. You know what I mean?" I finally concluded hopefully, thus ignoring the First Law of Holes. (When you're in one, quit digging!)

He clearly did not know. His face grew stern and challenging. "How do you know that it wasn't just yourself talking to yourself?"

Good question. A very good question indeed. "I just sort of know," I answered lamely, at a loss to explain.

"Humph," he snorted somewhat derisively, but he let it drop.

The interview over, I thanked him for his interest and concern, then beat a quick retreat.

I've thought about that interchange many times as I have pondered the issue he raised. How can we be guided spiritually? How do we know? The answer involves several simple but interrelated steps:

Seek. Recognize. Respond. It helps to start with small and simple things. Establish a pattern. Get some daily spiritual exercise!

Elder Boyd K. Packer has counseled us to seek the spirit of personal revelation through study and prayer: "Prayer is your personal key to heaven. The lock is on your side of the veil."

And how do we recognize spiritual promptings when they do come? Elder Packer acknowledges that describing the promptings from the Holy Ghost to one who has not had them is very difficult. He comments:

"The Holy Ghost speaks with a voice that you feel more than you hear. It is described as a 'still small voice.'. . . This voice of the Spirit speaks gently, prompting you what to do or what to say, or it may caution or warn you. . . .

"The flow of revelation depends on your faith. You exercise faith by causing, or by making, your mind accept or believe as truth that which you cannot, by reason alone, prove for certainty.

"The first exercising of your faith should be your acceptance of Christ and His atonement.

"As you test gospel principles by believing without knowing, the Spirit will begin to teach you. Gradually your faith will be replaced with knowledge.

"You will be able to discern, or to see, with spiritual eyes" (Ensign, November 1994, p. 60).

Once we've become accustomed to asking the Lord for personal revelation, how do we know that what we feel isn't just ourselves and our own fervent desires speaking? How can we tell the difference between psychological self-deception, wishful thinking, and the promptings of the Holy Ghost?

Elder Packer continues:

"'There are many spirits which are false spirits' (D&C 50:2). There can be counterfeit revelations, promptings from the devil, temptations! . . .

"The seventh chapter of Moroni in the Book of Mormon tells you how to test spiritual promptings. Read it carefully—over and over.

"By trial, and some error, you will learn to heed these promptings.

"If ever you receive a prompting to do something that makes you feel uneasy, something you know in your mind to be wrong and contrary to the principles of righteousness, do not respond to it!" (Ensign, November 1994, p. 61; italics in original).

Self-deception may feel good initially, but deep inside us a nagging whisper of doubt remains. I'm convinced of that. The prophet Isaiah made a wonderful promise to ancient Israel that I firmly believe holds equally true for us today: "And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left" (Isaiah 30:21).

Sometimes just taking "time out" and distancing ourselves from our intense desires will reveal them for what they are: self-deception and "counterfeit revelation." On other occasions we may succeed in temporarily convincing ourselves that our own inner desires are in fact the Lord's will. If those impressions are self-generated and wrong, our inner spiritual sense of "rightness" usually reasserts itself.

If we will but listen, we can hear the Spirit gently prompting us, "This is the way! Walk ye in it."
