Anne Osborn Poelman, Simeon Solution: One Woman's Spiritual Odyssey ( 1994)

Chapter 10

Examples of the Believers

After my baptism, the remainder of the summer passed swiftly. I could hardly wait until the professor and his family returned so I could share my newfound joy with them. The day after they arrived back in Palo Alto, I drove to their home unannounced and rang the doorbell. The youngest boy opened the door. His eyes widened as his mouth formed an 'O' of surprise.

Then he got so excited he abruptly slammed the door right in my face. I heard him shout, "Mommy! Tish's mommy is here!"

His mother came to the door laughing, "Well, let's at least remember our manners and let her in!"

I couldn't even wait until we sat down. "I've joined the Church!" I announced proudly to the family.

They were momentarily stunned. "Which church? Do you mean our church?"

"Of course! The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," I replied with a broad grin.

"How? When? Why?" the questions peppered me from all sides along with hugs and expressions of delight.

"I was baptized about a month ago," I answered as we all plopped down around the kitchen table. In between bites of freshly baked bread slathered with homemade jam, I told them the whole episode.

They were enthralled as I related my experiences, beginning with what a strong positive example and influence their father had been to all the medical students as well as to me personally. We alternately laughed and wept together as I recounted those intensely emotional memories. Now I understood what Dr. Axelrod from my high school science days had said so long ago: The only way to recapture the initial thrill of discovering something truly special is to help someone else find the same wonderful thing.

I remarked, "You know, one of the most interesting things is that finding the Church didn't really seem like a new discovery after all. It was more like recognizing something I'd already known for a long time. I know the gospel is true," I concluded simply.

They nodded their understanding as several of the family members added personal expressions of testimony. While we were talking, I noticed that the professor's face briefly clouded. He actually looked a bit uncomfortable. But after a moment's hesitation he cleared his voice and smiled. "I think this calls for a celebration," he announced. "Let's all go out for ice cream. Tish too!"

With whoops of delight, the children dashed for the car. Tish eagerly bounded along behind them, wagging her tail furiously and barking happily with all the excitement.

Several years later, after I had completed postgraduate training and moved to Salt Lake City, we all had a wonderfully warm reunion and were recounting that joyous first celebration together.

"I remember," one of the older children recalled, "Johnny got so excited he slammed the door right in Annie's face!"

"Tish ate my ice cream cone!"

"We're all related now anyway," Johnny declared. "That's 'cause we have one of Tish's puppies!"

"We named our dog after Tish. We call her 'Tisha,' for 'More-Tisha'! Get it?" one of the younger children put in as the others laughed.

"I know," I replied. "Someone else had a 'Paula,' for 'Poli-Tisha'! If your Tisha had puppies herself I suppose one of these days we could also have a 'Reppy,' for 'Repe-Tisha'!"

The children howled with glee at the thought.

The professor smiled indulgently, then grew serious. "Annie, I've always felt just a bit guilty about my possible role in your joining the Church."

"Guilty? Why would you feel guilty?" I asked.

"Well," he replied slowly, "I worried that you may have thought I was something I'm really not."

I was puzzled. "What do you mean?"

"I suppose what I'm trying to say is that I've never thought of myself as what you might call a Model Mormon."

"You were a wonderful role model," I protested vehemently.

He shook his head. "That's a separate issue, I think. I try hard to do the right thing. I'm not always completely successful. But what I really mean is something quite different. I guess I've never felt like I'm truly in the 'mainstream' of the Church. Since I've been young I've always had a lot of questions."

I started to comment but he stopped me. "I've never been what you might call the 'ten toes and both hands hangin' on the iron rod' kind of Mormon " he admitted. "I've been concerned that you might have thought I was, well, perhaps more, uh, 'orthodox' than I really am."

"I guess I understand what you're saying," I replied. "But let me ask you this: Do you believe that Jesus Christ is the Savior and Redeemer of the world?"

"Of course," he replied immediately.

"Was Joseph Smith a prophet of God?"

"Yes."

"Is the Book of Mormon truly scripture? Do you believe the gospel is true?"

"Yes to both," he said, smiling patiently at the continued questioning.

"Is the Church the Lord's true church?"

He didn't hesitate. "Yes, it is. And the basic gospel principles and doctrines aren't a concern. But," he added as I held my breath and waited for a major-league but, "sometimes I feel like I'm an outsider in my own church. I was born and raised in Utah. But somehow I never quite 'fit in' to the local culture. I suppose some people even regarded me as a bit of a maverick."

"First of all," I said, "I don't think there really is such a thing as a 'Model Mormon.' Or a 'Typical Mormon.' Or even an 'Average Mormon.' If someone has faith, believes the gospel fundamentals, loves the Lord, and is keeping His commandments, that's enough for me. What better example could anyone have?"

He didn't answer so I continued, "One of my favorite scriptures is in Second Corinthians, where Paul talks about writing our 'epistles' not with ink or stone tablets but with our hearts and actions that can be 'read' by others. Sort of a 'living testimony.' As I remember, you never said a word about the Church to me. You simply lived what you believe. After all, we're told, 'by their fruits shall ye know them.'"

He sighed with evident relief. "Well, thank you. I just didn't want you to think I was something I really wasn't. I'm glad you found the Church and the gospel and that I may have had some small part in that process of discovery."

Many people share my friend's concerns. No one wants to feel like a hypocrite. But being a hypocrite means professing or pretending to be something we really aren't. It is normal to feel inadequate, particularly when measured against the seemingly impossible goal of perfection. Recognizing our limitations and shortcomings is clearly essential for our eternal progression. However, we must avoid the spiritual paralysis that can sometimes result from dwelling on those inadequacies. After all, perfection is not just an eternal goal, it's a process. We are counseled to "continue in patience until [we] are perfected" (D&C 67:13).

The scriptures also tell us that being perfect does not necessarily mean being without flaw or blemish. Read the footnote to Matthew 5:48. The Greek word translated as perfect actually means "complete, finished, fully developed." The Lord expects us to be working toward perfection; he doesn't expect us to attain it instantaneously!

The Lord has further commanded us to be examples of the "believers" and to let our light shine before men. Actions do speak louder than words. Fortunately for me, most of the Latter-day Saints I first encountered were wonderful representatives of their faith, even if they were not perfect ones.

As the weeks after my baptism swiftly passed, I knew I had made the right decision. It felt good. It also seemed as though—in a figurative yet eternal sense—I had indeed come Home.

For the most part, the ward members made me feel welcome and wanted. Not unexpectedly, there were a few rough spots. One such experience is a vivid memory, even twenty-five years later. In retrospect it seems inconsequential and insignificant, even rather silly. But at the time it was a big deal.

During the first two years of medical school, the students dressed very casually; jeans and T-shirts were the accepted norm. I appreciated the relaxed atmosphere but also always enjoyed wearing nice clothes for special occasions. And for me, church was a very special occasion indeed.

To put one of my postbaptismal "downers" in context, remember that the 'sixties were the first real miniskirt era. Although the extreme "micro minis" frankly never appealed to me, I did wear my skirts a fashionable but comparatively modest (at least by the standards of the time) two or three inches above the kneecap. My absolute favorite outfit was a rose-colored skirt with matching vest that I wore with a pale pink, long-sleeved silk shirt. A patterned scarf knotted around my neck and fastened with a gold pin complemented the ensemble. When I wore that outfit I felt especially sharp.

Without thinking about it, I wore the favored outfit to church a couple of times. The second time, one of the sisters in the ward drew me aside after Sunday School. "Sister Osborn," she said in an intense near-whisper, "I need to talk with you. Now!"

Wondering at the urgency in her voice, I followed her into the relative privacy of the women's rest room.

"Some of the other sisters and I think you need a bit of friendly advice," she stated. "They don't want to hurt your feelings so they won't say anything to you. But I will. And I'm going to."

Instinctively I braced myself. She slowly looked me up and down, sending an unspoken message by letting her eyes deliberately linger on the hem of my skirt. I flushed under her scrutiny, suddenly understanding what was coming.

"Your skirts are way too short," she said in a flat, somewhat judgmental tone. "You would never be allowed into a Mutual dance," she continued, referring to the events held occasionally for the stake's young men and women. "Certainly not dressed like that! You know what they do at those dances?"

I shook my head silently.

"If a young woman comes in a short skirt, they make her kneel on the floor. If her hem doesn't touch the floor, they send her straight home!" she concluded dramatically.

I was outraged just thinking about such embarrassment. A spectrum of heated responses flashed through my mind, with "It's none of your business" and "I'd never want to go to one of those dances anyway" right at the top of the list.

I said none of them. I glared at her for a long moment, gritting my teeth. Finally I just said stonily, "Thank you for your interest and concern," and stalked out of the rest room.

The more I thought about that encounter, the madder I became. In retrospect I realize that my emotionally charged reaction was caused by more than the acute humiliation of the moment. The episode made me feel like an ugly duckling all over again.

I was really steamed. I felt personally offended. I even savored the delicious feeling of righteous indignation to which I felt quite justifiably entitled.

I stewed about the incident for several days. I formulated several possible responses, ranging from talking to the bishop to leaving the Church in a huff—or just walking away quietly and never going back.

In the end, I did none of the above.

I swallowed my pride. Instead of tripping over that stumbling block, I stepped over it and lengthened my stride. And my skirts.

Why? Once the anger and heat of the moment dissipated, I tried to put the unfortunate event in perspective. Admittedly, it wasn't easy. My pride had indeed been wounded. But I knew the Church was true. Could I allow the well-intentioned but tactless, insensitive behavior of one member distract me from that central fact? No way! The Church was a great blessing in my life and I knew it. I decided to let the incident drop. I couldn't forget but I could certainly forgive.

From that seemingly trivial but nonetheless difficult personal experience I learned another component of what would later become the Simeon Solution:

If we strive earnestly to remain focused, rooted, centered, and grounded in basic gospel principles, then personalities and peripheral issues will neither confuse nor distract us from our eternal goals.

A verse from a favorite Latter-day Saint hymn comes to mind:

Be fixed in your purpose, for Satan will try you; The weight of your calling he perfectly knows. Your path may be thorny, but Jesus is nigh you; His arm is sufficient, tho demons oppose. "The Time Is Far Spent" (Hymns, no. 266)

To remain fixed in our purpose requires perspective, determination, and maturity. It often takes real work. But if we can adopt Simeon's sound attitude of patience and trust, then personal disappointments and unresolved issues can be appropriately and successfully placed on a spiritual "back burner."

It makes me shudder to think what would have happened—or, perhaps more accurately, not happened—if I had stalked out of the Church in offense twenty-five years ago.
