Anne Osborn Poelman, Simeon Solution: One Woman's Spiritual Odyssey ( 1994)

Chapter 11

Setback

It was simply too wonderful an opportunity to pass up. London in the middle of an English winter wasn't particularly inviting, but the chance to spend two months learning pediatrics at the famed Hospital for Sick Children was irresistible. Also intriguing was the opportunity to attend my newfound church outside the U.S.A. Would it be as appealing as my beloved Palo Alto Stake? Recalling Max's promises, I expected it would be.

One of the families who had been instrumental in my post-baptismal fellowshipping knew a young couple who had just completed graduate school at Stanford, then moved to London where the husband was employed as the local representative of an American company. Concerned that I would arrive in London and need to search for housing in the dead of winter, my friends wrote the young couple and asked if I could stay with them for a few days while I settled in. I was relieved at their prompt reply, extending a warm invitation to share their small but cozy suburban flat for a few days after my arrival.

London in late February was as advertised: cold, damp, and dark with leaden, smoky-gray skies. But the small flat bustled with warmth and activity. A glowing coal fire in the grate radiated cheer that was exceeded only by the welcome from my hostess. She was a bright, very attractive woman about my own age. Obviously delighted to have an American visitor, even a thoroughly jet-lagged one, she gave me a big hug. Before bustling me off to bed, she sat me down for a glass of milk and a plate of cookies freshly baked with some of her precious supply of chocolate chips imported from home.

The young couple had three beautiful, extremely lively children. The oldest, a somewhat solemn, serious five year old, and the middle child, an irrepressible and mischievous two year old, were excited at the prospect of a brand-new source of play and entertainment. Their mother, occupied with a new baby, clearly welcomed the diversion.

We settled into an easy routine. I worked at the hospital and searched for housing during the day, then returned via the "tube" at dusk. Pam and I chatted amicably together as we fixed the evening meals, washed and folded laundry, entertained the older children, and fed the baby. It was my first in-depth look at the inner workings of a young Latter-day Saint family. I liked what I saw.

Except for one thing: Pam's husband, Paul.

Paul was an intelligent but aloof man who maintained his office in their home, consulting and rendering advice via telephone and mail. Other than an occasional foray into outlying areas to conduct site visits and negotiations for his company, his schedule was light and largely self-imposed, leaving moderate blocks of time unoccupied. He had carefully positioned a worn but comfortable easy chair and ottoman in the office, where he often sat and read while Pam struggled alone with the three children.

My puzzlement must have been apparent.

"Anne, you're wondering why I don't help Pam," he said.

Caught. I nodded.

"You're new in the Church. You obviously have a lot to learn," he said archly. "One of those things is the proper role and place of women."

The clear implication was that I was seriously deficient in that understanding.

"I'm the provider. I earn the living for this family. It's also my role as the priesthood holder to preside over the family and instruct my wife and children. It's my wife's role to bear our children, do the housework, and take care of the children. That's the way it is in our home. And frankly, that's the way it should be," he stated flatly. "The proper place for a woman is on a well-worn path between the kitchen and the bedroom!"

I laughed, thinking he was joking. He wasn't. His look of stern rebuke silenced me. Paul was totally serious, completely convinced of his moral rectitude. To him, the priesthood seemed to be a license to rule, not a commitment and obligation to serve.

Paul also regarded himself as quite a scriptorian and an expert in Church history. He delighted in expounding on obscure points of doctrine, most of which were completely unfamiliar to me. I suppose it was a bizarre, rather juvenile way of showing off and demonstrating his intellectual superiority.

A convert of only a few months, I was still "wet behind the ears." I was also in the process of reading the scriptures, further digesting and assimilating basic gospel principles. When I wanted to discuss simple, uncomplicated fundamentals, he acted bored and digressed, quoting extensively from the Journal of Discourses, the King Follett sermon, and relatively obscure secondary sources to substantiate his own interpretations.

It was confusing. I felt frustrated and discouraged, even somewhat disillusioned. Was Pam's husband really the Model Mormon Male he held himself out to be? Or was he an aberration, someone who wrested the scriptures and doctrines to suit his own personal needs and justify his arrogant behavior? Somewhat diffidently, I asked Pam about it.

"Oh," she replied with remarkable equanimity, "that's just Paul. Down deep he really is basically a good guy. I've learned to live with it."

I could never do that, I thought. Not in a million years.

Shortly afterward I found a place to live near the hospital and moved out. Periodically during my two months in London I thought about Pam and her husband. I wished I could discuss the issue with my Mormon friends in California, but they were five thousand miles away.

Studying the scriptures helped. When I read D&C 121 for the first time, it became readily apparent what proper exercise of priesthood authority really means. According to the revelation received by the Prophet Joseph Smith when he was in Liberty jail, many are called but few are chosen.

"And why are they not chosen? . . . they do not learn this one lesson—

"That the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness.

"That they may be conferred upon us, it is true; but when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, our vain ambition, or to exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness . . . the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man" (D&C 121:34-37; italics added).

Reading that scripture, I felt reassured and comforted. When I finally returned to Stanford, I told my friends about Pam's husband and his attitudes, which seemed such a contrast to their own gentle examples.

One of the men had been Paul's bishop. "I was afraid of that," he sighed resignedly. "Paul has always been convinced he knew the 'right' way things should be done. I was hoping that over the years he had mellowed."

He grinned wryly as he continued, "I guess there are some real male chauvinists in the world. A few are also members of the Church. We're not immune. It's unfortunate but true: Such people misinterpret the scriptures and use priesthood authority as an excuse to justify their own selfish actions."

He then added some terrifically sound advice. "Don't let someone else's inconsiderate or even inappropriate conduct become your own problem. Such people will eventually answer to the Lord for their actions. That's their problem, not yours."

I nodded silently in agreement, remembering the Skirt Incident.

All of us may encounter someone or something that seems jarringly inconsistent or incompatible with the basic principles and spirit of the gospel. It may be a disturbing concept or the less-than-ideal personal example of another Church member. The scriptures and basic teachings of the prophets provide a sure, eternal standard by which such experiences can be judged. Thoughtful study of those sources together with earnest prayer usually resolves the issue.

President Howard W. Hunter has strongly emphasized the importance of using gentle persuasion, not coercion, in exercising personal agency:

"God's chief way of acting is by persuasion and patience and long-suffering, not by coercion and stark confrontation. He acts by gentle solicitation and by sweet enticement. He always acts with unfailing respect for the freedom and independence that we possess. He wants to help us and pleads for the chance to assist us, but he will not do so in violation of our agency. . . .

"To countermand and ultimately forbid our choices was Satan's way, not God's, and the Father of us all simply never will do that. He will, however, stand by us forever to help us see the right path, find the right choice, respond to the true voice, and feel the influence of his undeniable Spirit. His gentle, peaceful, powerful persuasion to do right and find joy will be with us 'so long as time shall last, or the earth shall stand, or there shall be one man upon the face thereof to be saved.' (Moro. 7:36)" (Ensign, August 1994, back cover).

Whether favorable or unfavorable, personal examples should not determine our own response to the Church and the gospel. My medical school professor was a wonderful example, but I didn't join the Church because of him. Pam's husband was (at least in my opinion) a rather poor example, but I didn't leave the Church because of him, either. I'm glad, too! If I had permitted that episode to overwhelm my testimony of the gospel's truthfulness, I would never have experienced the joy that my future experiences in the Church would bring so abundantly.

Another fundamental principle of the Simeon Solution was thus added:

In his address at the 1994 General Relief Society Meeting, President Hunter counseled Latter-day Saint women to "stand firm in the faith," citing Nephi's statement, "Ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men" (2 Nephi 31:20).

The Church is true. We should also be true to the Church. Fidelity and loyalty, virtues that are often in short supply in modern society, are indeed their own rewards.

The Lord blesses those who stand firm in the faith and diligently keep his commandments. I was about to find out just how wonderful those blessings can be.
