Anne Osborn Poelman, Simeon Solution: One Woman's Spiritual Odyssey ( 1994)

Chapter 12

Single and Sane Simultaneously?

If I heard it once, I heard it a thousand times. In fact, it got to be downright annoying. A well-meaning member, ironically often an older sister, would draw me aside and inquire solicitously, "Sister Osborn, why aren't you married yet?" With the bolder women it was more like a statement, "You know, if you were really doing what the Lord wanted you to do, you'd be married and having babies!"

I didn't want to be rude (well, at least not really rude). But it was actually none of their business. So, depending on my mood and the level of their intrusiveness, I would sometimes ask innocently, "Why do you want to know?" That usually elicited a flustered stammer, "Well, uh, I guess I was just curious." Then I wouldn't say another word. At other times I assumed a very woebegone expression and replied sadly, "Well, no one has ever asked me." That response often caused a blush of embarrassment as the nosy questioner beat a hasty exit!

The truth of the matter is, I worried about it myself. Trying to remain gospel centered and sane while being single in an avowedly married church isn't an easy job. (As a matter of fact, being married with a family isn't so easy either, but that's another story.)

I often silently asked, If it's so important, why haven't I gotten married yet? Was it, as some suggested none too delicately, that perhaps I was "too picky"? Others, even less diplomatic, said I probably "intimidated the socks off" any potential suitors! I was certainly trying hard to keep the commandments. So where were the promised blessings I felt I was due? After all, as the scriptures clearly state, "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise" (D&C 82:10).

I entreated the Lord. Then nagged him. No answer. It took quite a while—with much thought, prayer, study, and not a small amount of anguish—before I got the whole issue in proper perspective.

Doctors sometimes wryly joke that the most powerful diagnostic instrument known to man is the "retrospectoscope." As in, "In retrospect, this patient's symptoms first began . . ." or, "In retrospect, the first time the patient's lung cancer could be identified on chest X-ray was . . ."

I applied a spiritual retrospectoscope to my own situation. As I reflected back on the defining moments in my life, it was as plain as day that the Lord had guided those pivotal choices. He was aware of my needs long before I recognized them, before I even acknowledged his presence and influence. He took care of me then; why doubt him now? Yes, I was disappointed that some anticipated blessings hadn't materialized. But in many other respects, I felt blessed beyond my wildest hopes.

I finally realized that the rhythm and pace, the "times and seasons," of each individual's life are different. The critical thing is to discover what our own times and seasons are and to make the most of them, not yearn to follow someone else's timetable. Heavenly Father has a plan, not just for his children collectively but for each one of us individually.

Patience is a virtue I still find in short supply, at least in my own life. I still struggle with the temptation to prescribe how and especially when (usually sooner, not later!) I want those promised blessings to occur. In retrospect, I'm profoundly grateful that in his infinite love the Lord hasn't always given me what I desired but instead has blessed me with what he knew I needed!

Once again, the scriptures provide wisdom and perspective: "Wait on the Lord: be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart: wait, I say, on the Lord" (Psalm 27:14).

Going to the temple also helped me gain much-needed perspective. I had been a member of the Church for about five years when my convert brother and sister-in-law were ready to receive their endowments in the Oakland Temple. Our bishop felt I was also ready, so after careful preparation the three of us went together.

Thoughtful preparation, growing spiritual maturity, and attitude make the essential difference in individual response to the temple endowment. For me, going to the temple was an incredibly rich spiritual blessing. The temple workers were serious but kind and solicitous. The doctrines were pure, the teachings clear, the covenants meaningful, and the promised blessings unambiguous.

My temple experience and study of the scriptures helped me learn two more essential aspects of the Simeon Solution:

Like Simeon, we need to be patient, remain faithful, and wait for fulfillment of the Lord's promises to be given in the Lord's own time. The temple experience helped me understand that no blessing essential for our happiness and eternal progression will be denied, if we are faithful and obedient. It just may not come as soon as we might wish!

However, maintaining that eternal perspective isn't always easy. At least it wasn't for me. Because my schedule was so irregular, I lived alone. When I came home after a long and exhausting day at the hospital, my home was always dark and silent. I had no one with whom to share the frustrations and disappointments of a difficult day.

Except Tish, of course. Somehow sensing those rough times when I felt isolated and achingly alone, she would shove her muzzle under my arm and whimper softly in sympathy. Her tail would thump the floor as if to say, "Please don't worry. It's okay. I'm here. Everything's going to be all right."

Canine comfort was wonderful, but it was no substitute for the real thing, the eternal companionship described in the scriptures. Attending the temple sealings of friends and neighbors was always a poignant, sweet-sad experience for me.

Holidays were especially hard during those long years I was single. For some people Christmas is a particularly difficult time. The sense of heightened expectation, the joyous, upbeat atmosphere, the family gatherings all accentuate already painful feelings of loneliness and isolation.

For me, Mothers' Day was by far the worst. The absolute pits. I dutifully sat through interminable programs as the Primary children sang to harried yet proud mothers. I winced inwardly as all the mothers in the congregation were asked to rise and receive a small gift, usually a potted plant or modest corsage. It always seemed as though I was the only woman who wasn't standing and smiling. Instead I slouched down in the pew, feeling different, left out, and even a bit ashamed.

I started skipping church on Mothers' Day. It wasn't the right thing to do, of course. In fact, it made me feel quite guilty and disloyal, but feeling guilty seemed much better than feeling like an ugly duckling. Either way, it hurt, and hurt a lot. (It wasn't until many years later when a sensitive bishop decided it was appropriate to honor all the adult women of the ward—single, married with children, married but childless, divorced, and widowed—that I resumed going to church on Mothers' Day.)

The remainder of my medical training at Stanford was a blur of tireless study, sleepless nights, and endless examinations. But I finished it. Specialty certification finally in hand (thirteen years of relentless, highly competitive education after high school) I left California for my first real job: Instructor of Radiology at the University of Utah School of Medicine.

I did look forward to enjoying the single social scene in Utah. Everyone had warned me that the ratio of single men to single women in Salt Lake City was far from promising. But compared to Palo Alto, it seemed like a veritable Promised Land. In California I had known almost no worthy, tithe-paying, temple-going, single Latter-day Saint men in their thirties. Or forties. Or (gulp) even their fifties.

After arriving in Salt Lake City I dated what seemed like nearly every eligible bachelor between Logan and Springville, Maine to Montana. Enduring innumerable dates and even some euphemistically termed "Special Interest" events seemed a small price to pay for the possibility of an eternal companionship and the blessing of celestial marriage.

It didn't happen.

Thirty-one passed in a flash. Thirty-two. Thirty-five. The years inexorably rolled by. Good ones. Lonely ones. Despite my best intentions, I still sometimes nagged the Lord. And I almost—but not quite—got married.

I finally decided that one very nice, soft-spoken widower came reasonably close to what I thought was desirable in an eternal companion. He was considerably older than I, but from the eternal perspective that really doesn't count for much, does it? When he asked me to marry him, I hesitated only because I hadn't received the strong spiritual confirmation that had accompanied other truly crucial decisions in my life.

I put him off. Frustrated, he began pressing for an answer. So, in fasting and prayer, I finally went to the temple. After the session was finished I sat in the celestial room for what seemed like hours, entreating the Lord to reveal his will. Should my answer be "yes," "no," or perhaps "I'm still not sure"?

Cosmic silence.

I had temporarily forgotten a fundamental lesson from the scriptures that I had learned years before as an investigator. As if through a still, small voice this scripture came to mind: "Behold, you have not understood; you have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me.

"But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right" (D&C 9:7-8).

Impatient, I finally said to the Lord, "Well, I've made up my mind. I'm going to do it. I'm going to marry Brother _________. If I'm right, please let me feel peace about it. And if I'm not, please let me know."

The ensuing reply was a single firm but powerful mental "No!" The impression was so strong it almost seemed auditory. Startled at the strength of the unexpected answer, I looked up and said out loud, "What?" Gently shushed by a nearby temple worker, I repeated the inquiry and received the same impression.

I'm chagrined and embarrassed to admit it, but I didn't actually believe the answer. I thought my vivid imagination was working overtime. I left the temple intending to accept the proposal. Still somewhat uncertain about my decision, I dismissed my nagging anxieties. I temporarily succeeded in suppressing the uncomfortable feeling that something wasn't quite right. But however much I tried, those uncomfortable sensations would not disappear completely.

The afternoon of the next day, a bright and beautiful Sabbath, I was quietly reading when someone knocked at the front door. I peeked out the window and was surprised to see one of the priesthood leaders in our stake standing on the doorstep. He told me he was out walking in the neighborhood and thought he'd drop by "just to see how I was doing."

It was odd. Definitely odd. I had seen his wife out walking briskly on many occasions, but never her husband. This good man is a modest, rather diffident person. So when he came in and sat down in the living room, he was understandably somewhat uncomfortable and ill at ease.

After a few halting, desultory comments, he finally cleared his throat and came to the point. "I suppose I'd better tell you why I came by," he began with some hesitation. "Last night I just couldn't get to sleep. So after tossing and turning for a while I finally gave up. I went downstairs into the study to read and ponder the scriptures. After a while I began meditating, then praying, pouring my heart out to the Lord in gratitude for his mercy and blessings. At that moment I think I felt closer to the Lord than at any other time in my life. The veil seemed so thin it was as though I could almost reach through it."

He paused at the vivid memory, then continued, "The Lord made some things known to me, personal things about some events that would take place in my life later on. Then at the end of my prayer, something quite unusual happened. I began to think about you. And I had the unmistakable impression that you were facing a critical decision in your life. I wasn't told what it was. No details. But what I was told by the Spirit is that you were about to make the wrong choice. Whatever that is," he smiled almost apologetically, "you're supposed to say no!"

I was stunned. How could he possibly have known?

"Well, actually . . . I am in a real quandary about something very important," I admitted. Then I corrected myself, "I mean I was in a quandary. I was going to say 'yes' when I know I should say 'no.' Not to anything bad," I added hastily. "Now I know what I need to do."

So I turned down the proposal. But it would be years before I would know how right that decision was.

I learned an important lesson from that experience. When we plead with the Lord for help, the answer to our prayers often comes through another individual. It has been said that answers to prayer usually don't come down through the roof but they do come knocking on the door! The corollary is that we should strive to be spiritually in tune so that, should he choose, the Lord can use us to bless the lives of others.

The first time such an opportunity came to me, I'm sorry to report I ignored it.

Toward the end of my medical training, I had the opportunity to study for a few months with a particularly outstanding professor in North Carolina. I moved into a spartan but clean apartment within easy driving distance of the medical center.

Busy with the added studies, I usually worked long hours and finished late. Regarding myself as a temporary resident, I didn't make much effort to interact with the other tenants in our modest apartment complex. But I did come to know a divorced woman who lived in a crowded one-bedroom unit with her two young boys.

One night as I was driving home, I had the distinct impression that I should stop off and visit with that struggling young mother. Somehow I felt she was in trouble. But I was tired. Too busy. I was preoccupied with studying for the terrifying specialty board examinations that loomed just a few weeks away. I ignored the feelings, ate a makeshift dinner, and went to bed.

The next evening the feelings returned, stronger and more persistent. I ignored them again, attributing them to my imagination.

I woke up the next morning with the nagging, insistent feeling that something was really wrong. She did need my help. I had an early case scheduled at the hospital so I couldn't see her then. But the evening would be soon enough, I thought.

I worried about it all day. The sense of foreboding was overpowering. As soon as I could, I rushed back and hurried over to her apartment.

Empty.

The dingy curtains were drawn back, revealing a silent room. The battered, nicked furniture was scattered in disarray. A broken toy lay abandoned on the worn carpet.

Gulping back tears, I banged insistently on the door of the adjacent apartment. A woman dressed in an old housecoat and bedroom slippers answered, a cigarette dangling from her lip.

"Where's Vicky?" I demanded breathlessly, fearing the answer.

"Ah dunno," she replied laconically. "She packed up the kids and left this morning. Took off like she was in one heck of a big hurry."

"Where'd she go?"

The woman shrugged. "Dunno. She never tol' nobody. She was closemouthed, that one."

My shoulders sagged in defeat and I turned slowly back toward my own small apartment.

To this day, I don't know what happened to Vicky and her children. What I do know is that I somehow failed her and disappointed the Lord. I hope against hope that someone else more responsive to the Spirit stepped forward to help.

It's easy to offer a smooth litany of excuses. Too busy. Too tired. Too preoccupied. Too distracted. But when we ourselves need help, we hope fervently that someone else will be listening attentively and responsively for those spiritual promptings. As for me, I promised the Lord I would never ignore them again.

Vicky, wherever you are, I'm sorry. I hope things worked out. I learned my lesson. I just hope the cost to you wasn't too high.
