Anne Osborn Poelman, Simeon Solution: One Woman's Spiritual Odyssey ( 1994)

Chapter 13

Obedience

The air of anticipation that filled the stake center was almost palpable. The excited young women chatted animatedly with their mothers as they began filling the chapel more than an hour before the scheduled meeting time. The group rapidly overflowed into the adjacent cultural hall as numerous rows of folding chairs were removed from storage and hurriedly set up.

This particular Young Women's conference was a truly special occasion in our stake. One of the Twelve Apostles had accepted the invitation to address the girls, their mothers, and the ward and stake auxiliary leaders. The stake presidency, stake high council, and bishoprics were seated on the stand with the Young Women leaders. I felt especially privileged to be present in the congregation as the adopted "big sister" of some neighbors in the stake.

The buzz of conversation hushed abruptly as the presiding Apostle was escorted to the podium. After the welcome, opening hymn, invocation, and a special musical number, the Young Women's president and our stake president each spoke briefly.

At last, the long-awaited moment arrived. There was an audible rustle as the Apostle was introduced. He arranged his scriptures on the podium and adjusted his glasses. He warmly acknowledged the stake officers and graciously thanked the young women for this special opportunity to address them.

"My dear young sisters," he began as he took out his written talk. Then he suddenly stopped, staring intently at the unfolded pages. He took a deep breath and momentarily closed his eyes. When he finally opened them, he smiled faintly and nodded slightly as if to himself.

With a small sigh he carefully refolded the talk and put it back inside his coat pocket. "Dear sisters," he began again, "I had a talk all prepared. But the talk I'd prepared for you isn't the one the Lord wants me to give now. I feel prompted to speak about an entirely different subject."

You could have heard a pin drop.

"A few days ago I received a letter written by several girls who were roommates at BYU. It was two pages full of single-spaced typewritten questions. The questions dealt very specifically and in rather graphic clinical detail with a variety of dating situations. The bottom line is that they wanted to know just how far they could go and still stay morally clean."

He grinned ruefully. "To tell you the truth, I had absolutely no idea how to begin answering them. The questions started with a first date and ran all the way to if you were engaged how intimate you could be and still maintain temple worthiness.

"I hate to admit it," he continued, "but I procrastinated answering them. I put that letter on the very bottom of my correspondence pile and tried to forget about it."

We all smiled, knowing how easy it is to procrastinate.

"After a few days, the letter gradually worked its way to the top of the pile. I still didn't know what to do with it. So I put it right back on the bottom again!"

An audible chuckle from the audience punctuated his remarks.

He peered over his glasses at the group. "When the letter resurfaced the second time, I knew I had to do something about it. But I still had no idea how to approach answering their questions. So finally I went to the temple in fasting and prayer. I asked the Lord how I could help these sisters. And then the answer came to me, clearly and unambiguously. With a grateful and relieved heart I returned to the office and began dictating my long-delayed reply."

He grew serious. "I said, 'Dear Sisters: The problem is you're asking the wrong questions. The question isn't how close you can come to the edge of the cliff before falling off, but how far away can you stay!'"

When I heard that statement, I had the satisfying inward aha! of discovery. For sure, I thought, no one ever fell off a cliff who didn't get close enough to get pushed over the edge or, peering into the abyss below, get spiritual vertigo and lose balance.

Few of us are ever dragged kicking and screaming to the precipice and bodily thrown over the edge! More commonly, we succumb to curiosity, gradually creeping toward the cliff to see what's there. Or we experiment with just how close to the edge we can walk without falling off.

The Apostle elaborated this concept further, illustrating how important it is not merely to obey the commandments but to observe them with exactness. He taught that diligent, willing obedience is absolutely crucial for our eternal progression. His counsel was to avoid compromising situations, staying as far away as possible from potential temptation or even the appearance of wrongdoing.

I've never forgotten that talk and the profound impact it had on everyone present. It became another guiding principle of the Simeon Solution:

Grudging, reluctant, or fearful obedience is not sufficient. Helaman attributed the success of his outnumbered stripling warriors to their obedience, faith, and trust in the Lord: "They did obey and observe to perform every word of command with exactness; yea, and even according to their faith it was done unto them" (Alma 57:21; italics added).

Likewise, the Lord commanded Joshua: "Only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou mayest observe to do according to all the law, which Moses my servant commanded thee: turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest prosper whithersoever thou goest" (Joshua 1:7).

The Lord has said he will bless us if we keep his commandments with exactness, diligence, honor, and a willing spirit. I was about to discover how generously he keeps his end of the bargain!
