Anne Osborn Poelman, Simeon Solution: One Woman's Spiritual Odyssey ( 1994)

Chapter 14

Ron

At last I felt genuine peace and contentment. The major, life-changing decisions I had made—sometimes knowingly, sometimes not—seemed to be the right ones. In retrospect, I now realize that the Lord brought me to this place, at this time.

I really liked Salt Lake City and loved our neighborhood with its cozy homes. I enjoyed the ward and felt very much at ease there. Many neighbors included me in family activities, and I developed the custom of inviting widows and families with hard-pressed mothers to Sunday dinner.

My career was also progressing. My first radiology textbook was well under way and I liked teaching in the medical school. Patients with difficult diagnostic problems were often referred to the University Medical Center. Using the combination of medical knowledge and spiritual insight to bless the lives of others was both gratifying and effective.

The prophet Amulek taught the Nephites to exercise faith and call on the Lord to bless their homes and families, their crops and fields (see Alma 34:17-25). Would the same process work with patients? Indeed it did! I found that if I were faced with a genuinely puzzling medical problem, prayer often worked wonders. Following the Lord's admonition to Oliver Cowdery in the ninth section of the Doctrine and Covenants, I would mull over a diagnostic dilemma and "study it out" in my mind, then ask the Lord if the conclusion I had reached was the correct one. If it was right, I felt the confirming influence of the Spirit. Skeptical colleagues wouldn't have believed it. But it worked! I never signed the Lord's name at the bottom of my X-ray reports, but at least I knew it belonged there.

I rarely dated now. As the years passed and I reached my mid-thirties, the already narrow "field" of eligible (read: active Latter-day Saint and at least somewhat appealing) men narrowed to a seemingly miniscule number. No matter. I was growing professionally, had a social schedule filled with family and neighborhood activities, and continued to learn about the gospel. I studied Church history and doctrine. I taught evening institute classes on the Book of Mormon and the New Testament.

By this period in my life I really felt I would in all likelihood never marry, at least not in mortality. But that was okay. The Simeon Solution and its eternal perspective made me certain that if I were faithful, no requisite blessings would ultimately be denied me.

I found the words of President Lorenzo Snow, confirmed by many subsequent Church leaders (including President Howard W. Hunter), especially comforting: "There is no Latter-day Saint who dies after having lived a faithful life who will lose anything because of having failed to do certain things when opportunities were not furnished him or her. In other words, if a young man or a young woman has no opportunity of getting married, and they live faithful lives up to the time of their death, they will have all the blessings, exaltation, and glory that any man or woman will have who had this opportunity and improved it. That is sure and positive" (Clyde J. Williams, comp., The Teachings of Lorenzo Snow [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984], p. 138).

Still more years passed, for the most part happily and productively. After serving for several years on the Sunday School General Board, I was called to serve on the Relief Society General Board.

At April conference in 1981, I was seated with the other auxiliary general board members in the front of the Tabernacle. After one of the sessions had concluded, Elder Ronald E. Poelman of the Seventy came into the congregation and chatted with me briefly. One of his brothers together with his wife and children had been guests at my traditional Sunday dinners. Elder Poelman had seen them recently and came down to convey to me their greetings. We were interrupted mid-conversation by someone who wanted to speak to me about an upcoming regional conference. Elder Poelman turned away, and we didn't speak again for another six months.

I really didn't know Ronald Poelman. He had been a counselor in the Palo Alto stake presidency when I had joined the Church. We had never become personally acquainted, although he later came to know my brother, Greg, who was serving in the bishopric of one of the Stanford wards.

Elder Poelman moved to Utah in 1978 after he was called as a General Authority. His first wife, Claire, died in 1979 after a protracted bout with breast cancer. Elder Poelman, a tall, handsome, but somewhat aloof man had evinced no interest whatsoever in dating. Contrary to popular impression, none of the Brethren ever pressed him to remarry.

At October conference in 1981, he again approached me following the Saturday morning session, this time to convey a greeting from my brother, Greg, whom he had just seen the previous week in California. I looked over Elder Poelman's shoulder and saw most of the Quorum of Seventy along with many of the Twelve intently observing the interchange. Ron later told me (much later, I might add!) that he had looked over my shoulder and seen the Relief Society General Board members assiduously trying not to stare at the two of us.

Once more we were interrupted. And once more he turned away. During lunch later that day, Barbara Smith, then general president of the Relief Society, pointedly asked me, "What's this with you and Elder Poelman?"

"What do you mean?"

"Just what I said. I saw you talking together."

I blushed (a rare event for a clinically hardened doctor) and replied somewhat heatedly, "Well, it's nothing. I really don't know him at all."

She persisted, "Well, do you like him?"

I was really flustered. "I said I don't know him. I've talked with him at general conference. That's all!"

She wouldn't let it drop. "Well, would you like to date him?"

I silently ground my teeth and replied, trying unsuccessfully to terminate the exchange, "If he ever wants to call me, he will. He can look up my number in the Church directory. It's right there."

Barbara's husband, Doug, had been observing this interchange quietly. He finally spoke up and observed, "Annie, it's not that simple. First of all, a General Authority can't just date casually like anyone else. He has no privacy. Second, let me make another observation. If Barbara died and I were single, the mere thought of calling someone—especially someone like you—for a date would terrify me! I'd rather dig a hole, crawl into it, and pull the top over me than pick up that phone. I'd need a bit of encouragement. You can be rather intimidating, you know."

Hmm. Doug Smith was a confident, competent, successful executive. Perhaps it wasn't as simple as I had naively supposed. And maybe I was somewhat aloof myself, carrying my professional demeanor around as an invisible but definite shield.

I didn't say anything more after that. But I did think about what Brother Smith had said, and I finally decided he was right. Perhaps Elder Poelman needed that bit of encouragement. I called his brother and sister-in-law and invited them for dinner the following Sunday night. When they accepted readily, I called Elder Poelman and asked if he would feel comfortable joining us for a quiet evening. To the surprise of both of us he replied, "Yes. I'd like that."

I've never planned a menu more carefully to seem casual and effortless. And it worked; it was a nice evening. Amazingly, it wasn't even awkward. The four of us enjoyed the food and conversation, then washed the dishes and cleaned up the kitchen together. Elder Poelman looked around the house, noting the titles in my extensive library. ("Have you read all those books?" "Not all, but most of them." "Is this your tool kit?" "Yes." "Do you know how to use all those things?" "Yes, most of them." He later said jokingly that that was when he really started to get interested.)

Elder Poelman arrived and left with his brother and sister-in-law. Safer that way, I guess! Certainly appropriate. Afterward he wrote me a nice, very proper thank-you note. And I didn't hear from him again for two months.

In early December, his sister-in-law called to invite me to their home for what sounded like a rather unusual evening. Elder Poelman was taking his youngest daughter, Laurel, then a sophomore at BYU, to Israel during the holidays. His brother and sister-in-law planned to show slides of their own trip several years before. Would I like to join them? A strange "date," if that's what it was: inviting someone to see your brother's old slides of his Holy Land trip! I had already promised friends I would play doubles tennis but agreed to come as soon as we finished.

That evening, hair still wet from a quick shower, I walked the few blocks to their home. Laurel apparently had to cancel at the last minute so the four of us watched the slides and chatted casually. As we were preparing to leave after some light refreshments, Ron noted that the only car outside was his. By then it was cold, the wind was howling, and it was starting to snow. So he did the gracious thing: He asked if he could drive me home.

From his point of view, it was a "white knuckle" trip. And not because the roads were slick with the first dusting of snow, either! When we reached my house, he escorted me halfway up the driveway, turned around, and quickly headed toward his car with a brief "Merry Christmas!" I say he actually ran; he says he merely "walked briskly." We both agree that he acted like a scared sixteen year old!

Two more months passed. The Israel trip came and went. Then one day in early February Elder Poelman called to see if I'd like to go out to dinner and the ballet. I accepted.

He continued, "I have a question. How do you feel about being seen with me in public?"

"I should think that would be of more concern to you than it is to me."

"It is!"

We both laughed. A rather long, remarkably comfortable conversation ensued. Our plans for the evening were complicated somewhat by my scheduled departure on an overnight flight to Florida for a vacation with my parents. But we eventually worked out all the details.

The designated evening finally arrived. After a quiet dinner at a restaurant near the theatre, we walked into the ballet. We immediately encountered what seemed like half of Salt Lake City in the lobby: several Relief Society board members, one of Ron's colleagues from the Seventy, two more of his brothers and their wives, and several colleagues of mine.

I don't remember much of the ballet. Neither does Ron. I was acutely aware of sitting next to him, our arms lightly touching. Afterward, we hastily departed for the airport. With only a bit more than ten minutes before the scheduled takeoff, Ron deposited me and my carry-on bag at the curb. "I really enjoyed the evening. It wasn't as bad as I thought," he confessed. I knew he didn't mean me; he was referring to the terrifying experience of dating for the first time after nearly thirty years of married life.

"I had a wonderful time too. Thank you."

"When you get back from Florida, perhaps we could get together again."

"I'd like that very much."

I disappeared into the airport and ran for the plane. I made it, but just barely. Later I wrote Ron a brief note from Florida, thanking him again for a lovely evening. I told my parents that I'd had an "interesting" date with a widower, but didn't elaborate.

I thought and prayed a great deal about my budding relationship—if a single date could be so called—with Ron. I certainly didn't love him; I scarcely knew him. But I sensed a certain inevitability about the relationship that frightened me more than a little.

I had also accepted an invitation from the Tampa, Florida, stake to fly in and speak at a special youth conference during my vacation. The stake president and his wife met me at the airport and took me to their home. After dinner the three of us settled in to get acquainted prior to the conference the following day.

"Anne, how are things going for you in Salt Lake City?" the stake president inquired. I launched into an enthusiastic description of my professional activities but he stopped me mid-sentence. "No, that's not what I meant. How are things in your personal life?"

I was taken aback by the pointed question from someone I scarcely knew. Yet for some inexplicable reason, I felt completely comfortable in answering frankly. "It's sort of—interesting. I dated a great deal during the first few years after I moved to Salt Lake. Then I pretty much stopped dating. No one really appealed to me. Until recently. The night I left to come down here I had a date with a widower who is an attorney," I replied with deliberate vagueness.

"Is it Elder Poelman?" he inquired bluntly.

I was truly startled. "Yes. How did you know?"

"I just do. How do you feel about it?"

"Confused. A bit scared. I hardly know him."

"Would you like me to give you a priesthood blessing?" he asked kindly.

I had rarely requested such a blessing but readily accepted his thoughtful offer. I don't think I've ever had such a direct blessing, before or since. In the blessing the stake president told me that Elder Poelman would call and ask if he could pick me up at the airport in Salt Lake. He would then take me home and ask me to marry him, and I was supposed to say yes.

I felt an immediate calmness and knew that what he said would in fact happen. We all had tears in our eyes, knowing that together we had just experienced a direct message from the Lord.

After the youth conference the stake president and his wife returned me to the airport. When I promised to keep in touch, they laughingly declared, "Just invite us to the wedding!"

My parents met me at the West Palm Beach airport, a letter from Ron in hand. He wanted to pick me up in Salt Lake when I returned! Knowing then what would surely happen, I decided to prepare my parents for the event.

"Ron says in the letter that he wants to meet me at the airport when I fly back to Salt Lake City. I need to tell you something else. When he takes me home he'll ask me to marry him. And I'm going to say yes!"

My mother, obviously and understandably startled, asked, "Well, do you love him?"

My reply was honest but definite. "No. But I will."

I had my own "white knuckle" trip back to Salt Lake. The flight seemed interminable but we finally arrived. I walked up the jetway and could see Ron waiting in the concourse, smiling broadly. I gave him a brief hug—our first embrace—and we headed for the baggage claim area. He never said a word when my two suitcases and three big cardboard boxes tumbled down the chute. A good prognostic sign!

He took me home and I invited him in for a glass of fresh Florida orange juice. It was cold in the house; Ron readily accepted my invitation to build a fire in the fireplace and stay for a catch-up visit.

A huge fire blazing merrily away, we cautiously positioned ourselves at opposite ends of the sofa.

"You know," Ron said softly, "I've thought a lot about you while you were away."

"I've thought a lot about you too."

"I know we're both busy and your hospital schedule is often unpredictable. But I was really hoping perhaps we might spend some more time together. There're some things I need to say to you, but I'm not quite sure how to go about doing it."

I replied quietly, "That's not really necessary because I already know."

He looked me squarely in the eyes with unmitigated joy and relief. "Well, then!" he exclaimed. "Will you marry me?"

"Yes! What took you so long?"

We both laughed uproariously at the saucy exchange. And closed the distance on the couch.

Three months later, Ron and I were sealed together in the Salt Lake Temple. We've been married for nearly thirteen wonderful years. Improbable as our courtship and marriage seems, it really happened like that. In retrospect, I think it's a classic example of the Simeon Solution at work: Be obedient, stay faithful, trust in the Lord. Be patient and remain spiritually centered. Stand firm in the faith.

Of course I can't promise every single brother or sister in the Church such a dramatic result. But I do firmly believe that our Heavenly Father is in charge, and that's sufficient. The Lord knows each one of us individually, personally, and intimately. He knows our innermost yearnings. He hears the earnest, prayerful pleadings of our hearts. He has promised that if we strive to live righteously and keep his commandments, he will pour out uncounted blessings on us. But the timing and specific nature of those blessings is up to him.

There's a bit of the miraculous in most people's lives, however mundane those lives may seem to them. For example, ask a convert how he or she came to join the Church, and watch for an interesting response. Or ask a happily married couple how they met. The latter is no mere conversational gambit, although it's usually a successful one. Try it sometime. Watch people's faces as they smile in wonder and recognition at the Lord's guidance of those long-ago events. Truly, if we're patient, faithful, and open to promptings from the Spirit, the Lord can and does work joyous miracles in our lives.
