Anne Osborn Poelman, Simeon Solution: One Woman's Spiritual Odyssey ( 1994)

Chapter 15

Adversity

A storybook romance, a blissfully happy married life, a productive career doing worthwhile things, and meaningful Church service. It couldn't last forever, could it?

Certainly not. And it didn't.

Late summer of that fateful year had already been a particularly stressful time for both Ron and me, filled with demanding work and pressing family concerns. The transient rest and relaxation we had enjoyed during a brief July break was replaced with August's relentless schedule.

The General Authorities' common occupational hazard, fatigue, was etched on Ron's face as he sat down to eat a hurried breakfast one Saturday morning before heading to the airport.

"Sweetheart, you look really tired," I remarked with concern, putting a bowl of freshly picked raspberries in front of him.

"I'm really beat," he admitted. "I haven't been sleeping well. Lots on my mind. And there never seems to be enough time to get everything that needs to be done . . .

I was startled to see he had fallen sound asleep mid-sentence. The poor guy was so exhausted he couldn't even stay awake to eat breakfast! Let him sleep, I decided.

Half an hour passed while I quietly cleaned up the kitchen, trying not to disturb him. Ron was immobile, out cold. But time was finally getting tight, and I didn't want him to miss his plane. I whispered in his ear, "Ron, time to wake up."

No response.

I kissed him on the cheek. "Sweetheart, we need to get going."

Still no response.

I gently but insistently shook his arm. "Ron, please wake up! Time to go!"

He opened his eyes. Looking confused and disoriented, he silently stared at the bowl of raspberries. He shook his head, trying vainly to clear his mind, then slowly reached for the spoon.

And missed!

I watched with mounting horror as he tried again, clumsily grasping the spoon in his fist. I felt frozen in stunned disbelief as he spilled the berries down his bathrobe.

This isn't happening! my mind screamed in frightened protest. But it was.

"Ron, I . . . "

He looked at me blankly, then tried to talk. His speech was slurred and thick.

This is a bad dream. A nightmare, I told myself again. It isn't real. Strokes happen to other people. Patients. Not my husband!

I struggled to compose myself, the doctor-half of me dispassionately making the diagnosis and already planning for the medical emergency while the wife-half was still immobilized from sheer terror.

The doctor-half won, at least temporarily. "Ron," I said decisively, "you're having a stroke. We need to get you to the hospital. Right now."

"No, I'm okay." His speech was better but still thick.

Not wanting to argue and risk upsetting him, I temporarily compromised. "All right. Just lie down on the couch in the living room so I can check your blood pressure." I helped him into the living room, noting his poor balance and his staggering, hesitant gait.

He stretched out obediently while I took his blood pressure. It was elevated—not critically, but high enough to be worrisome.

"I'm feeling better now," he said. "I need to get dressed." His speech was improving by the minute, to my vast relief. It still wasn't normal but it was definitely better.

"Sweetheart," I replied, "you've had a stroke. We need to get to the hospital."

"No," he insisted. "I need to go right to the airport. I can't miss my conference."

"Well, let's get you dressed first. Then we can decide whether we drive to the hospital or the airport." I knew which it would have to be, but I didn't want to make him anxious and further raise his already high blood pressure.

I helped him up the stairs, then sat and watched as he valiantly tried to dress. He couldn't get his leg into his pants. He clenched his jaw as he kept trying and missing. Frustrated, he finally looked up and reluctantly conceded, "Something really is wrong with me. My legs won't work right. My coordination is off. Let's go to the hospital."

I quickly called the emergency room at University Hospital, asked them to alert the neurology resident and on-call attending faculty, and drove Ron up the hill. The E.R. team was waiting as we sped into the portico. Gently but quickly they transferred Ron to a waiting wheeled cart and pushed him into an empty treatment room.

Knowing that his care was now in the capable hands of the E.R. team and the senior staff neurologists, I collapsed into a chair and wept. The cool, controlled doctor persona evaporated. All that was left was Worried Wife.

Each snippet of good news, no matter how small, seemed supremely important. I grasped desperately at each medical life preserver tossed into my own raging sea of emotional turmoil.

Ron's symptoms, at least the worst of them, continued to improve slowly. The CAT scan showed no bleeding into the brain. Good news. The angiogram, an imaging study that depicts the brain's blood vessels, showed an abnormally enlarged main artery where the flow slowed, tending to form clots that could break off and plug branches that supplied blood to critical areas of the brain. Bad news.

The diagnostic and laboratory studies completed, Ron was wheeled into a spacious, quiet room on the neurosciences floor. I sat by his bedside, hypnotized by the slow drip-drip-drip of lifesaving blood thinners from the intravenous infusion suspended overhead. The whole situation seemed completely surreal.

A steady stream of residents and attending doctors came and went. They examined Ron, poking and prodding, tapping his knees and elbows with ubiquitous rubber hammers, pricking his skin, making him walk and talk and count fingers. Perform like some poor circus animal, I thought.

I seemed invisible as the doctors conferred with each other in hushed tones. "Unusual clinical presentation," I heard the senior neurologist say to a group of attentive medical students and interns. "Probably a small embolus to one of the pontine perforating branches off that ectatic basilar artery. Temporarily knocked out the RAS."

Medical gobbledygook. On the receiving end for a change, I irrationally thought they all talked like that so patients and their families wouldn't know what they were saying. You know, like speaking a foreign language right in front of others who of course can't understand. Rude, isn't it? Down deep inside I really knew better; medicalese was a spare, technical language that described precisely what was being observed. But seen from the other side it seemed cruelly opaque and impersonal.

"Interesting case," the senior resident commented.

Interesting case! My husband? I thought, outraged.

His demeanor shifting from professor to concerned colleague, the senior neurologist turned to me and explained, "Ron's had a posterior fossa transient ischemic attack." That was medicalese for a "warning stroke" in the back of the brain.

He continued, "Fortunately, most of the symptoms have cleared. He has a bit of residual dysarthria and ataxia but I think that will eventually resolve, too." The speech and walking problems would get better. Good news.

"However . . ."

The catch. There always seems to be a "however."

"The angiogram showed rather severe vertebrobasilar dolichoectasia with very sluggish blood flow. I think Ron's superb cardiovascular conditioning probably saved his life. He was somehow able to maintain some posterior fossa perfusion until the clot lysed. So he had ischemia rather than frank infarction. He has recovered remarkably well. But he'll be at risk for the rest of his life. I would recommend gradually weaning him off the heparin drip and onto oral anticoagulants."

That was sobering news. It meant that unless Ron's blood could be "thinned" successfully, the abnormal blood vessel would continue to be a source of problems. This time he had escaped with virtually no brain damage. The next time he might not be so lucky.

"What happens if he's anticoagulated and he falls and hits his head? Or has another stroke and this time it bleeds?" I asked, already knowing the likely answer.

"That's the risk, of course, but I don't really see much in the way of alternatives," the neurologist answered. "It's not a surgically amenable lesion. Medical therapy is the only realistic treatment."

I sighed despondently, knowing the knife-edge balance Ron would walk for the rest of his life, however long and precarious that might be. The neurologist patted my shoulder sympathetically, gathered his team together, and left to see other patients.

Ron's brothers had been standing outside the room, patiently waiting until the doctors completed their rounds. They all filed in, hugged me, and surrounded the bed. Everyone had the sense not to make halfhearted jokes in an attempt to alleviate the somber mood. After solicitous inquiries and expressions of love and support, they gave him a priesthood blessing. It was full of hope and comfort.

We all felt better.

Not wanting to tire Ron, his brothers left after the brief visit and I was momentarily alone with him. "Sweetheart," I said, finally needing to break the tension, "if you die and leave me with all that new exercise equipment at home, I'm going to be mad as all heck!"

Ron grinned weakly, "I'll do my best. I have no intention of leaving you. With or without the equipment!" He closed his eyes, exhausted with the effort of speaking, and was soon sound asleep.

Needing time and space to reflect, I slipped out of the room and went down to my office—a quiet place on a Saturday afternoon. Sinking into a chair, I buried my face in my hands. The merciful numbness of the immediate shock was wearing off as awful reality came crashing in.

There was a soft knock on the door. I opened it reluctantly. Lucy, my pediatrician sister, walked in, steadying herself with her cane. She hugged me, saying, "I thought I might find you here."

We both sat down.

"Ron was sleeping when I dropped by. The neurologist says most of the neurologic deficit has cleared. He's going to be okay." Lucy paused, then perceptively asked, "So how are you doing, Annie?"

"I'm not sure," I confessed. "It all happened so unexpectedly. I guess what's hardest now is that all of a sudden life seems so uncertain."

"Annie, it always was. You just didn't recognize it," she said with a wry smile. Lucy has multiple sclerosis, the chronic relapsing-remitting kind, and wakes up each morning facing the distinct possibility that another part of her body won't work right.

I nodded at her insight, reluctantly acknowledging this unwanted intrusion of new anxieties into my life. After a few additional comments and another hug thrown in for good measure, we walked together toward the hospital's main entrance. It was a surprisingly beautiful day. Tired of trying to cope with everything, I decided to take a brief walk.

Everyone seemed so normal. People sat on benches, chatting happily and munching on sandwiches, oblivious to the awful event that had just transpired. How could they? Why weren't they grief stricken, as I was?

The sun was blindingly brilliant. Why hadn't it stopped in its tracks, acknowledging the sudden event that had wrenched our lives irretrievably out of mold?

Orderlies and technicians on break were playing basketball. The thunk-thunk of a dribble and then the clank of a missed shot ricocheting off the iron rim annoyed me. Why weren't they standing still, in silent respect and prayer for Ron's life? They don't even realize, I thought.

Everything seemed so normal, and yet I knew it wasn't and never would be, ever again. The ebb and flow of daily life continued unabated; the humdrum activities swirled all around and left me feeling isolated, fearful, and resentful.

When I returned to Ron's room, it was filled with flowers and fruit baskets, cards and helium-filled balloons. The first of many General Authority visitors had already arrived. As they came and went I found myself envying their robust good health, resenting their cheerful demeanor and unfailing optimism.

"Don't worry about your assignments," they said to Ron, "they're covered. Take as much time as you need," they added.

Baloney, I thought in wounded suspicion. What you really mean is, how much time will you miss? When can you get back? Are you going to be fully functional? I knew it wasn't rational, but I enjoyed the brief surge of righteous indignation I felt. It was better than feeling so alone and vulnerable.

Sunday evening, Elders Dean Larsen, then the Senior President of the Seventy, and Burke Peterson, with whom Ron was serving in the Southwest Area Presidency, returned to Salt Lake City from their own weekend assignments. At Ron's request, they had been the first ones notified of his condition.

When they walked into the room, I quickly put on my now-practiced mask of professional detachment and controlled wifely concern. The two men grasped Ron's arms in warm greeting, then turned to me and asked, "How's he doing?"

Standard question. Funny how people often talk about the sick individual in the third person. I gave the standard answer, reciting the event and the guarded but hopeful prognosis in a tired litany.

They both paused, then gently guided me into the hallway, out of earshot. "And how are you doing?"

The dam finally broke. Long-suppressed tears welled up and all the grief and anxiety spilled out in a flood. I was angry with the Lord for letting it happen to us. I resented the Church because of the relentless schedule I was sure had contributed to Ron's stroke. I was sad. I was mad. I was confused. I wasn't sure what I felt.

To their great credit and my eternal gratitude, those two good brethren didn't protest. They didn't offer false assurances. They didn't even offer a mild but justifiable rebuke, "Oh, you mustn't feel that way."

They just let me talk. They understood. And when I had finally finished running the gamut of my emotions, they gave me my own special blessing.

I'm not sure who was healed more, Ron or me. He did recover. In fact, only careful examination by an expert neurologist would disclose even minor residual problems. He does have to be very careful, but perhaps that's good.

Both of us learned some important things from that experience. We no longer take health and well-being for granted. We recognize life for the great blessing it is. It's true that I don't know what challenges tomorrow might bring. Frankly, I try not to think about it too much. But I do know one thing: whatever happens, it'll be okay. I waited a long time for Ron; I could do it again, if necessary. It would be hard, but with an eternal perspective and trust in the Lord, all things are possible. And bearable, too.
