Anne Osborn Poelman, Simeon Solution: One Woman's Spiritual Odyssey ( 1994)

Chapter 16

Unity or Uniformity?

The annual North America Central Area Mission Presidents' Seminar was approaching rapidly. This particular year the meeting was to be held under the direction of Elder Neal A. Maxwell. At the time, Ron was serving in the Area Presidency and we were consequently both invited to attend the seminar in historic Nauvoo, Illinois.

Mission presidents' seminars, traditionally three-day events that include instructional, spiritual, and some recreational activities, are carefully planned and greatly anticipated by the leaders and their wives. Much prayerful, thoughtful consideration is given to both the content and structure of these important meetings.

All the participants, namely the General Authorities and their wives as well as the mission presidents and their wives, would attend plenary sessions of this conference. A special breakout session for the wives had also been included in the packed schedule. As wife of the presiding senior Apostle, Sister Colleen Maxwell was our designated leader. She was acutely conscious of her responsibilities as well as very much aware of the unique nature of our special meeting and the opportunities it presented.

Well in advance of the meeting, Sister Maxwell asked the other General Authorities' wives to meet with her and discuss ideas about the session. Several suggestions were offered that might maximize the meeting's effectiveness. As is nearly always the case, the number of potential discussion items far outweighed the relatively limited time allowed for them.

After hearing everyone out, Sister Maxwell began to assign responsibilities. I, the youngest and by far the least experienced member of the group, was greatly relieved when the program was nearly complete and my name hadn't been mentioned.

My relief didn't last.

"Annie," Sister Maxwell said, turning to me, "I think we should hear from you at the meeting."

I groaned inwardly but still hoped my participation might be a relatively simple assignment, something like giving the closing prayer.

No such luck. "In fact," she added, "the more I think about it, the more I feel you should lead the discussion period. You could take a few minutes at the beginning and then open the discussion up to everyone."

Oh, no! I thought. I had only attended two other mission presidents' seminars and knew that such an assignment required the wisdom of experience combined with a real feeling for the challenges the sisters faced on a daily basis.

"Colleen," I demurred, "you know I'll do whatever you ask. But I feel really strange about the whole thing. I'm a convert. I didn't grow up in the Church. I've never been on a mission. I've never had children. I know zip about teenagers. And I've never cooked for the masses, either! What in the world would I talk about? What could I say that anyone doesn't already know better than I do?"

Everyone chuckled at my obvious discomfort.

Sister Maxwell was insistent. "Annie, we're putting you on the program for the discussion."

Later I spoke to her privately. "Are you sure about this?" I inquired dubiously.

She smiled, "I'm sure."

"What do you think we should discuss?"

"Frankly, I don't know."

"You don't know!" my panic rose a notch.

"No. But you will," she said gently but firmly.

I've never lost any sleep over giving medical lectures or delivering a scientific paper to an audience of thousands. But I experienced a lot of wakeful nights after Sister Maxwell's assignment. I prayed about it intensely and knew she was right. I was supposed to speak briefly and then lead the main discussion. On what topic, I hadn't the faintest idea.

I prayed about the specific subject and got no answer. There would be plenty of doctrinal discussions in the plenary sessions, and I didn't think more of the same would be appropriate.

Desperate for suggestions, I called several women I knew who had been mission presidents' wives. Some had interesting ideas but they just didn't seem quite right for us. I even thought of calling half a dozen women who were "old hands" and asking each one for her best two or three recipes to serve a minimum of twenty!

With barely a week left before the seminar, I had almost concluded this would have to be one of those times when "it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak" (Matthew 10:19).

Then, quite suddenly and unexpectedly, the answer came.

The Midwest in late autumn is glorious. The suffocating heat and high humidity of summer have faded, yielding to pleasantly sunny days and cool, crisp evenings. Silos and corn cribs are filled to bursting with the rich harvest and the fertile, loamy fields are meticulously plowed and fertilized in anticipation of the next plantings. Produce stands spring up along country roads, offering pumpkins, Indian corn, assorted decorative gourds, late-harvest pears, and homemade jams. The fall colors are past their peak, but a few leaves cling tenaciously to barren branches and brightly colored berries accent the dense underbrush.

We drove across the broad, lazy Mississippi River toward the Nauvoo lowlands. After freshening up at our hotel, we had a lovely dinner and retired early in anticipation of the next day's crowded schedule.

Ron and I arose before dawn to jog through the restored town and around the old temple site, then turned down along the river bank. The air was pungent, redolent with earthy odors and the damp smell of the nearby Mississippi. I would have enjoyed the spectacular dawn had I not felt so nervous. Mercifully, I didn't have an interminably long wait. The sisters' seminar was scheduled for the afternoon session of the first day.

The opening session was truly outstanding. Elder Maxwell presided and welcomed everyone. After the introductions he spoke briefly, then called on several members of the Area Presidencies (including Ron) to speak. Elder Maxwell then filled the balance of the morning with an extraordinarily inspiring talk about Joseph Smith. We sat spellbound as he expressed his deep love for Joseph Smith and delineated some of the Prophet's most profound doctrinal insights. Engrossed in the ideas Elder Maxwell was discussing so movingly, I temporarily forgot my nervous apprehension.

Lunch was over in a flash and the sisters started gathering for our breakout meeting. They were excited and upbeat as they chatted together prior to the afternoon session. I said little, wondering if what I had planned would really work.

The wives relaxed visibly as Sister Maxwell started the meeting, immediately putting everyone at ease with her gracious manner and approachable personality. A promising beginning.

After the opening hymn and prayer, Sister Maxwell and the wives of the other two Area Presidency members spoke. She then announced that the balance of the afternoon would be an open, informal discussion that she had asked me to lead after I made some brief introductory remarks. She told them a bit about me, then sat down.

I stood up, praying silently, Lord, please let it work.

"Sisters," I said, unable to keep the nervous tension from my voice, "when Sister Maxwell gave me this assignment, I had no idea what to do. I feel really inadequate. Who am I to be teaching you? You've all been members of the Church longer than I have. You know the scriptures and the doctrines. You've already been out in the mission field for periods varying from a few months to over two years. I've never even been on a mission myself."

I could see a few wordless protests forming. "No," I continued, "I have little experience as a General Authority's wife. Ron and I have been married for just six years. I've never had children. In fact, Ron tells me my theories of child-raising—based purely on abstract ideas and not one whit in practical experience—would curl your hair!"

They laughed and I felt better.

"I don't know beans about teenagers. I've never cooked for more than a dozen people in my life. What I'm really good at is diagnosing brain tumors and strokes, and I hope that will never be very useful for you. So I really pondered and prayed about what the Lord wanted us to discuss this afternoon. It took some time, but I feel I finally received the answer. I'd like to talk with you about discouragement, depression, and their malignant cousin, despair."

I could hear a sharp intake of breath as the sisters reacted to this unexpected turn. I continued, "We all feel discouraged from time to time. Such feelings are normal when our responsibilities seem overwhelming and unremitting. Personal resources are strained and feelings of inadequacy are exacerbated when the demands and expectations of others exceed our ability to meet them.

"Frankly, at first I felt really discouraged when Sister Maxwell gave me this assignment. I couldn't imagine what I could ever bring to this discussion that might be helpful. I thought and prayed about it. For a long time I didn't have the slightest clue. It made me feel inadequate, even a bit desperate. Maybe that's part of the process: learning to recognize our own shortcomings. Realizing our dependence on the Lord and somehow learning to cope with always falling short is another part."

I talked about the difference between feeling discouraged and being depressed. I then asked the sisters what they thought depression really was. How could it be recognized and helped? Did they know anyone who might be suffering from depression?

At first the sisters hesitated, each reluctant to be the first to comment. When one finally spoke up, the dam broke.

The afternoon flew by. When Ron opened the door to gather us for the closing session, the sisters were still talking animatedly. Realistically. Hopefully. Helpfully. And about a topic they had initially felt reluctant to discuss.

Those sisters felt good. I did too. My inexperience and different background hadn't been a handicap at all. In fact, it was okay, and safe, to express openly our feelings of inadequacy. To me that's one of the most wonderful things about the Church. Years later, I occasionally encounter some of those sisters. They still talk about that unusual session and how helpful it was in dealing with some of their missionaries.

That experience helped me recognize that each of us has a special, even unique role to serve in the kingdom. Uniformity is not necessary or even desirable; unity is. My life circumstances were very different from those of the mission presidents' and other General Authorities' wives. Yet our testimonies, firm commitment to the gospel, and dedication to the Lord's church united us.

The Apostle Paul stated, "Ye are all one in Christ Jesus" (Galatians 3:28). The Savior himself prayed to the Father that his apostles and all the saints "may be one, as we are" (John 17:11). The unity of which Jesus spoke does not require us to become identical. It does entreat us as individuals to be of one mind and purpose in our shared commitment to the kingdom.
