Anne Osborn Poelman, Simeon Solution: One Woman's Spiritual Odyssey ( 1994)

Chapter 17

Growing a Testimony

Its diesel engine finally stilled, the old but sturdy fishing boat rose and fell passively on the broad, deep Caribbean swells. The silence was punctuated by the sharp, rhythmic slap of waves against the weathered hull. A sea gull hovered hopefully overhead and cried plaintively, attempting to coax a handout from the crew.

The hot sun beat down in a cloudless, brassy sky as Ron and I peered somewhat apprehensively over the side into the brilliant blue water. Far below, the sandy, shell-strewn bottom looked deceptively close.

It was over fifty feet down.

The ocean floor sloped gently toward a spectacular coral reef that curved away into the distance, paralleling the beach that was by now barely visible on the horizon. Just beyond its crest, the reef below us abruptly disappeared in a vertical ledge that overhung a seemingly bottomless trench. The depths past the protective reef yawned in an inky, toothless grin.

I shivered involuntarily despite the scorching heat. Suddenly our much-anticipated "second honeymoon" assumed an ominous air. Perhaps Ron and I should have remained safely on the beach with the other sunscreen-coated tourists, sipping fresh guava juice under the tall coconut palms that rustled invitingly in the hot, humid air. And doing completely innocuous things like reading historical novels and napping in the shade.

Maybe we really were too old for this scuba diving stuff. It had seemed like such an adventuresome idea at the time. Intriguing signs posted on the wall of the hotel's beach shack invited tourists to sign up for lessons; we had yielded to the allure of the tempting underwater photos depicting brilliantly colored fish and exotic coral formations.

We started with the usual landlubber classes and required reading assignments. Our first actual experience with diving itself was within the safe but sterile confines of the hotel's large pool. We were taught how to don snorkeling gear properly and clear the water from our face masks. Once we became adept at those basic techniques, we were allowed to put on leaded weight belts, buoyancy compensator vests, and finally the heavy tanks of compressed air with their hoses and regulators.

It was fun. It was exhilarating. Freed from the mammalian necessity of periodically coming up for air, we paddled around in the pool's deep end, happily gesturing at each other and exhaling bubbles that spiraled in lazy circles toward the mirrored surface. Except for the pale bodies of vacationing swimmers occasionally splashing through the surface above us, the pool was devoid of activity. We soon became bored with its monotony and longed for our first real dive.

It wasn't long in coming. The next day our instructor took us for our first open-water excursion, a shallow dive in the island's nearby harbor. We dived down to the decaying hulk of an old boat that had sunk in about twenty feet of water. It would be romantic to say it was a long lost Spanish galleon bound for exotic ports with its cargo of purloined New World treasure, but in reality it was an old, dilapidated, World War II era tugboat. It didn't matter. We thought it was wonderfully exciting anyway.

But today's dive was qualitatively different. We had quickly left the calm harbor as the boat headed through the sheltering breakwaters, then turned and chugged steadily toward the open sea. After motoring for nearly an hour, the captain reached the designated spot and the dive guide quickly let out the anchor. The heavy, rusted chain seemed to unreel forever before the anchor hooked firmly into the sea bottom.

Ron and I were both uneasy about the deepwater dive. I secretly wanted to call the whole thing off but didn't want to disappoint him. He later told me he had felt like bowing out himself but didn't want to ruin the dive for me. So we were both stuck, reluctant partners in a suddenly and quite unexpectedly intimidating adventure.

Ron flopped awkwardly across the deck in his swim fins as the dive guide helped him into his weight belt and strapped the unwieldy tank of compressed air to his back. "Hey, no problem, mon," he assured Ron.

Ron grinned crookedly, unconvinced.

The guide slipped easily into his own gear, then sat on the boat's gunwale and explained to Ron how simple it really was. You just put the regulator in your mouth, held your mask firmly with one hand, and tumbled over the side backwards into the water. He demonstrated by leaning back and disappearing with a loud splash.

Ron looked at me and winked encouragingly. "No problem, mon," he mimicked. He shoved the regulator in his mouth, exhaled forcefully through it to blow any retained water out of the valves, took a couple of deep whooshing breaths from the tank, and was gone.

My turn. The captain looked at me questioningly, raising his eyebrows. I nodded resignedly and put on the gear.

Balancing on the gunwale of the pitching craft was harder than it looked. The boat lurched just as I was readying the regulator's mouthpiece. I abruptly lost my equilibrium and with a dismayed squawk fell overboard prematurely.

The shock of the cool water and my unexpected twisting somersault temporarily disoriented me. I couldn't tell which direction was up. The face mask filled with salty water, stinging my eyes and blurring my vision. I felt a sudden surge of panic until I remembered the lifesaving air that was strapped securely on my back. I fumbled for the hose and quickly found the regulator. Clearing it with a blast of air from the tank, I clamped my teeth on the mouthpiece, blew out the residual water, and inhaled deeply. Rubber-tainted air filled my lungs.

After a few rapid, greedy gasps, my breathing gradually slowed to nearly normal. No problem, mon! The gear worked fine, just as it had in the pool. Reassured about the independent air supply, I cleared the mask as we had been taught. All of a sudden everything came into sharp, clear focus. I was surrounded by a school of gaudily colored, variegated tropical fish. I could see the hull of the boat above, rocking gently with the waves as it tugged on the anchor chain. Fifty feet below, Ron and the guide were hovering near the bottom, gesticulating encouragingly for me to come on down.

No problem, mon, I thought again and let some air out of the buoyancy vest, beginning the slow-motion descent.

A sharp, growing pain in my eardrums interrupted the pleasant reverie. I had forgotten to equalize pressure between my middle ear and nasopharynx. I closed my mouth, held my nose, and forced air out. Both ears abruptly popped and to my relief the pain promptly disappeared.

Suspended weightlessly in the blue depths, fears forgotten, I eased into a deliciously slow somersault as I sank toward the bottom, luxuriating in the unbelievably liberating experience of complete freedom from gravity.

A soft, gentle stirring of fine white sand heralded my arrival on the ocean floor. I gave Ron and the guide the thumbs-up sign that meant "okay—all is well." The guide gestured for us to follow him as he slowly swam toward the reef looming in the blue-green distance.

I'll never forget our first close-up glimpse of that majestic coral reef. From the surface it had appeared relatively small and insignificant, somewhat resembling a miniature replica in a pet store fish tank. But from the perspective of the ocean floor, the reef was huge. It towered upwards for twenty or thirty feet and stretched in both directions until it disappeared out of sight in the hazy distance.

The reef was truly magnificent. It literally teemed with life. Fish of every size and hue darted in and out of innumerable hiding places. The reef's coral infrastructure was itself a dynamic, living thing, deposited millimeter by millimeter by an incredible variety of microorganisms. Over the centuries some had formed treelike excrescences that projected at odd angles from the main ridge line itself. Others formed rounded knobs or graceful, corrugated fans that decorated the outcroppings along the bank.

The reef was host to a veritable seaquarium of wildlife that lived in its nooks and crannies. Tiny tube worms peeked out of delicately elongated coral straws, their colorful feather-duster feelers swaying in the undersea currents until, somehow warned of our approach by a subtle change in water pressure, they abruptly disappeared inside their hollow cones.

Sea urchins nestled in rounded-out crevices along the reef, their surfaces gaily festooned with small shells and rocks. Spiny, misshapen fish that had evolved defensive coloration nearly identical to the reef itself were scarcely perceptible as they hid in its protective embrace. Moray eels eyed us suspiciously from their dark caves as we swam by. Even a few sharp-toothed, cigar-shaped barracuda slowly cruised the reef, looking for easy prey.

Thank goodness there were no sharks.

Time literally flew by as we swam with fish that circled around us, curious but unafraid. I was astonished at their variety and their rich, nearly fluorescent coloring. As if directed by some unseen choreographer, the schools slowly wheeled and turned in shimmering, flashing curtains of color. We even saw a baby octopus that briefly waved its tentacles at us before scuttling away to hide shyly beneath the reef.

The dive guide, intimately familiar with the reef's geography and population, pointed out a gigantic lobster that clacked and snapped its claws at us menacingly. Our guide left it alone for future undersea tourists to enjoy.

The coral reef and its denizens were a whole new universe, one we'd never imagined could be so completely engrossing. It was beautiful. It was wonderful. It was magic.

All too soon the dive was over. As we had been taught, we periodically checked the gauges on our tanks. We had started with a full air supply, nearly 3000 pounds per square inch. My indicator had been dropping steadily and was now hovering around 750 p.s.i.; 500 p.s.i. was the designated minimum with which to begin the gradual ascent toward the surface.

I looked around for the familiar anchor chain. It was nowhere in sight and I hadn't the faintest clue in which direction it was. To my relief the dive guide swam up and gestured toward the surface, beckoning us to follow him. He finned off vigorously into the distance as we tagged along behind his rapidly disappearing silhouette.

It seemed like we swam forever, but eventually we could see the waiting boat above us, rocking rhythmically. Holding onto the anchor chain, we slowly ascended toward the surface, periodically pausing to adjust for the lessening water pressure.

In sharp contrast to the tranquil depths below, the currents just under the wind-roughened waves were stiff and turbulent. As I popped through the glittering surface into the warm, buttery sunlight above, I kept the regulator safely in my mouth and inflated the buoyancy vest fully. I bobbed in the waves and clung precariously to the anchor chain as the guide boosted Ron onto the platform that jutted off the boat's stern. He unbuckled his gear and the captain hauled the cumbersome tank and backpack over the side into the boat. Then Ron climbed in and gratefully wrapped himself in a warm, dry towel, politely but firmly declining the readily proffered cup of raw Jamaican rum.

I followed the same routine. Despite the blazing hot sun, I found myself shivering uncontrollably—not out of fear but from mild hypothermia. Spending forty-five minutes submerged in seventy-six-degree water without a wet suit does that. My skin looked pale and bleached, shriveled from the prolonged saltwater immersion.

Legs trembling a bit from the exertion, Ron and I looked at each other and grinned exultantly. We had done it! We felt exhausted but happy and fulfilled.

The underwater environment was completely unlike anything we had ever experienced before. To function safely and successfully in such unfamiliar surroundings, we had to relearn a very familiar set of principles and then applied them to a new situation:

In all areas of life, spiritual as well as physical, carefully obeying those simple fundamentals results in genuine freedom, freedom to explore safely and enjoy the discovery of an exciting new realm.

Furthermore, as Ron and I have reflected on our scuba diving experience, I've realized that in many respects my testimony of the gospel grew much like that coral reef must have done.

Once upon a time, there was no reef at all where we took our first deep dive. Perhaps propelled by unseen underwater currents, sediment began to accumulate gradually and the first few micro-organisms found homes in the promising spot. Those tiny inhabitants multiplied and attracted more. Other species gathered and made their home in the nascent reef. Day after day, year after year, a millimeter at a time, the reef grew. With the passage of decades and perhaps even centuries, those first few humble coral clumps became an imposing, breathtaking, living edifice.

It's only in retrospect that the slow, steady deposition of a coral reef can be appreciated. The actual day-to-day changes pass completely unnoticed, even by an acute observer.

For me, coming to realize that the Church really is true was very similar. That knowledge was born of a thousand small but uplifting, edifying experiences. It was nurtured by prayerful, serious gospel study as I pondered the scriptures and read the inspired teachings of the Lord's anointed prophets. It grew through service to others. It was proven over and over by the practical, day-to-day "experiments" of which the prophet Alma spoke so eloquently. The indisputable evidence accumulated bit by bit, little by little.

Persistence pays off. The Lord has counseled us clearly on that point: "Wherefore, be not weary in well-doing, for ye are laying the foundation of a great work. And out of small things proceedeth that which is great" (D&C 64:33; italics added).

For many, if not most of us, a testimony is built, not bestowed. "Growing" a testimony takes both time and patience. It requires experience and service, hard work and determination.

With effort and experience, I found the gospel truly nourished my soul and literally became "delicious" to me. Friends, family, and even colleagues commented on its gentling, tempering effect on my life and personal relationships. I became a better person although by no means a perfect one.

As with observing the coral reef, it's only in retrospect that I can appreciate and identify the growth of my firm knowledge that the Church is indeed true. That testimony also developed with the passage of time and accumulated experience. Its growth was satisfyingly rapid at some times, agonizingly slow and almost imperceptible at others.

There were even a few occasions when it seemed as though my spiritual progress was actually reversed. I discovered that frustration arising from personal disappointments, troubling encounters, or unresolved doctrinal issues could gnaw at the foundations of my belief.

By trial—and sometimes error, too—I gradually learned to cope with unsettling circumstances by examining them in the context of my whole belief and experience. I look at things this way: The Lord has guided my life in the past, so I need to be patient and trust him. After all, he is still in charge. The Church is true, so I don't need to have neat answers to all my questions. I need to relax and put them on that old spiritual "back burner" for a season. That's the real essence of the Simeon Solution.

I'm convinced that, just as the foundation of our testimonies grows by accretion from many small and simple things, so it can be eroded gradually by the corrosive acid of discontent. Faith is rarely destroyed in some single, cataclysmic spiritual catastrophe. More often its loss is like picking up a handful of the fine, siltlike sand that lies on the ocean floor and feeling it gradually slip through your grasp grain by grain. Then it's gone.

We need to watch warily for the small and simple faith destroyers. A gripe here. A real or perceived slight there. A little doctrinal burr under the saddle. The microscopic slivers of discontent that, if left unattended, can incite a festering abscess that will poison our very soul.

The best antidotes for those difficult situations are trust, patience, and positive experiences. Service is a big boon; as we take care of others, the Lord will take care of our needs and concerns. He's done so in the past. He'll do so in the future.

Like the coral reef, the last important principle of the "Simeon Solution" evolved over a long time. When I was investigating the Church it began simply with the impression that I was on the track of something infinitely precious and worthwhile. As I tested gospel principles by believing without knowing, by acting on faith, the Spirit taught me through experiences the last, great, summarizing principle of the Simeon Solution, the one that is interwoven inextricably with all the others:
