Anne Osborn Poelman, Simeon Solution: One Woman's Spiritual Odyssey ( 1994)

Chapter 19

And What About Anna?

The manuscript was nearly complete. As I read the final draft of The Simeon Solution, I reflected once more on that after-dinner discussion when our doctor friend and neighbor had first talked about the concept. What would he think?

On the spur of the moment, I picked up the telephone and called. "I hate to impose on your free time, but . . ." I said, briefly outlining what I had been doing with his idea.

"Come on over," he replied warmly, dismissing any hesitation I'd had about bothering him.

I felt strangely diffident as I walked the few blocks to his house. How would he react? Would he be pleased?

He had just returned from the office and was busy feeding the dog. We sat in the kitchen chatting amiably as his youngest daughter bounced in and out of the room for periodic assistance with her homework. I asked him if he remembered that evening long ago when he had told us about the Simeon Solution.

"Of course. I've thought a lot about that discussion," he answered. "I'm pleased it was helpful."

"Very," I emphasized. "It put into words some of the concepts I'd been developing for a long time. How to trust the Lord. Stay faithful. Remain focused and centered. Be patient. How to meet adversity with equanimity. That sort of thing."

He nodded. "You know, you and I were both undergraduates in the 'sixties. It was a time of unrest, of uncertainty. In some respects, it wasn't much different from what we face today."

"You're right," I agreed. "Except now the voices of dissent and negativism somehow seem louder, more shrill."

"Simeon also lived in turbulent times," he added. "Yet he believed. And he patiently trusted the Lord, waiting a lifetime to behold the promised Messiah."

"Maybe perspective is also enhanced with age. You know, being fifty instead of twenty or thirty helps!" I grinned.

"Perhaps," he agreed slowly. "But I think we can all learn to stay rooted. Centered. Grounded. To keep things in context and be able to put aside unanswered concerns and questions."

"Not always easy," I admitted.

He grew serious, reflecting. "When I was an undergraduate back East, one of the Brethren who was then an Assistant to the Twelve visited the student ward. We had a chance to chat privately. He made me feel comfortable in expressing my concerns. I had some doctrinal questions for which there seemed to be no answers."

He continued, "To my surprise, he replied, 'You know, I don't have all the answers either. But I take those questions and, figuratively speaking, put them on the shelf. I can do that because I know the Church is true.'

"I've never forgotten that wise counsel," he finished. "When I read about Simeon, it made sense. That's what I meant by being able to put your concerns and questions on a spiritual 'back burner.'"

Thanking him for his ideas and input, I started to leave.

He stopped me. "And what about Anna?" he asked.

"Anna?" I replied blankly.

"Yes, Anna. She was there too. She also recognized Jesus as the promised Messiah. Are you going to say anything about her?" he said, reaching for his scriptures.

Sure enough. There it was, also in the second chapter of Luke: "And there was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Aser: she was of a great age, and had lived with an husband seven years from her virginity;

"And she was a widow of about fourscore and four years, which departed not from the temple, but served God with fastings and prayers night and day.

"And she coming in that instant gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spake of him to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem" (Luke 2:36-38).

"So what about Anna?" I said. "Faithful, righteous women throughout the ages have received personal revelation. In that sense, we can all be prophets or prophetesses. With a small 'p,'" I added.

"But what about with a large 'p'? As in Prophet and Priesthood?" he persisted. "What's your answer to that?"

"The same as it was several years ago when we had the dinner party: I don't know. And that's still okay. I don't have to have answers to all my questions. Thanks to you—and the Simeon Solution—I can live with that. In fact, I feel even a greater sense of peace now than I did then. I know the Church is true with all my heart. And that's sufficient," I concluded.

He smiled. "For me too. It really works."

Indeed it does. I return again and again to the simple principles of the Simeon Solution:

None of those basic concepts is independent of the others. They are all necessary. They interrelate and combine harmoniously to form a firm spiritual center, the "place of safety" that provides refuge and comfort in times of need.

The most precious blessings of my life have come directly through the gospel of Jesus Christ. The things that I know most surely are known not by intellect but by the Spirit. I know that if I live worthily, someday I too, like Simeon, will say: "Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word: For mine eyes have seen thy salvation" (Luke 2:29-30). The things I don't know, the questions I still have, can wait. I can be patient. I trust the Lord's promises.

And that is enough.
