Time of Departure--Funds Provided--Sorrow at Separating--Contrast Between Our Landing and Our Departure--Souls for Our Hire--An Exceedingly Happy Mission

The time had arrived for the five Elders, who had remained out of the first ten who were sent to the islands--to return home. It had been a matter of some thought how we would be able to obtain means to return. The islanders had but little money. A dollar with them was a very large sum; a ten cent piece was a much larger sum with them generally, and more difficult to procure, than a dollar was to Americans. But when they learned we were soon to be released, they manifested a very kind and liberal spirit. Still, with all they had done, when our passages were engaged, we did not have near enough money to pay for them. But we had faith that the necessary means would come from some quarter. And it did. Through the kindness of Elders Lewis, Johnson and Hammond and some white brethren whom we had baptized, we had enough, and some money to take with us, to help us when we reached San Francisco.

The Lord knew our wants and he supplied them. And thus He always does with His servants and those who put their trust in him.

Elder James Keeler, one of the five, failed to reach Honolulu in time to sail on the vessel on which we had engaged our passages. This was a great disappointment to us.

Elders Henry W. Bigler, James Hawkins, William Farrer and myself bade farewell to the Elders and Saints at Honolulu on Saturday, July 29th, 1854, and sailed for San Francisco, homeward bound. The wharf at Honolulu was crowded with native Saints and others, to see us embark. We had quite an ovation. There also were the Elders from home and Sister Hammond--Sister Lewis was not able to be out--to bid us farewell.

When the signal was made for all to go on board, we had considerable difficulty in making our way to the vessel, through the throng of people who crowded around to shake hands. My feelings were indescribable. My dear white friends I had been associated with on terms of the closest intimacy for several years. Ties of blood could not, it seemed to me, have caused us to be more attached to each other than we were. We had endured privation and toil together; we had counseled and prayed together; we had had seasons of joy and happiness together, such as those only know who have been engaged in similar labors.

My feelings were so acute at the thought of parting with these beloved companions and Saints, that, long as the years had been during which I had been absent from home, and much as I had yearned for that home and its loved associations, I could not control my emotions.

How great the contrast between our landing and our departure! We had landed there friendless and unknown--so far as man was concerned. Now there were thousands who loved us, who rejoiced in the truth of the gospel and in the testimony of Jesus. On that wharf that day was an illustration of the wonderful power of the gospel in creating love in the hearts of the children of men. We had gone forth weeping and bearing precious seed. The Lord had given us souls for our hire. Many who were baptized there have gone hence, who I firmly believe will be numbered among the redeemed and sanctified. Others, doubtless, will prove faithful, and receive an inheritance in the kingdom of our Father.

More than twenty-five years have elapsed since my departure from the Sandwich Islands. During that period my life has been a happy one. I have filled many missions, have seen great varieties of life, and have had exceedingly agreeable and delightful associations; but, after making allowance for growth and increased capacity to enjoy, I can truthfully say that, destitute as we were of many things which people brought up as we are think necessary to comfort, at no time or under no circumstances have I enjoyed more sweet, pure and soul-filling joy than I did on MY FIRST MISSION.
