Randy L. Bott, Prepare with Honor: Helps for Future Missionaries ( 1995)

1

About this Book

If you plan to serve a mission someday, you probably have lots of questions. Where will you go? Which language will you speak? What will the food be like? Will you succeed as a missionary?

Despite your eagerness to serve, you may not know how to prepare for a mission. There's a lot more to it than just showing up at the MTC when the time comes, says author Randy L. Bott, a former missionary and mission president. His book will lead you step-by-step through the essentials of preparing for a mission physically, mentally, and spiritually. Twenty-three chapters filled with stories and examples tackle topics like these:

* learning to talk to adults

* becoming a self-starter

* making "kindergarten decisions"

* learning to pray and receive answers

* going on a mission for the right reasons

"Preparation eliminates fear of failure, and you are not called to fail," writes Brother Bott. "You were called before the foundations of this earth to serve a mission. The place doesn't make a difference, but how you serve makes all the difference in the world. Take advantage of the time remaining to prepare to serve with honor."

About the Author

Randy Bott has many years of experience with missionary work. He served a full-time mission in Samoa from 1964 to 1967 and later worked as a stake mission president. Recently, he served as president of the California Fresno Mission.

An educator by profession, Brother Bott teaches missionary preparation classes at Brigham Young University. He is also the author of Serve with Honor: Helps for Missionaries and Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries. In Church callings, he has served as a Young Men president, a bishop, a high councilor, and a counselor in a stake presidency.

Preparing with Honor

Serving a full-time mission will be one of the most rewarding and difficult experiences of your life. You should be congratulated on being worthy to be considered for service. As a mission president, I watched many groups of missionaries come to our mission. During the three years my wife and I presided over the mission, more than six hundred young men and women joined us in service. On the day each of them arrived, nervous excitement filled the air. The long-awaited moment had come: the first day of their mission. At this point new missionaries realize that more diligent preparation would have been helpful. Consequently, I have written this book to help you better prepare for "the hour of your mission" (D&C 31:3).

To set the stage for the chapters that follow, let me tell a boyhood story and compare it to missionary preparation.

We were as tough as they came. In just a couple of weeks, we would be graduating from the eighth grade and would soon be off to high school. One day during music time, the teacher thrilled the boys by announcing that the freshman football coach was coming to talk to all who wanted to try out for the team in the fall. Gladly, every boy in class joined the mass exit into the gym.

We sat noisily on the floor, poking and jabbing each other. Suddenly, a mountain of a man entered the gym. He had on a T-shirt with the high school logo imprinted on the back. He was wearing sweatpants, gym shoes, and a baseball hat, and a whistle hung from his neck. He paced in front of us until we were quiet, squarely faced us, and announced, "Men, if you want to play high school football, there are a few things I want you to do." He then outlined some basic conditioning techniques, cautioning us against eating too much candy and drinking too much pop. He also told us to run every day and ride our bikes as often as possible. He even suggested lifting weights and getting jobs that required discipline, strength, and stamina. He talked of the fun and thrill of playing and winning but reminded us that our opponents wanted to win as well. The meeting didn't last long, but were we pumped! I don't think most of us heard much past the word men.

As you might guess, the coach's counsel went unheeded during the much-anticipated summer vacation. Before I knew it, the summer was over. Then I received a letter explaining when and where to pick up my football gear. On a hot August afternoon, a rough-looking group of kids appeared at the gym door. We were given the old varsity gear, which had long since served its useful purpose. The shoulder pads could easily accommodate two kids, and the knee pads in the pants acted as shin guards for most of us. I could even turn my helmet a full 360 degrees without having it touch my ears. But we were tough, and we were ready to receive the trophy for Best Freshman Football Team in the State.

We were ordered onto the field to warm up by knocking shoulder pads with each other. It felt sort of funny but good. We were then assigned positions according to size and to where we happened to be standing. We were taught a few plays that we practiced for about thirty minutes. The weather was hot, and we were all thirsty. The coach blew the whistle, and we all lined up on the goal line. We expected a short pep talk, then the welcome coolness of the showers. We were mistaken. He said, "When I blow the whistle, you run full speed down to the twenty-yard line and line up there." We didn't see much sense in that, but we all obeyed anyway. At the twenty-yard line, he blew the whistle again and had us run back to the goal line. Now things were getting ridiculous. Why would he want us to just run back and forth?

On the second sprint, several of my friends ran off to the side, ripped off their helmets, and started throwing up. I guess the combination of heat, physical exertion, and poor physical condition took its toll. I laughed to myself. On the way back from the twenty-yard line, several more dropped out. On the next trip to the twenty-yard line, I started feeling sick. More dropped out. On the way back to the goal line, I dropped out and joined my friends.

The coach called us all together and sternly chewed us out for not taking seriously his challenge to prepare. He informed us that we would meet at six the next morning for a three-hour workout and then run some more wind sprints. Several kids muttered unmentionable words under their breath and assured him they wouldn't be there. They walked to the locker room and turned in their gear. No glory for them.

True to his word, we started practice at six the next morning. Although it wasn't as hot as the day before, most of us had lost our breakfast by the end of practice—including me, about halfway through the wind sprints. About six or seven boys walked off the field when the coach announced that we would meet again at 4:30 that afternoon for another practice session. Turning in their equipment, they told us how stupid we were to put up with such nonsense. They challenged us all to boycott the practice and show the coach a thing or two. We declined.

The afternoon practice was terrible. Several times, I entertained thoughts of quitting. All my muscles were sore, even some I didn't know I had. My feet were blistered, my head was pounding, my back was aching, and my hands and arms were bruised from tackling and blocking. I was in a world of hurt. More than half the team quit that afternoon.

The next morning, we were wondering if the coach was trying to kill us. We decided among ourselves that we were as tough as he was and would not give up, no matter what. No one dropped out after that. The soreness was gone after about a week, and practices started to be fun. Our anticipation of the first game greatly increased our excitement. By the end of the season, we determined that the coach was right—football was fun! We were the mighty freshman football team, and our motto became No Guts, No Glory.

The lessons I learned from this experience also apply to preparing for a mission. Too many young men and women seem to think all they have to do is show up and they will be prepared to serve. They are cautioned and urged and warned by loving parents, teachers, and leaders. They are given opportunities to speak in church, to ask questions in Sunday School classes, and to study in seminary. They are lovingly watched over by priesthood and Young Women leaders who emphasize the need to avoid the deceptive activities that Satan makes look so enticing. Some fall into the devilish trap of thinking, "I can sin now, then clean up my act just before I go, and everything will be all right." What a tragic misunderstanding!

The excitement is high when the call arrives. Everybody talks about where you are going and what it will be like. Girls swoon as the newly called missionaries begin their preparation. The farewell may make you think you really are something wonderful. Before long, the date arrives to report at the Missionary Training Center (often called the MTC). After the orientation there, the parents go out one door and the missionaries another, and the training begins. Somehow the suits feel foreign, the ties seem tight, the wake-up calls come too early, and the classes are intense. You study twelve to fifteen hours a day and follow a strict schedule. When fatigue has set in, one of your MTC instructors decides to teach another hour on language training. A few prospective missionaries turn in their badges and choose the easy course. Sure, it will be embarrassing to go home, they think, but the people at home just don't know what the MTC is really like.

Day after day, you are asked to go beyond what you are sure is your limit. Others may call it quits, and you may even consider quitting yourself. But you are no quitter. You set your jaw and decide you can take anything for three weeks (eight weeks if you are learning a foreign language). There are spiritual highs almost daily, and the food (although not like Mom's cooking) isn't lethal. You learn to love your companion and roommates. But about the time you start getting the hang of it, your time at the MTC is over.

The farewells at the airport are not as bad as that first day at the MTC. You are pumped, ready to go. After a plane ride, you get off the plane into the welcome arms of your new mission president and his wife. The assistants to the president (APs) look so mature and polished. You are sure you will never be able to become like them. You won't remember much of the orientation because your brain was overloaded in the MTC. You get your first assignment, and you are sure the world has just been introduced to a modern-day Ammon.

But after two or three weeks with a companion who isn't perfect, you wonder why you are there. You may be verbally attacked by a well-meaning but misdirected "Christian" who wants to save your soul. You have been praying so many times a day that you lose count. Your companion has no mercy. He only wants to talk about scriptures and doctrines. He wants you to read, memorize, pray, talk to total strangers, and use the scriptures to defend your beliefs. Finally, your companion wants you to be happy and enthusiastic all the time.

Unfortunately, some missionaries find themselves throwing up on the sidelines, unwilling to continue until they have made up for their lack of spiritual and physical preparation. Times of discouragement come, and they don't feel like talking things out. They want to be alone, but the "White Bible" (Missionary Handbook) says you must always be with your companion. Thankfully, nobody dies from the adjustment period of a mission. But if even one missionary drops out during the adjustment period, that is one too many.

What can you do to lessen the shock of adjustment? This book will examine what a missionary does and give you some helpful insights on how to more effectively prepare for your mission. Your mission can and will be the greatest eighteen months or two years of your life to that point if you are prepared to serve. Start preparing today by doing what missionaries do. What a shame it is to be unprepared when it's your time to play. It is a real honor to be on the Lord's varsity team during the last minutes of the fourth quarter of the greatest game ever played. The opposition is well trained and desperate. They know that when the game is over (at the second coming of the Savior), they will be locked away in darkness for a long time. Their main objective is to make everyone as miserable as possible. They do this by subtly convincing you that you can prepare when you step onto the playing field. But preparation eliminates the fear of failure, and you are not called to fail. If you are prepared, you will not fail. Your mission president will look forward to welcoming you onto the team. But how grateful he will be if you have taken your preparation seriously. Good luck as you play your designated few minutes. Prepare now to serve with honor!
