Randy L. Bott, Prepare with Honor: Helps for Future Missionaries ( 1995)

3

Learning to Teach

Most of us envision a mission as two missionaries sitting in the homes of investigators, teaching them the missionary discussions. This certainly is a major part of a mission, so look at yourself now. How often do you get an opportunity to practice teaching? Some people have the mistaken idea that teaching is just standing in front of a class and talking. But this approach will only bring you heartache and disappointment. Teaching is one of the most difficult exercises in the world.

Most likely, your opportunities to teach may seem limited. However, with a little creative thinking, you will discover that the Lord and his church have provided many opportunities for even the young to practice their teaching skills. There are several experiences that will polish your teaching skills quickly and effectively.

Home teaching is the most often overlooked teaching opportunity. At least once a month, young men have the opportunity to teach in a situation that parallels the missionary experience more closely than any other. You and your companion visit a family to teach them the gospel of Jesus Christ. Remarkable! But what if your senior companion always teaches the lesson? Well, why don't you shock him by volunteering to teach the next one? If he is hesitant (which he won't be), remind him that you are trying to develop your teaching skills for your mission. Although it is recommended that you teach from the First Presidency message in the Ensign, you might ask your companion and the family if you can also teach the missionary discussions. You would be light years ahead of other missionaries if you could enter the MTC with the experience of teaching all six discussions. You would know what questions to ask your MTC instructors, and you would know your strengths and weaknesses. As you teach, you will be more motivated to learn the scriptures and doctrines as you discuss sacred things with others.

Many missionaries are shy and lack confidence in their ability to teach effectively. These skills can be strengthened a great deal with a little experience. Month after month you will see different reactions to different teaching styles. You will need to adjust your style to meet people's needs rather than expecting others to accommodate your style. Encourage them to ask questions so you will develop skills in answering. The moment of truth is when you ask them to evaluate your teaching. If they are honest, they will have some suggestions in areas where you might improve. You might find out that you have distracting habits, like scratching your nose. Being aware of such habits makes them much easier to overcome. These people love you and want you to succeed. They will be much more patient than many investigators who haven't developed those feelings of closeness. Try to change your weaknesses into strengths before you leave.

Visiting teaching gives women the same opportunity. Although the Relief Society permits making contact over the phone if other attempted visits fail, the value of face-to-face teaching far outweighs the inconvenience of repeated call-backs. It will also give you valuable practice in contacting evasive investigators.

Giving a talk in church is another great teaching experience. It has become a common practice for the youth to choose an interesting article from the New Era and read it to the congregation. Although this method helps polish your public reading skills, it doesn't do much for your teaching skills. Seek for opportunities to speak in church. Then take full advantage by preparing your talk from the ground up. Although the youth sometimes criticize boring talks given by adults, you will find it requires some honest work to prepare interesting talks.

How do you prepare an interesting and informative talk? First, decide on the purpose or problem of your talk by deciding what you want to accomplish. For example, you might write on a piece of paper, "The purpose of my talk is to encourage members of the Church to read their scriptures every day." Or you might state it in the form of a problem: "A problem we all face as members of the Church is regular scripture reading as a family." A specific purpose or problem will guide you in your preparation.

Next, ask yourself, "If I could say only three or four things about this topic, what would I say?" This approach usually helps you focus on a couple of ideas you feel are important for people to understand. Limit yourself to three or four main ideas. They are so important that if the speaker before you takes almost all your time, you need at least enough time to read your main ideas before you bear your testimony and sit down.

After you have identified your main ideas, look for inspirational stories, appropriate scriptures, and personal ex-amples to expand each of the main ideas. These can be called expansions because they do not stand alone but merely enlarge upon the main ideas. Make sure this information helps clarify the main ideas and is not just something to take up time. If the speakers in front of you take too much time, you can shorten your talk by eliminating or condensing the number of stories, scriptures, and examples. Never eliminate the main ideas! If a speaker doesn't show up and you have more time to take, just add some more expansion materials. Don't try to come up with a new main idea. The buffer that enables you to lengthen or shorten your talk without sacrificing the main ideas is the expansion section.

The final part of your talk is your testimony. Your testimony tells people how strongly you believe in what you have been saying. Don't wander with your testimony; focus on what you have been talking about. You may want to set up your talk using the following format:

Another opportunity to practice your teaching skills might be as a substitute teacher in Sunday School or Primary. Let the Sunday School president know you are willing to fill in. Take your preparation seriously. The more accustomed you become to using scriptures, stories, and examples, the easier teaching the gospel becomes. Remember, the Lord commanded us to teach from the scriptures (D&C 42:12).

Yet another opportunity for teaching is at youth conferences, firesides, and discussion groups. Although you may feel afraid or anxious about teaching others, you should realize that you do have something worthwhile to say. Choose a topic relevant to the audience you are addressing. Try to get them involved by asking and answering questions and making observations. You will soon discover how difficult it is to carry the entire load yourself. When everyone is involved, teaching becomes enjoyable. Don't ever turn down an opportunity to speak, because preparation forces us to learn. Also, the challenge of teaching allows us to grow.

The final area we will discuss is where you have a captive audience to teach—during family home evening. We are commanded to meet as a family every week and teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom. It is difficult for Mom and Dad to always teach the lesson. What a pleasant surprise (more like a shock!) if you volunteer to teach regularly. If you start early enough, you will gain adequate experience in teaching almost all the gospel principles in a friendly setting before being thrust into a sometimes hostile environment. Do yourself a favor and learn how to teach.

There are many good books on the techniques of teaching. One of the best sources of insight is to keep your eyes open at school, church, or seminary. See what makes one person a good teacher and someone else marginal. When you watch (without condemning) those who are really trying, the Lord will help you learn from their mistakes as well as their successes. Even when you have a hard time concentrating in sacrament meeting, you can make a mental note of how you would teach if you were the speaker. Make a list of what makes a good speaker interesting and a boring speaker boring (to you). Practice every chance you get. The Church and the world need a lot more good teachers.

1995 ﻿
