Randy L. Bott, Prepare with Honor: Helps for Future Missionaries ( 1995)

4

Learning to Pray

A missionary prays a lot because successful missionary work requires the help of the Lord. If you have learned to pray regularly, the transition to missionary life may not be that difficult. If you haven't, you may become frustrated as you try to learn in a crash course what others have learned over a lifetime.

Praying is like jogging. When you first start to get into shape, you feel like you will never make it. It is often uncomfortable, your muscles get sore, and everyone else seems faster and better. In short, you're not sure if it's worth the effort. But after the first few weeks of training, you start to get the hang of it, and jogging becomes not just doable but actually fun. The devil would have you believe it is impos-sible for you to communicate with God. He would have you believe only prophets and especially righteous men and women can get answers to prayer. He will whisper over and over that it isn't worth the price. But remember that Satan is "a liar from the beginning" (D&C 93:25). As with reading the scriptures, you must set some guidelines that will help you develop and fine-tune your prayers. First, decide you will pray every night and morning without fail. If you are already in the habit, this will be easy. If you are not, you will probably slip a few times before praying becomes part of your routine. It is easier to establish the habit if you pray at a specific time every day. Rationalization will kill the development of good prayer skills.

When we were young, my brother and I used to sleep in a little shanty behind our house. As soon as it was warm enough in the spring that we wouldn't freeze, we would move from the house to the shanty, where we would stay until the first snow fell or until the nights got so cold we couldn't keep warm. It was easy to rationalize kneeling on top of the bed, because the concrete floor was so cold. Then, to maintain my concentration on prayer, it was easy to rationalize putting a blanket around my shoulders to keep out the cold. The next step seemed automatic. Why not lie down so I could be looking into heaven in case Heavenly Father wanted to give me an immediate answer? You can guess the rest of the story. Several times, I would wake up at two or three in the morning and realize I had fallen asleep in the middle of my prayer.

Pray before you are so tired you can't possibly stay awake. It may help to think of prayer as a telephone conversation with your Heavenly Father. If you called your friends and immediately started to talk, explaining how things were going and asking questions without ever giving them a chance to answer your questions or respond to your comments, they might consider you rude. Yet we often do the same thing in our prayers. As a young man, I'm afraid I often "told" the Lord how things were and instructed him how to answer my prayers. Perhaps that is why I didn't receive many recognizable answers to my prayers. The answers were there, but I wasn't "tuned in" and listening for them. In later life, I have come to know that effective prayer requires some preparation. It is helpful to get into the mood of prayer by mentally reviewing the day or the plans for the day. Make a mental list of things you want to "talk over" with Heavenly Father. Make a second list of questions, needs, or concerns you may have. If you are having trouble getting into the spirit of prayer, you might try listening to some Church music or reading a chapter from the Book of Mormon. It took me a long time to realize you can't rush a prayer. Just going through the motions doesn't do much good. A sincere and honest prayer will change your life and the lives of those around you.

Sometimes a walking prayer is effective. You don't always have to be on your knees—although that position helps keep your mind focused on what you are doing. Concentrate on your words and focus on listening for the Spirit. Then your mind will not wander nearly so often. Learn to listen more than you talk in prayer. Heavenly Father knows all the answers and is willing to answer every sincere prayer. Your main problem will not be getting an answer to prayer but learning to recognize the answer when it comes.

Someone said, "General answers come from general prayers, and specific answers come from specific prayers." Specific answers usually make a profound impression, so learn to recognize how the Lord answers your prayers. He may give you an excited, tingling sensation all over your body. He may choose to give you a sudden rush of ideas. He may give you a calm, peaceful, right feeling. His answers may move you to tears. But be careful, because although spiritual experiences are often accompanied by strong emotions, all strong emotions should not be confused with spiritual experiences. How Heavenly Father answers your prayers may be different from how he responds to prayers of your parents, brothers, sisters, or friends. It is important that you discover for yourself how to communicate with God.

Don't try to dictate to the Lord when he should answer your prayers. Some prayers take years before the answer is realized. Some will be answered before you finish praying. Many missionaries have told me they received answers to prayers anywhere from a day to a few weeks later because they were specifically watching for them. A number of the missionaries lamented at having missed answers to prayers because they failed to watch for them.

"Asking in faith" requires that you expect an answer. After nearly three and a half years of waiting for the next dramatic answer to prayer, Joseph Smith recorded, "I betook myself to prayer and supplication to Almighty God for forgiveness of all my sins and follies, and also for a manifestation to me, that I might know of my state and standing before him; for I had full confidence in obtaining a divine manifestation, as I previously had one" (Joseph Smith-History 1:29; emphasis added). You may be surprised at how willing Heavenly Father is to reveal answers to your questions and problems.

If the answer does not come immediately, don't be discouraged. Sometimes we aren't doing anything wrong, we just haven't done it long enough. Daniel prayed and fasted for three full weeks on a pressing problem before he finally received an answer. When the answer came, he learned that he was holding up the process, not God (see Daniel 10:2-12). What a lesson for us: we can receive whatever we want from our Heavenly Father as soon as we are willing to receive it. We need to let our Heavenly Father determine when we are really ready.

Avoid the "Heavenly Father, bless the food" type of prayers. Nothing is wrong with a sincere blessing on the food. As you pray, make sure your heart and mind are really focused. Late one night, I came home from work exhausted. I went to the shanty and fell on my knees for my nightly prayer. "Heavenly Father, bless the food," I said. Oops, wrong prayer. I knew I had to do better than that, because I was wasting my time and the attention of the great Governor of the whole universe. Later, I discovered that Moroni felt the need to use his father Mormon's teachings to instruct the Nephites on the same issue: "[It is] counted evil unto a man, if he shall pray and not with real intent of heart; yea, and it profiteth him nothing, for God receiveth none such" (Moroni 7:9; emphasis added).

Prayer, when properly engaged in and understood, can be one of the greatest sources of comfort and insight. You can't expect to become an expert in prayer by offering a few isolated prayers any more than you can expect to become a great lecturer by giving an occasional lecture. Practice does make perfect, and perfect practice makes perfect prayer. You will never regret the time you spend praying because it will enrich your life, help you avoid temptation, and remind you of life's eternal perspective. As Alma counseled his faithful son Helaman, "Look to God and live" (Alma 37:47).

1995 ﻿
