Randy L. Bott, Prepare with Honor: Helps for Future Missionaries ( 1995)

5

Getting Along with Others

Getting along with companions and other missionaries is one of the more difficult adjustments for a missionary. But why is it so difficult? Unfortunately, too many missionaries have learned and adopted the "fight or flight" philosophy.

The "fight or flight" philosophy allows only for an extreme reaction—either fight with your companion and others or run away when problems arise. But you may argue, "Well, I'll get along with my companion and others because they are not like my brother or sister." Don't bet on it! The same principles necessary to get along with companions will help you bring peace and harmony to your family. You may think you brother is a reject from the war in heaven, so nobody expects you to get along with him. Wrong again. He is described by our Heavenly Father (who doesn't make mistakes) as one of his choice sons—a noble and great one (see Abraham 3:22-24). Your little sister may be so silly and giggly she drives you crazy. You may find the same or worse on your mission with children of members and investigators, or even some companions. You can expect to encounter all types of people.

The thing to do is learn now how to get along with people. How is it to be done? Start by deciding to take control of your reactions rather than letting someone else dictate how you react. Just because your little brother does something to annoy you doesn't mean you have to hit him. Fighting will never solve a problem; it will always make it worse. There are often power struggles in a family—trying to control each other's actions—and our responses are based on those situations. For example, let's say your little brother has a real mouth. He says things he knows will irritate you just so you will yell at him or hit him. He seems to enjoy the abusive attention. But you decide to take control of the situation. He mouths off in a manner that normally sets the cycle in motion. You choose not to respond. He wonders if you didn't hear, so he tries again. You smile understandingly but do not react. He wants to know if you are feeling okay. You assure him you are fine but tell him you are preparing for a mission by learning how to get along with him. He makes some statement about being sick to his stomach from your wonderful righteousness. Again you choose not to respond. As you stick to your decision, you find he starts to back off because it isn't fun to fight with yourself.

With this victory comes a sense of accomplishment and well-being. This good feeling is the Spirit bearing testimony that you are heading in the right direction. It almost becomes a game as you continue to identify and overcome the things that made you so grouchy before.

"Flight" is no more difficult to cure than "fight." For example, something goes wrong or someone does something that ticks you off. Normally you storm out of the house, slam the door, and rush to the car. With the screeching of rubber, you back out of the driveway, making sure everyone knows you are upset. You leave two parallel stripes of smoking rubber as you recklessly flee the scene. If you do this, you are watching too much television! Even though the world may solve problems by theatrically leaving the scene of confrontation, it is not acceptable for a missionary.

There will be times on your mission when you just want to get away from a stressful situation. That is all right as long as you take your companion with you! If he or she is the problem, you'd better have a "Plan B." Leaving your companion, whether you are angry or not, is dangerous, against mission rules, and could jeopardize your mission. If you have never learned to face problems without fight or flight, now is a good time to learn.

You will always have an authority figure standing over you in the mission—your trainer, your senior companion, the district leader, the zone leader, the assistants to the president, or the president himself. How can you learn to get along if you haven't practiced the skills? Start right now. When someone says something that makes you angry, learn to control your reaction. Get a hold of yourself, separate the issue from the person, and then deal only with the issue. It sounds pretty easy because it is! Say a quick prayer for help before you respond, and you will find you are more in control than if you speak first and think later. Some people suggest counting to ten before you say anything. If you remind yourself you love the person but disagree with what the person says, you will begin to direct your anger toward the issue and away from the person.

Set some guidelines for solving problems. Explain how the irritating comment made you feel: "When you accused me of driving recklessly, that really made me mad." You are focusing on your reaction and the cause. If you feel out of control, suggest a "cooling off" period. After you're in control, sit down and reason with the person. Learn how to talk face to face without yelling or accusing. Stay focused on the issue.

Too many teenagers try to bully or intimidate their parents by threatening to "run away" or demonstrating an "I'll show you" attitude. This is a "lose-lose" situation. Your position as a son or daughter is weakened because of the power struggle—you lose. Your parents begin to question their effectiveness as parents and wonder if it is all worth it—they lose. Try to create a "win-win" situation. If you can calmly and rationally express how you feel in a way that demonstrates to your parents you are maturing and can be trusted with the car—you win. Your parents realize that maybe they jumped to conclusions and didn't give you a fair chance to explain your side of the story, so they soften their feelings and response toward you—they win.

Rationally discussing an emotional issue does not mean you don't use forceful language to express yourself. As a missionary, you will find you disagree with your companion and investigators many times. But when you master the art of discussing without arguing, you will promote great learning experiences with a lot less stress.

As teenagers, we often feel it is our right to say what is on our mind. As an adult, you will discover that silence is sometimes the best answer to an explosive situation. In studying the life of the Savior, you will discover that he often chose to remain silent rather than argue. Learning how to be silent without sulking, pouting, or being indifferent is not easy. Watch people carefully when you react to a situation. If your silence angers them even more, maybe you need to learn to give a quiet, nonconfrontational response. When your response creates a different effect than what you wanted, figure out why it backfired and how you could have responded differently. You can generally find out what happened by asking the person to honestly tell you how he or she felt and how he or she would have liked you to respond. You can learn to "live together in love" (D&C 42:45). Every "battle" in which you control yourself is one giant victory for you on your mission.

1995 ﻿
