Randy L. Bott, Prepare with Honor: Helps for Future Missionaries ( 1995)

7

Being Physically Prepared

Serving a mission is one of the most physically demanding things you will ever do. You wouldn't think going out and teaching people would be that strenuous. What makes a mission so physically demanding?

Every mission follows a regular schedule: up at 6:30 a.m., prepare to proselyte from 7:00 until 9:30 a.m., proselyte until 9:30 p.m., study until 10:30 p.m., then go to bed. On the surface, it sounds easy. But let's look a little closer.

Up to this time in your life, there has probably always been someone else to prepare good nutritious meals. Now you must do most of the cooking yourself. Energy to keep you going during the day is obtained from the food you eat. If you haven't learned how to plan, prepare, and cook good meals, you may be tempted just to eat whatever is convenient. Nutrition from junk food, although an immediate source of energy, is short-lived. Before long, your body cries out for something more stable.

From the moment the thought enters your mind (maybe as you read this book), you should start collecting nutritious menus and shopping lists for different meals. Store them in a booklet or file folder. Practice cooking each one until you are proficient at preparing the meal. Your companions will love you forever.

Start evaluating your diet now. If you are a "junk food junky," start replacing junk foods with good foods. Your ability to maintain your health will determine, to a large degree, the success you enjoy as a missionary. If either you or your companion is constantly sick, you will greatly multiply the problems in keeping the Spirit. When the messengers go down, the message doesn't get delivered.

If an evaluation of your physical condition reveals that you are carrying too much weight, get on a sensible diet and exercise program. If you are excessively overweight or have serious health problems, you may not be permitted to serve a full-time mission.

In many places, missionaries either walk or ride bicycles. If you are out of shape, it will be a real shock to your system the first time your companion wants to bike thirty miles to a teaching appointment. I remember walking ten miles between villages in Samoa in the blistering heat and stifling humidity. I thought I had died and gone to the wrong place.

You can do yourself a real favor by getting on a cycling, jogging, or hiking program. If you are out of shape when you arrive and you exert yourself, you will tend to go to sleep when you stop walking or biking. It is really poor etiquette when you can't stay awake during a discussion because you are physically exhausted.

Teaching is fatiguing. The sheer mental exertion of trying to help someone understand important gospel concepts is tiring. Teaching several discussions a day will take its toll, and you will come home at night physically exhausted. I don't know of any effective way to overcome teaching fatigue. But I do know that if you are physically out of shape to begin with, teaching becomes an almost impossible strain.

A healthy body is able to fight strange diseases much easier than a sickly body. Also, when you are ill, your mind isn't as alert as when you are well. Feeling "under the weather" all the time makes learning a real chore. If you are constantly sick, you soon become discouraged and are tempted to give up. Before you go on your mission, you are required to get a number of shots. They are for your protection, but they also signal some of the unusual diseases you may encounter. Stay as healthy as you can as you prepare to serve.

Many places in the world have foods that are strange and exotic. Some foods you have heard of but were sure you would never eat. When your love for the people grows and your desire not to offend them surpasses your resolve not to eat their food, you may end up eating some strange things. If you are a picky eater at home, you will give yourself a lot of stress during your mission. Practice eating at least a little of everything served to you. Some of the most stressful problems between companions have come when one of them has made a big issue about not wanting to eat some of the native food.

If your body is healthy, your system can process unfamiliar foods without becoming ill. If you are teetering on the brink of being sick already, a little strange food can push you over the edge. On rare occasions, the food you are served may be tainted or spoiled. Then you will need all the strength you can muster to preserve your health. Of course, you wouldn't knowingly eat anything that would make you sick, but you may find out too late that the food was not good.

On their preparation days, missionaries often like to get together and play games. If you are grossly out of shape, it makes you the odd man out. Even though you may not be a great sports enthusiast, you will want to participate in some athletic events just so your companion won't miss out. Missionaries who are out of shape get injured more easily than those in good physical condition. Crutches make it tough to get from place to place. Many missions have banned competitive basketball because of the number of work-hindering injuries.

Occasionally, the schedule you keep as a missionary may get messed up. A few late-night blessings, a night or two taking care of your sick companion, a few nights of arbitrating problems between missionaries in your zone or district—all put a strain on your physical health. Those who plan for such stresses and are in good physical condition are able to handle the problems without getting sick themselves. Those barely making it during the best of times often find themselves seeking medical help to keep going.

Extreme weight loss or gain during a mission puts a strain on more than just your wardrobe. If you are physically active before entering the MTC, you will find weight control is much easier. It is expensive to buy several new suits or dresses after you have been on a mission three or four months. The overall message is, to be wise, get in shape now so you don't have to spend the rest of your mission wishing you had.

1995 ﻿
