Randy L. Bott, Prepare with Honor: Helps for Future Missionaries ( 1995)

8

Recognizing the Spirit

One of the statements that shocked me the most as a mission president was an elder or sister saying, "President, I don't think I've ever had a spiritual experience." How could that be? They were full-time missionaries whose responsibility was to help people recognize the Spirit so they would make the commitment to join the Church. As we worked with the missionaries, we began to realize that all of them had experienced many spiritual experiences, but some missionaries did not know how to recognize them.

What does the Spirit feel like? Maybe a better question is, "What do I feel like when the Spirit is with me?" If you asked a dozen missionaries how they know when the Spirit is present, you would probably get twelve different answers. One might say, "Well, I feel tingly all over." Another might describe the feeling as "total peace and serenity." Yet another might say, "My mind gets going a million miles an hour." Still another might describe the experience as exciting and activating. Each one would describe individual reactions to the Spirit. Also, different situations may trigger different responses to the Spirit.

Let's look at how several prophets have described the Spirit. Moroni was so impressed with his father's way of explaining spiritual things that he quoted Mormon as follows: "All things which are good cometh of God; and that which is evil cometh of the devil; for the devil is an enemy unto God, and fighteth against him continually, and inviteth and enticeth to sin, and to do that which is evil continually. But behold, that which is of God inviteth and enticeth to do good continually; wherefore, every thing which inviteth and enticeth to do good, and to love God, and to serve him, is inspired of God (Moroni 7:12-13; emphasis added).

You have been inspired of God if you have ever been prompted to do good, have felt feelings of gratitude and love toward God, or have been motivated to serve God (such as going on a mission!). In other words, you have had a spiritual experience. Think about the times you have stopped to help a child who has fallen off a bicycle. Think about the times you have decided to wash the dishes, clean the house, or mow the lawn for your mom or dad. You have been inspired by the Spirit. Think of the times you have thanked your Heavenly Father in prayer (private or public) for the Church or the prophet or your family or your health. You have had a spiritual experience. Think of the many times you have offered a silent prayer either of thanksgiving or of asking for something. Nephi said, "If ye would hearken unto the Spirit which teacheth a man to pray ye would know that ye must pray; for the evil spirit teacheth not a man to pray, but teacheth him that he must not pray" (2 Nephi 32:8).

Sometimes we think we must see an angel, hear a voice, or see a vision to have a spiritual experience. While all of those things would indeed be spiritual experiences, they are only a fraction of what your Heavenly Father has defined as spiritual experiences. Perhaps the Lord's advice to Hyrum Smith is a valuable guide for us too:

Put your trust in that Spirit which leadeth to do good—yea, to do justly, to walk humbly, to judge righteously; and this is my Spirit.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, I will impart unto you of my Spirit, which shall enlighten your mind, which shall fill your soul with joy; and then shall ye know, or by this shall you know, all things whatsoever you desire of me, which are pertaining unto things of righteousness, in faith believing in me that you shall receive. (D&C 11:12-14)

Let's highlight the effects the Spirit will have. It will (1) lead you to do good, (2) motivate you to be fair (just), (3) keep you from becoming proud (walk humbly), (4) help you make correct decisions (judge righteously), (5) help you think clearly and give you ideas (enlighten your mind), (6) cause you to have happy feelings (fill your soul with joy), and (7) help you learn any righteous subject you are studying. Not a bad list of benefits. I'll bet most, if not all, of those things have happened to you. It really isn't "having a spiritual experience" as much as it is "recognizing a spiritual experience" that we need.

As you prepare for your mission, take advantage of every opportunity to recognize how you feel when the Spirit is with you. As you read from the Book of Mormon and the other scriptures, pay particular attention to how you feel mentally and physically. Pay more attention to the feelings you have when you are praying. When you partake of the sacrament, note how you feel. When you bear your testimony or give a talk, notice the different feelings. Some people get "scared" just before they bear their testimony. Maybe it isn't fear at all but the Spirit preparing them to share their thoughts and feelings.

After that, if you still have difficulty recognizing the Spirit, talk to your parents, your priesthood leader, or your Young Women adviser. Seek out someone who has had more experience. You will have a powerful affect on investigators when you can confidently declare, "Brother Brown, what you are feeling right now is the Holy Ghost bearing testimony to the truthfulness of what we have been teaching!" Put your self in situations where you are fairly sure the Spirit is present. Grow into the principle of revelation, and you will bless your life and the lives of your investigators forever.

1995 ﻿
