Randy L. Bott, Prepare with Honor: Helps for Future Missionaries ( 1995)

9

Developing Your Testimony

Many times on your mission, your testimony will come under attack. People who think they are doing God a favor will try to "teach you a thing or two." Anti-Mormon literature will (depending on where you serve) meet you at every turn. Usually such challenges to your testimony will be easily met. Occasionally, however, the nature of a question may cause you some concern. That will especially be true if you haven't taken time to strengthen your testimony.

How do you strengthen your testimony? It really isn't difficult. The Savior taught, "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself" (John 7:17). The easiest way to get a testimony is to live the principle about which you would like to know. There is a recognizable emptiness when a missionary bears testimony about tithing when he or she has never paid tithing. A person who has never lived the Word of Wisdom does not enjoy the same advantage as one who has been tempted but resisted. The missionary who testifies that the Book of Mormon is true without having read it lacks the converting power that brings investigators into the Church. So with every principle of the gospel—live it and then testify of it.

Elder Boyd K. Packer gave a marvelous talk entitled, "The Candle of the Lord" in which he said, "Oh, if I could teach you this one principle! A testimony is to be found in the bearing of it." How do you get the rock-solid testimony about the Savior, the Church, the prophet, or the plan of salvation? It is difficult to "live" those. But Elder Packer teaches true doctrine: "Stand up in fast and testimony meeting and bear your testimony about that which you feel you know something but are not totally sure. In the very process of your testifying, the Holy Ghost will bear unmistakable testimony to you that what you are saying is true." The Lord confirms this method of gaining a testimony when he says,

Lift up your voices unto this people; speak the thoughts that I shall [note the future tense] put into your hearts, and you shall not be confounded before men; for it shall [again, note the future tense] be given you in the very hour, yea, in the very moment, what ye shall say. But a commandment I give unto you, that ye shall declare whatsoever thing ye declare in my name, in solemnity of heart, in the spirit of meekness, in all things. And I give unto you this promise, that inasmuch as ye do this the Holy Ghost shall be shed forth in bearing record unto all things whatsoever ye shall say. (D&C 100:5-8; emphasis added by Elder Packer)

Moroni 10:3-5 is a famous scripture often learned in seminary and Sunday School. It tells us how to gain a testimony of the Book of Mormon. Let's consider the entire formula for gaining a testimony:

Behold, I would exhort you that when ye shall read these things, if it be wisdom in God that ye should read them, that ye would remember how merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men, from the creation of Adam even down until the time that ye shall receive these things, and ponder it in your hearts.

And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost. And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things. (Moroni 10:3-5; emphasis added)

Often we think that if we just "read" and "ask," the answer will be given. Too often, we suffer disappointment and frustration because the desired testimony is not obtained. No one would expect to come up with the right answer to a complex mathematical problem unless the entire formula were used. So it is with a testimony. It really does work well when we use the entire formula.

The more experiences you can have in every area relating to the Church, the easier it will be to bear your testimony. Take advantage of every opportunity to be involved. Be willing to bear your testimony frequently. You will discover certain ways of testifying that appeal to you and that will have the greatest impact on people to whom you testify. Learn to be humble, bold, and straightforward but not overbearing.

Review chapter 3 to see how many different opportunities the Lord has given you to bear your testimony. Look at the blessing the Lord promises to those who will take the challenge to bear their testimony: "Ye are blessed, for the testimony which ye have borne is recorded in heaven for the angels to look upon; and they rejoice over you, and your sins are forgiven you" (D&C 62:3). Fortunate is the mission that receives missionaries who are experienced in bearing testimony to the truthfulness of every aspect of the gospel.

1995 ﻿
