Randy L. Bott, Prepare with Honor: Helps for Future Missionaries ( 1995)

10

Being a Self-Starter

Missionaries have to be self-starters. No one is going to give you a "wake-up call" every morning. The district leader won't have time to call you every day to see if you are out of the apartment at the designated hour. The mission president can't be expected to call you every day to see if you've taken your vitamins or brushed your teeth or put on a clean pair of socks. Those are things you must learn to do on your own.

If you are in the habit of doing things for yourself without being asked or "commanded," your mission will become fun and fairly easy. If you have to be prodded to do the normal tasks you are assigned, you may be in trouble. Think about how you are doing right now. How many times do you have to be asked to take out the garbage? More than once? The Lord gave a stern warning to those who need to be reminded all the time to do what they have promised:

It is not meet [necessary or desirable] that I should command in all things; for he that is compelled [forced] in all things, the same is a slothful and not a wise servant; wherefore he receiveth no reward. Verily I say, men [you and I] should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness; for the power is in them wherein they are agents unto themselves. And inasmuch as men do good they shall in nowise lose their reward. But he that doeth not anything until he is commanded, and receiveth a commandment with a doubtful heart [a bad attitude], and keepeth it with slothfulness [the least you can get away with], the same is damned [stopped in spiritual progression]. (D&C 58:26-29; emphasis added)

No reward, damned, slothful—these are hardly words to describe a faithful missionary or a person who is going to the celestial kingdom. Do yourself a big favor and start looking for ways to show your initiative. Take out the garbage before anyone has to remind you. Volunteer to scrub the toilets—it might shock your parents to death if you don't usually do things like that. Look for ways to be "anxiously engaged in a good cause." Missionaries who know how to work and are not afraid to evaluate the situation and just "do it" are loved by everyone in the mission.

Sometimes we fall into a rather childish habit of wanting people to tell us what to do. We have grown up in a world that says, "Nothing is bad unless we get caught—so what can we get away with?" Missionaries who foster this attitude before their missions are a real pain to the mission leadership until they go through an attitude adjustment.

It is no compliment when others have to tell you how to act, what to wear, or whether your hair needs to be cut. One of the signs that you are becoming an adult is your ability to recognize areas that need improvement and then (without being hounded) make whatever corrections are necessary. Maybe you need a little conscience sitting on your shoulder who whispers constantly in your ear, "The control is better when it comes from within!"

Ask yourself a couple of questions: "How do I act when I think no one is watching?" "Would I do (or say) the things I do if Mom or Dad or the bishop were here?" If the answer is less than you know you are capable of, then isn't now a good time to make the change?

Sometimes we get stuck in awkward situations. Our friends want us to do things we know are not right. Not wanting to be known as a "goody-goody," we often go along. One of the most desirable Christlike attributes is to stand for what you know is right in spite of opposition. Once you have established your reputation for not being able to be persuaded to do wrong, your friends will start to protect you. You will also be pleasantly surprised to find that many of them will join you.

I witnessed an act of true heroism the summer before my mission. I was working for the U.S. Forest Service in a remote town in northern Idaho. There were only a couple of LDS boys in the group of fifty in the camp. During the course of the summer, the non-LDS guys tried to get us to drink and party with them. We stood our ground and refused. At the end of the summer, my friend was promoted to a position usually reserved for guys who had worked at the camp for three or four years. We were all pleased for him. The camp boss threw a party for him. At a time when everyone was at the height of the festivities, the camp boss proposed a toast to my friend. Everyone had a glass of some alcoholic drink. The boss put a glass in my friend's hand and said something like, "Just one little drink won't hurt you a bit. Just to show you really are part of the group, drink up!" The room went silent. Every eye was on him. He didn't hesitate a second, responding, "How could I be loyal to you guys if I was a traitor to myself and my Heavenly Father? If you really value my friendship, you won't ask me to choose between you and God!" With that declaration, he poured the drink back into the punch bowl. A huge cheer went up from everyone, including the boss. During the rest of the evening, everyone there slapped my friend on the back and expressed their appreciation for his holding his ground. They all said they knew he wouldn't give in to the pressure. I was (and still am) proud to be numbered among his friends.

Don't wait until somebody chastens you for acting or talking inappropriately. Such things can greatly injure the reputation of the Church, the mission, your family, and yourself. What a thrill it is to watch young men and women live the way they know is right in spite of the fact that no one is looking over their shoulders!

As a mission president, I always felt a lump in my throat when I would drive, unannounced, through a town far from the mission headquarters and see the missionaries peddling their bikes on the way to an appointment. On the other hand, I was always disappointed when I would visit some missionaries during the middle of the day, after 6:30 a.m., or after 9:30 p.m. and find them not doing what they had committed to do. I have listened to the most creative excuses in the world, but they are just that—excuses. An excuse is a weak attempt to justify unacceptable behavior. Wouldn't it be nice to be able to stand before the Savior and not worry about whether he would accept our excuses. When he asks me if I served a mission, I will respond, "I did!" When he asks if I served with honor, I will tell him I really tried. I would encourage you to live so that excuses are not necessary.

The last days (in which you now live) will require men and women who are self-starters. There is already a high demand for men and women who know how to assess the task, martial the resources, and get the job done. There will always be a place of honor for those who exercise self-control rather than waiting for someone else to impose control from outside. Number yourself among the truly noble—control yourself!

1995 ﻿
