Randy L. Bott, Prepare with Honor: Helps for Future Missionaries ( 1995)

11

Being an Example

Envision what a missionary looks like. In a few months (or years) you will be that vision in the mind of other young people. For too long, young people have believed they could live whatever lifestyle is comfortable during their teenage years, change just before their mission, and everything would be all right. Unfortunately, many have discovered that habits are hard to break. Let's work from the outside inward.

When you receive your mission call, it will contain a picture of what a "missionary haircut" looks like for elders. The closer your haircut resembles the model, the easier it will be to live that mission rule. Missions are stressful enough without adding additional, unnecessary stress to your life. You may think the kids at your high school will make fun of you. If you learn to use humor in tense situations now, it will benefit you when teenagers may taunt you during your mission. When an elder stands to give his farewell address and has lines clearly marking where his old hairline used to be, it is no compliment to him.

Don't try to fool yourself. Although hair length may not be a big deal to you, it is still a major issue in whether people will open their homes to you. If wearing your hair in a long hairstyle is really important to you now, it will be a constant temptation during your mission to see how close to the limit you can get without someone reminding you to get a more conservative haircut. You don't have to stand out in the crowd to be outstanding.

It is no compliment when someone has to remind you how to look. The clothes you wear as a missionary will be entirely different from your current day-to-day wardrobe. Again, if you lean toward extremes in style, you will find it difficult to wear the conservative clothes required of missionaries. I remember how difficult it was to adjust to wearing a tie all day. Before my mission, I would put the tie on just before the start of a meeting and take it off before the "amen" of the closing prayer hit the ceiling. What a shock to the system to wear a tie from before sunrise until long after dark every day of the week. You might lessen the shock by wearing a tie all day on Sunday.

Shoes talk! Without saying a word, your shoes send a powerful message about you. If you are not accustomed to polishing your shoes and keeping them clean, now is a good time to start. That doesn't mean you have to keep them spit-shined, as in the military. But scruffy shoes tell others, "I really don't care that much about myself." A good suggestion for a Christmas gift or birthday present might be a shoe-shine kit in a compact bag.

Ironing shirts does not have to be unpleasant. Spend time with your mother and have her teach you how to press suit pants and shirts. A wrinkled shirt can distract investigators so they can't concentrate on the message. Learning how to launder and iron clothes will help cut down the expense of having to replace them because they have worn out before their time.

In many parts of the world, the temperature is high and the humidity even higher. Learn to shower and use deodorants properly. Body odor turns people off. You will need to use every trick you know to keep yourself presentable if you are in a bike area or in a mission where water for showering is scarce. I remember many times bathing in the ocean and then being allowed one cup of fresh water to wash off the salty film. Rinsing with just a cup of water could be done, but it wasn't easy.

Oral hygiene is also important. Take good care of your teeth. Learn to brush and floss regularly. It is always embarrassing when a missionary needs to be told to brush his or her teeth more often and use mouthwash. Breath mints help. Avoid chewing gum as a breath freshener. Gum, unless discretely chewed, is distracting. It is better to learn before your mission to avoid bad breath by properly caring for your teeth.

You may have developed an appreciation for a wide variety of music. The music you will listen to on your mission will be limited. Too many young people go on a mission with an addiction to certain kinds of music. Some go through "withdrawal" as they are required to put that music behind them. Do yourself a favor and evaluate now the music in your listening library. Learn to listen to and appreciate Church, classical, and instrumental (not rock) music. This will help you in exchanging your present music for mission music. Don't go on a mission with the idea of rewriting the rules for appropriate music. There is purpose behind those mission rules.

Watching television is usually a forbidden activity for missionaries. Not much on TV leads you to think about God, truth, virtue, or living a Christlike life. You can't take worldly things into your mind without their having a negative effect. When a large portion of your free time is devoted to watching television, you will be tempted to do the same thing on your mission. You will be less frustrated if you have learned to go without television. Instead, read a good book (the scriptures), exercise, help around the house, or write a letter. As a missionary, you will read more than you have ever read in your whole life. If you are not accustomed to reading, your natural reaction will be to fall asleep. You can't learn much while you are sleeping; inspired dreams usually follow intense study!

Check your attitude toward other people. If you are not being helpful, kind, and considerate, you are not preparing for your mission. Being kind to those who dislike you requires more than just showing up for appointments and meetings. You must learn how to control your actions and not allow others to negatively provoke you. The Apostle Paul counseled Timothy, "Let no man despise thy youth; but be thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity" (1 Timothy 4:12).

How many times have you heard the age-old (but true) adage, "What you are sounds so loud in my ears that I can't hear what you are saying." Start now to eliminate any mixed messages. Make the way you act confirm what you say. Perhaps an appropriate summary of this chapter's teachings would be: "If the way you look or act draws attention to yourself and away from your message, you are dressing or acting inappropriately." Remember, you represent more than yourself. You represent the Savior, your family, your ward, your friends, and the whole Church. Make sure you fairly represent every group.

1995 ﻿
