Randy L. Bott, Prepare with Honor: Helps for Future Missionaries ( 1995)

12

Making Kindergarten Decisions

What are kindergarten decisions? At first glance, you might think they are the decisions young children make while attending kindergarten. That is exactly correct. They are simple decisions that are vital to your success as a student or as a missionary.

There are several kindergarten decisions you need to make. I will talk about only a few and challenge you to complete the list. One decision that distinguishes "outstanding missionaries" from "ordinary missionaries" is their commitment to be obedient. This is such an elementary decision. It is easy to make and yet sometimes difficult to live. It is sort of like living the commandments Heavenly Father has given us. We should be able to live them perfectly, since no one of them is all that tough, yet we sometimes fall short. It is easy to say you will commit to being totally obedient to the mission rules. It is another battle altogether to live all the rules when you arrive in the mission. However, if you have made up your mind to be obedient, you are well on your way.

You will note I said it is easy to make kindergarten decisions. I never implied it would be easy to live those decisions. One of the decisions so easy to make and so difficult to live is getting up on time. Every morning about 6:25 a.m. (if your wake-up time is 6:30 a.m.), the devil will remind you how tired you are, how much you need another few minutes of sleep, how everybody else is sleeping in, how fifteen more minutes in bed won't make any difference. If you have made the kindergarten decision to get up on time no matter what, you will never need to make that decision again. From then on, your total energy will be directed to living the decision, not constantly remaking it.

Another kindergarten decision is to stay on your mission for the full time you were called. You are probably asking yourself why I would mention that one. It is because many missionaries begin to serve and find that a mission is more difficult than they had imagined. The devil is always there to whisper that you can't be successful, that you should just go home. This happens even to the most diligent and well-prepared of missionaries. If your decision is to serve no matter what, then you can focus all your strength on getting rid of those feelings of inadequacy. Those homesick feelings won't last long unless you waffle on the decision to stay.

Another decision is to write home once a week and to keep a journal of your mission experience. When the lure of a P-day activity hits you, you may be tempted to "postpone" writing until later. Make the kindergarten decision to write as scheduled. Then, instead of wasting valuable time debating with yourself, you will be writing letters and writing in your journal. In less time than it would take you to talk yourself out of writing, you can be finished. It is so easy to put off writing in your journal until you have a little more time. If you do, you will discover that your mission is over and you haven't recorded any of the spiritual experiences you wanted to preserve for yourself and your future family. Once the freshness of the experience is gone, you can only partially recapture your feelings. It will take only one or two missed experiences to convince you that this is one kindergarten decision you won't ever want to make again.

As a pre-missionary, you will want to make the definite decision that you will serve. Too many young men make the right decisions as a deacon, teacher, and priest only to drift into a state of indecision during their eighteenth year. If the kindergarten decision to serve was made early and kept, it will be easy to start the paperwork when the appropriate time comes. If serving a mission is top priority in your life, many of the sins that could disqualify you from serving will be much easier to resist. If serving a mission is a nonnegotiable decision, plans for work, school, and marriage will be easy to keep in proper perspective. If you don't make this kindergarten decision, most of the others won't make much difference. You can't serve an honorable mission unless you accept the call!

You can probably go through your present schedule and see many areas in which kindergarten decisions could make life much easier. The Word of Wisdom, morality, scripture reading, and church attendance are just a few that, if made correctly, free a lot of energy to use in living those commitments. Don't wait until you are nineteen or twenty-one to decide the kind of person you want to be. Remember, no one said kindergarten decisions would be easy to live; they are just easy to make. Once you have made them, the war with your unruly body still goes on, but your celestial spirit will eventually win. You will feel a lot better about yourself if you learn to make correct kindergarten decisions early and then live by them.

1995 ﻿
