Randy L. Bott, Prepare with Honor: Helps for Future Missionaries ( 1995)

13

Preparing Financially

Missions are expensive. At the current rate of $375 a month, the cost for a sister is $6,750. For an elder who serves twenty-four months, the cost is $9,000. That sounds like a lot of money—and it is! But that isn't the entire cost. The preparation costs alone run between $1,500 and $2,000. You might be saying, "Well, Mom and Dad say they will finance my mission!" Even if they are willing, you will gain more personal reward if you pay for part of your own mission. You need to escape the childish mind-set that someone else will always pick up the tab. The missionary who pays for at least part of his or her own way is a much more diligent missionary. It is easier to waste money when it is not your own.

How much do you have to save to be prepared? That depends on how much time remains before your mission and how long you will serve. If you just turned twelve and are starting your "mission account," you would have to save about $130 a month to cover all costs for a two-year mission. If you are seventeen years old and just starting, you would have to save about $460 a month to be self-sustaining! All of a sudden, missions are really expensive! No matter how old you are or how little you have saved, you will benefit from saving as much as you can before your call comes.

Too many young people have indulged in buying expensive "toys" and then painfully discover they don't have enough money to go on a mission. Over the years, I have heard many rationalizations. One young man explained that his going into debt for a sport truck was an "investment." He planned to sell it (at a profit!) when the time for his mission arrived. But how could he know that one miscalculation on his part during his senior year of high school would leave his truck a worthless piece of junk? Comprehensive insurance coverage was too costly, so he opted for just liability insurance. Because of that, he received no money for his wrecked truck. His debt was still outstanding and had to be paid. His mission went unserved.

Cars, trucks, motorcycles, boats, jet skis, stereo systems, and the like are fun and exciting but often trap prospective missionaries in a financial maze that makes serving a mission impossible or puts an extreme hardship on Mom and Dad. Many prospective missionaries set aside 50 percent of what they earn toward their mission, and tithing takes another 10 percent, leaving 40 percent of the total to live on. That may sound like enough, but there are also taxes and various living expenses. Even if it means cutting other expenditures, don't shortchange your mission fund or the Lord (tithing).

Some rather creative young people have entered into an agreement with their parents to set aside "matching funds." For every dollar you save, Mom and Dad are willing to match it by putting a dollar in a savings account. This approach gives you the added incentive of doubling your investment. It also lessens the impact on the family budget when you leave; most of your money will already have been set aside.

As you get closer to your mission date, start buying clothing you can use on your mission. There are limited opportunities for you to wear shorts, loud shirts, or "trendy" clothing on a mission. If you try purchasing clothing and shoes too far in advance, you may outgrow them before your mission date arrives. You might suggest to your family that Christmas, birthday, and other gifts include luggage, a camera, journals, scriptures, and other things you will need but not grow out of.

Youth is a great time of life. Buying and spending is fun and exciting. Reality is sometimes difficult to accept. Learning how to distinguish between wants and needs is an important lesson.

In addition to saving money, you will need to learn to budget the money you have. Learn to buy wisely. Start going grocery shopping with your parents. When you do, ask questions: Why did you choose this product rather than another one? Why did you buy the larger size rather than the cheaper smaller size? Why do "prepared foods" cost so much more than the ingredients to make the same thing at home? You will not have an unlimited bank account on your mission. Each mission will give you a monthly living allowance based on what the average missionary spends in that mission. If you have learned how to budget and use your funds wisely, you will have plenty. If you have not, you may find yourself without money halfway into the month. Trying to live for two weeks on starvation foods is not fun! Good budgeting makes starvation unnecessary.

Plan now to live within your allotted budget on your mission. Even if Mom and Dad can afford to send you extra money, it will be grossly unfair to the other missionaries who are not as fortunate. When you have extra money and your companion does not, it puts real stress on your companionship. Be wise enough to learn these financial practices before you leave; they will eliminate the stress of being with companions who do not know how to use their money. With proper planning now, finances will not need to become a central focus of your mission.

1995 ﻿
