Randy L. Bott, Prepare with Honor: Helps for Future Missionaries ( 1995)

14

Dealing with Girlfriends or Boyfriends

While you are on your mission, should you have a girlfriend or boyfriend waiting for you at home? Obviously, there isn't a definite answer either from the scriptures or from the Brethren. Rather, the objective is to look at the pros and cons of such a situation.

If you don't already, someday you will definitely want to have a boyfriend or girlfriend. This may or may not be the right time. Be honest and open in evaluating your situation. Sometimes, missionaries will serve with more honor because they know their special friends are keeping track of their progress. Sometimes, missionaries never quite get into their missions because they are always thinking and daydreaming about their special friends. Into which category will you fit?

If your special friend is behind you 100 percent and is willing to constantly write you encouraging letters, then maintain the relationship. If the letters are full of romantic sweet stuff, you will find it increasingly difficult to stay focused on your mission. If you are counting the days until you can be back together again, you will never get off the ground spiritually. On the other hand, if your friend helps you keep your mission and life in proper perspective, he or she may be exactly what you need to motivate you to serve more honorably.

From years of experience with elders and sisters who have left girlfriends or boyfriends behind, I would say most would have been better off had they started their missions without any social ties. The truth is that only about one out of every ten friends who are waiting for missionaries actually wait.

Talk this matter over with older brothers and sisters or friends who had someone wait. Would they do it again? Some will say yes; others will say no. At least consider the impact it will have on you if your friend decides not to wait. Will you be able to handle it? I have spent many days trying to put missionaries back together who have received the infamous "Dear John" or "Dear Jane" letters. It may be difficult to imagine your special friend writing one of those letters, but remember that all the other missionaries felt the same way before they got theirs!

There is another major consideration many pre-missionaries fail to take into account. For the next eighteen months or two years, you will be growing intellectually and spiritually at an incredible rate. Unless your friend is on an organized program, you will outdistance them in your progression. The result will be that although they may still like you when you get home, you may not be as interested in them. If you are planning something permanent when you return, be realistic enough to suggest a learning program for your friend: taking an institute class, teaching in the Church, doing community service, or following an individual study program—anything that will parallel what you will be doing.

Many young people do end up marrying the person who waited for them. What a great thing to have shared such a spiritual experience before you are married! Knowing that you are earning blessings for your future wife or husband and children is a real incentive to serve well (see Mark 10:28-30). And your weekly report to your friend can help keep you focused on what is really important.

If you decide to try it, set some practical and realistic guidelines. Write no more than one letter a week, which complies with the Missionary Handbook. If you are going to build a celestial relationship, don't try to build it on disobedience. Phone calls home are not permitted. If your mission allows calls home on Mother's Day and Christmas, then you may have the opportunity to talk briefly with each other. If that isn't practical, don't sacrifice the blessings promised to the faithful because of your desire to talk with each other.

Agree to focus your letters on your mission, and not on mush. Being away from each other for two years will be difficult enough without adding the burden of romantic homesickness. Share your insights into the scriptures and the gospel. Share experiences you are having as a missionary with new investigators, difficult questions, lessons you are learning, and prayers that are being answered. You will have plenty of time to catch up on the romantic side of your relationship after you get home.

Keep in mind that in spite of the best intentions of both of you, things may not work out. Make sure you do not write anything either of you will be embarrassed about if you end up marrying someone else. Several years after returning from my first mission, I met one of my missionary companions. He had been head over heels in love with his girlfriend. He would let me read some of the letters he wrote to her. I blush now as I remember some of them. She did not end up waiting for him. When he returned home (as he recounted the story), he met his ex-girlfriend, her husband, and their baby while walking down the street one day. As their eyes met, his face reddened as he remembered (and she obviously remembered) the things he had written. He said he was so embarrassed that he had consciously avoided seeing her since that time. I am so glad I didn't make the same mistake. My wife and I still enjoy visiting with my five former girlfriends and their families!

If you are just "sort of" serious, keep your relationship on a friendly note. You might have an understanding before you leave that if things don't work out, he or she will send the letters to your home as another record of your mission. Knowing that your future spouse and children might read the letters will also help you keep the relationship on a friendly plane.

If you decide the "waiting game" isn't right for you, break off your relationship carefully. You still don't know what the future may hold. You may have second thoughts later on. If so, you'll be glad you didn't burn your bridges behind you. It is such a relief to begin serving your mission without regrets about the relationships you had before you left home.

If things don't work out, agree to be friends. Those same qualities that attracted you to each other before your mission may well be the qualities your future "friends" will have. Don't act like a child if waiting doesn't work out. Since I have had to counsel many missionaries on the matter, I will also counsel you: Don't continue to correspond after your special friend is someone else's wife or husband! Those first months of marriage are a big enough adjustment without the added irritation from continued correspondence. It's funny how something that obvious escapes so many!

One more consoling thought: Although your boyfriend or girlfriend might end up marrying someone else while you are serving your mission, your husband or wife will not! Trust the Lord. You are on his errand, and he will watch out for you.

Waiting itself is neither positive nor negative. How you deal with it makes all the difference in the world.

1995 ﻿
