Randy L. Bott, Prepare with Honor: Helps for Future Missionaries ( 1995)

15

Leaving the Past Behind

Only one person has led a perfect life. As good as your mother thinks you are, that One isn't you! Since all have made mistakes, it almost becomes a game with some missionaries to talk, sometimes in a boasting way, about things they have done wrong. When you go to talk with the bishop and clear up the past, that should bury it once and for all. Don't keep bringing it up over and over.

There are good reasons to let the past stay buried. You are going to be held up as an example of what every mother and father wants their son or daughter to be. Bringing up the past gives the people who are listening to you a license to do the same thing. They will be saying in their minds, "Wow, Elder or Sister Jones sure is a neat person. If they could sin before their mission and still turn out good, maybe I can do the same thing!" Since people see you only the way you are now, they will not be aware of how much you suffered and learned as you repented. If you have really repented of your sins, you will wish you had never done them. You will look back with regret and pray mightily that the Lord will never bring them back. And you certainly won't boast about them.

If you become aware now that others look to you as an example, it will be easier when your conservative clothes and name tag label you as a Mormon missionary. Do you know that some of the kids in your neighborhood look at you and want to grow up to be like you? From the day you come out of the waters of baptism until the day you die, you can never escape being a living testimony. Either your good example will bear testimony of the Lord and his church, or your bad example will bear testimony of Satan and his counterfeit gospel. You are the only one who can choose for which side you will bear your testimony. You cannot choose whether or not to be a living testimony. You can only choose between being a good or bad example.

Use this simple key to help you know whether you are dressing, acting, and talking appropriately: If attention is drawn to you and away from your message, you are doing or wearing something inappropriate. For example, if a priest were to bless the sacrament while wearing an earring, people in the congregation might focus more on the earring than on the Savior. You might think the problem lies with everyone else, but it doesn't. You are commissioned by priesthood ordinance to stand in the place of the Savior to the people. You are not authorized to do anything that would distract them from following the Savior.

Mistakes you have made in the past are not anything of which you should be proud. When you truly repent, you crucify the "old man of sin" (see Romans 6:6) and put on the new man in Christ. Someday, unless you continue to remind the Lord about those mistakes, he will "remember them no more" (D&C 58:42). Why chance having them continually remembered by constantly talking about them? The Lord remembers them no more unless you choose to bring them up.

1995 ﻿
