Randy L. Bott, Prepare with Honor: Helps for Future Missionaries ( 1995)

16

Giving It Your All

The preparation period, the Missionary Training Center, and the farewell scene at the airport will have you so pumped you will hardly be able to contain yourself. Those things have announced that you are now actually starting the service everyone has talked so much about and for which you have waited so long. This enthusiasm will carry you for the first month of your mission. However, you must realize that difficult times await you, so don't be surprised when they hit.

Unfortunately, too many missionaries become overwhelmed with the amount of work there is to do and get discouraged. Some resign themselves to just enduring to the end, while others realize the responsibility they took on when they accepted the call and roll up their sleeves to do as much as they can. There are definite rewards for working hard in spite of what others may do. There is also a sobering caution given to us by President Joseph Fielding Smith:

[Missionaries] were to remember . . . one important duty which they were to fulfill and that was to be sure and bear testimony in every instance. If they performed their labors sincerely, humbly and diligently bearing witness of the restoration then it would be more tolerable for the heathen in the day of judgment, than for that house which rejected the message. If no warning had been left, however, then the judgment would be pronounced against the servant who was expected to deliver it. . . . The elders who delivered the message were also to be judges in the day of judgment against those who rejected their testimony. Missionaries of the Church should realize this fact. They are sent to warn the world and when they faithfully do their duty they will stand as witnesses against those who reject them, but if they fail to perform their duty, then those unto whom the message should have been given, will stand up as accusers in their turn, and the unfaithful servants will be condemned. (Church History and Modern Revelation [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1946], p. 47)

Think of it: a price must be paid for the testimony you will bear. If you faithfully do your duty, it won't make any difference (to you) whether the people accept or reject your testimony. You will be blessed as though everyone you teach joined the Church. However, if you fail to bear your testimony every opportunity you have, then the people you should have warned will stand to condemn you in the day of judgment. Knowing this, can you see how essential it is to be faithful and diligent in doing what you have been called to do?

On June 7, 1962, President Henry D. Moyle addressed missionaries in California about being diligent during their missions:

I shall go to my grave saying that missionaries . . . never rise in their entire life above the stature they carve out for themselves in the mission field. I ask the missionaries all over the world to write that in their book, and then read the book ten years from now. If perchance, they have not risen in that first ten years after they come home from the mission field, above that status of mediocrity that they (may have) maintained in the mission field, (they should) get down on their knees, pray, and work a little harder and seek to overcome that tremendous handicap they placed upon themselves by their lack of application, lack of appreciation, and lack of dedication in the mission field.

This is your opportunity for greatness. The rewards for faithful service will set the course for the rest of your life. If you really want to excel and become great, don't cheat yourself and the Lord by serving a casual mission. You have heard many times the saying that has been printed on posters, cross-stitched on wall hangings, and imprinted on pocket-sized reminder cards: "I never said it would be easy. I just said it would be worth it!" For missionaries, that is a true statement indeed!

It is not what but who that determines the success of your mission. The obvious answer is you. If you will decide now to take advantage of every opportunity to share the gospel and bear your testimony, you will be laying the foundation of greatness in your life. Since not all your companions and other missionaries may share your attitude, you have the opportunity to help them catch the same vision. President Smith's and President Moyle's statements are intended for the entire missionary force. What a blessing you will be to your mission and the Lord when you faithfully share the gospel with everyone you meet!

As a preparing missionary, you can learn to be diligent and faithful. Start now by concentrating on the present. Too many missionaries (and others) constantly look to the future as a time when they will finally be "happy." Others insist on talking endlessly about experiences they have enjoyed or endured in the past. What a terrible waste to be constantly "wishing away" your mission! Waiting until you are a senior companion or a leader or until your mission will be over is fruitless and even counterproductive. I have comforted many missionaries who thought happiness would come the last day of their mission. But only then did they discover they had fallen in love with the work, the gospel, the people, and the area. They realized too late that they did not want to leave.

You can't do much about the past. It is gone and can't be recalled. The future will arrive one moment at a time, but when it does, it is called "the present." If you are still in school, concentrate on enjoying each class period. It may be difficult in some instances. But if you can learn now to look for the good, the pleasurable, or the principle you are to learn, then the time will pass more quickly, and you will not look back with regret at having wasted part of your life. You may have a job before your mission. Practice being the best employee you can be. Don't worry too much about whether you are being paid what you think you are worth or whether the job is boring or difficult or unrewarding. Learning how to give an honest day's work for a day's pay will get you into the habit of serving with total honor. Don't make excuses for skipping work. If you are genuinely sick, call and let your employer know you won't be in. If you are just not motivated to go to work—go anyway. Happiness does not depend on a certain environment or activity. Happiness is a state of mind over which you have complete control. If you are not happy, don't fall into the satanic trap of blaming someone else. Take stock of where you are and the direction you are going; make a change if necessary. Life can be thrilling and rewarding, unless we wait around for someone else to tailor-make the environment to our liking.

You will hear it over and over again: "A mission is either the best or the worst time of your life. It all depends on you." How true that is! Being in the habit of taking full advantage of every moment, working as hard and as efficiently as you know how, and consciously enjoying each moment—these will create a memory of your mission you will relish forever. Live each moment now.

1995 ﻿
