Randy L. Bott, Prepare with Honor: Helps for Future Missionaries ( 1995)

17

Learning to Talk to Adults

Over the years, I have noticed how children seem to go through stages. When we were little, we were afraid of "big people" and shyly said nothing. As we grew older, we became more aware of those around us. Adults may have viewed us as obnoxious or a pain. As we matured toward adulthood, we may have gone through a second "shy" stage and again chose to be silent. Why do we clam up when adults are around? Are we afraid our ideas may sound silly or childish? Whatever the reason may be, you need to overcome shyness before going on your mission.

In doing a self-inventory, see if you are comfortable in discussing a variety of issues with adults. Do you wait for them to start the conversation? Do you answer in monosyllables? Do you look down or away when someone is talking to you directly? Do you stutter or stumble when trying to answer a question? If you do any of these, you can overcome them with a little practice.

Choose someone you respect and trust. Ask him or her to help you learn to express yourself. Choose a topic in which you may differ in your beliefs. Practice expressing yourself clearly and forcefully on this topic without being overbearing. Have the person critique your abilities. Learn to accept the person's criticism. Watch people who successfully do the things you are trying to learn.

If you are still going to school, think about taking a class in speech or debate. But be cautious on your mission about trying to use all you learn in debate. "Bashing" or arguing will not bring the Spirit but will result in far fewer converts than you might otherwise get. Learn to ask and answer questions in class. You will find classes in school much more interesting if you are involved than if you wait around for the teacher to "entertain" you. Hearing yourself ask intelligent questions will give you confidence in your intellectual abilities. Asking questions also gives you a nonthreatening opportunity to see how people react to you. If the class gets upset because of your questions, you may be using the wrong tone of voice. Ask, don't challenge! If the teacher asks you repeatedly to "rephrase the question," you can bet you are not making yourself clearly understood. Learn to speak loudly enough so the person you are addressing can easily hear you and not have to guess at what you are saying. In other words, "Don't mumble!"

Listen to the news often enough to be able to discuss intelligently what is happening in the world. Don't be so quick to label as "worthless" the classes you are taking in school. The Lord gave us a rather lengthy list of subjects with which we ought to be familiar when we go on our missions:

Teach ye diligently [we could also say "discuss"] and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory [an educated guess on how things might work], in principle [a fundamental truth on which other laws are based], in doctrine [something taught, especially as the principles or beliefs of a religion], in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand; of things both in heaven [astronomy] and in the earth [agriculture, forestry, ecology], and under the earth [mineralogy, geology]; things which have been [history], things which are [current events], things which must shortly come to pass [prophecies]; things which are at home [domestic affairs], things which are abroad [foreign affairs]; the wars and the perplexities of the nations [politics], and the judgments which are on the land [floods, droughts, famines, plagues, diseases, crime waves]; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms [geography, political science, sociology, economics]—[For what purpose?] That ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you. (D&C 88:78-80)

You will not master these topics by watching television comedy! Still, many wonderful television documentaries and science shows may add to your understanding. It is much easier to talk to people you will meet on your mission if you know at least a little about a great many topics. If you are totally unprepared in the areas the Lord has outlined, you will be more afraid to talk to "educated" adults.

Learn before your mission to graciously remain silent when someone strongly disagrees with your point of view. During your mission, you may encounter people who would love to draw you into a verbal (sometimes physical) fight over your beliefs. If you have learned self-control, you will not be so foolish as to engage in bashing with them.

Don't be afraid someone will disprove the Church; the Church is true. You may not know the immediate answer to every question thrown your way, but you can rest assured Heavenly Father knows the answer and has promised to tell you what he wants people to know in the very moment you need the answer. He said, "Neither take ye thought beforehand what ye shall say; but treasure up in your minds continually the words of life, and it shall be given you in the very hour that portion that shall be meted unto every man" (D&C 84:85; emphasis added). Another declaration by the Lord confirms this promise: "Lift up your voices unto this people; speak the thoughts that I shall put into your hearts, and you shall not be confounded before men; for it shall be given you in the very hour, yea, in the very moment, what ye shall say" (D&C 100:5-6; emphasis added). From thousands of experiences, both my own and those reported to me by missionaries, I know these promises are true. Do yourself a favor and "treasure up continually the words of life" and see if the Lord doesn't do the same for you.

You will understand more about the gospel after you have gained some teaching experience. But in spite of the little you know, it is many times more than your investigators know. Your understanding of what certain passages mean may silence even learned ministers. Read carefully what the Lord said about you as a missionary: "I, the Lord, am merciful and gracious unto those who fear me, and delight to honor those who serve me in righteousness and in truth unto the end. And their wisdom shall be great, and their understanding reach to heaven; and before them the wisdom of the wise shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall come to naught. For by my Spirit will I enlighten them" (D&C 76:5, 9, 10).

You may naturally feel timid or shy around those of greater age and education than yourself. Nevertheless, the Lord expects you to be tactfully bold in your teaching. In fact, he chastised elders in the early days of the Church for being afraid to talk: "With some I am not well pleased, for they will not open their mouths, but they hide the talent which I have given unto them, because of the fear of man. Wo unto such, for mine anger is kindled against them" (D&C 60:2).

Practice discussing eternal truths before you go on your mission; it will save you a lot of grief and anxiety when you arrive. Start today talking, discussing, presenting, listening, studying, asking, and answering topics that require spiritual understanding.

1995 ﻿
