Randy L. Bott, Prepare with Honor: Helps for Future Missionaries ( 1995)

18

Learning Self-Control

Our modern society teaches that a real man never walks away from a fight. But the Lord has asked us to turn the other cheek and control our actions. At times during your mission, people may push you to the limit. How you react can make the difference in whether a person does or doesn't join the Church.

One muscular Tongan elder shared an experience of self-control during a zone conference. This 230-pound elder and his equally muscular companion were being physically threatened and verbally abused by a 120-pound man. The abuser grabbed the Tongan by the tie and put his face right in the elder's face. The man swore and yelled, letting the elders know what sissies he thought they were and how much he hated Mormons. He threatened them and commanded them to leave immediately or he would "chew them up and spit them out." When the Tongan elder asked how he thought he would do that, the man demonstrated his defiance by biting the missionary's bicycle tire. How easy it would have been for the elder to "dispose" of this man. How grateful he was that he didn't. After the harassment, which lasted for about ten minutes, the detractor left, muttering oaths and curses to himself. As the missionaries turned to continue on their way, they saw a group of fifty people who had gathered to watch their reaction to the situation. They later taught many discussions to people from that group, and several of the people were eventually baptized. If these elders had not learned to control themselves before their missions, they might have damaged the good reputation of the Church and the missionary program. But they had previously learned to take charge of a situation and not to respond to every little irritation by fighting or yelling.

Some elders have not learned the valuable lessons of self-control and calmly walking away from confrontations. Such missionaries should take a crash course in self-control so they don't embarrass themselves, the mission, and the Church.

Controlling your temper is only one of many important areas of self-control. Controlling your appetite is also a must. Many places in the world teeter on the brink of famine. So if you eat without considering who else needs to eat, others may be forced to go without food. I learned this lesson the hard way. As young missionaries in Samoa, we had just experienced the first of three major hurricanes that destroyed our food supply. We had been invited to a meal with a member some distance from our home. By the time we arrived, I was famished. It seemed like forever since I had enjoyed a good meal. The food was brought and laid before us. After the blessing, I dived in, trying to satisfy my gnawing hunger. I devoured every scrap of food on the plate. Then I noticed my companion had only nibbled at his food. I thought he was crazy. I even thought of offering to finish his food if he didn't want it. Then I saw the look of disgust on his face. Without a word, he motioned toward a group of children watching us from the far side of the room. It took a few seconds for the reality of the situation to dawn on me: the only food they would be eating is what we didn't eat! I felt sick. Many times during the rest of my mission, I learned to suppress my hunger because many little mouths would appreciate my control.

Controlling your mind is another essential trait to learn. Many places in the world have a different standard of modesty than we do in the United States. That doesn't make them either good or bad—just different. If you have not learned to control your eyes and your thoughts, you could be in real trouble. Develop a system for keeping your mind clean. Learn to use Satan against Satan. Whenever you are tempted to entertain bad thoughts, use the temptation as a catalyst to remind you to think and do something righteous: memorize a scripture, read a chapter from the Book of Mormon, say a prayer, sing a favorite hymn, recite an uplifting poem, or do a service project. Any of these things will quickly put you in control of your mind and rescue you from the tempter. You will soon discover that Satan is not stupid; he just isn't intelligent! He will say, "Wait a minute. When I tempt Elder Jones, he is not tempted and actually does something that takes him further away from my kingdom." Satan will then withdraw the temptations in those areas (and hit you from a different direction). You can control your mind if you really try.

As teenagers, we are sometimes foolish enough to take a dare and do something we would normally never consider. We might even be called "chicken," "wimp," or "mama's boy" if we refuse. Learn to ignore the taunting. Satan has his mortal imps who will try to lure you into verbal or physical combat by using vulgarity or calling you names. If you have mastered the talent of walking away, it will be easy to continue. If you have the reputation of never walking away from a good fight, you will be in trouble. After a couple of incidents of fighting, your right to continue serving as a missionary will be brought into question. Don't allow Satan to destroy your mission because of your failure to control yourself.

1995 ﻿
