Randy L. Bott, Prepare with Honor: Helps for Future Missionaries ( 1995)

19

Serving for the Right Reasons

Doesn't everyone go on a mission to serve the Lord? It would be wonderful if everyone did. Probably any reason for going on a mission is a good reason if you end up getting converted after you get there. But you and the mission will benefit more if you determine to go to serve others and not just to serve yourself. If you happen to learn and grow (which you undoubtedly will) as a result of your service, that is fine. But when you go to serve, be willing to do whatever the mission president and the Lord ask. A self-serving attitude will make you angry and discouraged when you don't get the position you want or don't get to serve where you want.

Attitudes can be altered. You may have developed an "attitude" over your lifetime. But since a mission is such a great time of change anyway, you might consider an attitude adjustment before you go. To determine if you may have the wrong attitude for a mission, ask yourself, "If I am never called to a position of leadership in my mission, will I consider myself a failure?" If the answer is yes, you need to ask, "Who am I going to serve, myself or the Lord?" Remember, during his mortal ministry the Savior was never a district leader, a zone leader, or an assistant. He was a servant to all!

Some young men go on missions because their girlfriends won't marry anyone but a returned missionary. That's a good choice for the girls but a terrible misunderstanding to believe that simply being away from home for two years constitutes serving a mission. Again, you might ask yourself, "If my friend ends up not waiting for me, will I still be willing to serve a mission?" If the answer is no, you ought to adjust your point of view. There is about a 90 percent chance your special someone will not wait for you.

A few young men serve because a relative has promised them the car or truck of their choice when they return from their mission. My experience with such missionaries has been one of frustration and disappointment—unless they adjust their attitude. Missionary work is too difficult and too sacred to do just to earn a car. Although you might receive various gifts when you return, the most valuable gifts will be your spiritual growth, the eternal lessons you've learned, and the principles of successful living you have mastered as a result of your Christlike service. Ask yourself, "If no one gives me anything or even says thanks for my service, would I still be enthusiastic about serving?" If not, change your attitude.

Some young people decide to serve because their family expects it of them. Grandfather served, father served, older brothers and sisters have served, and now it's their turn. That is a good tradition, but it certainly is not the correct reason to serve. Serving a mission puts you in a select group of faithful Latter-day Saints. Some people may mock you for going, but those who ridicule have never served missions themselves. There are many reasons for serving a mission. For example, unexpected blessings will come to your family because of your service, but that should not be the determining factor. You may also be the first to serve from your family, or the hundredth. Ask yourself, "If no one in my family cares either way, would I still go?" If the answer is no, you need an attitude adjustment.

Some young people go because their friends may be going, so they had better go too. That is a powerful but temporary reason to go, because missionaries soon realize that the rigors of missionary life rapidly overcome the social push to serve. Certainly having friends serve throughout the world is a wonderful thing. Letters comparing and contrasting missions are motivating and exciting. I remember living on coconut and raw fish (because our food supply had been wiped out by a hurricane), and my friend in Chile wrote me about eating steak and strawberry pie. The exchange of letters helped us both through some difficult times, and we have laughed about and enjoyed sharing stories ever since we returned twenty-five years ago. So ask yourself, "If none of my friends go on missions, would I still go?" If the answer is no—you guessed it—you need an attitude change.

A few young people go on a mission because they didn't get accepted into school, their girlfriend or boyfriend just dumped them, or they can't think of anything else to do. Serving a full-time mission is one of the most honorable and valuable experiences God has provided for his children. So a mission should not be used as a second-option plan. Nevertheless, many of these young people eventually catch the vision of a mission and serve with honor and diligence. Unfortunately, some never catch on and become a dead weight to companions and the mission leadership.

Many young men serve because "the prophet has asked every worthy young man to serve." This noble reason is one of the better ones, because that kind of dedication will carry them a long way in life. It is difficult to fault a young man or young woman for responding to such a noble call. But this response is a distant second to the best reason: you should go because you love God and his Son and want to share their wonderful gospel with your spiritual brothers and sisters. When someone rejects your divine message, if you are there for any reason other than selfless service for the Savior, it will likely result in discouragement and depression. But when people reject your message and your mission centered on Christ, they are only rejecting him. You feel sorry that they are not willing to follow him and gain eternal life, but the presence of his Spirit replaces any feelings of personal rejection you may have. A powerful commentary is given in 3 Nephi 28:34-35: "Wo be unto him that will not hearken unto the words of Jesus, and also to them whom he hath chosen and sent among them; for whoso receiveth not the words of Jesus and the words of those whom he hath sent receiveth not him; and therefore he will not receive them at the last day; and it would be better for them if they had not been born."

Even in the powerful oath and covenant of the priesthood, the Lord reveals, "He that receiveth my servants receiveth me" (D&C 84:36).

Going on a mission for the right reason is like shooting at the bull's-eye of a target. It is much more likely you will hit the mark if you aim right than to assume that just by firing your rifle you might hit the bull's-eye. Before you ever get to your mission area, do whatever attitude adjustment is necessary to make sure you are serving for the right reason.

1995 ﻿
