Randy L. Bott, Prepare with Honor: Helps for Future Missionaries ( 1995)

20

Deciding to Be Obedient

You live in an interesting world. Your parents shake their heads in disbelief at your generation. But most likely, their parents (your grandparents) were equally shocked at how permissive the world was when your parents were growing up. However, some disturbing trends have surfaced in your day that should cause everyone a great deal of concern: the suffering and total disregard of human life caused by lawless gangs, the wholesale destruction of an entire generation of young people by the use of illegal drugs, and the general disregard of law and order.

Being born and raised in this kind of environment makes it difficult not to be affected. During your high school days, cheating may have been a way of passing classes. For many, lying has become just another form of speech, and selective obedience is often considered a component of being "smart." As you prepare to serve a mission, you need to consider carefully your attitude toward obeying the commandments. If you feel you have the right to select which mission rules you keep and which ones you don't, you are setting yourself up for a mediocre mission at best. The Lord never did say: "I, the Lord, am bound if ye do 80 percent of what I say." He has promised, "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do [100 percent of] what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise" (D&C 82:10). Obedience is a decision. Make it only once. Never entertain Satan's temptations to revise a previously made decision every time a new situation arises. If the Lord commands, do it. You will do yourself a huge favor by starting to strengthen your obedient attitude before your mission. When the Lord asks you to home teach, go every month. Right now you may have two or three families to visit. In many areas of the world where home teaching is just getting started or where the priesthood leaders use missionaries to find the lost or less-active, you may have twenty or thirty families to visit! These months or years before your mission should be used to learn, on a small scale, what habits and traits missionaries need on a large scale.

Since the Lord has asked you to attend your meetings, go every week without fail. It was always a shock and disappointment to hear the elder or sister who had only recently become active in the Church complain about all the meetings missionaries have to attend. Right now you attend the block meetings, maybe a Bishop's Youth Council, and perhaps a fireside on Sunday. As a missionary you will be required to attend, participate in, and conduct various meetings. For example, you may attend a correlation meeting with the ward mission leaders from wards where you serve, participate in two three-hour block meetings, and conduct two or three firesides all in one week. It is not at all unusual for missionaries to be in different meetings from 6:30 a.m. to 8:30 p.m. on Sundays, without a break! What a shock to your system if you think a seventy-minute sacrament meeting is long.

A mission requires you to be in control of yourself. If you have developed the habit of doing whatever you please until somebody puts the stops on you, you may find it difficult to control yourself during your mission. Start now to do what you know you should, whether somebody is watching you or not. A friend of mine, who was recently released as a mission president, shared the following story. He once overheard a conversation between two high school seniors who did not know he was listening. They were boasting about how they had really pulled the wool over their English teacher's eyes by faking it through her class without learning how to read. One said he had never learned to read during the full twelve years of school. To my friend's surprise, the "nonreader" was eventually assigned to the mission over which he presided. To the missionary's eternal credit, he did eventually learn to read. But he experienced many uncomfortable and embarrassing situations as he crammed years of study into a few months. Many times, my friend thought to himself, "Yes, you really did pull the wool over your teacher's eyes. But you are the one who now must pay the terrible price."

If we could just learn now that we never "get away with" anything! Every choice has a consequence we cannot escape. Every time we willingly disobey, the consequence will eventually catch up with us. It is childish to think we can pick up one end of a stick and get the other end of a different stick. If you pick up good study habits, you will eventually gain knowledge and understanding. If you pick up cheating, short-cutting, and responsibility dodging, you will eventually get disappointment, and the loss of the Spirit.

You may find yourself, as I did, hundreds of miles from the mission headquarters on an island with only you and your companion. Nobody will check up on you; no one will see if you get up on time, go to bed on time, or do any work—no one, that is, but your Heavenly Father. By the presence or absence of his Spirit, I learned to recognize that unseen eyes are always on us and are taking careful notes that will be used to our honor or our discredit at the day of judgment. Both as a young missionary and as a mission president, I am glad I made the decision to be obedient, even when nobody was there to check on me. Although I made many mistakes, I was diligent enough to enjoy the companionship of the Holy Ghost. This gift is denied to those who decide to revise the decision of obedience with every changing situation.

1995 ﻿
