Randy L. Bott, Prepare with Honor: Helps for Future Missionaries ( 1995)

21

Developing Emotional Stability

High school is probably the best training ground for the emotional roller coaster called a mission. In high school, one day can be wonderful because you won a football game, and the next day can be depressing because you didn't get a date to a dance. Mission life also has its ups and downs. Unfortunately during high school, we may not have reacted in an adult manner to these fluctuations. If you are accustomed to falling to pieces over mounting frustrations, you need to change your reaction.

Only you can determine your emotional stability. The world suggests that your environment makes all the difference. Although environment can contribute to your happiness or sadness, it does not have the power to control you. On your mission, you may find yourself in some deplorable situations and end up enjoying them. If you determine you are going to eliminate the extreme highs and the depressing lows from your mood swings, you will be a stable missionary. Just refuse to let yourself be easily swayed by what is going on around you.

You probably know people who always seem happy. Why don't you ask them how they do it? No matter what happens, they always look for the good, and everything eventually seems to turn out well for them. Others are just the opposite. No matter how much they have or how well things are going for them, they always look for, and usually find, the negative. When success comes during a test or on the athletic field, they always warn about the impending failure the next time. It is difficult to be around people who concentrate on the negative.

If you are one of those people, how do you go about changing? Recognizing you have a problem is a step in the right direction. Decide to eliminate the negative words from your vocabulary: can't, don't, fail, quit, and lose. Start looking for the good in everything. If you lose a ball game, you will know what you need to improve before the next game. If you get turned down for a date, determine what characteristics make you less than desirable and begin to change them.

Start listening to others. You will be surprised how negative people are. Negative attitudes are depressing. You don't want to go around depressed all the time, so avoid the "negative trap." Try to interject something positive into every conversation. If your entire group is negative, they will look at you as if something is wrong. Being around such people is like being in a room that is totally dark. Everyone is comfortable in the dark (because they don't know any better) until someone brings a light into the room. After that, they are not content to be in the dark. You will be surprised how quickly you can get others to join you in being more positive. You are to be a light to the world (see 3 Nephi 12:14).

You will need all the practice you can get. During your mission, many factors could contribute to your having a negative attitude. If you have learned to share your positive light with others before your mission, you will find it easier to do so during your mission. The simple but accurate adage applies: "Whether you think you can or you can't, you are correct!"

Determine the kinds of things that cause you to have a negative attitude. Is it when you are rejected when asking for a date? When you don't make the team? When you fail a test? Rejection can be almost hour by hour in missionary service. People do not often reject you as a person, but they may reject what you stand for and whom you represent. If you haven't learned to deal with rejection before you go, you could easily get depressed on your mission. Practice controlling how you react to rejection. Life still goes on, even if your invitation to go on a date is refused. The world won't end if you don't make the team or if you fail a test. Fifty years from now, you won't even remember the teacher's name, let alone the questions you missed on the test.

Next, look at your reaction to rejection. If you pout, throw a temper tantrum, storm off, lash out, or emotionally break down, then you need to take control of yourself. None of those responses are acceptable for missionaries. You won't need to seek out emotional stress to practice your controlling techniques—stress will find you! Trials are just a part of life; we will never escape them completely. Each time you face a situation that has caused you problems, take positive action to stay happy and even tempered. Also, don't lose your self-control when things are going well. Obnoxious and over-animated responses often upset people, so control your extreme reactions. When you get into situations in which you normally run away, try staying and rationally talking through the problem. It will surprise and please those who differ with you. Learn to know your limits. If you really are losing control and you can't help it, find an acceptable way to release some pressure. Knocking a hole in the wall with your fist is not acceptable at home or on a mission. Maybe lifting weights or running or talking through the problem with a friend will have the same pressure-reducing results.

If you feel like crying all the time, you may need some additional help. Unfortunately, the world does not slow down to give you a rest, and the pace of a mission is demanding. There just isn't much time to stand back and regroup. However, prayer will greatly help you to put your problems into proper perspective. Give the Lord a chance to help you learn more about yourself. You need to learn some strategies to help you cope with the stress. If necessary, seek the advice of a professional with your parents or priesthood leader. Since the Lord knows how difficult it is to live in these latter days, he has provided a good support system to help us emotionally cope with our ever-changing situations.

Childish behavior is hard to deal with both at home and on a mission. Learning to recognize these childish traits and overcoming them will help you be a more effective missionary and leader. The fact that life is full of struggles doesn't mean you can't overcome them. Don't assume that your problems will just disappear on your mission; every emotion is greatly intensified in missionary service. Get control of yourself now.

1995 ﻿
