Randy L. Bott, Prepare with Honor: Helps for Future Missionaries ( 1995)

22

Identifying and Overcoming Goliaths

Everyone has character weaknesses that need to be overcome. If you are totally honest in evaluating your present condition, you will recognize the need to change before you enter the celestial kingdom. Just like David the shepherd boy, who had to overcome the giant Goliath, so too will you have giants to conquer. What kinds of things are considered "Goliaths?" You could make a long list, but let me share how I identified my first major challenge.

I was sitting on a beach in Samoa just watching the waves pound across the reef. My companion was resting against a palm tree not too far away. I started thinking about the celestial kingdom: "What things are you doing that you know you will have to change before you will be welcome in the presence of God?" I suddenly realized one of my main weaknesses: I was notorious for sulking. Whenever something didn't go just right, I would go silent. Maybe you do the same thing. But I had perfected the fault. So I made a conscious decision to overcome that un-Christlike habit. It didn't happen all at once. But over several months, I started to control my silence. Before the end of my mission, I felt I had pretty well overcome the problem. Although challenged frequently when I returned home, I remembered how good it felt to be in control of my attitude. I would just say to myself, "No, you are not going to wimp out and sulk. That is selfish and un-Christlike, and you can control it." Then I would force myself to smile, talk, engage in conversation, or do something physically active. Miraculously, the inclination to sulk eventually disappeared. Each time I mastered the inclination to sulk, the urge got weaker and weaker. Every time I suppressed the desire to be silent, the urge became less frequent. Even today, I have to watch myself, but I know it isn't impossible to control my attitude.

Some psychologists and others say we are a product of our environment, and they put tags and labels on our unacceptable behavior, giving it a technical name and thereby making it "okay" to engage in it. You will find yourself soaring spiritually if you refuse to accept your undesirable traits and try diligently to overcome them. Some traits may require professional help or medication to control. But I am convinced that these are few and far between when we finally decide to improve.

Don't be discouraged if your lifelong habit is difficult to break. You may have a short fuse on your temper. Learning to control yourself and control the elements that have traditionally set you off is a rewarding experience. As you gain mastery over your temper, the Spirit will let you know that God is pleased with your efforts and will help you.

The Lord has put our weaknesses and problems in a whole new perspective: "If men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them" (Ether 12:27; emphasis added). Since the Lord gives us weaknesses, he has promised to help us overcome them—we don't have to do it on our own. He will make our weaknesses become strengths if we will follow some simple steps:

The more you practice, the easier it will be to overcome the problem. Do not focus on the problem all the time, however. The Savior has taught us an interesting concept: "Whosoever will save his life shall lose it: and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it" (Matthew 16:25). If we focus on ourselves, we lose our spiritual substance, which is the real definition of a person. When you forget about yourself (lose yourself), your spiritual self begins to grow. It becomes easier to find yourself because there is more of you to find. Try it, and you will find that the Savior speaks the truth.

Many young people need to overcome the "Goliath" of being obnoxious. Whether they do it to get attention or because they don't know how to act appropriately, it needs to be overcome. Watch people's reactions to your behavior. If they look shocked or annoyed, you need to change. You are wrong if you think it is their problem if they don't like the way you act. You are sent to serve and bring people to the Savior. You can't do that if your behavior or attitude drives them away.

Another "Goliath" may be personal hygiene. Showering, using deodorant, brushing your teeth, changing your socks, grooming neatly, and clearing up your complexion—all will help you present a more acceptable image. Identifying and eliminating nervous tics or unconscious habits will also help. In a class I took on student teaching, we were required to teach a lesson before a group of our classmates. The presentation was to be videotaped so we could review it. We had been cautioned beforehand to make sure we were properly dressed, zipped up, well groomed, and relaxed. One young man was so worried his pants were unzipped that he raised and lowered his zipper a dozen times during a presentation. He was totally unaware of his actions. When he saw the replay, he dropped the class and changed his major. One young missionary had to be corrected many times before he broke the nervous habit of picking his nose.

If you have a habit of interrupting people as they speak, work on not doing it. If you refuse to make eye contact during a conversation, practice until you have mastered doing so.

As you overcome your weaknesses, you will begin to anticipate the challenge of tackling another one. It becomes like a game. Instead of worrying about not being perfect, you will begin looking forward to the challenge. "Give me another mountain!" is the attitude. Happy is the missionary who is in the habit of identifying and overcoming his giants. If you can overcome the most noticeable and annoying habits before you start your mission, the others will be readily overcome. You will not become perfect before you get your call or after your call. Don't worry—you will always have something to work on during your mission. If you postpone correcting your "Goliaths" until you start your mission, you may be embarrassed because of your weaknesses and waste the Lord's time correcting them.

1995 ﻿
