Randy L. Bott, Prepare with Honor: Helps for Future Missionaries ( 1995)

23

Going Forth with Honor

Where will you be called to serve? It will be no surprise to the Lord, although it may be a surprise to you. You were called before the foundations of this earth to serve a mission. The place doesn't make a difference, but how you serve makes all the difference in the world. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught, "Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938], p. 365). So your decision to serve is just the final preparatory step to something you have been waiting to do for thousands of years. No wonder you are excited!

Some missionaries make the mistake of wanting to tell the Lord where they should serve. Resist the temptation. He knows you better than you know yourself. He has prepared people for you to touch whom no one else can touch. He knows everything about your mission. Let him be the Lord and you be content to be his servant. If you are assigned to a mission and circumstances require a change, don't feel as if you are letting the Lord down. I learned a valuable lesson when President Gordon B. Hinckley called Sister Bott and me to our mission. After President Hinckley issued the call, I asked where we would be serving. He replied, "President Bott, the world is a big place. Where you are assigned to serve doesn't make a difference. That may change half a dozen times before you end up where you are going to serve. The important thing is that you have been called."

Young missionaries receive a letter that calls them to serve and assigns them to a certain mission area, so it is easy to make the mistake of saying, "I was called to the Samoan Mission." More correctly they should say, "I was called as a missionary and assigned to work in Samoa." Throughout your mission, your specific assignments may change. Usually it is within the mission boundaries. Occasionally, demands and circumstances will dictate that you receive a "special transfer" to a different mission or a different language. But your call as a missionary never changes.

What a thrill to be invited to serve on the Lord's first team during the last minutes of the fourth quarter of the greatest game ever played! President Ezra Taft Benson gave a stirring address on realizing who you are and what an honor it is to serve now:

For nearly six thousand years, God has held you in reserve to make your appearance in the final days before the Second Coming of the Lord. . . . While our generation will be comparable in wickedness to the days of Noah, when the Lord cleansed the earth by flood, there is a major difference this time. It is that God has saved for the final inning some of his strongest children, who will help bear off the Kingdom triumphantly. And that is where you come in, for you are the generation that must be prepared to meet your God.

All through the ages the prophets have looked down through the corridors of time to our day. Billions of the deceased and those yet to be born have their eyes on us. Make no mistake about it—you are a marked generation. There has never been more expected of the faithful in such a short period of time as there is of us. Never before on the face of this earth have the forces of evil and the forces of good been as well organized. Now is the great day of the devil's power, with the greatest mass murderers of all time living among us. But now is also the great day of the Lord's power, with the greatest number ever of priesthood holders on the earth. And the showdown is fast approaching. ("In His Steps," in Speeches of the Year, 1979 [Provo, Utah: BYU Press, 1980], p. 59)

There you have it—a prophet of God has described your mission to you. This is not the time for weak knees or faint hearts. The Lord has sent you to earth at this special time to participate in the great scenes preceding his second coming. Your life will not be easy before, during, or after your mission. Muscles are made strong through challenging the resistance of heavy weights. Spiritual muscles are strengthened by overcoming the resistance of heavy opposition.

You will never have another opportunity to serve as a single young man or woman. The more prepared you are when you arrive in your mission area, the more enjoyable your mission will be and the more success you will have. If you postpone preparing until you arrive, you will be cheating yourself and the Lord.

People from a million other worlds will want to talk to you about what it was like to serve a mission on this special world where their Savior worked out his infinite atonement. They will want to know how you were able to withstand the temptations and problems of a sin-sick world in the final days before wickedness was destroyed. They will want to hear a detailed account of the spiritual experiences you had and how you overcame the opposition you faced. If you have prepared with honor to serve with honor, you will be able to give a satisfactory report. Take advantage of the time remaining to prepare to go forth with honor.

1995 Â Â Purpose or problem:Scripture study
