Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1965)

PREFACE

To the ancient Hebrews, reading and re-reading and reading again the Sacred Scriptures and having them explained and expounded by the teachers and masters of Israel was a great part of their learning. [^1] This was especially true of the descendants of Judah and many of the tribe of Benjamin. By meditation and study they understood the words of the prophets as did no other people. [^2] In the prophetic word they heard the Voice of God, and justly did they reason: "Thy Word, O God, is my command." (Ancient Hebrew saying.)

With an Eye of Faith they beheld the visions vouchsafed by God to their fathers. With a voice like unto a trumpet-call they summoned their neighbors—far and near—"O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt His Name together." (Psalm 34:3.)

The annals of those times disclose that when the glory of their kingdom reached its maximum under the wise rule of David and Solomon; when the magnificence of its court was the envy of all the capitals of the earth; the Jews, with unrestrained joy, shouted praises to their King Who ruled On High, and in their jubilation cried: "Who is our Rock [^3] but our King, and Who is our King but the Lord, and Who is the Lord save He be God." At this same time, David, the sweet singer of Israel, caused these words to be emblazoned upon the Standard of their King: "Sing praises to God, sing praises: sing praises unto our King, sing praises. For God is the King of all the earth; sing ye praises with understanding." (Psalm 47:6-7.)

For generations the Jews walked undaunted in the path of duty and loyalty. Willing hearts upheld them; steadfast spirits gave them courage. As a people they were firm and immovable in keeping the commandments of the Lord. After this manner the Jews have be queathed to the world a knowledge of The True and Living God

Through that glorious heritage the people of the earth are legitimate heirs as His sons and daughters to a comprehensive under standing of God's majesty, His goodness and His mercy, and they therein with greater and greater awareness more fully and freely recognize His power and presence in every experience of life. In this heritage they are made partakers of the blessings of His word.

The Prophetic Word, revealed by "holy men of God" who "spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost" (See II Peter 1:21), witnessed to the ancient Hebrew brethren that God was their Rock and their Redeemer. That is their Creator and One in Whom all things are made perfect.

Moses wrote that in the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. The beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea, were given an abode and told to multiply and fill the earth. The Great Creator pronounced GOOD what He had done. He then said to His Only Begotten Son: "Let Us make man in our image." This was done! The knowledge of the glorious creation of man was inherited by every passing generation of Israel. It lifted all Israel to a higher plane in their estimate of mankind. That such a belief was universal among them is shown when Malachi proclaimed that great truth by stating in the form of a question what was an established fact in the minds of his hearers. He asked: "Have we not all one Father? hath not one God created us all?" (Malachi 2:10.) The thought that they were created in the image of God imbued every generation of ancient Israel and sanctified before Him their prayers to Him and their praise of Him.

To them He was the Majesty On High.

The Jews believed in God, the Father Almighty; they believed that He was the Maker and the Creator of all. They believed in a God with Whom they dwelt in close relationship, and One Who would lead and guide them in every experience of life. The Hebrew conception of man's relationship to God was the basis of their learning, and the learning Paul deplored was in the wisdom displayed by the pagan philosophy of Greece and Rome; and of it he declared that the world, by wisdom, knows not God (I Corinthians 1:21).

This task has been left to revealed religion.

It has been left to revealed religion to do that in the attempt of which mankind has failed. It has been left to revealed religion to accomplish those things for which men have sought in all ages. Revealed religion is the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

If you lean unto your own understanding and trust to those who are worldly wise, you may search every acre of the globe and not find it; you may follow every path of human erudition and not walk in the way of truth; a man may partake freely of all the learning that has accumulated since the world began and still not know that which has been revealed to even the humblest of God's children: "And this is Life Eternal, that they might know Thee the Only True God, and Jesus Christ Whom Thou hast sent" (John 17:3).

This is a great mystery revealed to the pure in heart. Learning cannot find it; the power of man cannot gain it; with money it cannot be purchased. But it is made known to those who without guile seek the Kingdom of Heaven. Jacob, the son of the Patriarch Lehi and himself a Jew from Jerusalem, said: "Behold, great and marvelous are the works of the Lord. How unsearchable are the depths of the mysteries of Him; and it is impossible that man should find out all His ways. And no man knoweth of His ways save it be revealed unto him; wherefore brethren, despise not the revelations of God." (Jacob 4:8.)

In the pages that follow we will show that God continuously revealed His holy mind and will to His servants, the great Hebrew Prophets. Also, we know that He will not hide His face from any generation of His children who seek after Him. Therefore, based upon that great truth which like Him is without beginning or end, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints proclaims that the Voice of Our Father has again been heard to speak and again is preached Baptist-like that glorious proclamation: "PREPARE YE THE WAY OF THE LORD."

—Philip C. Reynolds

GENESIS

The Hebrew Scriptures. The Sacred Scriptures of the Hebrews, preserved to us in the Old Testament, are divided into thirty-nine different parts or books, all of great antiquity. [^4] We cannot expect that each part as it was originally inscribed, remains unimpaired by the passage of time. When we consider the ages that have gone by since the Books of the Bible were written, the many translations and re-translations that have been made of them, the vicissitudes through which they have passed in their transmission to the present generation, we wonder not that errors have crept in and parts left out, but that any records at all survive. Editors and copyists, whether consciously or unconsciously, have deleted many important passages and otherwise made obscure portions of Holy Writ that when originally written were plain and easily understood by those to whom they were directed.

To substantiate the foregoing as a fact we need go no further in our research than to compare the story of the Creation of the earth and Man, and the history thereof down to the time of the Flood as it appears in the Book of Genesis (Old Testament) with these same writings, unimpaired or unmarred by the incidents of time, contained in the Pearl of Great Price, the Writings of Moses. At first they both were the same; the one, (Genesis) effaced by the wisdom and carelessness of men, the other as it was revealed by God through the Prophet Joseph Smith.

The Book of Moses, [^5] the first part of the Hebrew Scriptures which we call Genesis, meaning the beginning, or the Creation of all things, contains the earliest authoritative account given to the human race concerning the origin of the Universe and Man, the Fall, and the promise of Redemption.

Some regard this story as myth. But from the Pearl of Great Price we learn that God Himself, in vision, revealed to Moses concerning a New Heaven and Earth, Man, the Fall, and the Plan of Salvation. That is how Moses received his basic information. There is no more important part of Moses' writings than is this. Whether it is revealed again by God as contained in the revelation given by God to the Prophet Joseph Smith, or it comes to us in its deleted form which we have in the Old Testament; the important thing is that they both are the work of Moses. If, as it is claimed by some, that the Book of Genesis is unreliable, and also that the writings of Moses as they are recorded in the Pearl of Great Price are even more so, then the revelation of the beginning of the universe, the origin of man, and the reason for his redemption, are gone. In Moses' writings is noted the Beginning; if the last Chapters of the Book of Revelation are likewise discarded, the consummation of all things is unknown.

Of course, at His pleasure, it can be revealed again by God. The importance of the idea herein expressed is that God Himself revealed that in Him is the Beginning of all things, and also in Him are all things made perfect. In Him is revealed the First and the Last. Without a beginning and completion the story of the Plan of Salvation is a jumbled affair, a confused mixture, one that is not readily understood by the honest in heart. (See Doctrine and Covenants, Section 77.)

Footnotes

In the Law the Jews were taught the divine origin of the heavens and the earth, through acts of creation; the beginning of the human race, the "fall" and its consequences and the promise of redemption. They were taught the lesson of sin and destruction in the flood, but also the renewal of the covenants of God and the re-peopling of the earth by the descendants of Noah. They were further shown the beginning of the Hebrew people, their history and development, by which they became, notwithstanding human frailties and stubbornness, the foundation of the Messianic Kingdom of God on earth. They were taught a moral law that surpasses anything ever conceived by man, and a civil law and ritualistic service, exactly suited to their conditions and calculated to educate them in righteousness and holiness.

This "learning of the Jews" was meant to be applied to every day affairs. It was to be their very life, and not only something to discuss. The Jew had to become familiar with the words of the Law. He was told: "Bind them for a sign upon thy hand"; "they shall be as frontlets between thy eyes," "thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house" and on thy gates (Deut. 6:8-9); ye shall teach them diligently to thy children, speaking of them when thou sittest in thy house and when thou walkest by the way, when thou liest down and when thou risest up (Deut. 11:19). Joshua was commanded to meditate on the Law day and night (Josh. 1:8-9), and one of the duties of the king was to have a copy of the Law made and to read it every day (Deut. 17:19.)

A more complete idea of what Hebrew learning consisted may be had by reading the prayer offered in song by the Jews of David's day: "Teach me, O Lord, the way of Thy statutes; and I shall keep it unto the end. Give me understanding, and I shall keep Thy law; yea, I shall observe it with my whole heart. Make me to go in the path of Thy commandments; for therein I delight. Incline my heart unto Thy testimonies, and not to covetousness. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity; and quicken Thou me in Thy way. Stablish Thy word unto Thy servant, who is devoted to Thy fear. Turn away my reproach which I fear; for Thy righteous judgments are good. Behold, I have longed after Thy precepts; quicken me in Thy righteousness." (Psalm 119:23-40.)

"As might be expected, these divisions are very imperfect and even when not inaccurate, they tend to break the sense and to obscure the meaning." (Bible Handbook, by Joseph Angus, p. 60.)

The use of the term, Book of Moses, by Nephi (I Nephi 19:23) is remarkable evidence of the genuineness of the Sacred Record of the Nephites which a well-informed student of the Book of Mormon will appreciate.

---
Notas:
[^1] Are the Books of the Bible all that is necessary for the guidance of men to eternal Life and Exaltation, or IS CONTINUOUS REVELATION NECESSARY? From I Maccabees: "It was on the fifteenth day of the month of Kislev, that the messengers of King Antiochus set up an idol on the Altar of God, and had incense burnt in its honor. And they gave order that the people of Judea should forsake the law and the covenant, profane the Sabbath and pollute the sanctuary. And many chose rather to die than to forsake the Holy Covenant. And the king's officers came to the City of Modin, and said to Mattathias, the son of John, the son of Simon the Hasmonean, a priest of the sons of Joarib who dwelt in Modin: Thou art a great man and strengthened with sons and brethren in this City. Come, then, and fulfill the King's command as all the heathen have done, and the men of Judah and they that remained in Jerusalem. And thou shalt be in the number of the King's friends. But Mattahias answered and spake with a loud voice: Though all the nations that are under the King's dominions obey him and fall away each one from the religion of his fathers, yet will I and my sons and my brethren walk in the covenant of our fathers. God forbid that we should forsake the Law to depart from our faith either to the right hand or to the left. And when one of the Jews came in the sight of all to sacrifice to the idol, Mattathias was inflamed with zeal, neither could he forbear to show his anger, and he slew him, and also the King's officer, and the altar he pulled down. And Matthathias cried throughout the city with a loud voice saying: Whosoever is zealous of the law and maintaineth the covenant, let him follow me. So he and his sons fled into the mountains, and they went about pulling down the heathen altars, and they rescued the law of the hands of the Gentiles.
[^2] Is there any evidence, supposing continuous revelation to be necessary, that Joseph Smith was a true Prophet of God? Septuagint, Septuaginta, Latin, meaning seventy. The pre-Christian Greek version of the Old Testament still in use in the Eastern Church; so called from the legend that the translation was made by 70 emissaries from Jerusalem for Ptolemy II, about B.C. 270. It is believed that this translation was the one used by the Savior and His Disciples.
[^3] See Revelation 12:6. Also The Reign of Anti-Christ, pp. 68-72, Janne M. Sjodahl. John the Revelator expressly states that the exile of the Church should last 1260 days, or years. But these are lunar years. And lunar years of 354 days each are equal to 1222.5 of our solar years. (See Lieutenant C. A. L. Totten, Our Race, Series 2, number 8, page 218.) Accepting this calculation as correct, 1222.5 of our years (that is, 1260 prophetic, or lunar years, counting from the decree of Emperor Phocas, 607 A.D.) sending the Church into the wilderness, takes us to the year 1830 A.D., when The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was re-established through the Prophet Joseph Smith.
[^4] 4. "The present division of the scriptures into chapters and verses . . . are not of divine origin, nor are they of great antiquity. The Vulgate was the first version divided into chapters: a work undertaken by Cardinal Hugo, in the 13th Century, or as Jahn thinks, by Langton, Archbishop of Canterbury, 1227. He introduced the division into chapters only. The Hebrew Scriptures were similarly divided by Mordecai Nathan in 1445, and in 1661 Athias added in his printed text, the division into verses. The New Testament was divided in the same way by Robert Stephens, who is said to have completed it in the year 1551, during a journey (inter equitandum), from Paris to Lyons.
[^5] 5. The Book of Moses. Special attention is called to this phrase for the simple reason that anciently the Jews regarded as one Book what we now look upon as five, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy. They spoke of it as the "Law" (Torah). The division into five different Books took place probably in Alexandria, in Egypt, many centuries later, certainly after the Exodus. They were collectively called The Pentateuch, which title means in Alexandrian Greek, The Five Volumes. It was introduced to the Western World by Jerome (d. 418) and his contemporary, Rufinus. To the Jews it was, "Five-fifths of the law." It was the Book of Moses. Ezra and Nehemiah refer to this section of Hebrew Scripture as the Law of Moses (Ezra 7:6) and the Book of the Law of Moses (Nehemiah 8:1), sometimes only as the Book of Moses, (Ezra 6:18; Nehemiah 13:1; II Chronicles 25:4). When they speak of the Book of Moses, singular, they do so consistently because in all ancient Hebrew manuscripts what we now know as Five Books was one single Scroll.
