Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1965)

THE BOOK OF MOSES

CHAPTER 1

VISIONS OF MOSES

As revealed to Joseph Smith the Prophet in June 1830.

SCMoses 1 1Moses 1 2VERSES 1-2. The words of God, which he spoke [^1] unto Moses. At a time which we can only presume, but probably in his early manhood, Moses was caught up—taken up—into the recesses of an exceedingly high mountain, [^2] where seclusion and quietness prevailed. He was carried to this sacred spot by the power and Spirit of God Who deemed it to be wisdom that through Moses the story of the Creation of Earth and Man should be made known to the children of men.

SCMoses 1 1Moses 1 2As we have noted this story is regarded by some as myth. We also have pointed out that it is the earliest authoritative account give to the human race concerning the origin of man and the universe, the Fall, and the promise of Redemption.

SCMoses 1 1Moses 1 2In the solitude of the mountain tops Moses saw God [^3] face to face, and he talked with Him. [^4] To abide the glorious splendor of God's presence Moses was transfigured (Transfigured, means to change the form or appearance of; to exalt, glorify, illumine; especially we refer to the supernatural change in the appearance of Jesus on the Mount—Matthew 17; Mark 9) before Him. "The glory of God [^5] was upon him," this grand and glorious revelation says: "therefore Moses could endure His presence."

Moses 1 3VERSE 3. I am the Lord God Almighty. [^6] Here the Lord God explains to Moses the meaning of His Name, Endless. Time, as we measure it in years, is an unknown quantity in the Eternal Life of God, for He said to Moses: "I am without beginning of days or end of years." This may be explained thusly: The purposes of God are eternal. He does nothing temporal in nature. The works of God are works of truth, and truth is everlasting. Truth always existed as such; it had no beginning, and will have no end. It is self-existent. All the works of God are consecrated, and all truth is in Him dedicated to the salvation and exaltation of His children, worlds without end. "And is not this endless?" [^7]

Moses 1 3Moses undoubtedly taught this wonderful truth to the Children of Israel, for early in their history they understood its fine import. We are reminded of King David's 111th Psalm: I will give thanks unto the Lord with my whole heart, in the council of the upright, and in the congregation. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have delight therein. His work is glory and majesty, and His righteousness endureth forever. . . . The works of His hands are truth and justice; all His precepts are sure. They are established for ever and ever, they are done in truth and uprightness. . . . He hath commanded His covenant forever; holy and awful is His Name." (Jewish translation)

Moses 1 4VERSE 4. Behold thou art My son. The Almighty Father now imparted unto Moses the knowledge of what perhaps Moses had never even dreamed—the exalted relationship between them, that is of Father and Son. The Father, pleased with the works which He had ordained, and with an evident satisfaction in the purposes whereunto He had established them, commanded Moses to look, [^8] "And I will show thee the workmanship [^9] of Mine hands." However, God quickly added, "Not all," because My works and My words continue one upon the other without end "for they never cease."

Moses 1 5VERSE 5. No man can behold all My glory. A man in his mortal state cannot see all the mighty works of God, except he, at the same time, witnesses all of God's glory. This cannot be done because there are many things which God has decreed for the exalted ones, and one who is in his carnal (fleshy) state of mortality cannot even surmise, let alone see, for to see is also to partake thereof.

Moses 1 6VERSE 6. I have a work for thee, Moses, My son. The Lord God does nothing save it be for a wise purpose. He makes no empty promises, neither useless nor meaningless gestures of any kind whatsoever. So when God said to Moses, "I have a work for thee," we see in it the commencement of a great and marvelous fabric, built to God's honor and glory.

Moses 1 6The great and Eternal Father, King of us all, saluted Moses as a son, if you please, a Prince in the Royal Household. "Thou art in the similitude of Mine Only Begotten." [^10] Like Him alone of Whom I am the Father in the flesh. "He is full of grace and truth." Full of grace, means that the Only Begotten is imbued with a love for God's children that caused Him willingly to do for us that which we could not do for ourselves. He gave His earthly life that we might live eternally. By doing so, He, the Savior, [^11] redeemed us from the effects of Adam's fall. By His grace [^12] are we saved. We, ourselves, were powerless.

Moses 1 6"But there is no God beside Me." We may understand more fully God's purpose in making this important pronouncement to Moses when we realize the following conditions: We must remember it may have been necessary to impress upon Moses' mind the significance of the outstanding feature of the worship of the True and Living God: There is only one God, there is none other. Moses had been reared in the court of the Egyptian Ruler. All his surroundings were of royal splendor. In spite of his future high calling, Moses partook of the beliefs and practices of the Egyptians. This was especially true of the Israelites who had been in bondage for 400 years.

Moses 1 6In their years of bondage, the Children of Israel had adopted many of the habits and customs of their bondsmen. This influenced and gave shape and form to many of their conclusions. In the great number of deities adored and worshiped in that land, Jacob's descendants were gradually weaned from the memory of the God of their Fathers. The Egyptians were idolaters in the extreme. It has been said of them that at this time a god was easier to find than a man.

Moses 1 6The Children of Israel had forgotten the God of their Fathers; they toiled, as did their taskmasters, on the day the Lord had set apart as their day of rest and one in which to think of Him. They took great oaths, as did the Egyptians, and they made for themselves gods of wood, and gods of stone, and of precious metal. To these man-made gods they bowed down and worshiped.

Moses 1 6Moses afterwards taught the Children of Israel this great truth, and of it, the Master said, "This is the first and great command." (Matthew 22:38.) Moses said, "Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God is one Lord. And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart; And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children." (Deuteronomy 6:4-7.)

Moses 1 6The omnipresence and omnipotence of God is hereby proclaimed by God Himself. "All things are present with Me." [^13] He forgets nothing (save the transgressions of the repentant sinner—Jeremiah 31:34). The present is before Him; He knows the future, and the past is a witness telling of His glory. He that formed the eye, sees all; He that planted the ear, hears all; He that teacheth man knowledge, knows all. (See Psalm 94:9-10.)

Moses 1 7VERSE 7. Moses, My son; thou art in the world, and now I show it unto thee. Unlike the Lord Whose creations are many, Moses was of the earth, earthly. The one great sphere on which he lived was a replica of many other worlds which were works of God. However, other than testifying to Moses of God's glory and the magnificence of His Being, they remain silent and unseen, except as God decrees to make them known.

Moses 1 7God now decreed that to Moses the Creation of this world should be made known. "I will show it unto you," was God's authoritative edict.

Moses 1 8VERSE 8. And it came to pass that Moses looked, and beheld the world upon which he was created. Moses looked; the vision of his blessed eyes, illumined by the glory of God, and his ears unstopped because of the majesty of His words, saw "the world and the ends thereof," and also the inhabitants of the earth even from the very first; from Adam and Eve on down to the last, he saw them. [^14] The voice of God, not a voice like thunder upon the distant mountain tops, but a gentle voice as if it were a whisper, explained to him the history of the world that in panorama passed before him. This greatly astonished Moses. He marveled at the scenes envisioned, for never had he even thought of God as the Maker and Creator of all.

Moses 1 9VERSE 9. And the presence of God withdrew from Moses. [^15] Moses' vision ended, and God's glory no longer encircled him about. Moses was left to himself. The strength of the Lord no longer sustained his mortal being. And he fell unto the earth. [^16]

Moses 1 10VERSE 10. It was the space of many hours before Moses did again receive his natural strength like unto a man. For many hours Moses, overcome by the heavenly visitation, lay upon the ground. His strength was gone; he was exhausted. Nevertheless, as he was lying there not knowing what to do—benumbed by the prospects that lay before him and, we imagine, not realizing the magnitude of his vision—solemnly concluded "that man is nothing," [^17] which thing, Moses, accustomed to the higher things of life "never had supposed."

Moses 1 10Our thoughts are of King David's words: "O Lord our God, how glorious is Thy Name in all the Earth, Whose majesty is rehearsed above the Heavens. When I think of Thy Heavens, the work of Thy fingers, the Moon and the stars, which Thou has established . . . what is man that Thou art mindful of him, or the son of man that Thou thinkest of him. O Lord our God, how glorious is Thy Name in all the Earth." (Psalm 8. Jewish rendition.)

Moses 1 11VERSE 11. But now mine own eyes have beheld God; but not my natural, but my spiritual eyes. The glory of God, the majesty of His presence, the spirit of holiness, came upon Moses, and, being transfigured before Him, Moses beheld the face of God. [^18] One may wonder at it—sophists, and those incredulous who are wise in their own eyes—but this poor shepherd lad who once tended the flocks of his father-in-law, Jethro, priest of Midian, with undying eyes saw God face to face and he talked with Him.

Moses 1 11The glorious splendor of God's presence, to which earlier in this discussion we have referred, caused Moses, while he lay prone upon the ground musing, to contemplate the magnificence of his vision. And of it he said aloud that if it were not that "I was transfigured before Him" "I should have withered and died in His presence."

Moses 1 11Too often in our own strength we imagine we are masters of all about us. Seldom do we realize that we labor in a sphere which God has given us, and the moment we leave that sphere and enter one in which God alone rules—if alone and without God's presence—our right hand becomes withered, and we find ourselves as nothing. Our utmost strength is absolute weakness, and our greatest wisdom but foolishness. However, in Moses' weakness God showed His strength. (See II Corinthians 12:7ff.) God's strength was made perfect in Paul's weakness. Just so, we may understand, Moses' weakness and God's strength.

Moses 1 12VERSE 12. Satan came tempting him. While Moses still lay upon the ground, weakened by the severe experience he had just undergone, Satan came to tempt him. [^19] He commanded, "Moses, son of man, worship me."

Moses 1 12A word in appraisal of Satan's true character would not be amiss at this time: From the beginning, Lucifer, who afterwards became Satan, was a disobedient child. As he matured in things spiritual, he, with increasing unruliness, delighted in deceitfulness. The Doctrine and Covenants calls him, "One who was a liar from the beginning." (Section 93:25.) In the Book of Ether (8:25), he is said to be the "father of all lies," and the same appellation of him is made in the Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses 4:4; both of which mean that he was the first to make and tell a lie. All lies thenceforth were and are made by his power.

Moses 1 12Often Lucifer gathered about him those who like him took pleasure in ignoring, not heeding, the counsel of a good, wise, and loving Father. Too, he was impetuous. Sometimes he sought to force his selfish will upon others who differed in their opinion with him, and who at the same time exhibited a keen realization of their own exalted estate. Also there were still others who disagreed with him and who showed a high regard or a great degree of satisfaction in obeying and honoring their Royal Parent's mind and will. Lucifer did not!

Moses 1 12He was proud, haughty, and rebellious; proud, because he, as "Son of the Morning," stood high in the Councils of Heaven; haughty, because he nurtured the thought that he could impose his personal ambitions upon his many brothers and sisters who dwelt in his Father's House; rebellious, because when he could not seduce them his disappointment became rage, and of all the passions that occupy the heart, whether it be of men or of angels, disappointed pride is one of the most bitter and malignant. He led one-third of the heavenly hosts in rebellion against the authority of their Father, Who is God and Father of all.

Moses 1 13VERSE 13. Moses looked upon Satan and said: "Who art thou?" Moses, somewhat bewildered, but he still being strong in the might of the Lord, looked upon Satan who attempted to belittle him by calling him, son of man; Moses asked of the deceiver: "Who art thou?" Evidently Satan desired to make Moses feel inferior, for Moses knew that one worthy of being worshiped should be greater than the worshiper. "Behold, I am a son of God," Moses, disdainful of Satan, said, "in the similitude of His Only Begotten," am I not greater than thou? "Where is thy glory, that I should worship thee?" [^20]

Moses 1 14VERSE 14. I could not look upon God, except His glory should come upon me. Fresh from the scenes of his vision, and the words of God still resounding in his ears, Moses withstood the order to worship him, Satan had made. "I surely can look at thee as one man can at another, but at God I can only look if His glory is upon me, and I am strengthened before Him," thus quickly came the response to Moses' thinking, and even quicker the determination to worship Him Whose glory shed its brilliant light about him. But as to his caller, there was no light; all was gloomy, his presence was darkness.

Moses 1 15VERSE 15. Blessed be the Name of my God. Quickened by the Spirit of God which remained within him, Moses was enabled to judge of the difference between God and the evil visitor, for God was light, and the evil one darkness. (See Comments on verse 14.) The One Whose light shone brightly, radiant with truth and with beams of glorified splendor, had said to Moses: "Worship God, for Him only shalt thou serve." [^21]

Moses 1 16VERSE 16. Get thee hence, Satan. Moses quickly sensed the meaning of God's words: "Thou art after the similitude of Mine Only Begotten." This raised Moses to a position of pre-eminence when compared to Satan, and the attempt Satan made to subjugate Moses and induce him to obey his command was rendered as though it never had been made. "Be gone Satan! Get thee hence! [^22] Seek no more to deceive me. For only God will I worship, and Him only will I serve."

Moses 1 17VERSE 17. The Burning Bush. Almost overwhelmed by the wonder of his vision, Moses, however, recalled another such a one when the Lord called to him from the Burning Bush. Twice now, God had spoken to him in two marvelous manifestations of His divine will. "Call upon God in the Name of Mine Only Begotten, and worship Me," was the chief message the voice of God declared to Moses on both occasions. Many of the commands revealed by God while Moses was on the mount, confirm the commands he made known when God proclaimed them from the Burning Bush. Again we repeat the great message of both: "Call upon God in the Name of Mine Only Begotten, and worship Me." (See Exodus 3:1-10.)

Moses 1 18VERSE 18. I will not cease to call upon God. The integrity of Moses and his ability to judge right and wrong were thus tried, and in the process thereof his understanding quickened and his blessed eyes penetrated the darkness his evil visitor had spread about him.

Moses 1 18Having received much knowledge from the incidents portrayed in his vision, he, with an inquiring mind, envisaged still more things to come. Of these things he would ask God, for His glory had illumined Moses' mind.

Moses 1 18Again Moses with increased positiveness ordered Satan to depart from his presence.

Moses 1 19VERSE 19. Satan cried with a loud voice. Typically true of Satan's infixed attributes (See Comments v. 12), he, upon hearing Moses' inflexible determination to worship only God and to serve Him, cried with a loud voice, the reverberations of which shook the earth: "I am the Only Begotten, worship me!"

Moses 1 20VERSE 20. Moses began to fear exceedingly. The commotion caused by Satan's violent expression of disappointment in the refusal of Moses to worship him—a showing of wrath so furious that it seemed almost to rend the earth—caused Moses to fear greatly, and in it Moses saw the bitterness of hell and the ends evil power will exert to show its hatred for that which is good.

Moses 1 20"Calling upon God, he received strength," [^23] to combat his dismay. Thus, having through the power of God recruited his strength, Moses once more commanded Satan to depart out of his presence, and again with even greater emphasis he repeated his definite conclusion, "For this one God only will I worship, which is the God of glory."

Moses 1 21VERSE 21. Satan began to tremble. The fearsome spectacle presented by Satan that he might induce Moses to obey his command only had the effect of completely estranging Moses from Satan's designs. And Moses, "Calling upon God," cried, "In the Name of the Only Begotten, depart hence, Satan."

Moses 1 22VERSE 22. Satan departed hence. At the authoritative command of Moses, who in the Name of the Only Begotten, ordered Satan hence, Satan again cried with the same loud voice and again did the earth shake. [^24] "With weeping, and wailing and gnashing of teeth," [^25] Satan "departed hence, even from the presence of Moses, that he beheld him not."

Moses 1 23VERSE 23. Of this thing Moses bore record. In writings, Moses bore record of all these things that happened to him. But because of lack of faith in the words and works of God, iniquity has kept the account of them from the knowledge of mankind for more than thirty-five hundred years, or until now, when they have been revealed again as God promised through one who in His wisdom He would raise up. That one is the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Moses 1 24VERSE 24. Moses lifted up his eyes unto Heaven, being filled with the Holy Ghost. No longer did Satan disturb or molest Moses. Quiet ruled where turbulence and turmoil had been brought into play by the devil. All was again peaceful. Moses, being filled with the Holy Ghost, [^26] which beareth record of the Father and the Son, [^27] lifted his eyes unto heaven.

Moses 1 25VERSE 25. Blessed art thou, Moses. Left alone, Moses, in quiet meditation but with eyes steadfastly looking upward as in prayer, called upon God's holy Name and immediately beheld His glory again. Encircled about, we imagine, by a light far brighter than any Moses had ever seen, and with peace, God's most precious gift, again burning in his heart, he heard a voice saying: "Blessed art thou, Moses, for I, the Almighty, have chosen thee, and thou shalt be made stronger than many waters; for they shall obey thy command as if thou wert God."

Moses 1 26VERSE 26. Thou shalt deliver My people from bondage, even Israel My chosen. No doubt Moses looked about him; was he alone? he wondered. Where was Satan? Then it was that the Heavenly Voice assured him: "I am with thee, even unto the end of thy days." The great purpose unto which Moses was charged: "Thou shalt deliver My people from bondage, even Israel My chose," is more fully outlined in Exodus 3:7-12: "And the Lord said, I have surely seen the affliction of My people which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their taskmasters; for I know their sorrows; And I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that land unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing with milk and honey; unto the place of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites. Now therefore, behold, the cry of the Children of Israel is come unto Me: and I have also seen the oppression wherewith the Egyptians oppress them. Come now therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth My people the Children of Israel out of Egypt."

Moses 1 27VERSE 27. Moses cast his eyes and beheld the earth. The Heavenly Voice continued to instruct Moses and while it was yet speaking, Moses cast his eyes as if in meditation and by the Spirit of God saw and determined in his mind the times and seasons concerning the whole earth. The creation thereof he saw and its preparation that it might fulfill the great Creator's purposes.

Moses 1 28VERSE 28. He beheld the inhabitants of the earth. Not only did Moses observe the earth and its creation, but also the numerous inhabitants thereof. [^28] By the Spirit of God he saw the many races and nations of men who should inhabit God's wonderful Creation. Their number was so great that they were countless, even as "the sand upon the sea shore." However, great as was their number, there were none who in Moses' vision were not beheld by him.

Moses 1 29VERSE 29. He beheld many lands. Living souls were seen by Moses occupying the many lands which as in panorama passed before his vision. The lands were called "earth" by the voice, meaning dry ground that rose above the waters of the earth which God had created. No generation of men yet to come was lost to Moses' sight. He saw them all by the inspiration and power of God.

Moses 1 30VERSE 30. Tell me, I pray Thee, why these things are so. In wonder and admiration, Moses gazed upon the scene so clearly presented to his vision. He was not confused, neither curious, but being mortal, he did not readily grasp celestial purposes. "Tell me, I pray Thee, why these things are so," Moses inquired of the Lord, "And by what Thou madest them?"

Moses 1 31VERSE 31. For Mine Own pleasure have I made these things. Again God's glory shone about Moses and again he stood in the presence of God. In the conversation which followed between them—that is between God and Moses—Moses received an answer to his query that while it was not direct, it was meaningful: "For Mine Own purpose have I made these things." "The wisdom thereof is in Me," the Lord said, but we may judge that in all things the eternal purposes of God are well considered. All God's creations and all His works are consecrated to be most for His children's good, [^29] and greatest for His Own glory.

Moses 1 31We will let an observation by John the Revelator and some words of Kings David and Solomon be a full comment on this important answer to Moses' important question: "Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honor and power: for Thou hast created all things, and for Thy pleasure they are and were created," (Revelation 4:11.) Bless the Lord, O my soul. O Lord my God, Thou art very great; Thou art clothed with glory and majesty. Who coverest Thyself with light as with a garment, Who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain; Who makest winds Thy messengers, the flaming fire Thy ministers. Who didst establish the earth upon its foundations, that it should not be removed for ever and ever. Thou didst cover it with the deep as with a vesture; the waters stood above the mountains. At Thy rebuke they fled, at the voice of Thy thunder they hasted away. The mountains rose, the valleys sank down unto the place which Thou hadst founded for them. Thou didst set a bound which they should not pass over. Who sendest forth springs into the valleys; they run between the mountains; Beside them dwell the fowl of heaven, from among the branches they sing. Who waterest the mountains from Thine upper chambers; the earth is full of the fruit of Thy works. Who causes the grass to spring up for the cattle, and herb for the service of man; to bring forth bread out of the earth. Who appointest the moon for seasons; the sun knoweth his going down. Thou makest darkness, and it is night, wherein all the beasts of the forest do creep forth. The sun ariseth, they slink away, and couch in their dens. Man goeth forth unto his work, and unto his labor until the evening. How manifold are Thy works, O Lord! in wisdom hast Thou made them all." (Psalm 104, Jewish rendition.)

Moses 1 31And now the words of Solomon, the wise old Hebrew King; in them, Wisdom speaks: "Doth not wisdom cry? and understanding put forth her voice? . . . I lead in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment . . . The Lord possessed me in the beginning of His way, before His works of old. I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was. When there were no depths, I was brought forth; when there were no fountains abounding with water. Before the mountains were settled, before the hills was I brought forth: While as yet He had not made the earth, nor the fields, nor the highest part of the dust of the world.

Moses 1 31When He prepared the heavens, I was there; when He set a compass upon the face of the depth: When He established the clouds above: when He strengthened the fountains of the deep; When He gave to the sea His decree, that the waters should not pass His commandment: when He appointed the foundations of the earth; Then I was by Him, as one brought up with Him: and I was daily His delight, rejoicing always before Him. . . ." (Proverbs 8.)

Moses 1 32VERSE 32. By the Word of My power, have I created them. God continued to converse with Moses, explaining to him that through His Only Begotten Son, He (God) had created all things. Jesus Christ, Who is the Only Begotten Son of God, [^30] the great Jehovah, meaning Creator (See The Sacred Name, end of Chapter), in obeying the orders of His Father, created them all under His Father's supervision. Jesus Christ was the Word of God's power. [^31] "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God . . . ." (John 1:1.)

Moses 1 33VERSE 33. Worlds without number have I created. The works of God are without number; the stars in the sky which we see on a dark night, the flowers in the field, the mountains, lakes, and valleys testify of His glory and together magnify and exalt His Holy Name.

Moses 1 33God's purpose in creating the earth and the beauties thereof was to make man pure and happy. He would rather bless than curse His children.

Moses 1 33The beauties of the earth and its riches; the precious ores and useful metals that abound in its hills; the fountains of water that give life to the thirsty soil, the grassy uplands and the wide billowing savannahs upon which graze myriads of both sheep and cattle, the fields or ripening grain, the green woodlands, the sunny skies, and the waterbrooks, altogether make the earth a happy, holy, place for God's children to dwell.

Moses 1 33Surely, "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament showeth His handiwork." (Psalm 19:1.)

Moses 1 33When the magicians of Pharaoh's court could not do what they saw Moses and Aaron do, they said, "This is the finger of God." (Exodus 8:19.) That expression is used throughout the scriptures, and means the power, or the presence, or the purpose of God. The creation of the earth, its preparation as a dwelling place for God's children wherein they might be pure and holy unto Him, is indeed the "Finger of God"; in it the power, and the presence, and the purpose, of the Great Creator are manifest.

Moses 1 33Worlds created. We repeat what one of the authors hereof wrote in the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 449, of which he was the author and compiler, Janne M. Sjodahl: "It has been usual to refer to the Father as the Creator, and this is true in the sense that He is the originator of the Plan. But the worlds were created by Him through the Son. God's Son, the Great Jehovah, was the Architect and Builder, the Executive of the Great Council in Heaven, through Whom the Plan of Salvation was made a reality, as well as the Plan of Redemption. (See Hebrews 1:2: "God hath in these last days spoken to us by His Son, Whom He hath appointed Heir of all things, by Whom also He made the worlds.")

Moses 1 33Note that the worlds were "created," which means "formed," "organized." They were not made out of nothing, or ex nihilo, as the learned express that impossible proposition. Nor are they without beginning in their present form. The world as we know it, had a beginning; it will have an end. Matter itself has neither beginning nor end, as far as we mortals know.

Moses 1 33"The worlds were made by Him; men were made by Him; all things were made by Him, and through Him, and of Him." (Doctrine and Covenants 93:10.) Christ, the Only Begotten, was the actual Builder or Maker of the worlds just as an architect is the actual maker of the house he builds. The worlds were made by Him, for He is the very Source of the light and life that permeate Creation.

Moses 1 34VERSE 34. The first man of all men have I called Adam. The principal knowledge expressed here, is that of all men, Adam, which the Lord further says, "is many," is that he was the first man. [^32] This is important, because with Adam commences the Work of Redemption.

Moses 1 34In these days of uninspired and ungodly thinking; when God has sent strong delusion to many learned men "that they should believe a lie," (II Thessalonians 2:11) it is considered the part of great wisdom to assert the falsehood that Adam was not the first man, the father of the human race. In this verse the Lord definitely states that Adam was. (See also Writings of Moses, Pearl of Great Price, 3:7.)

Moses 1 34In the Improvement Era, 13:75-81, is the following: "Adam, our great progenitor, the first man, was, like Christ, a pre-existent spirit, and like Christ he took upon him an appropriate body, the body of a man, a 'living soul.' The Doctrine of Pre-existence—revealed so plainly, particularly in latter days—pours a wonderful flood of light upon the otherwise mysterious problem of man's origin. It shows that man, as a spirit, was begotten and born of heavenly parents, and reared to maturity in the eternal mansions of the Father prior to coming upon the earth, in a temporal body to undergo experience in mortality. It teaches that all men existed in the spirit before any man existed in the flesh, and that all who have inhabited the earth since Adam have taken bodies and become souls in like manner.

Moses 1 34"It is held by some that Adam was not the first man upon this earth, and that the original human was a development from lower orders of the animal creation. These, however, are the theories of men. The Word of the Lord declares that Adam was 'the first man of all men' (Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses 1:34), and we are therefore duty bound to regard him as the primal parent of our race."

Moses 1 34"Joseph F. Smith

Moses 1 34John R. Winder

Moses 1 34Anthon H. Lund."

Moses 1 34"First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

Moses 1 35VERSE 35. But only an account of this earth . . . give I unto you. The labor that Moses under God was assigned, had to do only with the world upon which he stood. But the works of God encompass many other worlds, and of these Moses would not receive knowledge.

Moses 1 35We, perhaps, cannot conceive the immensity of God's works; indeed, His "works and words" have no end. The worlds which He has by His Son created, cannot be numbered by men. There are worlds that endure forever, serving the Lord. There are others that had not fulfilled the measure of their creation and at the word of God passed away. But truly, in the heavens above, in the stars He has established, God has raised a memorial of His greatness to all generations.

Moses 1 35The work which Moses was called to perform concerned only the things of this earth and its inhabitants. But we are told that while the other worlds cannot be numbered by men, to God, they are. He knows each one and watches over them; He loves them and claims them as His very own.

Moses 1 36VERSE 36. Moses spake unto the Lord. Moses did not murmur because his vision of things past and things yet to come was restricted to the world upon which he stood, but his soul hungeringly sought knowledge "concerning this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, and also the heavens." In prayerful supplication, Moses, mindful of the things he had seen and the words declared to him by the voice of God, besought the Great Creator to show him more of those things that concerned the mission whereunto he had been called. And then Moses said: "Thy servant will be content."

Moses 1 37VERSE 37. The Lord God spake unto Moses. (See Comments v. 5.)

Moses 1 38VERSE 38. As one earth shall pass away . . . even so shall another come. There is no end to the works and words of God, for as one of His great works pass away, another is begun. It is our opinion that the materials from a world that is destroyed because it did not fulfill the purposes of its creation are used in the formation or building of another earth. We cannot conceive of a dumping ground for any such waste materials, but as a baker puts together the ingredients that make a wheat cake, just so the Architect or Builder of the world uses castoff materials. Matter cannot be destroyed nor can it be created!

Moses 1 39VERSE 39. For behold, this is My work and My glory. As we have repeatedly said, that all the purposes of God, all His works and words, are consecrated to the immortality and Eternal Life of man. He delights in blessing His children. That is His glory; that is the everlasting principle upon which all things are and were created.

Moses 1 39We are reminded of the words of King David: "Thy loving-kindness, O Lord, is in the Heavens, Thy faithfulness reaches unto the skies. Thy righteousness is like the mighty mountains; Thy judgments are like the great deep; man and beast Thou preserveth, O Lord, How precious is Thy Loving kindness, O God! And the children of men take refuge in the shadow of Thy wings. They are abundantly satisfied with the fatness of Thy house; and Thou makest them drink of the river of Thy pleasures. For with Thee is the fountain of life; in Thy light do we see light. O continue Thy lovingkindness unto them that know Thee; and Thy righteousness to the upright in heart." (Psalm 36:5-10.) Also, "I will give thanks unto the Lord, in the council of the upright, and in the congregation. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have delight therein. His work is glory and majesty, and His righteousness endureth forever. He hath made a memorial for His wonderful works; the Lord is gracious and full of compassion. He hath given food unto them that fear Him; He will ever be mindful of His Covenant. He hath declared to His people the power of His works, in giving them the heritage of the nations. The works of His hands are truth and justice; all His precepts are sure. They are established forever and ever, they are done in truth and uprightness. He hath sent redemption unto His people; He hath commanded His Covenant forever; Holy and Awful, is His Name. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; a good understanding have all they that do thereafter; His praise endureth forever." (Psalm 111; This is a Jewish rendition of both Psalms.)

Moses 1 40VERSE 40. Moses, My son, I will speak unto thee concerning this earth upon which thou standest. God now commanded Moses to write "the things which I shall speak . . . concerning this earth upon which thou standest." Moses did so; either his secretaries working under his direction, or Moses himself did the mechanical writing, but nevertheless whoever did the actual work, we ascribe the writings to Moses.

Moses 1 40It will be our duty to show that the prophecy uttered by the Great Creator (recorded in verse 41) is fully and completely fulfilled in the artful designs of the copyists and editors through whose hands these writings afterwards passed.

Moses 1 41VERSE 41. When the children of men shall esteem My words as naught. In the days of unbelief, when the words of God are considered as naught among the children of men; when divine utterances are regarded as foolishness; when the works of God's hands are said to be fortuitous, existing only by chance; when the wise who are wise in their own eyes, take away parts of His Holy Word because their eyes see not, and their ears hear not, the wonderful truths God has herein entrusted unto man; then, the Lord says: "I will raise up another like unto thee; and they shall be had again among the children of men—among as many as shall believe."

Moses 1 42VERSE 42. These words were spoken unto Moses in the mount. The words herein were spoken by God unto Moses (See v. 1), and are repeated herewith by the same Source, the Lord God Almighty, to the Prophet Joseph Smith in June 1830.

Moses 1 42Very definite instructions were given the Prophet concerning those unto whom these words should be made known, only "to them that believe." (See Chapter 4:32.)

THE SACRED NAME

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3"Jehovah," or, as most scholars now believe, "Yahweh," is his name. (Exodus 6:2, 3.)

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3Concerning the meaning of that sacred name, the opinions are divided. Some derive it from a form of the Hebrew verb "hajah," which would mean, "One who calls things into being," i. e., the Creator. The objection to this interpretation is chiefly that the form suggested does not appear anywhere but is merely assumed. Others point out that the verb "hajah," which is generally rendered "to be," "to exist," really means, "to become," "to come forth," and that the name therefore signifies, "One through whom God is coming forth," i.e., "revealing" himself. (See Gesenius, Hebr. and Aram. Handworterbuch. This agrees with Exodus 33:19, 20; Matthew 11:27; John 1:18; Hebrew 11:3; 1 Timothy 6:16.)

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3Some have understood Exodus 6:2, 3 to mean that the sacred name Jehovah was unknown before revealed to Moses, but that cannot be the true meaning of those verses. According to Exodus 3:13, 16,Moses said: "Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them?"

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3The Lord answered this question thus:

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3"I am that I am: and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me."

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3Further:

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3"The Lord God [Jehovah Elohim] of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob, appeared unto me," etc.

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3This shows clearly that the Israelites in Egypt knew that Jehovah was the God of their fathers. For, otherwise the mention of his name would have had no effect.

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3In the Book of Abraham, Pearl of Great Price, the question is settled beyond a doubt. There we read:

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3"And his voice was unto me: Abraham, Abraham, behold, my name is Jehovah, and I have heard thee and have come down to deliver thee, and to take thee away from thy father's house, and from all thy kinsfolk . . . I will take thee, to put upon thee my name, even the Priesthood of thy father, and my power shall be over thee. As it was with Noah so shall it be with thee; but through thy ministry my name shall be known in the earth for ever, for I am thy God." (Pearl of Great Price, p. 30, vv. 16-19.)

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3Note (1) that the sacred name was revealed to Abraham while he was in the city of Ur of the Chaldees; (2) that when the Lord puts his name upon a chosen servant, he confers upon him the Priesthood; (3) that the father of Abraham had the Priesthood, and therefore must have known the name of the divine Head; and (4) that as the knowledge of the name had come from Noah, so, through Abraham, it should be made known in all the world.

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3There is every reason to believe that the sacred name was well known to our first ancestors, Adam and Eve, from the early days of their existence on earth, first in the Garden of Eden, and then after the exodus from that paradise. This belief grows as we read the second and third chapters of Genesis, and it becomes a certainty when in the fourth chapter (v. 1) we hear the joyful exclamation of Eve at the birth of Cain, "I have gotten a man from Jehovah."

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3And then again, in Genesis 5:29, we learn that Lamech, the father of Noah, knew the sacred name. For, in naming his illustrious son, he said:

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3"This same shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord [Jehovah] has cursed."

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3The name was known all through the ages before the flood, and then to the patriarchs after the flood, but it had undoubtedly been dimmed in the consciousness of the Israelites in their wretched condition in Egypt, and therefore it was again revealed through Moses.

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3"It [Jehovah] is certainly not a new name that is introduced; on the contrary, the 'I am that I am' would be unintelligible, if the name itself were not presupposed as already known. The old name of antiquity, whose precious significance had been forgotten and neglected by the children of Israel, here, as it were, rises again to life, and is again brought home to the consciousness of the people." (Smith, Bible Dictionary.)

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3In reading the scriptures about the various manifestations of Jehovah, it is important to remember that a messenger authorized to represent Jehovah always speaks or acts as if he were the divine Person he represents. He stands literally, in his stead. For instance:

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3We remember the account in Exodus of the rebellion of Israel, in consequence of which the Lord decreed to send an angel to go before the people in his stead. The account is, briefly, this: The Lord instructed Moses to break camp and cause the people to proceed on their way to Canaan. But, he said, "I will not go up in the midst of thee; for thou art a stiffnecked people: lest I consume thee in the way" (Exodus 33:3). "And I will send an angel before thee" (v. 2). The Lord, however, would again be with the people when they should take possession of the land, for, he says, "I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, etc." Now Moses was anxious to know more about the angel who was to be their guide. So he said to the Lord: "See, thou sayest unto me, Bring up this people; and thou hast not let me know whom thou wilt send with me." (v. 12.) Then the Lord said, "My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest" (v. 14.) From Isaiah 63:9 we learn that "presence" here stands for, "The angel of his presence." Isaiah says: "In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel of his Presence saved them." That, then, was the name of the messenger who was to represent Jehovah. Of this messenger we read in Exodus 23:20-23: "Behold I send an angel before thee . . . Beware of him, and obey his voice; provoke him not, for he will not pardon your transgressions: for my name is in him. But if thou shalt indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak; then I will be an enemy unto thine enemies. . . For mine angel shall go before thee, and bring thee in unto the Amorites and the Hittites . . . and I will cut them off." Thus, the Angel of the Presence of the Lord occupied completely the position of the Lord himself during the entire journey through the wilderness.

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3Moses may have known who the Angel of the Presence was. Isaiah may have known. We do not. But we do know according to the scriptures that Michael is the "first of the chief princes" (Dan. 10:13); and that he is specially the prince of the people of Daniel (v. 21), that is to say, the Hebrews. And we know, further, that it is Michael who, during the last days of unprecedented trouble, when the children of Israel are to be delivered a second time, shall "stand up" for them. (Dan. 12:1.) May it not then have been Michael who was the Angel of the Presence in the wilderness? We also know that Adam is "Michael, the Prince, the Archangel" (Doctrine and Covenants 107:54.)

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3In the Doctrine and Covenants the important truth is revealed that Jesus Christ, our Redeemer, is Jehovah. We read, "Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ, your Redeemer, the Great I AM, whose arm of mercy hath atoned for your sins." (29:1.) "I AM," as we have seen, is the same as "JEHOVAH."

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3Again:

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3"Thus saith the Lord, your God, even Jesus Christ, the great I AM, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the same which looked upon the wide expanse of eternity, and all the seraphic hosts of heaven, before the world was made; the same which knoweth all things, for all things are present before mine eyes; I am the same which spake, and the world was made, and all things came by me." (38:1-3; comp. 109:34, 68; 110:4.)

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3This truth is definitely stated in "A Doctrinal Exposition," signed by the First Presidency and the Twelve Apostles of the Church, June 30, 1916. We read:

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3"A fourth reason for applying the title 'Father' to Jesus Christ is found in the fact that in all his dealings with the human family Jesus the Son has represented and yet represents Elohim, his Father, in power and authority. This is true of Christ in his pre-existent, antemortal, or unembodied state, in which he was known as Jehovah; also during his embodiment in the flesh; and during his labors as a disembodied spirit in the realm of the dead; and since that period in his resurrected state." ("Articles of Faith," James E. Talmage, p. 471.)

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3JEHOVAH

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3One description of the Deity is that found in the so-called Athanasian Creed. There we read:

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3"The Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God. And yet, they are not three Gods but one God. So likewise the Father is Lord, the Son Lord, and the Holy Ghost Lord. And yet not three Lords but one Lord. . . . And in this Trinity none is afore or after another, none is greater or less than another, but the whole three Persons are eternal together and co-equal."

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3To those who find in this creed a sufficient and adequate presentation of their concept of the Deity, the question, "Who is Jehovah?" is not even likely to occur. But if they should meet it, they would probably answer something like this: "The Father is Jehovah, the Son is Jehovah, and the Holy Ghost is Jehovah. And yet, they are not three Jehovahs but One." In other words, Jehovah would to them stand sometimes for the Trinity, and sometimes for each of the three Divine persons.

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3But all Christians do not accept the Athanasian representation. Some of us understand that the Persons in the Godhead are three distinct Entities, or Beings, each possessing in the highest degree of perfection all the qualities that constitute what we call a "person," an individual, and that they are one in the same sense that the disciples of Christ are one, though separate beings, each living is own individual life. To those who so understand the Deity, the question stated is important as having a bearing on the divine nature of Jesus. Who is Jehovah?

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3If we endeavor to find the answer to that question, we must search the scriptures. There is no other source of reliable information on that point. Philosophy cannot help us. Our own logic leads us nowhere. Our only concern in this inquiry is: "What is written in the law? How readest thou?" (Luke 10:26.)

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3If we, then, first turn to the Doctrine and Covenants, this remarkable volume of revelations that largely pertain to our own dispensation, we learn that Jehovah is the Second Person in the Godhead, the Son, who, in his human manifestation became known as Jesus Christ, or Jesus, the Christ. There can be no controversy, or doubt, as to that.

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3Section 29 contains a revelation given in September 1830, consequently only a few months after the foundation of the Church. It is one of the outstanding revelations, given in the presence of six Elders; it reveals the doctrine of gathering, makes the important announcement that the coming of Christ is near, makes known the position of the first apostles in the Millennial kingdom, speaks of the first resurrection and the signs preceding the second advent, and of the general resurrection, and, finally, gives revelations concerning the creation, the fall, and the innocence of little children. And who is the divine personage that gives this important revelation? We read: "Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ, your Redeemer, the Great I Am, whose arm of mercy has atoned for your sins" (v. 1.) It is Jesus Christ, the Redeemer, who speaks, and it is he whose name is "The Great I Am."

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3That name is the English for Jehovah, as is clear from Exodus 3:14. Moses asks the divine personage who manifests himself to him for information as to his name: "When they (the children of Israel) shall say to me, "What is his name? what shall I say unto them?" And he said: "Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I Am hath sent me unto you." It was Jehovah who spoke to Moses, either in person or through his "angel" who represented him. (See verse 7, where the Lord is Jehovah.)

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3The word Jehovah is derived from the Hebrew verb "to be" or "To cause to be," and means, therefore, the One who is, or who creates.

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3This truth is further confirmed in Section 110, which contains the account of the glorious appearance of Jehovah to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Elder Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple on April 3, 1836. They saw our Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, as they rose from prayer, and they heard him speak. The Prophet says: "We saw the Lord . . . and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying: 'I am the first and the last, I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain, I am your advocate with the Father.'" Here we learn that Jehovah is "the first and the last," "he who was slain" and "your advocate with the Father"; that is to say, the Son, Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God, our Mediator.

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3Note that Jehovah, according to his own word, is "our Advocate with the Father"; he is not our Father, the first Person in the God-head, but one who represents us before the Father. In one sense he is the father of the human race, because as our representative he stands at the head of the children of men in the plan of redemption. He is the second Adam, and in that sense he is the Father, "Everlasting Father" (Isaiah 9:5) and he is also the Son (Mosiah 15:2-4), but that is figuratively speaking or rather, speaking with the law of adoption in view, as Abraham, figuratively speaking, is the "Father" of "all them that believe." (Romans 4:11; Galatians 3:7.)

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3Jehovah is then Jesus Christ, our Lord and Redeemer.

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3In the old Testament, Jehovah is one of the Elohim. This is very clear from numerous passages. Note that it was "the Lord God" who made the earth and the heavens. (Genesis 2:4.) "The Lord God" is the English of "Jehovah Elohim," or, as I think we should understand it, "Jehovah, the Elohim." It was Jehovah Elohim who "planted a garden" (Genesis 2:8), who "took the man and put him into the garden" (Genesis 2:15) who commanded man concerning the tree (Genesis 2:16), and who appeared in the story of the fall and promise of redemption. It is Jehovah who has promised to create new heavens and a new earth" (Isaiah 65:17).

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3It was Jehovah who spoke to Abraham, concerning Sodom and Gomorrah. (Genesis 18.) Jehovah seems to have been one of the three men who stood before him as he sat in the tent door. It may have been Jehovah in person, or it may have been one who was his representative, his "angel," having authority to speak in his name. Jehovah was the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. (Genesis 28:13 and many other passages.) He, probably, it was who wrestled with Jacob (Genesis 32:24-30). For, although he did not tell his name, he conferred upon Jacob in blessing him, the authority of a "prince"—a title bestowed upon our Father, Adam, at Adam-ondi-Ahman (Doctrine and Covenants 107:54) and Jacob felt impressed with the fact that he had seen Elohim "face to face."

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3It was "the angel," or messenger of Jehovah, who first appeared to Moses in the burning bush. (Exodus 3:6), but later, as soon as the attention of Moses had been attracted to the miraculous manifestation and he drew near to investigate, then it seems, Jehovah Elohim addressed him (vv. 4-17).

At the exodus from Egypt, the Angel of Elohim [^33] went before the camp of Israel, and when the Egyptians pursued, this divine Personage "removed and went behind them," so that he stood in the fiery cloud between Israel and the pursuers. (Exodus 14:19, 20.) This Angel of Elohim was Jehovah, for so we read: "And Jehovah went before them by day in a pillar of cloud, to lead them the way." (Exodus 13:21.)

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3Jehovah, the great Angel, or Messenger, of Elohim—the representative, in other words, of the great Council of Elohim, in which this plan of salvation was accepted, and on account of which he was afterwards known as the "Wonderful Counselor." (Isaiah 9:6), but when Israel, after the many manifestations of his power, turned to the golden calf, possibly with ceremonies of which obscene practices formed a part (Exodus 32:25,) then he threatened to withdraw entirely. At this critical juncture of the history of Israel, Moses went up on the mountain and pled before Jehovah of Israel, whereupon Jehovah in answer to the prayers of his faithful servant, gave him the promise that he would send his Angel with him. From this time Jehovah withdrew and left one of his angels, or representatives, in charge.

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3Who this angel of Jehovah is, we are not expressly informed, but since Daniel says that "the great prince which standeth for the children of thy people" is Michael (Daniel 12:1; 10:13 and 21), there can be no harm in the suggestion that Michael, our venerable ancestor, possibly was the angel of Jehovah who had already at this time performed the mission of which Daniel speaks. But be this as it may, Jehovah withdrew and as a sign of this the tent in which religious ordinances were performed and which hitherto had stood in the center of the camp, was now removed a long distance from it. The cloudy pillar, in which the angel of Jehovah manifested his presence, rested there.

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3A remarkable interview between Moses and Jehovah took place at that tent away from the camp. Moses reminded Jehovah that although he had commanded him to be the visible leader of the people, he had not instructed him regarding the journey. "Show me now," he said, "thy way." Jehovah answered, "My presence shall go with thee." (Exodus 33:14.) That is to say, Jehovah would not entirely abandon the people. He would be near, just as Jesus promised to be near his apostles even after he had departed. In the same sense, Jehovah would be present and manifest himself from time to time as circumstances required. This promise was fulfilled throughout the entire journey in the wilderness.

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3After having obtained this promise, Moses said, "I beseech thee, show me thy glory." In answer to that prayer, Jehovah explained to him that he could not see his face, but that he (Jehovah) would show him all his goodness and proclaim, or explain, his name to him, and also permit him to see his back as he was passing by a certain place.

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3This last expression is in all probability a misunderstanding by the translators of the Hebrew word. The word may here mean "behind" in point of time, "afterwards," and in that case we may understand the meaning to be Moses was given the privilege of seeing Jehovah in the form in which he "afterwards" would appear in the flesh. This human form we know was his "glory," for John says: "The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory (his body) as of the only begotten of the Father." If we understand the text in Exodus the same way, it is clear. Moses saw Jehovah, just as John saw the bodily form of the Word, all but his face. (Exodus 33:20-23.)

SCEx 6 2Ex 6 3This agrees perfectly with the beautiful narrative in the Book of Ether concerning the interview of the Brother of Jared with our Lord. The Lord showed himself unto him in "the body of his spirit," in the likeness of which he, Jesus Christ, had created man (Ether 3:14-16), and he says: "The time cometh that I shall glorify my name in the flesh." (v. 21.) That was his "glory," and that was, we may feel sure, the glory which Moses, as well as the Brother of Jared, saw.

Footnotes

"And so great was their astonishment that they fell to the earth, and understood not the words which He spake unto them." (Mosiah 27:12.)

"And now, when he had said this, he fell unto the earth as if he were dead." (Alma 18:42.)

"Now the joy of Ammon was so great even that he was full; yea, he was swallowed up in the joy of his God, even to the exhausting of his strength; and he fell again to the earth." (Ibid., 27:17.)

See also Ibid., 4:11.

"O how great is the nothingness of the children of men; yea, even they are less than the dust of the earth." (Helaman 12:7.)

". . . I do not boast in my own strength, nor in my own wisdom . . . Yea, I know that I am nothing; as to my strength I am weak; therefore I will not boast of myself, but I will boast of my God, for in His strength I can do all things . . ." (Alma 26:11-12.)

"Yea, and I also exhort you, my brethren, that ye be faithful unto prayer continually, that ye may not be led away by the temptations of the devil, that he may not overpower you that ye may not become his subjects at the last day; for behold, he rewardeth you no good thing." (Ibid., 24:39.)

"And the mists of darkness are the temptations of the devil . . ." (I Nephi 12:17.)

"And they said unto me: 'What meaneth the rod of iron which our father saw, that led to the tree?' And I said unto them that it was the Word of God; and whoso would hearken unto the Word of God, and would hold fast unto it, they would never perish; neither could the temptations and the fiery darts of the adversary overpower them unto blindness, to lead them away to destruction." (Ibid., 15:24.)

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye must watch and pray always, lest ye be tempted by the devil, and ye be led away captive by him." (Jesus Christ, to the Nephite people, III Nephi 18:15.)

(See also III Nephi 2:3; 6:15.)

"And the Holy Ghost beareth record of the Father and Me; and the Father giveth the Holy Ghost unto the children of men, because of Me." (III Nephi 28:11.)

"And now, I would command you to seek this Jesus of Whom the prophets and apostles have written, that the grace of God the Father, and also the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of them, may be and abide in you forever." (Ether 12:41.)

"And the Holy Ghost beareth record of the Father and Me; and the Father giveth the Holy Ghost unto the children of men, because of me." (III Nephi 28:11.)

"That bodies who are of the Celestial Kingdom may possess it forever and ever; for, for this intent was it made and created, and for this intent are they sanctified." (Doctrine and Covenants 88:20.)

---
Notas:
[^1] And it came to pass that the Lord spake unto Moses, saying: Behold, I reveal unto you concerning this heaven, and this earth; write the words which I speak. I am the Beginning and the End, the Almighty God; by mine Only Begotten I created these things; yea, in the beginning I created the heaven, and the earth upon which thou standest. "All the rivers run into the sea. . . ." (Ecclesiastes 1:7); See also Job 38, read the entire Chapter.
[^2] And the earth was without form, and void; and I caused darkness to come up upon the face of the deep; and my Spirit moved upon the face of the water; for I am God. See Isaiah 11:6-9; 65:25; Hosea 2:18.
[^3] And I, God said: Let there be light; and there was light.
[^4] And I, God, saw the light; and that light was good. And I, God, divided the light from the darkness.
[^5] And I, God, called the light Day; and the darkness, I called Night; and this I did by the word of my power, and it was done as I spake; and the evening and the morning were the first day.
[^6] And again, I, God, said: Let there be a firmament in the midst of the water, and it was so, even as I spake; and I said: Let it divide the waters from the waters; and it was done;
[^7] And I, God, made the firmament and divided the waters, yea, the great waters under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament, and it was so even as I spake.
[^8] And I, God, called the firmament Heaven; and the evening and the morning were the second day.
[^9] And I, God, said: Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and it was so; and I, God, said: Let there be dry land; and it was so.
[^10] And I, God, called the dry land Earth; and the gathering together of the waters, called I the Sea; and I, God, saw that all things which I had made were good.
[^11] And I, God, said: Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, the fruit tree yielding fruit, after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed should be in itself upon the earth, and it was so even as I spake.
[^12] And the earth brought forth grass, every herb yielding seed after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed should be in itself, after his kind; and I, God, saw that all things which I had made were good;
[^13] And the evening and the morning were the third day.
[^14] And I, God, said: Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven, to divide the day from the night, and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and for years;
[^15] And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth; and it was so.
[^16] And I, God, made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night, and the greater light was the sun, and the lesser light was the moon; and the stars also were made even according to my word.
[^17] And I, God, set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth,
[^18] And the sun to rule over the day, and the moon to rule over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness; and I, God, saw that all things which I had made were good;
[^19] And the evening and the morning were the fourth day.
[^20] And I, God, said: Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life, and fowl which may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven.
[^21] And I, God, created great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind; and I, God, saw that all things which I had created were good.
[^22] And I, God, blessed them, saying: Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the sea; and let fowl multiply in the earth;
[^23] And the evening and the morning were the fifth day.
[^24] And I, God, said: Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle, and creeping things, and beasts of the earth after their kind, and it was so;
[^25] And I, God, made the beasts of the earth after their kind, and cattle after their kind, and everything which creepeth upon the earth after his kind; and I, God, saw that all these things were good.
[^26] And I, God, said unto mine Only Begotten, which was with me from the beginning: Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and it was so. And I, God, said: Let them have dominion over the fishes of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.
[^27] And I, God, created man in mine own image, in the image of mine Only Begotten created I him; male and female created I them.
[^28] And I, God, blessed them, and said unto them: Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.
[^29] And I, God, said unto man: Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree in the which shall be the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat.
[^30] And to every beast of the earth; and to every fowl of the air, and to everything that creepeth upon the earth, wherein I grant life, there shall be given every clean herb for meat; and it was so, even as I spake.
[^31] And I, God, saw everything that I had made, and, behold, all things which I had made were very good; and the evening and the morning were the sixth day.
[^32] And by the word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth. 32. "And be beheld that they did contain the Five Books of Moses, which gave an account of the Creation of the world, and also of Adam and Eve, who were our first parents." (I Nephi 5:11.)
[^33] And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten. 33. The name here is not the same as "The angel of Jehovah," which occurs in so many places.
