Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1965)

CHAPTER 2

THE WRITINGS OF MOSES

As revealed to Joseph Smith the Prophet in December, 1830

Moses 2 1VERSE 1. In the beginning I created the heaven and the earth. Ponder, if we can with our finite minds, a time far distant in the past according to man's reckoning; a time so remote that in it there were no organized existences throughout the vast expanse of our universe; a time before the earth was formed, "Before God's works of old." The happenings of that time are known to man only by revelation from God. The Great Overruler of all, the Creator of the heaven and earth, pleased with the work of His hands, condescended to make them known to the children of men through a vision, He vouchsafed to Moses, who later became the leader of Israel.

Moses 2 1Some people regard this story as myth, and that the incidents of that time were accidents. But it is our purpose to show that what man sometimes call fortuitous circumstances, are really not so, but that the accidents of man are the inspirations of God, and the incidents of that time were the leadings and guidings of Him Who, in wisdom, made all things.

Moses 2 1To see all God's works would entail an endless vision to Moses, for God's works and words have no end. Therefore, He revealed to Moses only those things concerning the heaven and the earth upon which Moses stood. God commanded Moses: "Write the words which I speak. I am the Beginning and the End, the Almighty God; by Mine Only Begotten I created these things; Yea, in the beginning I created the heaven, and the earth. . . ."

Moses 2 1The student will note that the Speaker identified Himself as God Almighty; He therein having authority to speak and thereby established as true those things which He spoke.

Moses 2 1"In the beginning I created the heaven, and the earth." That leading sentence is perhaps the most sublime one ever written or ever uttered, and to impress upon Moses' mind the magnitude and excellence thereof, God explained to him that by the Priesthood and Power of His Only Begotten Son He created these things. Behold, He says: "I am the Beginning and the End," meaning no doubt that all things had their commencement in Him, and in Him all things would have a perfect ending.

Moses 2 1SCIENCE AND THE CREATION

Moses 2 1Many of the differences between the theories of so-called science and the revealed Word of God concerning the creation of the earth and its development as a fit abode for His children, are more imagined than real. These divergencies, if we may call them such, stem from unenlightened reasoning and begin with facts unknown except they are made manifest by revelation vouchsafed to man by Him Who made all things.

Moses 2 1The Writings of Moses contained in the Pearl of Great Price and the Book of Genesis, both tell the same story of the beginning of Creation although the latter in a form much edited and deleted by copyists since they were compiled. Science, however, explores a disparite origin of the universe. Although the proponents of each and every theory are united in their arraignment of the Mosaic writings, they, themselves, are greatly divided in their conclusions and offer only speculation as to the wonderful unfoldment of all created things.

The advocates of each scientific theory—we will call them pseudo-scientific because they are only guesses and not based upon exact knowledge—are together in maintaining that the acts of Creation enunciated in the Pearl of Great Price and the Book of Genesis are contrary to every known law of nature. But the Story of Creation as contained in both these Books to which science objects in greatest measure, is the statement that in six days the Lord made the heaven and the earth. Nevertheless, and in spite of the ill-considered objections of the protagonists of each theory so advanced, we note that neither account, which at first were identical writings of Moses, states that the days mentioned therein were days of twenty-four hours duration. We know that a day with the Lord is infinitely longer than a day on earth, and when days are mentioned in the text, we understand it to mean periods of indeterminable length of time. (See Book of Abraham 4:4-19.)

Moses 2 1The teachings of science that "the order and beauty of the world are not the result of one directly creative act, but the outcome of a long and gradual process, continued over myriads of years," is a theory known to us as Evolution, and unless it is understood in its widest possible sense, it is somewhat distasteful to us. But in view of the discoveries that science is continually making, and the lessons mankind is learning, we see in the explanations of science the difficulties and perplexities caused by a too literal interpretation of one word (day) have largely disappeared. Also, we see no misunderstandings that cannot be bridged, no perplexities that cannot be solved. Many have come to see that the Creation would be just as God-appointed and miraculous, if it were slow and progressively continuous, as if it were sudden and complete. The Lord said to Moses that "By the power of My Word I created these things"; we understand the phrase My Word to be God's Only Begotten Son, and the same Power necessary to originate and sustain a ceaseless and durable process of development in the universe at large would be no less than that required to bring it into existence at once or in a moment, and thereafter perpetuate the measure of its creation.

Moses 2 1Another objection which is often made, not only by men of science, but by many others who are familiar with certain chronological data, is the date posted in the margins of their Bibles that the Creation took place in the year 4004 B.C. Their idea is that it requires a far greater antiquity than any such time. Here it is well to state that the marginal date of which we have spoken is not part of the Bible, but was put there solely because of calculations, both Jewish and Christian, which it is generally admitted were based upon incorrect knowledge.

Moses 2 1Moses, the writer of the record telling of God's Creation, did not confine his inspired account to any number of days of 24 hours each or years in which the world took upon itself the beauty and the simplicity of the finished product. Moses wrote of the sun, moon, and stars; how they grew through a succession of days, each day more and more, to a memorial of God's glory and goodness that shall last forever. He did not commit himself to any definite limits of time in which God accomplished His mighty works, but simply says that "In the beginning." Those words alone are sufficient to establish beyond any doubt the time element here involved: "In the beginning I created the heaven and the earth," that phrase, it has been said, "Is elastic enough to cover the modern scientific position," and it is well to remember in considering Moses' writings, that they were written for religious purposes and not for scientific instruction.

Moses 2 2THE FIRST DAY

Moses 2 2VERSE 2. The earth was without form and void. The material (See Book of Abraham 3:24 and 4:1) of which the earth was formed was in the beginning (v. 1) a huge mass of matter without definite and permanent shape or form. (Material meaning matter as the constituent of which the earth was organized, or in a larger sense, that which gave a substantiality to the whole universe.) The Gods went down to that place where they saw those materials did exist and formed the earth. It was then the foundation of the earth was laid. But then it had no power in and of itself, no inherent force, nothing in its general character to better its lifeless condition. It was a bleak and desolate waste, unoccupied by any inhabitants whatsoever.

Moses 2 2The words of the text indicate that the "beginning" was still more remote than the incidents therein recorded. This verse informs us of the start of God, the Father's work in making the earth a suitable place for man's habitat. The earth itself was but the foundation upon which God built a home for His children. It was laid with that end in view. Now to prepare this Home that the earth might fulfill its purpose was the Great Creator's task. The part He played in the "beginning" is included in the First Day's Work. The "beginning" can be stretched backwards to include any time necessary to cover all things.

Moses 2 2Great mists of dark clouds rose from the waters that spread the earth over. "My Spirit," said the Lord, "moved upon the face of the waters," and further said that they obeyed My will. "For, I am God." Which betokens One Who is all powerful, the Almighty.

Moses 2 2Compared in number to the people of the earth at the time of Moses very few worshiped the True and Living God. Many nations and people had vague ideas concerning the Creation of the earth and the things therein. Their beliefs undoubtedly stemmed from predeluge writings and traditions that were handed down from generation to generation since the time of Noah. The vision of Moses regarding the Creation and the subsequent works of God bore witness to him and his followers that the earth and its glorious progression along the way to perfection was the work of many gods who worked under the combined power and wisdom of One Who was their Head, even God, the Father Almighty.

Moses 2 3VERSE 3. Let there be light. Light is essential to life and growth, and the Great Creator aware of that phenomenon decreed or appointed that there should be Light; "And there was light." Thus by wisdom the earth, by slow degrees of progression became a suitable place for man's abode.

Moses 2 4VERSE 4. Saw that light was good. God, having rebuked the mists of darkness that enveloped the earth, even that they fled before the warmth of light that everywhere broke through the clouds and irradiated the whole earth, saw it was "good," and so pronounced it. Light began to fulfill the purpose for which God had designed it. "Good" are all things that serve the Lord.

Moses 2 4And I, God, divided the light from the darkness. That the earth in revolving upon its axis produces alternate periods of light and darkness, is the evident truth spoken of here. Periods of light and darkness are the two main parts of the day, and Moses, accustomed to Oriental expressions, used that colloquialism, or familiar conversation, which constitutes a "day," from "Sunset to Sunset," and the division of the day as "Evening and Morning."

Moses 2 5VERSE 5. I, God, called the light Day; and the darkness, I called Night. The Great Creator was increasingly emphatic in impressing upon Moses that all these things were done by the power he had vested in His Son. God Himself gave the order, or let His will be known, and His appointed pleasure was done according as He desired, and this by His Only Begotten Son, the Great I Am; the Creator under the Father of all.

Moses 2 5Opening the windows of heaven and thereby letting the light burst forth to dispel the gloom that for ages had held the earth in thraldom, was the work of the First Day.

Moses 2 5The credit due the Builder, the One Who actually put God's orders into being, was the Lord God, Jehovah; all mention of Him has been deleted by copyists, we know not who, from the writings of Moses as contained in the Hebrew scriptures, the Book of Genesis. This fact reminds us of the words of God recorded in Chapter 1:41 of Moses' writings as we find them in the Pearl of Great Price, wherein He prophesied to Moses concerning the coming forth of Moses' writings in their fulness, "In a day when the children of men shall esteem My words as naught and take many of them from the Book which thou shalt write."

Moses 2 6THE SECOND DAY

Moses 2 6VERSE 6. Let there be a firmament. . . The stars in the black concave of the heavens after the great sun has gone down, testify boldly of God's wisdom. Of old He laid the foundation of the earth, and didst stretch forth the canopy of the heavens; yet, in His infinite wisdom, God prepared a place for man to come forth and dwell. To the watery waste He appointed a firmament, that is by His divine will He caused to be established a portion of space by which the waters that covered the earth were divided, each part asunder of the chaotic oceans that then held the earth in a watery grave.

Moses 2 7VERSE 7. And I, God, divided the waters. This verse is a continuation of the last, but it shows as accomplished what He commanded. The waters under and those above the firmament were the primeval seas that washed the great areas of land that lay hidden beneath their surface, and the moist clouds that descended upon the earth.

Moses 2 7God Almighty, the Creator, informed Moses that the division took place just as He had commanded.

Moses 2 8VERSE 8. And the evening and the morning were the Second Day. The work in preparation of the earth as a home for God's children progressed slowly but surely. Over a bleak and desolate waste, He had caused light to break forth through the darkness that enshrouded the earth, and had divided the earth's moist atmosphere from the waters that surrounded it. He had caused rain to fall that in the future the thirsty soil might be given a drink of life-giving water.

Moses 2 8When all this was accomplished by the power of His Only Begotten Son, the work of the Second Day ended and the labor of the Third commenced.

Moses 2 9THE THIRD DAY

Moses 2 9VERSE 9. Let there be dry land. The Creator saw that everything He had done was good; they augured well a world both of existence and maintenance to all future inhabitants. He, however, saw the necessity of dry land; therefore He commanded it, and it was done as ordered. A sort of seismological disturbance shook the earth; valleys rose, mountains sank, or were submerged beneath the waves of a tumultuous, rushing sea. Great plains, depressions in the earth, lakes, and rivers, took their places, and all creation joined in songs of praise to its Maker. These things were all made known to Moses as he stood upon the mount. (See Moses 1:1; also, Psalm 103:7.)

Moses 2 10VERSE 10. And I, God, called the dry land Earth. At God's command the waters under the firmament gathered together in the place prepared for them, leaving dry the vast area of land which He called Earth. "The gathering together of the waters" He called Sea. In this manner, oceans, seas, lakes, and rivers were formed with each having its own channel or watercourse and each going down to the sea. [^1]

Moses 2 11VERSE 11. Let the earth bring forth grass. The earth now far advanced in its preparation for human habitation, the Creator looked at His works and again said that all things which He had made were good. He, therein rejoiced that they, every one of His tasks, worked together for the full success of His purposes. But for the sustenance of any future inhabitants of the earth, neither man nor beast, no provision had been made. Therefore, His next command was to that end: "Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, the fruit tree yielding fruit, after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed should be in itself upon the earth."

Moses 2 12VERSE 12. And the earth brought forth grass. And behold, the earth was covered with verdure; it developed as the Creator designed it should. The earth became fruitful; it yielded seed-bearing plants of all kinds, and also trees that yielded seed within its fruit. Grass sprung up for the cattle that were yet to be created, and herb for the service of man. Grain for bread came forth out of the earth; again we repeat the words of the ancient Hebrew King, David "How manifold are Thy works, O Lord! In wisdom hast Thou made them all; the earth is full of the riches of Thy bounty." (Psalm 104:24.)

Moses 2 12May we, remembering the goodness of God in Him providing for our needs; the clothing we wear and the food we eat, repeat more of David's words: "Thou makest the outgoings of the morning and evening to rejoice. Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it; Thou greatly enrichest it with the River of God, which is full of water: Thou preparest them corn, when Thou hast provided for it. Thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly: Thou settlest the furrows thereof: Thou makest it soft with showers: Thou blessest the springing thereof. Thou crownest our labors with Thy goodness; and Thy paths drop fatness. They drop upon the pastures of the wilderness: and the little hills rejoice on every side. The pastures are clothed with flocks; the valleys also are covered over with corn; they shout for joy, they also sing." (Psalm 65:8-13.)

Moses 2 12Thus all nature perpetuates fulfilling the command of the Creator in providing for man and for beast; herbs for man and grass for the beast.

Moses 2 13VERSE 13. And the evening and morning were the Third Day. (See Comments v. 4.)

Moses 2 13THE FOURTH DAY

Moses 2 14VERSE 14. Let there be lights in the firmament of heaven. A wise and kind Creator knowing the times that were yet to come, in His universal knowledge and unlimited power and authority, ordered that luminaries be established in the firmament of heaven to be for signs to divide the day from the night. They of course determine the seasons of the year as they do the days. The regular arrangement of these heavenly bodies in relation to the earth's movements, or the unchangeable method of reckoning time, was in them established.

Moses 2 14"And again, verily I say unto you, He hath given a law unto all things, by which they move in their times and their seasons; And their courses are fixed, even the courses of the heavens and the earth, which comprehend the earth and all the planets. And they give light to each other in their times and in their seasons, in their minutes, in their hours, in their days, in their weeks, in their months, in their years. . ." (Doctrine and Covenants 88:42-44.)

Moses 2 15VERSE 15. And let them be for lights . . . to give light upon the earth. In the work of the First Day, the Creator, by and through the power of His Only Begotten Son, caused that the mists of darkness which hid the source of light, should be dispelled. Thereafter warm rays of light were diffused throughout the earth, and the work of the Second and Third Days followed in rapid succession.

Moses 2 16VERSE 16. And I, God, made two great lights. "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth His handywork," thus said the Psalmist who undoubtedly understood the truths concerning the Creation, and may we give to God the glory due His Great Name. For He made great lights, the sun to rule the day, the moon and stars to rule the night. He commanded and they were created; He gave unto them a law they cannot transgress.

Moses 2 16Through the power of His Son, the Great I Am, His Only Begotten, God drove away the clouds that buried in their mists the dazzling rays of the sun, and it burst forth in all its glory, resplendent in its pristine beauty.

Moses 2 17VERSE 17. And I, God, set them in the firmament of the heaven. All God's works, the accomplishment of His hands, are purposeful. He made the sun, and the moon, and the stars, to give light upon the earth. "Man goeth forth unto his work, and to his labor until the evening"; he does not stumble by the way, nor does he plant except in the season thereof. "The way of the Lord is perfect, His word is tried, His Councels stand forever. The Lord liveth;" exalted be the God of the Creation.

Moses 2 18VERSE 18. I, God, saw that all things which I made were good. There is a great lesson that all may learn here. The sun, moon, and stars, are creatures of God, but in obeying His will they serve us, His children. He serves best who serves God by serving in that manner. That is why the Creator pronounced them "good," because they served His purposes in serving us.

Moses 2 19VERSE 19. And the evening and the morning were the Fourth Day. (See Comments v. 4.)

Moses 2 20THE FIFTH DAY

Moses 2 20VERSE 20. Let the waters bring forth abundantly . . . We can conceive the huge storehouse of plenty which the Creator was building, when we think of the work He brought to the issue of full success on the four previous days. A radiant light on the First Day; rain to quench the thirst of the soil on the Second; grass for the beasts and grain and fruit for man on the Third; and on the Fourth, great luminaries in the heaven that told of His glory and spoke of His might; all together the work of the Four Days bear witness of an orderly and splendid Creation.

Moses 2 20"Let the waters bring forth abundantly," the fish, and every moving thing that hath life, "and fowl which may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven," was the edict of the Fifth Day. This order shows how in wisdom the Creator provided in abundance for that which was to come. This proclamation by Him Who made all things, included every thing that moveth—insects, reptiles, things that creep and crawl, the fishes of the sea, the fowl of the air, the sparrow on the housetop and the eagle on its outspread wings.

Moses 2 21VERSE 21. The waters brought forth abundantly . . . and every winged fowl after its kind. Great whales, and every living creature whose habitat was the waters, were brought forth abundantly; each one according to its own species, or in other words, a distinct kind of creature having its own characteristics, and in breeding transmits these characteristics to its offspring.

Moses 2 21Also, every winged fowl according to its kind came forth in great numbers, so that, at times their flight darkened the firmament.

Moses 2 21More and more, the Creator grew pleased with the work of His hands, and even more and more He provided what He called "good" for the future inhabitants of the earth, who we are told joyously awaited the time of its occupancy by them. (Job 38:1-7.)

Moses 2 22THE SIXTH DAY

Moses 2 22VERSE 22. And I, God, blessed them. . . Providential care hovered over God's Creation, and divine blessings added to the peace and quiet that prevailed upon the vast extent of land and sea. Unlike it is now, there was then no enmity one creature for another, but all united to make life a pleasant and useful part of the Creator's plans. As it will be in the 1000 years of Millennial peace, the lamb lay down with the lion. [^2] The Creator blessed the fish and fowl with a prodigious offspring, saying: "Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the sea; and let fowl multiply in the earth."

Moses 2 23VERSE 23. And the evening and the morning were the Fifth Day. (See Comments v. 4.)

Moses 2 24VERSE 24. Let the earth bring forth . . . cattle . . . In bringing His plans to a successful conclusion, the Creator after witnessing the ordered progression of His purposes so far, provided further for the benefit of man who had not yet been created. He commanded the earth to bring forth cattle and other beasts that man may use them for his sustenance and his service when the time should come.

Moses 2 24God also caused to be created "creeping things" from giant caterpillars and reptiles down to the almost insignificant insects; every "living creature" after its own kind the earth was commanded to bring forth.

Moses 2 24We may understand that where in the text it says "creature" it means "any and all things that were created." For every creature of God is good. . . (I Timothy 4:4.)

Moses 2 25VERSE 25. And I, God, made the beasts of the earth after their kind. Cattle and creeping things, the beasts of the earth, all living creatures, brought forth their own kind because the Creator so commanded it. The earth was full of God's bounties and His creatures. All nature rejoiced in His goodness and wise providence.

Moses 2 26VERSE 26. Let Us make man in Our image. The orderly advance in the development of the earth as a habitation for man proclaims itself to be the perfection of God's mighty hand; a providential undertaking.

Moses 2 26From the very first when the foundation of the earth was laid; when all the elements used therein were gradually taking their place, and darkness covered its broad expanse; when first the great Creator out of the blackness, cried: "Let there be light," the Finger of God, the works of His hands are easily seen by all who have a desire to know the mind and will of God.

Moses 2 26The upright in heart may see in every event or turn of events in the earth's preparation as an abode for His children, the tender care of a wise, kind, and loving Father.

Moses 2 26When the earth was made ready and the last of God's edicts fulfilled, the "house" fitted and arranged for his use, the Voice of God speaking to His Only Begotten Son, with Whom He counseled, was heard to say: "Let Us make man in Our Image."

Moses 2 26And it was so done!

Moses 2 26After counseling together, the Father and the Son, joint Creators of the earth and all that is therein; God, the Father, pronounced that upon Creation man should have dominion over all other created things throughout earth's vast expanse. The fishes of the sea, the fowls of the air, cattle and all creeping things, were to be subject to man's desires or for his use and pleasure.

Moses 2 27VERSE 27. I, God, created man in Mine Own image . . . The earth through successive stages of preparation had now become a suitable place for man's abode. Light, so necessary to life, drove away the mists of darkness that had held the enormous oceans of the earth in their murky grasp; the sun, moon, and stars, gave warmth where only cold had prevailed; drops of rain bathed the whole earth with showers—watering its ridges abundantly, and blessing "the springing thereof" until the entire globe was covered with verdure (See Psalm 65); cattle, fruit, fish, and fowl, all God's bounties were provided well for man's needs and wants.

Moses 2 27Man's creation, the highest state of God's mighty work, was made a reality when He formed man in the likeness of His Only Begotten Son, the Lord, Jesus Christ. "Male and female," said the Creator, "created I them." When God commenced His great work of Creation, when the foundation of the earth was laid, it was then "The morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy." (Job 38:7.)

Moses 2 27In our discussion of the Creation, we have dwelt somewhat on God's purpose in undertaking such a mighty task. However, we find a full and complete answer to our query in the words of Nephi, God's prophet to the Nephites: "Behold, the Lord hath created the earth that it should be inhabited; and He hath created His children that they should possess it." (I Nephi 17:36.)

Moses 2 27Although the Lord told Moses: "Men shall . . . take many of them (My words) from the Book which thou shalt write (v. 41), Moses' account of God's works as it appears in both the Pearl of Great Price, and the Bible, resemble each other in that they take for granted, "God lives."

Moses 2 27Handbooks on theology generally begin by stating the philosophical arguments supposed to prove that there is a Supreme Being, but God's books do not argue the question. "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth," is the sublime opening statement of the Bible. The first incident of the Pearl of Great Price is that of a vision had by Moses, in which he saw God face-to-face. There is no attempt at argument; no appeal to the reasoning power of man, only a plain statement of a sublime fact in the simplest possible language: God is!

Moses 2 27Yet, when one of the inspired writers in the Book of Mormon has occasion to rebuke atheism, he applies the cosmological argument with the greatest possible force: "If there be no God, we are not, for there could have been no Creation." (II Nephi 11:7.)

Moses 2 27That argument is unanswerable.

Moses 2 27There are two widely divergent views concerning the existence of man on earth.

Moses 2 27One of these has been called the scientific view, although it is scientific only in ascertaining a certain class of facts. Outside this preparatory work, it becomes un-scientific in the highest degree. Its conclusions are not scientific. In other words, it reminds one of a building of cardboards erected on a solid rock foundation. But such a structure would be no more lasting than one built on sand.

Moses 2 27The other is scriptural, and therefore, in fact, scientific both in foundation and superstructure.

Moses 2 27In the so-called scientific view, man is the product of selection and heredity, surroundings and training. He is merely a wonderful and complicated machine. As such he delivers his products as a machine. He who knows the parts of a machine can calculate its motions and control its purposes. In the same way, the acts and even thoughts of man can be controlled by one who knows the human machinery. There can be no personal responsibility in a machine; nor in man, if he is but another machine. And even if a degree of responsibility is admitted, there can be no self-determination. The acts and thoughts are determined by the construction of the different parts. It is all mechanical.

Moses 2 27The scriptural view of the existence of man is different. In this view, man is the child of God. He has come, in accordance with an eternal, divine decree upon this earth, as a wonderful institute of learning in order to get an experience necessary for eternal progress. His body, be the origin of it clearly understood or not, is the tabernacle in which the eternal and immortal spirit dwells during its existence in the material world; it is also the wonderful collection of tools by means of which that spirit is in contact with the material world, and thereby able to fulfill the purpose of its existence on the earth.

Moses 2 27In this view, man is a personality, dwelling in flesh, with independence, volition, and responsibility. He has a peculiar place in the history of the universe as the bearer of the highest ideals, and as subject to moral responsibility. As the child of God, man has a unique place in the creation which can be comprehended only in the light of divine revelation.

Moses 2 27This is the scriptural view of the existence of man on earth.

Moses 2 27It is also the only scientific view.

Moses 2 28VERSE 28. Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth. God's blessing on man and his wife to multiply and replenish the earth was a benediction upon his seed ever after. God "hath made of one blood all nations of men to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation" (Acts 17:26), so said Paul. Every nation under heaven, every kindred, tongue, and people, who dwell upon the face of the earth, are of one pair, male and female. Some are white, and some are black; some are copper-colored and some are yellow, but research along scientific lines, as well as the Word of God, are concordant in that both say all men are of one species and one family.

Moses 2 28In blessing the first couple (Adam and Eve), the Creator gave them dominion over all His creations, the "fish of the sea, and the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth." He also told them to "subdue" the earth, thereby telling them that the earth awaited the seasons of planting and harvest; that its many riches would reward the efforts of their posterity to conquer its problems and bring its lands into cultivation.

Moses 2 29VERSE 29. I have given you every herb bearing seed . . . to you it shall be for meat. Adam, the first man, did not enter upon the task of survival without the advice of his Maker, Who is God; thereby smoothing his path and making light the burden of carrying on. Food for his sustenance was provided in the seed of plants and herbs; God gave him trees, the fruit thereof together with the herbs would satisfy his need for food. Again, we repeat the words of David, the Psalmist: "How manifold are Thy works, O Lord! In wisdom Thou hast made them all; the earth is full of the riches of Thy bounty." (Psalm 104:24.) Also, "The heavens are Thine, the earth also is Thine: as for the world and the fulness thereof, Thou hast founded them." (Psalm 89:11.) "He covereth the heaven with clouds, and prepareth rain for the earth. He causeth the grass to spring up for the cattle, and herb for the service of man." (Jewish prayer of praise to God.) And let us not forget the words of Lehi, the ancient Hebrew scholar: "Great and marvelous are Thy works, O Lord God Almighty! Thy throne is high in the heavens, and Thy power, and goodness, and mercy are over all the inhabitants of the earth." (I Nephi 1:14.) "Behold, are not the things that God hath wrought marvelous in your eyes? Yea, and who can comprehend the marvelous works of God? Who shall say that it was not a miracle that by His Word the heaven and the earth should be; and by the power of His Word man was created of the dust of the earth; and by the power of His Word have miracles been wrought." (Mormon, Book of Mormon, 9:16-17.)

Moses 2 29To the minds of mortals, the marvelous works of God are incomprehensible; to us they are inscrutable. Except through revelation (like the vision of Moses which we are considering) they cannot be found out. The revealed Word of God is a lamp unto our feet, and a light unto our path (See Psalm 119:105), and here we remember the words of Isaiah: "Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of His servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light? let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God." (Isaiah 50:10.)

Moses 2 30VERSE 30. To every beast, every fowl, and to everything that creepeth upon the earth, shall be given every clean herb for meat. God's thoughts were for the cattle, and for the fowl of the air, and for every one of His creations whether it be man or beast—"both beasts and babes were provided for." Every clean herb, those not poisonous or were otherwise defiled, should be for the maintenance of both beasts and birds. They should not be left to hunger. And so at God's command they would be fed.

Moses 2 31VERSE 31. All things which I had made were very good. In the contemplation of His works, now at their completion, God pronounced them very good. At the conclusion of each day's work, the great Creator said of it, that it was good. Now, when the work of Creation was finished, when man was created to occupy and subdue the earth, the combined labor of His hands brought forth even from the Maker Himself the assurance that it met the purposes for which it had been created; that it was in accord with the mind of Deity, and that it was a fit abode for God's children.

Moses 2 31Thus in six succeeding periods of time the work of Creation was finished and the earth was therein made ready for or prepared for man. It is said by many that God created all these things out of nothing. He did not! That impossible proposition is defended by a large number of advocates who cater to ignorance and infatuation; we refer to only a few: "God, the Hebrew word is Elohim, which bespeaks, (1) The power of God, the Creator. El signifies the strong God; and what less than almighty strength could bring about all things out of nothing?" "The manner in which this work was effected: God created it, that is, made it out of nothing. There was not any pre-existent matter out of which the world was produced." (Matthew Henry's Commentary on the Bible.) "God—the name of the Supreme Being, signifying in Hebrew, Strong. Mighty. It is expressive of omnipotent power, and by its use here in the plural form is obscurely taught at the opening of the Bible, a doctrine clearly revealed in other parts of it, viz., that though God is One, there is a plurality of persons in the Godhead—Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Who were engaged in the creative work. Created, not formed from any pre-existing materials, but made out of nothing." (Commentary on the Whole Bible. J.F.B.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Thus the heaven and the earth were finished, and all the host of them. Hosts, any living plant or animal whose existence depended upon the earth's fulness.
[^2] And on the seventh day I, God, ended my work, and all things which I had made; and I rested on the seventh day from all my work, and all things which I had made were finished, and I, God, saw that they were good; Sabbath, the Hebrew word, Shabbath, means rest, or cessation from labor. The statement in the Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses, 3:3, is that God rested on, and hallowed the Seventh Day. By the Jewish law given at Sinai, the seventh day was to be a day of rest, in which no secular work was to be done, and which was to be kept holy unto God.
