Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1965)

CHAPTER 3

THE WRITINGS OF MOSES

As revealed to Joseph Smith the Prophet in December, 1830—Continued

Moses 3 1VERSE 1. Thus the heaven and the earth were finished. . . In the manner indicated in the previous Chapter; in its several periods of growth, the earth, crowned with the glorious works of God, the hosts [^1] which He had created, had become progressively a "good" place for the dwelling thereon of man. The earth was now ready for its occupants. It was then a Celestial Orb; a temple made by God "Whose tessellated floor," it has been said, "is the earth we trod upon; whose roof is the all enveloping sky; whose lamps are sun, moon, and stars"; and in which, we might add, "is an anthem ceaselessly rendered, and universally heard, 'Fear God, and give glory to Him . . . and worship Him Who made the heaven and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters.'" (Revelation 14:7.)

Moses 3 2THE SEVENTH DAY

Moses 3 2VERSE 2. On the Seventh Day I, God, ended My work. Six days of labor had ended, and the Creator contemplated the work of each. He offered no apologies for what He had done, no pretexts or excuses, but calmly and joyously pronounced them "good." So satisfied was He at the results of His mighty efforts, that by Him, the Seventh Day was set apart as a day of rest.

Moses 3 3VERSE 3. And I, Lord, blessed the seventh Day, and sanctified it. After the creative days spent by Him in fitting the earth for man's abode, God, the Great Creator, rested. For six days He had watched and planned, but now the earth was finished for the purpose of which it was intended. The Creator was not tired, nor was He weary and worn, but well-pleased. "Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard, that the Everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary?" (Isaiah 40:8.)

Moses 3 3The work of Creation goes on and on; it never stops, but is renewed daily. The Lord in His wisdom has established that all things shall not end. And that the earth might abound in His goodness and peace reign throughout its vast domain, He instituted the Sabbath [^2] as a Day of Rest, and one in which to think of Him. Unto us He set the great Pattern; He ceased for one day from all His labors, for He had successfully accomplished what He had set out to do. God blessed the Seventh Day, and sanctified it. [^3]

THE HEBREW ORIGIN OF SABBATH WORSHIP

Moses 3 3"And the LORD [^4] (Jehovah) spake unto Moses, saying, 'Speak thou also unto the Children of Israel, saying, Verily My Sabbaths ye shall keep: for it is a sign between Me and you throughout your generations; that ye may know that I am the LORD that doth sanctify you. Ye shall keep the Sabbath therefore; for it is holy unto you: every one that defileth it shall surely be put to death: for whosoever doeth any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from among his people. Six days may work be done; but in the seventh is the Sabbath of rest, holy to the LORD: whosoever doeth any work in the Sabbath Day, he shall surely be put to death. Wherefore the Children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath, to observe the Sabbath throughout their generations, for a perpetual covenant. It is a sign between Me and the Children of Israel forever: for in six days the LORD made heaven and earth and on the seventh day He rested, and was refreshed.'" (Exodus 31:12-17.)

Moses 3 3Throughout the ages the Jews have accepted the Sabbath as Israel's heritage and declare that they who take pleasure in the Sabbath shall find peace and joy. "They who take delight therein, to restrain their feet from following their usual paths on God's holy day, shall tread upon the high places of happiness, and shall enjoy the heritage of the House of Israel." They, too, offer this prayerful thought—

Moses 3 3". . . Too often do we go our way day after day and forget His wisdom and guidance. The tasks and trials, the pursuits and pleasures of life absorb us and crowd the thoughts of God from our hearts. Therefore the Sabbath is given us. It is as a gentle voice bidding us turn for a moment from our daily toil, that we may refresh ourselves with the waters of life drawn from the wells of salvation. . . . May all of us realize more and more the value and the necessity of the observance of the Sabbath Day. May we remember continually, O LORD, that with Thee is the Fountain of Life, that in Thy light do we see light. Of old Thou didst lay the foundation of the earth and stretch out the canopy of the heavens; yet, in Thine infinite wisdom, Thou hast permitted the human heart to be its own master, so that man's homage to his Creator, as evidenced in Sabbath rest and Sabbath worship, shall be the spontaneous fruitage of a loving faith, the Soul's own thank-offering laid upon Thine altar." (Jewish Union Prayer Book.)

Moses 3 3And again—

Moses 3 3"Heavenly Father, we rejoice that amid the ceaseless cares and anxieties, the vain desires and wearisome struggles of our earthly life, Thy holy Sabbath has been given us as a day of rest and refreshment of soul. It takes the burden from our shoulders, calls us to the restfulness of Thy House and the joy of Thy worship, and comforts us by Thy gracious message: Peace, peace, be to those that are far and to those that are near. . . . When we sing Thy praise, may our souls rise with our songs to Thee, and when we render Thee our homage may we remember that only by obedience to Thy commandments, by faithfulness to our duties, by the goodness of our deeds, can we make our worship acceptable to Thee."

Moses 3 3Our worship of God on the Sabbath Day is like the dew from heaven; it revives our drooping spirits and imparts courage and strength to our tired frames, weary and worn with the toils of everyday life.

Moses 3 3We have been put upon the earth and appointed to do the Lord's bidding. It may cost all we hold dear, but it is good to pause in our struggle for the things of the world and search for that which "maketh truly rich." To worship God the Father through His Son, Who is Jehovah, the Creator, is the objective of the Sabbath Day. And in this connection it is well to remember the words of the LORD to this generation, the words which He spake to the Prophet Joseph Smith, "He that hath Eternal Life is rich." We can now understand more fully the words of that vast throng of good men and women who already have gone our way, "The rewards of righteousness are more to be desired than all the riches of the earth."

Moses 3 3It is good to draw near unto the LORD in Sabbath Day worship; it is good to depart from all earthly pursuits and seek Eternal Life. It is good to forsake all sinful pleasures and listen to the promptings of that still small voice which cometh from the Father to lead and to guide and to warn of things to come. We become so engrossed in the world and the things of the world, that we have little time or thought for else than, "What shall we eat? or What shall we drink? or Wherewithal shall we be clothed?" (Jesus Christ, III Nephi 13:31.)

Moses 3 3When these questions present themselves, it is then we should remember other words of the Savior: "Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." The Sabbath Day, in words more eloquent than any found in the dictionary, says to each and all of us: "Come, refresh yourselves with the waters of life, that abound in the Wells of righteousness." REST OF THE LORD means the fulness of His Glory. (Doctrine and Covenants 84:24.)

Moses 3 3As we heed His call and follow Him, emulating the Great Creator's seventh day example, we will grow in grace as we grow in years and in the knowledge of the glory of Him Who created all things, or in the knowledge of that which is just and true. (See King Benjamin, Mosiah 4:12.)

Moses 3 3What is still more, in the nurture and admonition of God, we will increase in the fear of Him and the time will not be far distant until we begin to say as did the Prophet of old, that from now on, henceforth and forever, I will serve God, and keep His commandments. (See Joshua 24:15.) Then our Sabbath Day's offering of homage to God will be acceptable to Him, and the Holy Spirit dwelling within us will render our worship on this Holy Day, most for our good, and greatest for the glory of our Father Which is in heaven.

Moses 3 4VERSE 4. These are the generations of the heaven and of the earth, when they were created. Some Bible commentators on the narrative in Genesis concerning the Creation, contend that the words, "These are the generations of the heaven and of the earth, when they were created," should be placed at the commencement of the story. They argue thusly: That it has probably been transposed from its original place before Genesis 1:1, as in all other cases the phrase stands at the beginning of the section to which it refers. (Compare 5:1; 6:9; 10:1 Book of Genesis. The One Volume Bible Commentary, Edited by the Rev. J. R. Dummelow, M.A., Queen's College, Cambridge.)

Moses 3 4We, however, feel it is not so! because the phrase itself was written by Moses and by him put in its proper place in 3:4, Writings of Moses, Pearl of Great Price. And further, it was so revealed by God to the Prophet Joseph Smith. In our opinion it does not point to the incidents as they are outlined in the 2nd Chapter of Moses' writings and which are also recorded in Genesis, Chapter 1, but to that which follows; it being a more informative statement of the Creation.

Moses 3 4In the day that I, the Lord God, made the heaven and the earth. Here we have a new Name not beforehand mentioned in the story of the Creation, viz., LORD GOD. That is Jehovah Elohim. Indicating that it was Jehovah Who was the Creator under His Father's counsel. All English versions of the Bible to emphasize this fact spell the Name in capital letters, LORD. So when reading the Writings of Moses either in the Pearl of Great Price or the Book of Genesis, you may substitute the Name Jehovah for its English equivalent, LORD. (See The Sacred Name—Jehovah, at end of Chapter 1, this Commentary.)

Moses 3 5VERSE 5. For I, the Lord God, created all things . . . spiritually. . . . Definitely so, this is a firm statement of the pre-existence of all things. Man, beasts, birds, and plants, were created spiritually before they were placed upon the earth by the Lord God.

Moses 3 5This statement of pre-existence is utterly ignored by commentators of the Bible because they do not understand it, and teachers of religion confuse the issue with many words. Besides, parts of Moses' writings containing God's Holy Words which he was commanded to write and in which God Himself explained His works in the life before the earth-life are deleted from Moses' writings as the Creator said many of them would be.

Moses 3 5The Lord God saw that throughout all His earthly works there was not any man upon the earth to "till the ground," and no rain to soften the furrows thereof, and water its ridges (Psalm 65:10). There was not any flesh upon the earth, neither man, fish or fowl. The earth was a barren waste and was unable to produce wherewith life might be sustained. The Creator, therefore, having made the children of men spiritually and had as yet no place for them to go, caused rain to fall upon the earth that the earth might be made ready for plants and trees to spring up out of the ground.

Moses 3 6VERSE 6. I, the Lord God, spake . . . At the Creator's word, a mist arose from the earth and fell as rain. Drops of water refreshed the parched ground; seeds germinated and grew. Where before the earth had been bare of verdure, now it was full of God's glory, in that, like wearing a garment of green in the springtime, the whole earth resounded with songs of joy; in words quite inarticulate, yet ceaseless and heard by all, His holy Name was exalted above all: "Fear God, and give glory to His Name. And worship Him Who made heaven and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters."

Moses 3 7VERSE 7. I, the Lord God, formed man from the dust of the ground. Man, the last of His train of progressive creation, was by the Creator formed out of the "dust of the ground." When man's shape and structure were finished, God "breathed into his nostrils the breath of life," [^5] thus making what was formerly a piece of clay, "a living soul." From that lowly beginning, "the dust of the ground," man rose to a peak of excellence wherein he reaped the rewards of his God-given benediction: "Let them have dominion over the fishes of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth." (2:26.) However, man's sovereignty was in a realm which God gave unto him, but Moses' account of God's Creation shows that more blessings awaited man's integrity to certain restraints and limitations that his Creator would thereafter make known to him.

Moses 3 7Thus, flesh having a human form and attributes had its beginning. God created the first man, but the great lesson revealed here in Moses' writings, nevertheless, is that "All things were before created; but spiritually were they created . . . ." That means just this: That all things, plants, fish, fowl, beasts, and man, were beforetime created spiritually in the heavens and thereafter took upon themselves bodies that they might dwell upon the earth. God through His Word, Who is His Only Begotten Son, countenanced every development of His—that is the Father's Plans.

Moses 3 8VERSE 8. I, the Lord God, planted a garden eastward in Eden . . . God's love for His children is not told in storm and tempest, nor in the discipline of the rod, but in the things which He puts around them to make them pure and happy. For His children's benefit and betterment all things are consecrated.

Moses 3 8To this end He planted a garden eastwardly in Eden [^6] which we know as the Garden of Eden, and into which the Lord put the man whom He had created.

Moses 3 9VERSE 9. And out of the ground made I, the Lord God, to grow every tree, naturally. . . . Eden, the Garden of the Lord, was planted by the Creator to be not only a delight to Adam, [^7] but as we learn in further contemplation, a home where he could prove himself obedient to his Father and commune with his Creator. Life in the Garden was to be a probationary period in Adam's existence.

Moses 3 9Trees of all kinds were planted therein by the Lord God which were "pleasant to the sight of man," and in the shade of which Adam retired to walk "in the cool of the day" (v. 4:14). As the name, Eden, implies, it afforded Adam a pleasant dwelling place and in addition thereto he saw that every plant and every tree which God had created were "for the use of man" and for food.

Moses 3 9This verse further reveals that all things whatsoever that are and were created, even every tree and plant that grows upon the earth, was aforetime brought into being by the Great Creator of heaven and earth. "I, the Lord God, created all things spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth." (v. 5.) Such an understanding of His words, "I, God, created the heaven . . ." influences, and gives shape and form to our approach in studying God's holy mind and will.

Moses 3 9Of the many beautiful trees which were planted in His Garden, the Lord God mentions only two by their names: The Tree of Life, [^8] and the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil. [^9]

SCMoses 3 10Moses 3 11Moses 3 12Moses 3 13Moses 3 14VERSES 10-14. And I, the Lord God, caused a river to go out of Eden to water the Garden. . . . Various explanations of these verses—which are the same as those found in Genesis 2:10-14—have led to much confusion, and many students of sacred literature agree among themselves that the Garden of Eden was somewhere in the western part of the Arabian Peninsula. Others maintain that these words are a more recent addition to those written by Moses, and therefore cannot be his. To these theories we do not agree. They are part of the Revelation given to Joseph, the Prophet; and we know that the revelation of Moses' writings to him is true and exact. They are by God made known.

SCMoses 3 10Moses 3 11Moses 3 12Moses 3 13Moses 3 14"And I, the Lord God, caused a river to go out of Eden," which River was divided into four different streams, each having its own course, in order that Eden should become a Watered garden.

SCMoses 3 10Moses 3 11Moses 3 12Moses 3 13Moses 3 14These streams were named, beginning at the first: Pison, Gihon, Hiddekel, and Euphrates. The River Gihon, the record says, "encompassed the whole Land of Ethiopia (v. 13), also that "the fourth river was the Euphrates." (v. 14.) It must be remembered that these names, or their Hebrew or Assyrian equivalents, are of great antiquity; greater, perhaps, than the story of the dispersion of mankind at the Tower of Babel. Is it not possible that both these names and the others mentioned—Pison and Hiddekel—were handed down by the immediate descendants of Noah who certainly were familiar with the story of the Garden? It is strictly in accord with human customs everywhere to name a new home after the old from which a wanderer may have been forced to flee, or to commemorate an important incident, as in the case at point, that occurred in the Patriarchal Dispensation.

Moses 3 15VERSE 15. And I, the Lord God, took the man, and put him into the Garden of Eden, to dress it, and to keep it. The Lord God, the great Creator, did all things; whether He did them Himself or under His supervision, it matters not; they were done by Him. He put the man into the Garden to keep it and to cultivate it and prepare its fertile soil for further planting.

Moses 3 15In this verse the Lord God teaches the lesson of labor, thus ennobling it. On an occasion when Jesus performed mighty miracles on the Sabbath, thereby working the works of His Father's kingdom, the Jews sought to condemn Him. He answered their hypocritical accusations by saying: "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work." (John 5:17.) He rewards work, not idleness. The Garden of Eden, we are sure, was not a place exempt from labor. Man was not placed upon the earth to eke out his life in a vain and useless existence. Man's form and structure give him something wherewith to work, and it is God's providence that, man having work, is thereby made happy. By the labor of his hands, man too is able to make beautiful the things around him. We may glorify God's Holy Name by us caring for, in the sphere He has given us, His mighty creations. There is no better way to commune with the Maker than by so doing. May we in humility quote in this connection, a prayer offered by the Jews of our day: "God and Father, we have entered Thy sanctuary on this Sabbath Day to hallow Thy Name and to offer Thee prayers of thanksgiving. The week of toil is ended, the day of rest has come. Thou, Creator of all, hast given us the blessing of labor, so that by the work of our hands we too may fashion things of use and beauty. May we so use this gift that day by day we may look back upon our work and declare it good. May the fruit of our labor be a service acceptable unto Thee. May each new Sabbath find us going from strength to strength so that whatever of good we have done we may still do better; and wherever we have failed, we may by Thy grace be helped to worthier work. Make us conscious of our opportunities for service which Thou hast put within our reach. Help us to use our powers for the benefit of our fellow men, so that the hearts of Thy children may be gladdened by the work of our hands." (Jewish Union Prayerbook.)

Moses 3 15Thus was Adam given pleasant employment, and in this probationary period was daily in communion with his Creator, being taught the things of life and happiness.

SCMoses 3 16Moses 3 17VERSES 16-17. The Tree of the Knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it. . . . After that Adam was safely ensconced in the Garden enjoying its beauty and scrutinizing its denizens, he came upon a strange tree, unlike the others, and one he had never seen before. Adam, being close to his Maker, inquired of it and of its fruit. In answer to his query, he was told by the Lord that it was a peculiar tree and was known to Him as "The Tree of the Knowledge of good and evil." Adam was cautioned against eating of its fruit because it possessed qualities that when partaken of would make the partaker morally responsible for his acts. [^10]

SCMoses 3 16Moses 3 17"Nevertheless," said his Creator when He saw that Adam was a bit bewildered, "thou mayest choose for thyself. . ." what thou doest, to eat or not to eat, "for it is given unto thee" to do as thou wilst. "But remember that I forbid it, for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die."

SCMoses 3 16Moses 3 17In His inscrutable wisdom, the Lord God assigned no reason for Him to demand the death penalty that was to ensue Adam's disobedience to His command: "Of the Tree of the Knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it. . . ." We, however, may conclude it was part of the Plan of Life and Salvation.

SCMoses 3 16Moses 3 17To obey the Lord's command or to disobey it, as the case might be, was Adam's freedom of choice. [^11] If he was careless and chose to neglect its compliance; if he rebelled against God's holy law and questioned the Creator's authority and wisdom and partook of the fruit that was forbidden then his life would be forfeit. It was so decreed by the voice of God Almighty. God's word is sure; if death did not come to Adam, His word would be as naught.

SCMoses 3 16Moses 3 17Adam came to this earth innocent and devoid of worldly knowledge. The Garden was prepared for him by his Heavenly Father to be his first home. There under providential care and tuition he became capable of performing his mission upon earth.

SCMoses 3 16Moses 3 17Knowledge of good and evil is the power to distinguish between good and evil. And means that God not only promised Adam death, but to him God also gave reason to discern between right and wrong. Eating of the fruit which was forbidden imbued Adam with freedom to choose good or bad. The faculty of making a choice is a heritage left to all mankind by Adam who was the first to possess it.

SCMoses 3 16Moses 3 17Adam, in choosing, learned by experience to tell the good from the bad. By choosing the right "when the choice was placed before" him Adam grew in grace, "and in the knowledge of the glory of Him who created all things, and in the knowledge of that which is just and true." (King Benjamin, Mosiah 4:12.) We imagine that to acquire the knowledge thus spoken of was a long but pleasant task for Adam. Eating of the fruit which God had forbidden, gave Adam the faculty of discernment or the power of discrimination. It did not give him bare facts but the ability to perceive their truth. He would learn by experience. Self-discipline and education were the means of Adam's progression or advancement. Knowledge is obtained by doing; it is not conferred by an act of disobedience. Adam was blessed not because he ate of the Forbidden Fruit but in spite of him doing so.

SCMoses 3 16Moses 3 17It has been said: "Man's freedom of choice, makes it possible for him to disobey, and to come to the required knowledge by the wrong way; for the knowledge of good and evil is bought dearly by doing ill."

SCMoses 3 16Moses 3 17However, man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge. That was true of Adam, so God permitted him to eat of "the fruit of the Tree."

Moses 3 18VERSE 18. I will make an help meet for him. With a loving Father's tender care, the Lord God watched over Adam every day and every hour. Adam's welfare was the end the Creator had in view. Of all the creatures on the earth, he was the only man and walked alone in the Garden which God had planted. Adam had no one with whom to share God's bounties that were all about him. For him to be alone was not God's will because "it was not good that man should be alone."

Moses 3 18Therefore, in consultation, the Father and His Only Begotten Son, the joint Creators of Adam and all things on the earth, determined to give him a help meet, a companion to be a wife.Being alone and without a helper of any kind, Adam could not fill the measure of his creation.

Moses 3 18God pitied Adam in his solitude; man is by nature a social being, and the Great Creator having made him, knew his needs and wants. Wherefore, the Lord God quickly perceived that it was not good for Adam to be thus alone.

Moses 3 19VERSE 19. Every beast . . . I commanded should come unto Adam to see what he would call them. The beasts of the field, the fowl of the air, which God had formed out of the ground, were nameless, so God commanded that they appear before Adam "to see what he would call them." By their physical traits, and their natural habits, Adam saw in them certain characteristics that distinguished them one from the other; and by these qualities that were peculiar to each, classified them into different species, to which, whether one or more, he gave a name signifying some typical property. And that became the name by which they were afterwards known.

Moses 3 20VERSE 20. Adam gave names to . . . every beast of the field . . but as for Adam, there was not found a help meet for him. The Lord God, having beforehand given to Adam dominion over all the creatures He had made, caused that Adam give to each one a name. A name which was to be suggested by some characteristic seen by Adam in the creature as it passed before him.

Moses 3 20Adam thus gave expression to his God-given right of suzerainty over all the beasts and birds by him giving them names with which they would later become associated, or afterwards would be known.

Moses 3 20Adam, no doubt, was a little perplexed and a bit confused because that among all God's creations, other than him, he saw that each had a mate; but as for him, there was not "among them" a companion, or a "help meet for him."

SCMoses 3 21Moses 3 22VERSES 21-22. And I, the Lord God, caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam. These verses tell of the creation of a help meet for Adam, but in our opinion the words in them are allegorical. We have no doubt that Adam was not conscious of God's doings and that in some way he was the center of the Creator's work. It however adds to our understanding of God's glory to believe that in His wisdom He provided a mate for Adam as He had done for all other living souls.

SCMoses 3 21Moses 3 22We may not fully understand how Adam's help meet was formed, but in all God's dealings with man let us keep in mind that there is a wisdom we cannot fathom; there is an omnipotence we can lean upon but cannot grasp. She was created much to Adam's joy, and we can leave the things we do not understand to that day when what we know not now, we will know hereafter.

SCMoses 3 21Moses 3 22A finished product, God brought her to Adam.

Moses 3 23VERSE 23. Adam said, "She shall be called woman." After seeing the number of God's creations that lived in the field, or winged in the firmament above the earth, Adam found not a suitable companion in them all.

Moses 3 23Adam's joy upon seeing her who would thereafter be his mate, only reflected his recognition that she was his kind. In ecstasy, he exclaimed: "This is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of man." Adam gave unto her a name, as he had all other of God's creations, perceiving that in her were qualities the others did not possess—"She shall be called Woman . . ." "Man," "Woman," is strikingly like the Hebrew, Ish, Ishshah (Wife-man, or she-man), differing from man only in sex, not in nature.

Moses 3 24VERSE 24. Therefore shall a man . . . cleave unto his wife. This verse teaches the sanctity of the marriage relation. It recognizes by the mere mention of it that man shall put aside the ties that bind parents to their children, and in their place substitute the links that join firmly the kinship of husband and wife. United, the husband and wife shall not be separated; what God, has put together, as in this case of Adam and his wife, "let not man put asunder." [^12]

Moses 3 24God does nothing of a temporal nature; that means just this, all His acts are everlasting and shall have no end. Marriage is a sacrament instituted by Him in the beginning. It is as He is, from everlasting to everlasting, not just until death doth part.

Moses 3 24In connection with the foregoing reference, it is well to read further the statement of Jesus found a little farther on; in the 11th verse of the same Chapter: "But He said unto them, All men cannot receive this saying, save they to whom it is given."

Moses 3 24Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, have had the understanding of this saying of the Lord given unto them, and in temples raised up to the Most High God, the marriage covenant is made Eternal by the ordinance known to them as Celestial Marriage.

Moses 3 25VERSE 25. And they were both naked . . . and were not ashamed. Neither Adam, nor his wife, knew any evil. Their bodies came from God pure and clean; nothing defiled the temples in which they dwelt. They were innocent from wrongdoing. There was nothing in them for which to be ashamed.

Footnotes

"At a later period the simple Jewish law of early days was added to by the traditions of the elders, until the Sabbath rules became burdensome, and, in some cases, foolish. It was against this, and not against God's Law of the Sabbath that Jesus set Himself in His teaching and healing.

"The Sabbath, one day out of each week, was kept by the Jews on the day now called Saturday. How early this was taken to be the seventh day is not known. After the Ascension of Jesus, the Disciples met on the first day of each week for prayer and praise. The Jewish Christians for a long time kept both the first and the seventh; but as Gentile Christians never having kept any such day before celebrated only the first day of the week as the Lord's Day. The celebration of the seventh day by the Christians was finally abandoned." (Cruden's Concordance of the Bible.)

"Wherefore, men are free according to the flesh. . . . And they are free to choose liberty and Eternal Life, through the great Mediation of all men, or to choose captivity and death. . . ." (II Nephi 2:27.)

"Therefore, cheer up your hearts, and remember that ye are free to act for yourselves—to choose the way of everlasting death or the way of Eternal Life." (Ibid., 10:23.)

Husbands, love your wives . . . so ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. He that loveth his wife loveth himself. For no man ever yet hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as the Lord the Church. . . . For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be joined unto his wife, and they shall be one flesh. Nevertheless let every one of you in particular so love his wife even as himself; and his wife see that she reverence her husband." (Ephesians 5:22-33.)

---
Notas:
[^1] And I, the Lord God, spake unto Moses, saying: That Satan, whom thou hast commanded in the name of mine Only Begotten, is the same which was from the beginning, and he came before me, saying—Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor. Wherefore, he gave commandments unto men, they having first transgressed the first commandments as to things which were temporal, and becoming as Gods, knowing good from evil, placing themselves in a state to act, or being placed in a state to act according to their wills and pleasures, whether to do evil or to do good. Now, we see that the man had become as God, knowing good and evil; and lest he should put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat and live forever, the Lord God placed cherubim and the flaming sword, that he should not partake of the fruit—. (Alma 12:31; 42:3.)
[^2] But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me—Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever. "Whither shall I go from Thy Spirit? or whither shall I flee from Thy presence?" (Psalm 139.)
[^3] Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down; See Comments v.12.
[^4] And he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice.
[^5] And now the serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field which I, the Lord God, had made.
[^6] And Satan put it into the heart of the serpent, (for he had drawn away many after him,) and he sought also to beguile Eve, for he knew not the mind of God, wherefore he sought to destroy the world.
[^7] And he said unto the woman: Yea, hath God said—Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? (And he spake by the mouth of the serpent.)
[^8] And the woman said unto the serpent: We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden;
[^9] But of the fruit of the tree which thou beholdest in the midst of the garden, God hath said—Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.
[^10] And the serpent said unto the woman: Ye shall not surely die;
[^11] For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.
[^12] And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it became pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make her wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and also gave unto her husband with her, and he did eat.
