Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1965)

CHAPTER 4

THE WRITINGS OF MOSES

As revealed to Joseph Smith the Prophet in December, 1830—Continued

This Chapter tells of the entrance of sin into the world; also how that the flesh became subject to evil, the penalty of which was death. As Paul said: ". . . by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin. . ." (Romans 5:12). Herebefore we have noted that Adam and his help meet came to earth from God, clean and pure. When they transgressed His Holy Law and partook of the Forbidden Fruit, their sin in doing so was influenced by conditions other than their own. They knew no sin. The evil thing they committed did not originate with them. Sinning was suggested by some power from without; there was a change without, therefore there was a change within. They recognized their folly in partaking of the Fruit; where-before they saw no evil, now Adam and his wife, Eve, were ashamed because there was nothing to hide their consciousness of guilt; they blamed others for their plight. God, in His mercy, drove them forth from the Garden which He had prepared as their home that by sorrow and affliction they could keep another of His great commandments: "Multiply and replenish the Earth." (See 5:2.)

SCMoses 4 1Moses 4 2Moses 4 3Moses 4 4VERSES 1-4. Satan . . . is the same which was from the beginning. Moses appears to be somewhat perturbed because of the intrusion of Satan into the solemn surroundings that attended him while in communion with the Great Creator. Moses was perplexed, but nevertheless and notwithstanding his mental disturbance occasioned thereby, God reminded him that Satan had fled, when, in the Name of His Begotten Son, Moses himself had commanded the Man-of-darkness so to do. (See vv. 12-22, Chapter 1.)

SCMoses 4 1Moses 4 2Moses 4 3Moses 4 4The Lord God saw Moses' dismay, and quickly reassured him. He identified the intruder as "that Satan . . . which was from the beginning." His name was Lucifer, which means, Lightbearer, and indicates the once exalted position of him who is so called. (Doctrine and Covenants 76:26.)

SCMoses 4 1Moses 4 2Moses 4 3Moses 4 4We here reprint the words of one of the authors hereof; commenting upon this text, Elder Janne M. Sjodahl, writes: "There was a great Council in Heaven deliberating concerning the Redemption of Man. To its members, God said: 'Whom shall I send?' We may infer from scripture passages that there were many mighty spirits in that assembly. Lucifer was one of them. He was one of the chiefest among them. He arose and spoke: 'Behold, here am I, send me. I will be Thy son, and I will redeem mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me Thine honor.'

SCMoses 4 1Moses 4 2Moses 4 3Moses 4 4"God's Well-beloved Son, the Great Jehovah, was also there; He spoke, and a solemn stillness pervaded the Council. 'Here am I, send Me,' But He added, 'Father, Thy will be done, and the glory be Thine forever.'

SCMoses 4 1Moses 4 2Moses 4 3Moses 4 4"Lucifer proposed to destroy the free agency of man and save every soul by compulsion. Jehovah proposed Salvation by free choice on the part of man.

"Jehovah's proposition was accepted; wherefore Lucifer decided to carry out his plan without the consent of the heavenly Council, and to subject the human race to his will. He began his agitation for followers among the spirits, and such was his eloquence and influence that he turned away one-third part of the hosts of heaven from Jehovah, the Son of God. (Doctrine and Covenants 29:26-37.) He and his followers were cast out, but they never have ceased to oppose Jehovah and His cause. They never have ceased to endeavor to establish their kingdom among the children of men, and their efforts are visible in false doctrines, corrupt morals, strife and contention, persecution, and abortive efforts to combat sin by legislation instead of by the influence of the Gospel of CHRIST. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 450.)

SCMoses 4 1Moses 4 2Moses 4 3Moses 4 4But, after all exegetical comments have been made; after a critical explanation of this portion of scripture, we are forced to say: "It does not matter to Satan, who is the devil, what we believe or what we do not, as long as we do not believe in Jesus Christ, Whose adversary the devil was from the beginning."

SCMoses 4 1Moses 4 2Moses 4 3Moses 4 4Ever since he rebelled against divine authority and therefore was cast out of heaven, Satan has carried on a ruthless, yet abortive attempt to thwart the purposes of the Lord God. However, in spite of Satan and his many wicked ways, all Creation shouted praises, glory and honor, to God's great Name, and unitedly augured a grand and glorious future. Notwithstanding how manifold were Satan's insidious plots; no matter how deeply laid were his plans to ensnare mankind, and by them destroy what God had created; no matter that his aim was to make the human race, of which Adam and Eve were its progenitors, slaves to his will, and bring to naught the authority of the Council in Heaven, the Lord God's Plans to exalt mankind were laid even deeper. Of God's ways, Satan knew nothing. These Plans were divinely conceived, and it so happened that as they developed according to heaven's gracious command, the Creator of both heaven and earth brought forth in spite of Satan's evil designs that which was best for man and greatest for the Glory of our Father in heaven.

SCMoses 4 1Moses 4 2Moses 4 3Moses 4 4The story of the Fall of Adam has been told a thousand different times by a thousand different people. But one of the fundamental principles of pedagogy is repetition. It is by repetition we teach and by repetition we learn. The righteous do not tire of repetition. Therefore, we repeat an oft told story, hoping that it will impress the reader with an appreciation of God's wisdom, and His eternal mind and will.

SCMoses 4 5Moses 4 6VERSES 5-6. And Satan put it into the heart of the serpent. No beast of the field which God had created was as cunning and as crafty as was the serpent. In the writings of Moses the word, subtle, is used to describe it. Subtle, in this sense means, wily or sly. Satan recognized that in the serpent there was a tool wherewith to work. He was forced to use a beast in his conspiracy to tempt Eve, because of man or woman, there only existed Adam and his wife, Eve. The instigator of the scheme to seduce them was the devil who as Lucifer in the Heavenly Council sought to destroy what the Lord God had made, and to make nothing of God's holy will towards mankind. The woman, we may surmise, because of her trusting nature and her frailty, was the object Satan sought first to beguile. (Beguile, is to delude by false promises or by craft; to deprive of proper reason by deceit; to cheat.)

SCMoses 4 5Moses 4 6Satan, too, was crafty and deceitful; so a creature having like propensities was a subject suitable with which to conspire. The devil and the serpent formed a conspiracy. We call it conspiracy because unity in evil is conspiracy, while unity that is not lasting and real is merely coalition. Together they sought to abridge man's freedom to choose between good and evil, a condition the devil had hoped for from the very foundation of the earth. By eloquence in speaking, of which he was a master, Lucifer had drawn one-third of the heavenly hosts after him in the intrigue to save all men by force, giving them no choice whatsoever in the things they did or did not do.

SCMoses 4 7Moses 4 8Moses 4 9Moses 4 10Moses 4 11VERSES 7-11. Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it. These verses record a conversation which was had between the woman and the traducer (one who leads along; to expose to shame by slander; one who slanders; culminate; vilify; defame), who spoke by the mouth of a serpent. We may infer that when the text says, serpent, it means just that. There is no question that Moses in writing the account of his vision meant that the serpent in question was a real beast.

SCMoses 4 7Moses 4 8Moses 4 9Moses 4 10Moses 4 11Satan put words in the serpent's mouth in the attempt he made to defame God Almighty's Name in the mind of Eve. He, in his nefarious plot to deceive her, attributed to the Creator what we may call, double-talk; that is, talk that to all appearances was sincere and full of meaning, but actually was, as Satan wished it to appear, not worthy of belief on her part. Satan strove to build Eve up in her own estimation to the mighty heights of self-determination (determination of one's acts by oneself without external compulsion). In this way he gained her confidence. Perhaps she thought the serpent was a heavenly messenger.

SCMoses 4 7Moses 4 8Moses 4 9Moses 4 10Moses 4 11Satan, in his vile effort to seduce Eve, first asked her a simple question: "Yea, hath God said—Ye shall not eat of every tree of the Garden?"

SCMoses 4 7Moses 4 8Moses 4 9Moses 4 10Moses 4 11The woman answered his question thusly: "We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the Garden; but of the fruit of the tree which thou beholdest in the midst of the Garden, God hath said—Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die." The Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil is the Tree of Death. It is opposed to the Tree of Life (II Nephi 2:15). Death came into the world through eating the fruit thereof. The prohibition not to eat of its fruit had another implication: "Neither shall ye touch it." Its fruit is evil, or unclean, as is all evil. These words remind us of the words of Isaiah, which were quoted by our Lord to the Nephites: "Touch no unclean thing." (Isaiah 52:11.) "Touch not that which is unclean." (III Nephi 20:41.) "The wages of sin is death." (Romans 6:23.)

SCMoses 4 7Moses 4 8Moses 4 9Moses 4 10Moses 4 11"Neither shall ye touch it," simply means keep sin at arm's length; don't allow it to tempt, even to test your strength at resistance to the vain things of the world.

SCMoses 4 7Moses 4 8Moses 4 9Moses 4 10Moses 4 11When Satan saw that the woman was willing to discuss the matter he had introduced, he grew bolder in the plot to bring about his desired result. He denied the truth of what God had said, and firmly volunteered: "Ye shall not surely die. For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good from evil." [^1] Satan sought to plant discord between man and his Creator by misrepresenting God's command.

SCMoses 4 7Moses 4 8Moses 4 9Moses 4 10Moses 4 11There is a lesson here that all may learn. It is this: Sin has its beginning in ignoring authority. Whether it is in open rebellion against God's holy laws, or in a refusal to notice them, its end is the same. To disregard His Word means disaster. Satan knew this from experience, and therefore "he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself." (II Nephi 2:27.)

Moses 4 12VERSE 12. She took of the fruit thereof, and did eat. Eve succumbed to Satan's beguiling stratagem when she saw that the fruit of the tree was good for food. She saw no difference in it than in any other tree in the Garden of which they could freely eat. To eat thereof, looked inviting, but partaking of it was prohibited. The nature of man is to want something he cannot have. Therefore, perhaps Eve desired what was forbidden. She hungered for wisdom, and to gain it was what the serpent claimed would be her lot; Eve's eyes would be opened. Here we can see the truth of there being an opposition to all things as spoken of by the Prophet Lehi when blessing his son, Joseph. (II Nephi 2:11-25.)

Moses 4 12Eve further saw not only that the fruit was good for food, but, as we have pointed out, that it was inviting to look at—pleasant to the eyes. That probably means or refers to the vain things of the world. "We are often betrayed into snares by an inordinate desire to have our senses gratified." This may have been an inducement for the woman to transgress.

Moses 4 12To escape vanity, and not enter into temptation, was Eve's freedom of choice, but she looked with pleasure upon the Forbidden Fruit. She took thereof, and did eat. It was not forced upon her, but she ate of her own free will. The devil may tempt, however, he cannot compel. Eve, having eaten, gave to Adam and bade him eat as she had, using we suppose the same arguments that the serpent had used with her. Not with any thought of ill will towards him, but with a sincere desire for his welfare she overcame all Adam's objections, and "He did eat."

SCMoses 4 13Moses 4 14Moses 4 15Moses 4 16VERSES 13-16. The eyes of them both were opened. Satan's declaration spoken from out of the mouth of the serpent that if Adam and his wife, Eve, would eat of the fruit that was forbidden, their eyes would be opened, was quickly realized by them. But not as they expected. Their physical vision was unimpaired, it having been created perfect by God. However their ability to discern things whether they were right or wrong was a mental one. Their power of perception was psychological. Through it they became aware of their nakedness. To hide their shame they took large leaves of the fig tree and fastened them together to fashion themselves aprons. A recurring sense of guilt haunted their consciences; that court of righteous and holy decisions which was folded up in their bosoms. Disobedience to God's laws is the act wherein the conscience is first awakened, and of it, both Adam and Eve were guilty.

SCMoses 4 13Moses 4 14Moses 4 15Moses 4 16On a certain occasion as Adam and Eve in the cool of the eventide walked in the Garden wondering at its beauty, and partaking of its bounties which the Lord god had provided with a lavish hand, they heard His voice. It was a pleasant voice, and mild; as a loving Father speaking to His children.

SCMoses 4 13Moses 4 14Moses 4 15Moses 4 16They attempted to flee the Lord God's presence [^2] when He called to them. They were so utterly dismayed by their error in refusing His guidance that they lacked the courage to face Him as beforehand they were wont. A sudden incitement to avoid Him seized their overpowering fright, and they made an unsuccessful effort to hide themselves among the trees God had planted.

SCMoses 4 13Moses 4 14Moses 4 15Moses 4 16We can imagine their hurried flight to escape God's expected reprimand. They cowered behind the knowledge they had received by eating of the Forbidden Fruit.

SCMoses 4 13Moses 4 14Moses 4 15Moses 4 16The Lord God seeing their sudden scamper to supposed shelter, called to Adam, "Where goest thou?" A very familiar salutation as one man to another.

SCMoses 4 13Moses 4 14Moses 4 15Moses 4 16I was afraid. Where before, Adam and his wife, knowing no evil, had awaited God's call with great simplicity and with even greater expectancy. They yearned for His presence. Now, in remorse, they sought to hide where He would not likely find them. As yet they had not learned that God knows all. Adam gave his excuse for hiding, although it was vain, that he was naked and afraid.

SCMoses 4 17Moses 4 18Moses 4 19VERSES 17-19. Who told thee thou wast naked? Now follows a conversation between the Lord God and Adam and his wife, Eve. "Who told thee thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldst not eat. . .?" God already knew the answers to the questions He would ask of the man and woman. However a confession of guilt was desired of them to shore up any resistance to evil on their part that may confront them at some future time. It was an acknowledgment of weakness, and of disobedience to God, when in fact they should have relied upon His strength.

SCMoses 4 17Moses 4 18Moses 4 19The Lord's delving questions compelled Adam to freely and openly confess what he did. But in confessing his part in the drama then going on, Adam blamed his wife for his mistrust, and even went so far as to imply that God Himself was somewhat to blame; Adam said: "The woman Thou gavest me, and commandest that she should remain with me, she gave me of the fruit, and I did eat."

SCMoses 4 17Moses 4 18Moses 4 19There is a similarity between human nature now and then. It never changes. Man is prone to blame some external force for his mistakes; seldom does he look for an inward inclination. Adam blamed Eve, and we will see where Eve blamed the serpent; neither husband or wife accepted the culpability, or the blame-worthiness for their acts.

SCMoses 4 17Moses 4 18Moses 4 19The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. "What is this thing thou hast done?" said the Lord God, following up the line of His questioning, imputing that Eve was the one on whom to fix responsibility. Eve blamed the serpent for deceiving her with its monstrous lies.

Moses 4 20Moses 4 21SCVERSES 20-21. Because thou hast done this thou shalt be cursed above all cattle. . . . God, Almighty, the Judge and Creator of all things, that a righteous and wise judgment be had, called before Him those who for one reason or another, rejected His cause, and refused to abide His command, that they were not to eat of the Forbidden Fruit. He thereupon passed a just sentence where and upon whom it was done. The serpent was the first to taste of His wrath. It was with the serpent that Satan conspired, and therein made the bold plan to thwart the purposes of God by inducing the man and woman to disobey his holy order. Satan was the prime instigator of the plot to destroy mankind, and he it was who urged the serpent to incite the woman to ignore or refuse to obey God's command. But the instrument used by the devil to deceive Eve was an enormously treacherous one. The serpent was that one. In Satan's hands it was a servant of evil. As an instrument or tool wherewith Satan accomplished his inglorious end, the serpent was equally culpable with Satan, and deserving with him of any punishment whatsoever.

SCMoses 4 20Moses 4 21The Sentence. "Because thou hast done this thou shalt be cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life." Moses, the original writer of this account, no doubt conceived the serpent as a beast which walked upon two or more feet. The Lord classified it as being one of the species of cattle, or a beast of the field. However, it is not important what kind of animal the creature was when we consider its debasement brought about by God's righteous sentence. We may presume that it is not now what it was before the curse was placed upon it.

SCMoses 4 20Moses 4 21In further punishment of the part the serpent played in the downfall of Adam and his wife, the Lord God decreed that: "I will put enmity between thee and the woman, between thy seed and her seed; and He shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise His heel." (v. 21.)

SCMoses 4 20Moses 4 21This is a prophetic allusion to our Lord and Savior. The serpent's head, its vital spot, is the devil, and Jesus Christ—He, not it, as in Genesis 3:15—shall trod upon and crush Satan together with his wicked ways. Thus He will bruise the serpent's head. Satan will cause the Lord sorrow and suffering, but the final victory, or the triumph over all evil, will be in Jesus Christ, the seed of the woman.

SCMoses 4 20Moses 4 21To bruise His (Christ's) heel, Satan tempted Him in the wilderness. It was the "devil who put it into the heart of Judas to betray Christ, of Peter to deny Him, of the Chief Priests to persecute Him, of the false witnesses to accuse Him, and of Pilate to condemn Him." In many ways Satan bruised the Great Redeemer's heel by causing Him pain and misery, and afflicting Him with our afflictions.

Moses 4 22VERSE 22. Unto the woman, I, the Lord God, said . . . The woman was next to hear her doom or the sentence for the sin she had committed. The Lord God was merciful and the judgment He pronounced was in conformity with her offense. She had brought sin and therefore sorrow into the world by partaking of the Forbidden Fruit and from this time forward sorrow would be her lot. "In sorrow shalt thou bring forth children, and . . . he [thy husband] shall rule over thee." It has been said that "Her sentence was not a curse to bring her to ruin, but a chastisement to bring her to repentance."

Moses 4 22The pain and suffering of childbirth is of fleshy origin, and it may be assumed that the sins and foolishness of mankind have contributed in an ever increasing measure to its dangers. There is evidence in the experiences of us all that there is a close relationship between sin and sorrow. God in passing His judgment upon the woman merely confirmed that fact.

Moses 4 22Henceforth, instead of the woman being the same as the man in standing before the Lord God—they having been created equal, but she having taken the lead over the man in eating of the Forbidden Fruit—the woman, because of her doing so without consultation with him, would thereafter be subject to her husband and dependent upon him.

SCMoses 4 23Moses 4 24Moses 4 25VERSES 23-25. Cursed be the ground for thy sake. . . . The blessing of work had already been given man wherein he was called to dress the Garden of Eden and keep it (v. 3:15.) To the man, however, it was not a laborious task. He delighted in his God-given privilege of supervision, and took great pleasure in dressing and keeping the plot of ground which God had planted. But suddenly all was changed. He had broken the Maker's holy law, and under God's inexorable edict, the man was no longer to be the keeper of the Garden's denizens, nor the caretaker of its wonderful acres; the man feeding the while on the many bounties God had provided therein.

SCMoses 4 23Moses 4 24Moses 4 25Also by that decree, under adverse conditions man in future times would draw from the earth those things which in his fallen state had become so necessary. Thorns and thistles would grow in the ground he would thereafter prepare for ripening crops; and only by constant labor on man's part would the earth's productiveness be assured. That meant work, and work in the heat of the day, meant sweat. Diligent effort, never-ending vigilance, sweat and sorrow, was the price God demanded of the man for his disobedience.

SCMoses 4 23Moses 4 24Moses 4 25In punishment for breaking God's holy law, Adam, for that was the name the man would thereafter be called, by command of his Creator, would be forced to endure throughout all the days of his mortal career the curse imposed by the Lord God upon the ground: "In sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life . . . By the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread."

SCMoses 4 23Moses 4 24Moses 4 25Out of the dust of the earth, Adam's mortal body was made, and until such a time as that same body returns to the ground whence it sprung, he will be compelled to subsist or abide his existence by every effort his resourcefulness may devise and human ingenuity suggest. From that time forward the trials and disappointments of life would assail him and his every effort. Again, we see that an opposition [^3] to all things is an obstacle confronting man; by it Adam would learn the delights of Eden as opposed to the toil and sorrow of the life into which he was driven.

SCMoses 4 26Moses 4 27VERSES 26-27. Adam called his wife's name, Eve. Hebrew, Havvah, which means, life. Adam called his wife's name, Eve, because she was to be the mother—the source of life—of all the inhabitants of the earth. Thus he showed faith in keeping another of God's commandments: Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth." (2:28.) Also, Adam, as if in vision, saw that in her seed the great propitiation that was to be made for their sin in eating of the Fruit that was forbidden, would be among them, and through Him a reconciliation made between God and himself, and hence his progeny.

SCMoses 4 26Moses 4 27The Lord God called Eve, the mother of all living, because she was the first of all women of whom there would be many, and because she was the first woman of the human race.

SCMoses 4 26Moses 4 27God, the Father of all men, clothed as He does now the naked and therein shows His watchful care over His children. The real reason for Him sewing such garments as spoken of in verse 27 is not generally understood, and we will not attempt to discuss it here, but the temple service shows it to be an honor to wear a replica of them, and an evidence that the wearer thereof holds the Holy Priesthood of God.

SCMoses 4 28Moses 4 29Moses 4 30VERSES 28-30. Behold, the man is become one of Us . . . . In these verses we find another instance where many of the original words written by Moses have been displaced or taken away from his writings (See 1:41) by unauthorized editors and copyists who lived anciently, and into whose hands they had fallen.

SCMoses 4 28Moses 4 29Moses 4 30At no place in Moses' account of the Creation and God's dealings with Adam and Eve as it is given in the Book of Genesis does it state that God counseled with His Only Begotten on things concerning their every act as it does in the Pearl of Great Price. Words to the effect that He did have been deleted from the Biblical account. It is important to realize this because without these words the story is incomplete, and has resulted in much confusion in the minds of Christians as to Who the Creator actually was, whether the Father or the Son.

SCMoses 4 28Moses 4 29Moses 4 30The Only Begotten of God is the Creator who under His Father's guidance made the heaven and the earth, and Whose counsel and advice the Son had on all things. Jesus Christ is the Only Begotten, the Creator, just as the builder is of a house. It is of solemn and impressive consequence to view the whole series of actions in the earth's creation and God's subsequent dealings with Adam and Eve as a joint undertaking of Father and Son in which it is not improbable that we also helped.

SCMoses 4 28Moses 4 29Moses 4 30To discern between good and evil is a godly quality, and to choose right over wrong is a freedom of choice which God has vouchsafed to every man. It establishes him among the upright, creates in him a clean heart, and makes him as one amid the Gods. This is a picture only partly fulfilled by Adam and Eve; they having eaten of the Forbidden Fruit knew good from evil. However, it was now their lot to go forth into the world and make a choice.

SCMoses 4 28Moses 4 29Moses 4 30It was now that the execution of their sentence was to begin. The Lord God had decreed that they be sent forth from the Garden of Eden; so it must be. God's word is sure! His words cannot return to His mouth unfulfilled, or void.

SCMoses 4 28Moses 4 29Moses 4 30Adam, who broke God's law was now to be punished for his sin. God drove him out of the Garden to "till the ground from whence he was taken."

SCMoses 4 28Moses 4 29Moses 4 30In a word, Adam was not only cast out of the Garden of the Lord, but he was cut off from God's presence which was "the bliss and glory of Paradise." The communion he had there with his Maker was justly ended; he no longer walked and talked with Him. But we must remember that God's watchful care was still over Adam, "The man was only sent to till the ground out of which he was taken. He was sent to a place of toil, not of torment. He was sent to the ground, not to the grave—to the workshop, not to the dungeon, nor to the prisonhouse—to hold the plow, not to drag the chain. His tilling the ground would be recompensed by his eating its fruits. . .Our first parents. . . were not abandoned to despair; God's thoughts of love designing them for a second state of probation upon new terms." (Matthew Henry, paraphrased by the Editor.)

SCMoses 4 28Moses 4 29Moses 4 30When Adam and Eve began their careers outside the Garden of Eden, it was with a high degree of culture. Adam knew how to take care of trees and cultivate the soil. He knew the different animals, for he had named them according to their characteristics. He could observe some of the heavenly constellations which like a celestial timepiece indicated not only day and night, but also seasons, particular days and years, and we might add, cycles. (See Doctrine and Covenants 88:42-45.)

SCMoses 4 28Moses 4 29Moses 4 30For a good understanding of the text which is herein spoken, we refer the reader to a conversation had between Alma, the Younger, and his son, Corianton, which is recorded in Chapter 42, Book of Alma, in the Book of Mormon.

Moses 4 31VERSE 31. I placed at the East End of the Garden of Eden cherubim and a flaming sword. . .After that God had driven Adam out of the Garden of Eden, He placed cherubim and a flaming sword to guard the way to the Tree of Life which He had planted therein. In the event that Adam and his wife, Eve, should attempt to re-enter the Garden and once more partake of its bounties, God placed a barrier against the approach thereto—a flaming sword whose flashing blade turned every way and dashed streaks of light in all directions, which appeared as if it were lightning. Such a display of God's displeasure, and also His determination that the man and woman should not eat of the Tree of Life and live forever in their fallen condition, was a command not given in words but in preventive action.

Moses 4 31Cherubim, plural of cherub; in the Authorized Version, cherubims. There has been much speculation concerning the meaning of this name. Some students of sacred literature suggest that cherubim denotes angels, while others just don't know. The word, however, is used throughout the Old Testament to denote an object or a power having a divinely appointed duty to perform, but it fails to signify by definition its meaning. We, nevertheless, are inclined to believe that it means something that represents God, or anything—angels or whatnot—that, as a servant serves His purposes. Moreover, at times it may be said to be a creature of the mind, signifying to the user of the phrase something not easily defined.

Moses 4 31To illustrate the many uses of the name and the different meanings thereof, we suggest the following Biblical passages where the name is embodied: In Psalm 18:10, David says that Jehovah "rode upon a cherub, and did fly: yea, He did fly upon the wings of the wind." The Psalmist, to our understanding, is describing a thunderstorm wherein the swift wind is a servant of God. David continues his description of the stormclouds by speaking of "the brightness that was before Him. . . ." May we not see a connection between the flaming sword of this text (4:31) and a flash of lightning. Also, in the 1st and 10th Chapters of Ezekiel, the cherubim are represented to be attendants of God; although much mystery surrounds their duties, we believe it is to the glory of God that they serve.

Moses 4 31Again, in Exodus 25, is an account where God instructs Moses concerning the building of the Ark of the Covenant. He tells Moses of its dimensions and the trimmings thereof. The cherubim that were included in that skillful work of art are therein described; their size, their relative positions, their composition and their makeup. Between them (the cherubim) said the Lord, "I will commune with thee. . . ." (Exodus 25:22.) Thus, we see in this that the cherubim here mentioned are inanimate objects, however, they had that providentially prescribed duty of representing God in the minds of the sometimes disobedient Children of Israel.

Moses 4 32VERSE 32. These are the words which I spake unto My servant Moses. (See Comments, verse 42, Chapter 1.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And it came to pass that after I, the Lord God, had driven them out, that Adam began to till the earth, and to have dominion over all the beasts of the field, and to eat his bread by the sweat of his brow, as I the Lord had commanded him. And Eve, also, his wife, did labor with him. But behold, it was appointed unto man to die—therefore, as they were cut off from the tree of life they should be cut off from the face of the earth—and man became lost forever, yea, they became fallen man. And now, ye see by this that our first parents were cut off both temporally and spiritually from the presence of the Lord; and thus we see they became subjects to follow after their own will. (Alma 42:6-7.)
[^2] And Adam knew his wife, and she bare unto him sons and daughters, and See Statement on Sacrifice at beginning of Chapter 5.
[^3] And from that time forth, the sons and daughters of Adam began to divide two and two in the land, and to till the land, and to tend flocks, and they also begat sons and daughters. Redeem, by sin came death. Sin, the violation of Divine Law, purchased it. God's Plan of Salvation provided that the price which was paid for it, be given back. What was that price? When it was paid, demand would be made by the One Who paid the price for death to deliver up all who were in its bondage, or were held in its relentless grasp. The ransom was high. Only God, Himself, could pay it. He, alone could meet the prescribed terms! The Redeemer's Plan of Salvation provided beforehand that He would pay the price, even with His own life to loose the bands of death. That price was paid, the Ransom met! He died, the Great Redeemer died.
