Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1965)

CHAPTER 5

THE WRITINGS OF MOSES

As revealed to Joseph Smith the Prophet in December, 1830—Continued

In this Chapter (5, corresponding to Genesis 4 of the Hebrew Scriptures) we see where the words of the Lord God which He spoke to Moses (1:41) are duly fulfilled wherein He warned Moses that the day was coming in which "men shall esteem My words as naught and take many of them away from the Book which thou shalt write." As God predicted, a goodly number of them have been erased or deleted by men who had no equitable or rightful power authorizing them to devise or edit the original manuscript as written by Moses.

In ancient times copyists who labored long and arduously to reproduce sacred records, sometimes omitted words and phrases not greatly understood by them. This was especially true when the subject at hand was beyond their conception as we imagine were the great spiritual truths herein enunciated. But whatever may have been the reason therefore, and there may be many, the Lord God in apprising Moses of that future time, was quick to assure him: "I will raise up another like unto thee; and they shall be had again among the children of men—among as many as shall believe." (Moses 1:41.)

We also will learn as the narrative unfolds between its 1st and 59th verses how sin once indulged, captures man's nature and makes him a slave of passion, a victim of corruption. It will show us how that jealousy leads to hatred and sometimes to murder. How it may destroy brotherly affections, and rip apart the ties that bind humanity. It makes liars of all sinners whose disregard for truth outrages the Lord's commandment: "Thou shalt not bear false witness. . . ." However, through these verses we gain the knowledge of what to do, not alone of what not to do.

We learn that labor is a blessing that comes from God, and by Him is consecrated to man's good. Again it is given man to do all things in the Name of the Only Begotten of the Father; to repent and call upon God forevermore in the Son's Name. Thus, we learn that the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the Only Begotten, was preached to Adam and Eve by an angel, and by them obeyed.

The Doctrine of Sacrifice is herein made known, but it is not even mentioned in the Book of Genesis until Cain and Abel brought offerings unto the Lord. The Doctrine is made plain when the angel of whom we have spoken explained to Adam and his wife its similitude "of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth."

Because no mention of Sacrifice is made in Genesis prior to the above reference of it in connection with Cain and Abel, some learned students of the Hebrew Scriptures offer various opinions seeking to solve the differences therein presented. They suggest that the story of Cain and Abel is misplaced; that it should occupy a later position in the narrative as it now appears. But we find differently! It is in the Pearl of Great Price where it is best understood, and Adam rejoiced upon hearing the voice of the Lord, for it assured him that although he was fallen, he mayest be redeemed, "and all mankind, even as many as will."

Moses 5 1VERSE 1. Adam began to till the earth. As the Lord God had commanded, Adam, as soon as he was driven out of the Garden of Eden began to prepare the ground for planting the seed he, no doubt, had learned to gather and store while in the Garden of the Lord. Almost at once he found that only by the sweat of his face and incessant labor the earth could be made to bring forth its fruits, which beforetime had been provided by the Lord so abundantly. Adam also saw that among the beasts of the field there were some whose characteristics he knew because he had named them according to their special traits, which were useful in his efforts to subdue the earth, and which he therefore used, and brought them into subjugation as also the Lord God had commanded.

Moses 5 1In all these things, Adam's wife, Eve, helped him in the daily chore; lightening his burdens and rendering comfort as a God-given companion should.

Moses 5 2VERSE 2. Adam knew his wife, and she bare unto him sons and daughters. The first commandment was given to Adam and Eve, husband and wife: "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth. . ." commenced its fulfillment shortly after they were driven out of the Garden to labor hard against adversity, and thus become stronger in overcoming all difficulties.

Moses 5 2Sons and daughters were born to the pair, and the great purpose of the Lord God in the earth's creation was begun in that Adam and Eve became the first parents of a great multitude of men and women who inhabited it from their time until the present. All the human race are descendants, and we mean literally, of the one pair, Adam and Eve.

Moses 5 3VERSE 3. The sons and daughters of Adam began to divide two and two in the land. . . To accomplish His purposes in the creation of the earth, the Lord God moved upon the children of Adam, both male and female, to select mates such as Eve was to Adam, who as a comrade proved herself not only a companion but a help meet in time of trial and urgent need. As Eve before them had helped Adam, so together they tilled the ground and watched over their flocks and herds; "they also begat sons and daughters." Thus an ever increasing posterity greeted Adam and Eve, and it was not long—measured by Adam's life span—until the whole face of the land was peopled with their descendants.

Moses 5 4VERSE 4. Adam and Eve, his wife, called upon the Name of the Lord. In prayer, simple and beautiful, Adam and Eve continuously invoked God's holy Name. On an occasion as they walked toward their old home, the Garden of Eden, their hearts overflowing with gratitude for their many blessings, they heard the voice of the Lord coming in answer to their cry. They could not see Him, for because of their transgression "they were shut out from His presence." [^1]

Moses 5 4Adam and Eve had sinned by breaking God's holy law. In doing so they introduced evil into the world. All sin is of evil. No evil or unclean thing can endure God's presence. They had cut themselves off from any personal communion with Him and for that reason, Moses says, "they saw Him not," although they heard the voice of the Lord.

Moses 5 5VERSE 5. And He gave unto them commandments. . . . Although Adam and Eve could not see the Lord they heard His voice. It was a pleasant voice, as if it were a whisper and of perfect mildness (Helaman 5:30; 46), saying unto them by way of commandment that "They should worship the Lord their God, and should offer the firstlings of their flocks, for an offering unto the Lord." [^2]

Moses 5 5Adam did as he was commanded although the reason for sacrifice was to him unknown.

Moses 5 6VERSE 6. Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? Adam, obedient to God's command that he offer sacrifice, made it a duty so to do. Then, after many days had passed since that requirement was instituted and he was appointed it to fulfill, a messenger from the Courts of Glory came to him with a divine commission. It was evidently at a time when Adam was engaged in conducting this form of worship, for the angel asked him: "Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord?" Adam appears to be a bit confused. This may have been the only time he wondered about the purpose of sacrifice. His response to the angel's query discloses Adam's innocence and guilelessness, for he answered: "I know not, save the Lord commanded me." He did it though he knew not why.

Moses 5 6There is a lesson here we all may learn. Adam learned it by his experience in the Garden of Eden. That lesson is: Do not doubt or disobey any of God's commands, whether it is spoken by God Himself or by His servants here below. The Lord said to the unenlightened Lamanites who had gathered within the prison walls to destroy Nephi and Lehi, the sons of Helaman: "Seek no more to destroy My servants whom I have sent unto you to declare good tidings." (Helaman 5:29.) We imagine reading other words of the Lord which are not given in the account of this wonderful incident: Their words are My words. For later on He said to Moroni: "I am He Who speaketh." (Ether 4:8.) We can no more effectively destroy His servants than by disobeying God's holy word of which they were the Lord's mouthpieces.

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8VERSES 7-8. This thing is a similitude of the Sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father. Adam's heavenly visitor now delivered the message he bore, saying that the sacrifice he, that is Adam, offered is a similitude or a foreshadowing "of the Sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, Which is full of grace and truth."

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8In offering his sacrifice unto the Lord as he was commanded, Adam was admonished by the angel to look forward to that great and last Sacrifice which the Son of God would willingly make as a propitiation for the sins of the world, none of them did He commit. Through His self-sacrifice and death, the Only Begotten would appease divine justice, and by that Sacrifice effect a reconciliation between God and man who had become estranged through Adam's transgression.

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8Full of grace and truth, means that the Only Begotten was imbued to overflowing with a love for God's children; insomuch that He left His home On High to suffer, bleed, and die, among men that they might be redeemed from the effects of Adam's Fall. [^3] Doing something for men that they could not do for themselves is the meaning of the phrase, God's grace. He died a Sacrifice for sin that man might live; they themselves could not overcome death.

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8The Only Begotten is in truth the Lord God. He is the God of truth. He abounds in grace and truth.

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8Thou shalt do all that thou doest in the Name of the Son. The angel now instructed Adam to do all things whatsoever he did in the Name of the Son; also to repent, and call upon God in the Name of the Son forevermore.

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8Humbly, we will let the comments of Jacob, the son of the ancient Hebrew Prophet, Lehi; also Nephi, the son of Helaman, and other Nephite worthies, be sufficient to enlarge upon this particular sentence. We hereby append a complete concordance to the phrase "'In the Name of Jesus Christ."

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8In the Name of Jesus—

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8Jacob 4:6 We truly can command in the N. of Jesus

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8III Nephi 7:19 In the N. of Jesus did he cast out devils

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8 20 In the sight of the people, in the N. of Jesus

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8 8:1 Did many miracles in the N. of Jesus

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8 1 Do a miracle in the N. of Jesus

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8 10:6 Pray unto the Father, also, in the N. of Jesus

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8 7 Pray unto the Father, also, in the N. of Jesus

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8 8 And prayed unto the Father in the N. of Jesus

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8 26:17 Were baptized in the N. of Jesus

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8 21 Were baptized in the N. of Jesus

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8 27:1 Were baptizing in the N. of Jesus

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8 28:30 Shall pray unto the Father in the N. of Jesus

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8IV Nephi 1:1 Were baptized in the N. of Jesus

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8 5 Work miracles save it were in the N. of Jesus

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8 27 Ask the Father in the N. of Jesus

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8Mormon 7:8 Be baptized in the N. of Jesus

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8 9:6 Cry mightily unto the Father in the N. of Jesus

SCMoses 5 7Moses 5 8Ether 5:5 Come unto the Father in the N. of Jesus

Moses 5 9SCVERSE 9. The Holy Ghost fell upon Adam. Adam, after he was expelled from the Garden of Eden gladly kept God's commandments, and thus was worthy of His divine blessings.

Moses 5 9However, Adam had ruefully learned a sorrowful lesson. Unaccustomed as he was to the uncertainties and vicissitudes of earth-life as compared to the time when with a lavish hand God had provided for all his wants and desires in Eden; where in that plentiful home no cares or worries repressed his innocent delights. Now he continually contrasted his fallen plight with life in the Garden of the Lord before his self-determined act of disobedience caused him to be dispossessed. He wondered whether or not all was lost, and if a relentless punishment would claim him forevermore?

Moses 5 9One day while thus musing he was suddenly imbued with a comforting and soul-satisfying influence. He was again at peace with himself and God. That influence was the Holy Ghost. It came upon Adam in a moment of deep despair. Where before he had been hopeless and the future seemed dark, now all was changed. He no longer felt abandoned to a mournful lot, and to an unending punishment wherein a constant fight with self-imposed cumbrances offered no surcease to temper oncoming woe. Instead he looked toward the future with pleasure. Even through dismay and daunt he could see God's providential care, and through the darkness caused by his sin, he saw a great light. That light was the assurance that again life would be as it was before his transgression; that communion between him and his Maker would again be established.

Moses 5 9The joy that came to Adam was occasioned by a voice which he heard above his mental deliberations. That voice was the Voice of Jesus; it was magnified and exalted in Adam's very being by the influence of the Holy Ghost which testified of the Only Begotten Son of God.

Moses 5 9"I am the Only Begotten of the Father from the beginning, henceforth and forever," said the Voice, "what as thou hast fallen thou mayest be redeemed, and all mankind, even as many as will."

Moses 5 10VERSE 10. Blessed be the Name of God. Adam was now filled with the Holy Ghost which testified to him of the Only Begotten and His ministry. Adam in great elation could not restrain himself from prophesying. Inspired by its influence which permeated his entire being, he saw and bore record of the greatness of his seed which future generations would attain. Their number and their habitation; all the families of the earth were as an open book to him of which God was the Author, Omnipotence the shield, and eternity was its glorious life. Adam rejoiced in the Lord his God, the Only Begotten of the Father.

Moses 5 10"Blessed be the Name of God," he cried, "for because of my transgression my eyes are opened"; meaning that he understood his part in the great Plan of Life and Salvation. "In this life I shall have joy"; his repentance was complete; the sorrow brought about by his sin was turned into gladness, and the prospect of life in the flesh, instead of presenting a dark and gloomy future, was full of hope and life. He saw that through the redemption brought to pass by the Only Begotten of the Father his transgression would be blotted out and joy would be his portion instead of sadness. Out of darkness there would come rays of Living Light. "And again in the flesh I shall see God." In Adam's mind he recalled that while in the Garden of Eden he had seen God and talked with Him. Now it was different. Sin had separated them. But through the Plan ordained by the Lord God that separation would not be eternal. It was only suspended, "And again I shall see God in the flesh."

Moses 5 11VERSE 11. Eve heard all these things and was glad. Adam's wife, Eve, heard and understood all the words of her husband, and together they rejoiced in God's wisdom and justice. Out of their transgression He had brought forth that which was most for their good and greatest for His glory. Again, we remind the reader of the words of the poet when in speaking of God's works: "Out of evil, still educing good."

Moses 5 11It was ordained before the world was created that through man's transgression he should have posterity to people the earth. Eve's exclamation of joy came in response to the impulses of her heart; every fibre of her being was alerted to the grand mission to which she was appointed—that of mother to all the inhabitants of the earth. As the Lord God said: "The first of all women," and as Adam called her Eve, because "She was the mother of all living."

Moses 5 11The heart of Eve was glad, not only because she was the mother of all, but because she could see another great blessing coming to them from their transgression. God again turned the wicked ways of Satan and his angels to accomplish His divine purposes. While on the one hand eating of the Forbidden Fruit was in contravention of God's command, yet, doing so enabled Adam and Eve to express their Free Agency—a God-given right—and thus they were endowed with the power to reason between good and evil, and with freedom to choose between right and wrong.

Moses 5 11Eve rejoiced that through the promised redemption of the Only Begotten of the Father, their sin in bringing evil into the world would be remembered no more against them. It would be blotted out by the Sacrifice that would be offered by God Himself. She also rejoiced in the hope of Eternal Life which God "Giveth unto all the obedient." [^4]

Moses 5 12VERSE 12. Adam and Eve blessed the Name of God. Upon them hearing the firm promise of redemption from their fallen estate to one of celestial glory, a joyous paean of praise to God, the Eternal Father, and His Son who was their Redeemer, left their lips as Adam and Eve blessed God's great Name.

Moses 5 12To Adam and Eve the whole earth was God's temple. Its Holy of Holies was their hearts wherein they constantly communed with their Maker. God's Altar, before which they bowed and whereunto they brought their prayers, and their praise, and their offerings of homage, was the ground they trod upon.

Moses 5 12Adam and Eve knew that God's power, His goodness and mercy, were over them "henceforth and forever." All nature—the green pastures, the wooded uplands, the still waters—joined with them in songs of praise and thanksgiving. Even the fields wherein they worked to till the ground brought forth to God's honor and glory the abundant fruits of a plentiful harvest.

Moses 5 12Adam and Eve were so overjoyed at this fresh expression of providential care and the glorious prospects before them that they told their children and their children's children every word the angel had said; what is still more, they witnessed anew unto them the Only Begotten Son of God of Whom the Holy Ghost had borne record.

Moses 5 13VERSE 13. And Satan came among them, saying, I am also a son of God. . . The gladness with which the hearts of Adam and Eve were brim, [^5] was apparent in their offspring, but however in some of them it was fleeting. They let the world and the things of the world be their god. How different they were than the righteous as expressed by the ancient Hebrew brethren: "Gladness is for the upright in heart, and a steadfast spirit for those whose God is the Lord."

Moses 5 13Satan came among them tempting them; with his many wicked ways he led them astray. The deceiver, almost unnoticed, put it into their hearts to doubt the redemption that was to be made by the Only Begotten Son of God. "Believe it not," he muttered into their ears. "I am also a son of God," and such Eternal Life in the flesh as has been promised, is a myth not worthy of belief.

Moses 5 13Some of Adam's seed loved Satan more than God, and from that time henceforth they followed after their own lusts, indulging in whatsoever pleased their fancy or satisfied their whims. Their desires were of the flesh, fleshy. And so on did they break God's laws until at length they became sensual and devilish. [^6]

SCMoses 5 14Moses 5 15VERSE 14-15. The Lord God called upon men. . .and commanded them that they should repent. The Lord God saw that disaffection had crowded all thoughts of Him from the hearts of many of Adam's progeny, and that loyalty to His cause was being supplanted by a growing disregard of His laws, that if allowed to continue would speedily embrace all mankind.

SCMoses 5 14Moses 5 15He therefore called upon men by the Holy Ghost to leave their wicked ways and return unto Him. The Holy Ghost is often used by the Father as a messenger to His children here below, and its influence is felt by the peace and comfort it manifests in their hearts. It often carries a message to the distressed and the oppressed as well as the righteous among them. Its message at this particular time, was, REPENT, [^7] and was sounded to all men everywhere.

SCMoses 5 14Moses 5 15Many of Adam's children believed and turned from their neglectful and wicked ways; others did not hesitate to forswear themselves, saying "All is well," though they knew differently, and still others unmoved by the Holy Spirit's promptings, refused to abjure evil and continued to work their works of darkness.

SCMoses 5 14Moses 5 15An irrevocable decree had gone forth from the mouth of God that they who believed in the Son of God and repented of their sins should be saved; "and as many as believed not and repented not, should be damned." God's words must all be fulfilled!

SCMoses 5 14Moses 5 15The cry to Repent has been a clarion call sounded to every generation of God's children. All the patriarchs and prophets have made repentance their special message, and whether their words come to us through the revelations of old or the seers of our own time, they bring a command of God. To repent is a direct order coming from Him Who presides over all, and not through an ambitious priest who presumes to act as His vicegerent. Repentance from evil is the natural move of those who understand God's holy purposes. To turn from pride and humble oneself before Him is the mark of a true believer. It matters not who one is, we all have need to repent. There is only One Who is good, only One Who has no need to repent. That One is our Father in Heaven.

SCMoses 5 14Moses 5 15Repentance is a moral endeavor of the heart, not a vagrant conclusion of the mind. It is a resolve of the conscience, not a calculation. It is not a weatherglass that indicates the high and low of our spiritual devotion, nor is it a mechanical proposition. It is not machine-made, having no thought or feeling. A man may seek to apply stern mathematical rules to his behavior; he may add restraints and take away life's pseudo-joys and follies, or multiply his philanthropies. But in the end, and not withstanding his intents, his arithmetic will not prepare him for life in the kingdom of God which is immortal.

SCMoses 5 14Moses 5 15Money is the god of such a man; he would fain purchase the Lord's blessings and thereby make common merchandise of God's most precious gifts. Using that formula of life, his solution of its problems is wrong, just as wrong as is the answer one receives who takes paper and pencil and thereby attempts to prove the Gospel true. It cannot be done!

SCMoses 5 14Moses 5 15God, our Father has put us here upon the earth and enjoined that we do His bidding. A keener awareness of His loving kindness and His holy will, "a fuller and freer recognition of His power and His presence in all the experiences of life," should turn us from pursuing life's vanities and thereafter seek only those heavenly treasures that "maketh truly rich."

SCMoses 5 14Moses 5 15Repentance is a step forward and upward in the progress to our Eternal Home; it is proof that our footsteps are firm, and a witness to our integrity. Repentance, be it remembered, is a mandate from God.

SCMoses 5 14Moses 5 15To forsake one's sins, with that added determination to do them no more, is repentance. Repentance means to amend or resolve to amend one's life as a result of contrition for what has been done or omitted to be done.

SCMoses 5 14Moses 5 15Notwithstanding our divine parentage and our birthright, too many, too often, day by day perform their allotted tasks forgetting God's wisdom and guidance. We have no time or thought for else than the world and the things of the world. The burdens we carry, the imposts life lays, its pursuits and pleasures, are the gods that fill the pantheon of our hearts. Pantheon means a peoples' aggregate gods, or a temple dedicated to all their gods. We use that expression, meaning, that place where we honor most the things we love best. If we love the things of the world more than we love the things of God, we turn our hearts into pagan temples, and worldly goods into objects of reverence and adoration.

Moses 5 16VERSE 16. Adam and Eve, his wife, ceased not to call upon God. Clouds of wickedness gathered throughout the land presaging a devastating storm; they were black, ominous, and almost impenetrable. Only here and there light from heaven broke through to illumine the earth. However, in spite of the gloom about them and the iniquity everywhere abounding, Adam and Eve, his wife, were firm and steadfast in keeping the commandments of God and continued to call upon His Holy Name.

Moses 5 16In the course of time a son was born to Adam and Eve whom they called Cain. In Hebrew, Cain means or signifies possession, and Eve overjoyed with her offspring said: "I now possess a manchild which the Lord hast given to me." [^8]

Moses 5 16Eve envisioned the ideal family relationship in Cain, for she regarded her son as a gift from God. Consciously or unconsciously, she offered a prayer: "Wherefore may he not reject His words."

Moses 5 16But Cain was no doubt permitted to indulge in many things that to others were forbidden. Eve, his loving mother, was foolishly fond of her manchild, and he grew up domineering and rebellious. He was haughtily contemptuous of being obedient to the Lord's commandments, and therefore said: "Who is the Lord that I should know him?"

Moses 5 17VERSE 17. Eve again conceived and bare Cain's brother, Abel. As nature would have it, Eve again conceived and gave birth to another son; a brother to Cain, and to him she gave the name Abel. Abel, in ancient Hebrew connotes something vain, or vanity, itself. Why Eve chose this title by which her son would afterwards be known, is a mystery; we do not know. However, it may be that she compared him to her own perfect creation, and saw therein what God can do and what she herself had done in Abel's creation, wonderful though it was. She noted, perhaps, the weaknesses and imperfections of the flesh inherent to her offspring, and of which sin was the causative agent. She may have thought it vain in trying to do what God had done in the creation of herself and Adam, her husband. She may have had the notion, that, as Solomon the wise old Hebrew King said many years later: "All was vanity."

Moses 5 17However, what may have been the causes that inspired Eve in the selection of her son's names—Cain, her possession of a gift from God, and Abel, something vain—we learn from Moses' writings that Abel, the younger son born to Adam and Eve, "Hearkened unto the voice of the Lord," while, the older, Cain, "hearkened not." (v.16.) This reminds us of certain words of Isaiah: "Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of His servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light? let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God." (Isaiah 50:10.) We presently shall see that similar conditions as those described by Isaiah, influenced and gave shape and form to Cain's future life.

Moses 5 17Both Cain and Abel followed in their father's footsteps in that they became, the one, Cain, a husbandman, or a tiller of the ground; the other, Abel, a keeper of sheep—a feeder of a flock as some translators of the story in Genesis have it.

Moses 5 17The will of God is that no man should be idle and that all should be employed in a useful occupation. Upon labor He has placed the blessing of rich reward if diligent efforts are therein made. God provided that the ground should bring forth to Adam the bounties of a joyous harvest, by the sweat of his face and the work of his hands. Just so, that same blessing has been passed onto Adam's descendants. Since Adam's time it has been that when man eats of the work of his hands, happy is he, and it is well with him. The Jews say, "May the fruit of our labors be a service acceptable to Thee. . .make us conscious of our obligation to Thee and of the opportunities for service which Thou hast put into our reach. Help us to use our powers for the benefit of our fellow men, so that the hearts of Thy children may be gladdened by the work of our hands."

Moses 5 17That pretty well explains Why? God provided that Adam should labor, and Why? he in turn taught his children to follow thereafter.

Moses 5 18VERSE 18. Cain loved Satan more than God. Cain grew up unmindful of his great heritage. His heart became dead in trespass and sin. He was a servant of evil. Cain delighted in evil-doing, and by disobedience to God and His laws showed a willingness to do the devil's bidding. For he loved Satan more than God.

Moses 5 18Cain's heart was readily accessable to evil promptings, even to the evil one's commands.

Moses 5 18One day when Cain's mood was quite ugly—offensive from a moral aspect—Satan commanded Cain to "Make an offering unto the Lord." We may be surprised because the devil would give such an order, but it connotes peremptoriness, or arbitrary authority with an expectation on Satan's part of Cain's obedience. But Satan alone knew the conditions he would put into Cain's heart in offering such sacrifice.

Moses 5 18We here find Cain, a doer of evil, going as far as His righteous brother, Abel, in the external services of their religion.

SCMoses 5 19Moses 5 20VERSES 19-20. Both Cain and Abel brought offerings unto the Lord. It was not long as time was measured in that both Cain and Abel brought offerings of the fruit of their chosen labors to render sacrifice unto the Lord.

SCMoses 5 19Moses 5 20Cain brought of the harvest of his fields what we believe were not good, selected products. He carefully gathered them so that the best were left for his own use. We can conceive of his mental disquiet as Cain approached the performance of the sacred rite. His motive for doing so was not to serve God, but satisfy the pride with which Satan constantly was puffing him up. His sacrifice was but a vain oblation (Isaiah 1:13.)

SCMoses 5 19Moses 5 20Abel, on the other hand, brought "of the firstlings of his flock and the fat thereof." He selected for his offering only that which was the best of the best. It was the topmost in excellence; surpassing all others and showing gentle care. His offering was indicative of a righteous man; his choice of the best showed that his thoughts were of God, godly. "By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts." (Hebrews 11:4.)

SCMoses 5 19Moses 5 20God knowing the hearts of all men was pleased with Abel's offering, as it represented a heart that was upright and steadfast. Moses wrote that the Lord had "respect" for Abel's sacrifice and for Abel himself. That means just this, that the Lord accepted Abel's sacrifice because Abel was righteous (Matthew 23:35.) Here also we may learn a lesson: When we render our homage to God may we remember that only by obedience to His commandments, by faithfulness to our duties, by the goodness of our deeds, can we make our worship acceptable to Him.

SCMoses 5 19Moses 5 20Let us honor God with the first fruits of our increase, seeing in the case of Adam and his children that to worship Him thus, is no novel invention, but an ancient institution revealed by God to man.

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23VERSES 21-23. But unto Cain, and to his offering, He had not respect. Because Cain was rebellious and disobedient to His commandments, the Lord did not approve of Cain's offering. Abel offered a sacrifice in faith; Cain was full of pride, having confidence only in his own strength. He gave no thought that when compared to God's, his utmost strength was absolute weakness, and his greatest wisdom but foolishness.

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23The great difference in the offerings of the brothers, Cain and Abel, lay not in the objects of sacrifice themselves, but in the principles that impelled their sacred duty. There was a certain dissimilarity in their characters. Abel made his offering with an eye that was single to the glory of God; Cain sought hypocritically to obtain God's favor which his actions did not merit. God had not respect for Cain nor for his offering. (v. 21.)

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23In a way not understood by us, the Lord made known to Cain and his brother, Abel, that He approved of the latter's offering, and rejected Cain's. Cain was proud and haughty. His pride, as we have noted, was a devil-puffed-up conception of his own importance. However, by a divine rebuke it was deflated. Satan watched the turn events had taken and was pleased. He wanted Cain to be miserable, as he was miserable.

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23Cain's "countenance fell." His pride was disapproved of, and of all the passions that occupy the human heart, we have beforehand noted, disappointed pride is one of the most bitter and malignant.

Nevertheless and notwithstanding Cain's wicked heart, the Lord God sought to calm him and reason with him. "Why art thou wroth? Why is thy countenance fallen?"

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23Cain did not answer.

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23"If thou doest well," the Lord further assured him, "thou shalt be accepted." We conceive of the Lord saying something like this: "If you keep My commandments, thou and thy offerings shall come up before Me as evidence of an upright and pure heart; testifying to Me that you no more love deceit and things that are evil, and have resolved hereafter to serve Me."

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23". . .if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door, and Satan desireth to have thee." The plainest reason; a clear statement of fact by the Lord so that Cain understood and could readily realize the awful future that awaited him if he continued in a life of disobedience, served only to embitter him. "If you continue in evil doing, each time you listen to the enticements of Satan, it will more and more enslave you, and the time will not be far distant until you shall be subject to the devil and be a servant of his bidding," we can imagine was the conversation between the Lord and Cain.

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23Here we may learn another lesson: God's commandments are given us not to punish, or to harass, but to keep us safe from evil. They are consecrated to our good. They are lifeguards. If we ignore, or refuse to obey them, we abandon a loving Father's tender care and become subject to the Destroyer. That is an unbending rule. We may assume that is why the Lord cautioned Cain to render obedience—hearken unto My commandments—and at the same time warn him that in effect evil is a little corridor which in every man's house leads to sin. That corridor divides the spiritually living from the dead, the good from the bad, the right from the wrong, the just from the unjust. At the end of that passageway is a door. On the threshold thereof crouches sin, which like a monster, lies waiting to pounce upon anyone who opens that door. Satan is that monster! His desire is to seize as his prey all those who walk along that corridor. Thus we see what means the phrase, "Sin lieth at the door."

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23Why is thy countenance fallen? Cain's mental and moral state of mind was greatly disturbed. He betrayed this condition by seeking to hide from the Lord, Who knows men's hearts and minds, the confusion that of him was innermost. The condition of Cain's heart reflected in the expression of his face.

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23I will deliver thee up. The Lord anxiously continued to reason with Cain, warning him of the dire consequences of persisting in iniquity. Cain knew better than to continue in evil practices. From the earliest when at his parents' knees he had been taught to listen to that still small Voice which would come from the Father to lead and guide him in all the experiences of his life.

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23But the teachings of his father and mother had little effect in swaying him from the affections he soon developed for that which was forbidden. The pleadings of dutiful and God-fearing parents failed to turn Cain from an evil path into one of duty and loyalty. Adam and Eve made all manner of inducements looking towards his well-being. But Cain refused all their entreaties; he grew up rebellious, and became a law unto himself.

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23The patience of the Lord became almost exhausted. With an allseeing eye He perceived that point in Cain's life where the last effort of human wickedness cannot pass, and where righteous exhortation no more abounded in Cain's good works.

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23Cain, in his rebellious opposition to all that was good, left but one way for the Lord to act. The Lord could no longer look with compassion upon this hardhearted man. When all other efforts had failed, the Lord, despairing of Cain's repentance, admonished him, saying that if he did not turn from his evil ways, He, the Lord God, would not further strive against his wilfulness, but would deliver him over to Satan for the Evil One to do with him whatsoever he, that is, Satan desired.

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23And thou shalt rule over him. These words have been the source of much discussion. Many attempts have been made to explain their intended meaning. All are unsatisfactory. The more they are explained the more confused becomes the reader. They do not appear to be consistent with the rest of the text.

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23After stating that the Lord told Cain unless he should repent and "hearken unto My commandments," the text quotes the Lord as saying: "I will deliver thee up, and it shall be unto thee according to his desire." (v. 23.) The following few words of the text are perplexing: "And thou shalt rule over him." The Lord was still presenting before Cain the awful consequences of disobedience, and warning him further obstinate or unruly behavior would result in total banishment from God's presence into the realm of Satan where despair and anguish reward all those who rebel against God and His laws.

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23The Lord was pronouncing a curse upon Cain because of his iniquity, and was not blessing him with dominion over Satan. The two statements in the text do not express ideas that are consonant one with the other. We must take the whole thought and not lift out a few words and in their abstractness offer a new thought wholly discordant with the context. We cannot imagine that Cain would be delivered up to Satan for Cain to rule over the devil. Neither do we believe that one so ambitious as was Lucifer—consider his rebellion in heaven itself against the authority of the Almighty wherein he sought for himself God's honor and glory—for him to permit anyone to rule over his domain and thus rule over him and be his master.

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23It has been suggested that in the process of printing, when the Pearl of Great Price was first published, the exact language of the original manuscript of Moses' writings was incorrectly copied, and that the words herein discussed and their meaning have been changed. This error, if so it be, has been perpetuated in later printings.

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23In the early days of the printing trade it was not uncommon for words to be transposed and otherwise one word substituted for another. Sometimes faulty editing and careless proofreading were to blame for any errors that may have crept in. It was an easy matter, as it is now, for the printer to set type, saying: "And thou shalt rule over him," instead of, as we believe it should be: "And he shalt rule over thee." The difference between the two statements, as far as words alone are concerned, is little, and a mistake not apt to be caught only by the best proofreader.

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23This reasoning is only a suggestion, and is not to be taken as being the correct approach to a proper understanding of the involved term.

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23However, it may be said that the first time the Writings of Moses were printed (England 1851) the words "And thou shalt rule over him," do not appear as part of the text. Also, the verses, 24 to 31, do not appear. Why they were left out and not published, we do not know. They appear in subsequent editions.

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23Another explanation of this text is herewith presented, and to some it is the right answer.

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23Cain, having been born of goodly parents and therefore possessing a body of flesh and blood but with a wicked heart, was enabled to do much that an unembodied spirit could not. Satan needed an outlet for his lies and deceptions; a kindred spirit, so to speak, and be his agent in stirring up men to open rebellion to God and His laws. Cain was that one! Ever ready for his own gain, Cain listened to the blandishments of the evil one. But Cain's desire for power in himself was like unto Satan's. Ambition is a characteristic of all servants of evil. That statement is shown to be true if we consider Lucifer's conduct during the Great Council in Heaven when he sought glory and power for himself alone. Cain was not unlike Lucifer.

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23Satan could act only through his representative, and the success with which Satan prevailed in bringing to pass his wicked designs depended on the willingness of his associate in sin to spearhead his purposes. Cain was an ideal conspirator with Satan in those iniquitous schemes. Cain was the evil type. It is here where Cain can be said to rule over Satan because Satan, as we have pointed out, could accomplish his nefarious ways no faster than Cain's movements allowed.

SCMoses 5 21Moses 5 22Moses 5 23Cain no doubt will be resurrected and in his resurrected body will be greater, if we understand it correctly, than Satan, having no body of flesh and blood ever could be. Thus, Cain would be the most powerful and thus rule over Satan.

Moses 5 24VERSE 24. From this time forth thou shalt be the father of his lies. The Lord knew Cain's heart and his foibles. Cain gloried in evil. Satan by false promises made him feel strong in doing iniquity. Cain's pride which was puffed up by Satan, knew no bounds. He sought happiness in doing evil. He was lifted up in the pride of his heart. Some of his brothers and their wives joined him in his revolt against all things righteous. The traits that caused Lucifer's downfall from the heavens above were evidenced in Cain's moral and spiritual attributes. He loved the things of Satan more than the things of God.

Moses 5 24Cain loved to make a lie and to deceive was his greatest ambition. The Lord took note of this hardhearted man and put no restraints on his activity in wickedness, save it were to warn and exhort him to righteousness. To suppress Cain's choice of the wicked would violate the eternal principle of Free Agency. This God could not do and still be God.

Moses 5 24Cain had his choice. To plunge deeply into the accomplishment of Satan's wicked designs was the course he pursued. The Lord seeing how intolerant Cain was, and how much he loved darkness rather than light, prophesied to him of coming woe. "From this time forth thou shalt be the father of his lies," was the dictum of an outraged God. No longer would He strive with Cain. No longer would He seek to counsel him. But from then on the devil's wicked ways would be Cain's ways, and through it all the evil ones' lies and deceptions would find utterance from Cain's heart of granite. The father of Satan's lies, is that through Cain, and by him, and of him, Satan's voice would be heard in the words Cain would thereafter speak.

Moses 5 24"Thou shalt be called Perdition." Perdition means entire loss; utter loss of the soul, especially, or the final loss of any happiness in a future state; eternally damned.

Moses 5 24Here Cain is marked by the Lord as Perdition, or as one who has lost even the desire to do good; one who is an heir to a portion of hell.

Moses 5 24Cain knew better than espouse all iniquity, yet he persisted in doing evil. He wanted evil as a companion; he hoped for evil to guide him; his life was a concept of evil. He, we repeat, rebelled as did Lucifer against God and His righteousness.

Moses 5 24For thou wast before the world. (See Chapter 4:1.)

Moses 5 25VERSE 25. These abominations were had from Cain. The Lord pronounced a cursing that would come upon Cain unless he should repent of his evil ways. Future generations of men would know that Cain refused to abide the Word of God wherein He counseled Cain in wisdom and in great forbearance. Cain rejected the counsel of God and chose to follow the flatterings of Satan.

Moses 5 25No doubt that Cain, proud and haughty as he was, believed that through the rewards of wickedness he would gain more worldly goods (See 5:33) than by listening to the voice of righteous behavior. He espoused Satan's lies, and ignored the greater counsel of God. Down through the ages of time when wickedness has appealed to some men as the source of happiness, there were others who in their guilelessness recognized the allurements of sin as being the same recompense as Satan meted out to Cain in the beginning: destruction both temporally and spiritually.

Moses 5 25These abominations [^9] of which this verse speaks were Satan's lies. The curse upon Cain was that he would be known as their instigator.

Moses 5 26VERSE 26. And Cain was wroth. Cain's jealousy of his younger brother, Abel, influenced every turn of his life. His jealousy soon changed into hatred and angry passions not governed by reason. Cain's ill-will towards Abel was intense. His spite was keen and inexhaustible. The thought of revenge stirred him to even greater bitterness and malignancy. From that moment on, Cain plotted against Abel who had offended him only in that Abel had offered an offering to the Lord in righteousness. Abel "walked in holiness before the Lord." "Not as Cain, who was of that wicked one, and slew his brother. And wherefore slew he him? Because his own works were evil, and his brother's righteous." (I John 3:12.)

Moses 5 26Hatred itself is a breach of the Sixth of the Lord's Ten Commandments: "Thou shalt not kill . . ." "Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer." (John 3:15.)

Moses 5 27VERSE 27. Adam and Eve mourned because of Cain and his brethren. Adam and Eve, ever ready to serve the Lord, sorrowed greatly because Cain and some of his brothers ignored the teachings they had received at their hands. Satan put it into their hearts to disobey the promptings of the Holy Spirit and follow after the enticements which were promised by him. Evil, as we have noted, crowded all thoughts of God, their Great and Eternal Father, from their hearts.

Moses 5 28VERSE 28. Cain took one of his brother's daughters to wife. The rapid growth of iniquity among Adam-and-Eve's posterity may be seen in the social and marital relationships that soon sculptured their manner of life.

Moses 5 28Cain had other brothers than Abel, some of whom were rebellious like unto himself. They had daughters and a marriage between one of them and Cain brought together the elements of resistance to divine authority so pronounced in Cain. It was like a "cell" in furthering the beliefs of some systems of philosophy so rampant in the world. Out of the union of these two came others who spread their disbelief in and rejection of God's holy laws. It is written of Cain and his wife: "They loved Satan more than God."

Moses 5 29VERSE 29. This day I will deliver thy brother Abel into thine hands. This verse shows how utterly debased by wickedness Cain had become. A conversation is recorded that took place between Satan and Cain in which Satan promised Cain that under certain conditions he would deliver Abel into his hands.

Moses 5 29Abel had become the owner of many sheep and cattle. (v. 33.) Abel walked uprightly before God and had prospered in his labors, while Cain on the other hand had been godless and slothful. Of Abel, Cain grew increasingly jealous.

Moses 5 29Satan knew his man, and with terrible oaths of secrecy bound Cain to complete servitude to his diabolical schemes.

Moses 5 29Cain, who had sunk so deep in sin that the voice of a righteous indignation could not reach, was the chief actor in Satan's hell-conceived plot. He was to give to his brothers to accept the same appalling oaths as had been administered to him by Satan. All was to be done in secrecy so that "Thy father may not know it; and this day I will deliver thy brother Abel into thy hands."

Moses 5 30VERSE 30. And Cain sware unto Satan that he would do according to his commands. Completely abandoning himself to Satan's wishes, Cain agreed to do all things Satan had proposed. Not only did Cain agree to Satan's plans, but they were done in secret.

Moses 5 31VERSE 31. Cain gloried in his wickedness. After Cain had covenanted with Satan wherein the evil one agreed to deliver Abel into Cain's hands he boasted in his newly found power. He vaunted himself to vainglorious heights, and said: "Truly I am Mahan, the master of this great secret, that I may murder and get gain."

Moses 5 31Cain was the chiefest of the secret organization of which the devil was the author and the beginner. All the efforts of the other members of that abominable thing were subservient to his wishes. Therefore, he was called the chiefest, or Master Mahan. The word Mahan is obscure, but we may be assured that it implies the head or governing unit of that body. And in his undue elation Cain "gloried in his wickedness."

Moses 5 32VERSE 32. Cain went into the field, and talked with Abel. Cain with malice aforethought went into the fields where he found Abel tending his flocks. There Cain talked with Abel, suggesting to him "Let us go into the open country." (Septuagint.) [^10] Under the guise of brotherly affection, Cain, for some pretended reason or other, persuaded Abel to go with him to some out-of-the-way place where Cain's contemplated act of murder would be least likely found out.

Moses 5 32It was there that Satan delivered Abel into Cain's hands as he had promised so to do.

Moses 5 32No doubt Cain, when they arrived at the suggested place, became bitter and abusive and on a fabricated charge accused Abel of unbrotherly actions.

Moses 5 32We imagine Cain was a physically strong and mighty man, and took the advantage that offered to browbeat and bully Abel who trusted him with an affection dear to most brothers. Cain, Moses says: "Rose up against Abel, his brother, and slew him."

Moses 5 33VERSE 33. Cain gloried in that which he had done. Not in the least perturbed nor repentant for what he had done, but rather exultant in that he had put Abel where he could no longer counsel him in the ways of righteousness, Cain rejoiced as if in victory.

Moses 5 33"I am free," he cried; from thenceforth Cain figured that with Abel out of the way he could do whatsoever he wished without fear of Abel's better example being set before him.

Moses 5 33Also, we suspect that Satan put it into Cain's heart that in Abel's death Cain would become the owner of Abel's flocks. Thus we see that Cain not only wanted to rid himself of Abel's presence, but that Cain coveted the fruits of Abel's labor for he greedily expected that they would fall into his hands.

Moses 5 34VERSE 34. Where is Abel thy brother? Utterly bewildered and morally lost in a flood of passion that nearly overwhelmed him, Cain sought excuses and false denials. (See v. 38.) His hard heart was like granite; it was impervious to the influence of the Holy Spirit. He imagined that he had lured Abel into complete destruction and would hear no more from him. But in this he was mistaken; Cain's crime was not only against Abel, but against God and all His Creation. In his ignorance and infatuation he felt safe because he thought no one knew what he had done except the members of the devil-inspired, secret organization of which he was the head, and its leader, and its ultimate appeal. He forgot that God in heaven above knew his every thought and act.

Moses 5 34Here it must be remembered that Cain held the Holy Priesthood, and it may have been at a time when Cain was perfunctorily officiating at one of the sacred rites connected with the peoples' worship of God that Abel was not present. His absence was a singular thing. He had always joined in the ceremonies offered therein.

Moses 5 34Contemplation of his deed against Abel haunted Cain, and while in that serious mood the Lord—it may have been by His Holy Spirit—said to Cain: "Where is Abel, thy brother?"

Moses 5 34Cain evincing the spirit of falsehood with which Satan sought to sustain him, answered: "I know not." And haughtily contemptuous of the Lord's query, added: "Am I my brother's keeper?"

SCMoses 5 35Moses 5 36VERSES 35-36. What hast thou done? The enormity of Cain's offense is indicated in the Lord's question. Besides him being a murderer, Cain is confronted by direct evidence that he is also a liar. He endeavored to conceal a deliberate murder with a deliberate lie. But God Who knows all, is not deceived, "Thy brother's blood cries unto Me from the ground." The earth which opened its mouth to receive the martyr's blood is shown in the curse that followed upon Cain's efforts to subdue it that it would not tolerate a murderer, "Thou shalt be cursed from the earth," was the penalty imposed for Cain's gross infraction of divine law and order.

Moses 5 37VERSE 37. When thou tillest the ground it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength. Here be it observed that unlike his father, Adam, Cain himself was cursed; Adam was not. In the Lord's judgment of Adam, the earth was cursed "for thy sake," while in Cain's case the cursing was personal. To Cain's labors the ground henceforth would not respond to his tilling thereof. It would not yield of its bounties as of yore. Cain had polluted the ground by spilling thereon his brother's blood.

Moses 5 37Fugitive and vagabond. Instead of vagabond, the Revised Version has wanderer. Cain was condemned to perpetual disgrace and reproach among men; to perpetual horror in his own mind. His conscience full to brim of guilt would haunt him wherever he sojourned and make of him a nomad and an unwanted guest. No one would seek his presence because with him was terror and dismay.

Moses 5 38VERSE 38. Satan tempted me because of my brother's flocks. Confronted with evidence against him which he could not deny; being found guilty, and sentence pronounced by the proper authority, Cain sought excuses and false denials. (See v. 34.) "Satan tempted me because of my brother's flocks." (See v. 33.) Cain pleaded, seeking to mitigate the terms of the cursing. He also pled extenuating circumstances which he alleged contributed to his offense. "I was wroth also; for his offering Thou didst accept and not mine; my punishment is greater than I can bear," he cried.

Moses 5 38Cain, like many others, sought to minimize his wickedness by blaming someone else for his mistakes. He sought to blame the Lord because his offering (vv. 19-21) was not acceptable, while that of Abel, his brother, was. But Cain's excuse was nevertheless rejected having come from a heart diseased and depraved.

Moses 5 38Here may we repeat an observation made by us some time ago; it may help us understand why the Lord accepted Abel's offering and not Cain's: "By obedience to His commandments; by our faithfulness in every line of duty; by our patience under trial, and by the goodness of our deeds, is our worship of God made acceptable to Him." These qualifications Cain never met.

Moses 5 39VERSE 39. From Thy face shall I be hid. In this verse Cain's remorse, not because he had killed Abel, but because of the Lord's curse upon him, appears as proceeding from a genuine fear of that which was to come. No longer would Cain be guided by the Lord's ministrations or those of His holy angels. In times past the Lord's Spirit had watched over Adam and his children throughout all the experiences of their lives. Sometimes they obeyed Its holy promptings; other times many of them, as in the case of Cain, preferred to seek the specious promises of Satan which he made to them in using artful flattery.

Moses 5 39Cain realized the wrong he had committed, but nevertheless was unrepentant. He was dismayed and depressed, weighted down with the burden which in his cursing fell upon him. The Lord's curse hung heavily over him; great was his terror as in amazement he cried: "Behold Thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the Lord, and from His face shall I be hid." Meaning that from henceforth he would be forced to walk alone; his pathway unlighted by the Lord's counsel, therefore in the future his footsteps would be in darkness. In Cain there was no light to discern God's holy Countenance.

Moses 5 39Remembering Cain's folly, we ask with Isaiah: "Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light." Also, we remember that the Lord does not hide his face from any generation of His children who seek after Him.

Moses 5 39Not only would the murderer Cain wander throughout the lands of his brothers as a fugitive from justice, but everywhere he tallied, no matter where, he would become known for what he was. He feared that all the inhabitants of the area wherein he sought refuge would slay him because of the guilt that made him an unwanted reprobate, even among the most wicked of them. Cain was afraid of retribution and thoughts of it made a coward of him who was bold in trespass and sin. His final conclusion was that the wickedness of which he was guilty could not be hid from the knowledge of anyone because in seeking to cover up his hardness of heart he would betray his fraternal perfidy.

Moses 5 40VERSE 40. I the Lord set a mark upon Cain. Notwithstanding his wickedness, the Lord spread a protecting canopy over Cain that in case others recognizing him as his brother's slayer, should slay him also. To the end that other evil men should not slay him the Lord "set a mark upon Cain."

Moses 5 40This mark was a black skin. (See Moses 7:22.)

Moses 5 40Not at all that the Lord countenanced Cain's evil actions, but that God's unfailing purposes should therein be brought about, this mark was put upon Cain. The Lord uses the wicked ways of men as well as the good to accomplish His purposes.

Moses 5 40The black skin of Cain and his children was notice to the inhabitants of every region whereunto they wandered that while they endured the curse of the Lord, they were also protected from the revenge of their unpitying relatives who were now their enemies. "Whosoever slayeth thee, vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold." "Vengeance is Mine, and I will repay," is expressive of the Lord's will.

Moses 5 41VERSE 41. Cain was shut out from the presence of the Lord. In the King James translation of Genesis, the above quotation is rendered: "And Cain went out from the presence of the Lord, and dwelt in the Land of Nod, on the east of Eden . . ." (Genesis 4:16.) The two statements referring to the same thing are substantially the selfsame. The statement in Genesis however connotes that he did so of his own free will; the other recorded by Moses himself suggests that being "shut out from the presence of the Lord" was part of the curse imposed on him by the Lord.

Moses 5 41The Land of Nod in Hebrew denotes the land of the wanderer; the land of those who live in tents; a nomadic land.

Moses 5 41Cain and his wife (v. 28) together with many of his brethren departed from the place where God's servants dwelt and where the Gospel was preached, and roamed abroad to the eastward where they could no longer be admonished unto righteousness.

Moses 5 42Verse 42. Cain builded a city. Within a relatively short time Cain and his associate brethren became a numerous people. With him as their leader they built a city which he named after his son, Enoch. Most likely it was a closely clustered conglomeration of mud and thatched huts.

SCMoses 5 43Moses 5 44Moses 5 45Moses 5 46Verses 43-46. And unto Enoch was born Irad . . . These verses contain a genealogy of Cain's descendants down to the seventh generation, not including Adam, the first man. These generations were headed by:

SCMoses 5 43Moses 5 44Moses 5 45Moses 5 46Cain who was the son of Adam

SCMoses 5 43Moses 5 44Moses 5 45Moses 5 46Enoch who was the son of Cain

SCMoses 5 43Moses 5 44Moses 5 45Moses 5 46Irad who was the son of Enoch

SCMoses 5 43Moses 5 44Moses 5 45Moses 5 46Mahujael who was the son of Irad

SCMoses 5 43Moses 5 44Moses 5 45Moses 5 46Methusael who was the son of Mahujael

SCMoses 5 43Moses 5 44Moses 5 45Moses 5 46Lamech who was the son of Methusael

SCMoses 5 43Moses 5 44Moses 5 45Moses 5 46Jabal and Jubal who were the sons of Lamech

SCMoses 5 43Moses 5 44Moses 5 45Moses 5 46Lamech married two women, Adah and Zillah. Adah bare him Jabal who was a keeper of flocks and herds of cattle. Jabal dwelt in tents which suggests the life of a nomad who moves his sheep from place to place. Jubal was the brother of Jabal, and was a musician of some note among his associates. Both these men were sons of Lamech's wife, Adah, and were much different in nature. Jubal taught of his accomplishments to others who played stringed and wind instruments. Perhaps he was the first to make music an art.

SCMoses 5 43Moses 5 44Moses 5 45Moses 5 46Lamech's other wife, Zillah, "bare Tubal Cain" who developed into a skilled or artistic worker; an inventor or deviser who fashioned "brass" and iron, possibly silver, into objects of ancient art or utility. Brass, here, means copper; the alloy brass was unknown at that time. Zillah also gave birth to a daughter who they named Naamah.

SCMoses 5 47Moses 5 48Moses 5 49Moses 5 50VERSES 47-50. Lamech had entered into a covenant with Satan

SCMoses 5 47Moses 5 48Moses 5 49Moses 5 50Hear my voice, ye wives of Lamech,

SCMoses 5 47Moses 5 48Moses 5 49Moses 5 50Hearken unto my speech;

SCMoses 5 47Moses 5 48Moses 5 49Moses 5 50For I have slain a man to my wounding,

SCMoses 5 47Moses 5 48Moses 5 49Moses 5 50And a young man to my hurt.

SCMoses 5 47Moses 5 48Moses 5 49Moses 5 50We have here the first instance of poetry appearing in the Bible. Hebrew poetry is not as we have it, meter and rhyme, but the rhythm of thought. It is known as parallelism, being couplets expressing the same thought in different words. (See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Reynolds and Sjodahl, Volume I, pp. 268 ff.)

SCMoses 5 47Moses 5 48Moses 5 49Moses 5 50Moses, to emphasize the growing laxity of good and pure morals among the sons of men, and the depravity into which they were sinking, again refers to that which was an abomination unto God: the secret combinations that were spreading their nefarious practices far and wide.

SCMoses 5 47Moses 5 48Moses 5 49Moses 5 50Lamech had undoubtedly slain an associate in evil, and so confessed to his wives. But notwithstanding that it had been re-enforced by more wicked oaths than before, he had entered into the selfsame covenant with Satan that Cain had in the beginning. Lamech expected, as the oaths implied, secrecy on the part of all others who like unto himself had taken it upon themselves to conceal knowledge of one another's crimes, thus fostering wickedness. But in his expectations, he was mistaken!

SCMoses 5 47Moses 5 48Moses 5 49Moses 5 50Irad, the son of Enoch and the grandson of Cain, knew whereof the covenant and forthwith began to divulge its secrets to members of his family.

SCMoses 5 47Moses 5 48Moses 5 49Moses 5 50Lamech feeling betrayed by his confederate in wrongdoing, became angry and slew Irad. He slew him because of the oath both had taken, not as Cain slew Abel to get gain. To forfeit one's own life was the price of revealing the oath's secrets (See v. 29), and Lamech, a vicious man, proceeded to carry out the exactions of the covenant.

SCMoses 5 47Moses 5 48Moses 5 49Moses 5 50This hell-inspired covenant was begotten in sin and nurtured in darkness. It grew in wickedness as it grew in years.

Moses 5 51VERSE 51. Their works were in the dark. "The Lord God worketh not in darkness" (II Nephi 26:23). "And there are also secret combinations, even as in times of old, according to the combinations of the devil, for he is the foundation of all these things; yea, the foundation of murder, and works of darkness; yea, he leadeth them by the neck with a flaxen cord, until he bindeth them with his strong cords forever." (Ibid., 22.)

Moses 5 51Moses notes that in those times "every man knew his brother," as if to say that every conspirator knew his co-conspirator. Whether by secret signs or whatnot, they recognized each other and would therefore uphold him even in sin.

SCMoses 5 52Moses 5 53Moses 5 54Moses 5 55VERSES 52-55. The Lord cursed Lamech and his house. The Lord departed out from their presence and therefore ministered not unto the sons of men because they refused to heed His words and keep His commandments. The Almighty, displeased, withdrew, and being without Him, profound darkness veiled their works.

SCMoses 5 52Moses 5 53Moses 5 54Moses 5 55Ever deeper they plunged into the unfathomable depths of sin; darker and darker became the gloom that enshrouded them about. Soon the evils of their wickedness and abandonment reached their maximum. The Lord witnessing their hearts, diseased and depraved, cursed Lamech and all those who had covenanted with Satan. We can imagine no greater curse than to be without God in perilous times to guide our footsteps.

SCMoses 5 52Moses 5 53Moses 5 54Moses 5 55Lamech's wives, notwithstanding they were descendants of Cain who with his posterity were also cursed, rebelled against their husband and published abroad an account of his evil-doings. Lamech like Cain gloried in evil-doing and boasted in wickedness. His wives, nonetheless, refused to cower in fear of one so unjust and vehement. They had no pity for him; no compassion for one so wretched as he. It was not long until his associates, themselves sin-besotted, refused their acquaintanceship because he also had transgressed the covenant by telling his wives the secrets of the oath. He was friendless and was despised even by the most degraded. Cast out and not wanted, he went and dwelt alone; afraid to mingle with his own lest he should be killed in penalty of his broken oath.

SCMoses 5 52Moses 5 53Moses 5 54Moses 5 55However the things concerning Lamech were not discussed among the sons nor the daughters of men for to do so would reveal his co-conspirators. Unity in evil is conspiracy! In disclosing the terms of the conspiracy to his wives, there is little doubt that Lamech uncovered to shame many who did not openly sponsor the oath-taking.

SCMoses 5 52Moses 5 53Moses 5 54Moses 5 55Thus in open defiance of God's laws, the children of men sought happiness in doing that which was forbidden. They loved Satan more than the Almighty and served him who would destroy them. Works of darkness began to shut out any light from heaven; men chose darkness to light because their deeds were evil. (See John 3:19.)

SCMoses 5 56Moses 5 57Moses 5 58Moses 5 59VERSES 56-59. And God cursed the earth. The Almighty cursed the earth because the inhabitants thereof refused to keep His commandments. He became angry with their repeated acts of iniquity, and wrathful at their constant disobedience. A sore affliction such as a prolonged famine visited the dwelling places of men, and an increasing want of the necessities of life throughout the land failed to cause them to repent.

SCMoses 5 56Moses 5 57Moses 5 58Moses 5 59Men refused to believe in life's greatest comfort: God's Only Begotten Son; they put aside the thought of Eternal Life, preferring the things of the world to treasures in heaven. The cup of their destruction was filling fast.

SCMoses 5 56Moses 5 57Moses 5 58Moses 5 59The Gospel of Jesus Christ was preached to Adam, and by an Holy Ordinance confirmed unto him. That Holy Ordinance was the Gift of the Holy Ghost which abided in him and attested to him the truth of Christ's Atonement "which should come in the meridian of time." Just as long as the earth stands, the Gospel will be declared to the pure in heart. They will never cease to fulfill the purposes of a grand and glorious Creation. The earth is immortal; the Gospel of Jesus Christ is immortal! because it has God for its Author, Omnipotence for its shield and eternity of its glorious life.

they began to multiply and to replenish the earth.

Footnotes

Figuratively speaking, He hath redeemed Jerusalem. Jerusalem had been sold, figuratively, by the apostate Jews. Thy had perverted the ways of the Lord, and too, they had abandoned the covenant their fathers had made with the Lord at Sinai. The Mosaic Law provided that any land could be redeemed if perchance it had been sold. However, a price was demanded for its redemption. What was that price? Jerusalem had not been bartered away for gold, or for silver; nor was it sold as common merchandise. There was only One who could redeem the pledge that had been made. That One was their King! Isaiah said: "He hath redeemed Jerusalem." Not with a great army; not with money, but He has redeemed it with the blood which was shed on Calvary; the redemption brought about by Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews.

When Isaiah says, Jerusalem, we may interpret it as meaning the entire earth and all mankind. "The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof; the world and they that dwell therein." (Psalm 24:1.) He hath redeemed Zion. He is our King, our Redeemer, our All. Great is our King! And Who is our King? but the Lord. And Who is the Lord? save He is God. (Jewish saying.) "Let the heavens be glad, and the earth rejoice; let the fields exult, and all that is therein." (See I Chronicles 16:31-32.) The Lord hath redeemed His people.

"Therefore, as they had become carnal, sensual, and devilish, by nature, this probationary state became a state for them to prepare; it became a preparatory state." (Alma, to his son, Corianton, Alma 42:10.)

Thus, when Abraham was about to offer his son, Isaac, as a sacrifice as the Lord had commanded Abraham so to do, the child asked his father: "Where is the lamb for a burnt sacrifice?" Abraham answered: "God will provide for a burnt sacrifice." But when Abraham was nearly ready to carry out his divine command, a voice from heaven stopped him in his intent of obedience, for the Lord God did provide where-with to sacrifice. "And Abraham called the name of that place, Jehovah-jireh," meaning the Lord will provide. And that, hundreds of years later when Moses recorded the incident, the Mountain was so called. (Genesis 22:7-14.)

Also, Hagar, when her son was perishing in the wilderness, and she beheld an angel standing beside the life-giving spring, exclaimed, "Beer-lachai-roil" which means, literally, "Well, to live, to see." That is to say "The well of Him that liveth and seeth me," for that was the thought that came to her mind. (Genesis 16:13-14.) And that became the name of the well.

And, let us consider the name, Liahona. It is the name which Lehi gave to the ball, or Director, he found outside of his tent the very day he began his long journey through the wilderness, after his little company had rested for some time in the Valley of Lemuel (I Nephi 16:10; Alma 37:38.)

L is a Hebrew preposition meaning to, and sometimes to express the possessive case. Iah is a Hebrew abbreviated from of Jehovah, common in Hebrew names. On is the Hebrew name of the Egyptian City of the Sun, also known as Memphis and Heliopolis. Liahon means, therefore, literally, "To God is light"; or, "Of God is light." That is to say, God gives light, as does the Sun. The final A reminds us that the Egyptian form of the Hebrew name On is Annu and that seems to be the form which Lehi used. Remember that Lehi was learned in the language of the Egyptians.

Lehi had just received the divine command to begin his perilous journey. The question uppermost in his mind, after having received that call, must have been how to find the way? That must have been quite a problem. But he arose early in the morning determined to carry out the command given. Undoubtedly he had spent the night in prayer for light and guidance. And now standing in the opening of the tent, perhaps as the first rays of the sun broke through the morning mists, he beheld a metal ball "of curious workmanship." He picked it up and examined it. And then, as he realized that it is the guide for which he had been praying, he exclaimed in ecstasy: "L-iah-on-a," which is as much as to say: "This is God's light; it has come from Him." And that became the name of the curious instrument.

---
Notas:
[^1] And Adam hearkened unto the voice of God, and called upon his sons to repent. Yahweh (Hebrew) or Yahwistic; a theory marked by the Hebrew name for God or Jehovah. The Yahwist historian is reputed to have belonged to the Kingdom of Judah and in his history used the Name Yahweh for the Lord. The historian of the Northern Kingdom used ELOHIM for God's Name, and thus it is known as the "Elohist Document." Both were compiled shortly after the succeeding reigns of David and Solomon, the latter, or Elohist, about fifty years after the Yahwist.
[^2] And Adam knew his wife again, and she bare a son, and he called his name Seth. And Adam glorified the name of God; for he said: God hath appointed me another seed, instead of Abel, whom Cain slew. See Book of Abraham 1:28, also verses 44-46, this Chapter.
[^3] And God revealed himself unto Seth, and he rebelled not, but offered an acceptable sacrifice, like unto his brother Abel. And to him also was born a son, and he called his name Enos. Alma 13:1-19.
[^4] And then began these men to call upon the name of the Lord, and the Lord blessed them; "Wherefore, brethren, seek not to counsel the Lord, but to take counsel from His hand. For behold, ye yourselves know that He counseleth in wisdom, and in justice, and in great mercy, over all His works." (Jacob 4:10.)
[^5] And a book of remembrance was kept, in the which was recorded, in the language of Adam, for it was given unto as many as called upon God to write by the spirit of inspiration; "And He commandeth all men that they must repent and be baptized in His Name, having perfect faith in the Holy One of Israel, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God. And if they will not repent and believe on His Name, and endure to the end, they must be damned; for the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel, hath spoken it." (II Nephi 9:23-24.)
[^6] And by them their children were taught to read and write, having a language which was pure and undefiled. Adam lived 930 years, and Enoch was born about three hundred years before that patriarch passed away.
[^7] Now this same Priesthood, which was in the beginning, shall be in the end of the world also. "Enoch was twenty-five years old when he was ordained under the hand of Adam; and he was sixty-five and Adam blessed him." (Doctrine and Covenants, 107:48.)
[^8] Now this prophecy Adam spake, as he was moved upon by the Holy Ghost, and a genealogy was kept of the children of God. And this was the book of the generations of Adam, saying: In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him; "And now, my brethren, I have spoken plainly that ye cannot err. And as the Lord liveth that brought Israel up out of the land of Egypt, and gave unto Moses power that he should heal the nations after they had been bitten by the poisonous serpents, if they would cast their eyes unto the serpent which he did raise up before them, and also gave him power that he should smite the rock and the water should come forth; yea, behold I say unto you, that these things are true, and as the Lord God liveth, there is none other name given under heaven save it be this Jesus Christ, of Which I have spoken, whereby man can be saved." (II Nephi 25:20.)
[^9] In the image of his own body, male and female, created he them, and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the day when they were created and became living souls in the land upon the footstool of God. "And moreover, I say unto you, that the time shall come when the knowledge of the Savior shall spread throughout every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. And behold, when that time cometh, none shall be found blameless before God, except it be little children, only through repentance and faith on the Name of the Lord Omnipotent." (Mosiah 3:20-21.)
[^10] And Adam lived one hundred and thirty years, and begat a son in his own likeness, after his own image, and called his name Seth. The orthodox view of the status of children is that they are totally depraved, from the first moment of their existence; that they are contaminated by sin, and that, if they die before they are baptized, they go to destruction as the property of the prince of the lower regions. As soon as a child is capable of moral action, they say, it gives evidence of perverted moral character, in manifestation of anger, malice, selfishness, envy, pride, etc., in short, they are born in sin and begin life as sinners.
