Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1965)

CHAPTER 6

THE WRITINGS OF MOSES

As revealed to Joseph Smith the Prophet in December, 1830—Continued

Moses 6 1VERSE 1. Adam hearkened to the Voice of the Lord. Every fibre of his being attuned as it was to the promptings of the Holy Spirit which cometh from the Father to lead, and to guide, and to direct aright, Adam heard therein the Voice of God. Whether by God's Own voice, or by angels sent down from the Courts of Glory, or by the inspiriting and inspiring influence of the Holy Ghost, the Gospel of Jesus Christ was declared right from the very start, and men were admonished to believe on the Only Begotten Son Who was prepared "Before the foundation of the world."

Moses 6 1Again, we see that the Gospel was proclaimed to the understanding of Adam and his children, and he, obedient to the Voice and comprehending its truths, called upon his sons to repent. (See Comments 5:14-15.) Adam remembered that an angel from God's presence had appeared to him and had related in detail His holy purposes concerning Sacrifice. The angel also told him to do all things whatsoever in the Name of the Son; the heavenly visitor fulfilled his divine commission by telling Adam: "Thou shalt repent and call upon God in the Name of the Son forevermore." (See 5:6-8.)

Moses 6 2VERSE 2. Birth of Seth. Many sons and daughters were born to Adam and his wife, Eve; of these there was one who they named Seth. As Seth grew to manhood he evinced many qualities that were reminiscent of Abel, who was slain by Cain.

Moses 6 2Adam recognized in Seth one who was firm and steadfast in keeping the commandments of God, and therefore praised the Lord. Adam rejoiced and glorified the Name of God, for in Seth's faithfulness and good deeds he was comforted; Adam said: "God hath appointed me another seed, instead of Abel whom Cain slew."

Moses 6 3VERSE 3. Unto Seth a son was born, and he called his name, Enos. Like his brother, Abel, Seth offered an acceptable offering to the Lord, and to other commandments which had been given he was not rebellious in keeping them. God revealed Himself to Seth which alone is evidence that Seth walked in holiness before the Lord as did Abel his brother. (See 5:26.)

Moses 6 3Unto Seth, a son was born, and he called his name, Enos.

Moses 6 4VERSE 4. Seth and his son, Enos, together with Adam began to call upon the Name of the Lord. The family relationship between Adam and his children is herein noted in that it was strengthened in righteousness by them, together, invoking God's Holy Name (Jehovah) and in offering an acceptable and worthy sacrifice.

Moses 6 4In unitedly worshiping God they instituted public service which included sacrifice and prayer uttered by steadfast hearts.

Then began these men to call upon the Name of the Lord. What is considered to be the earliest, or original Yahwist (Jehovah) Document or History, [^1] uses from the very first the Name Yahweh for God. Translated into English that is Jehovah. However, the Priestly Document, as it is called, says that the Name Jehovah was revealed to Moses (Exodus 6:2-3). It may be that at the time spoken of in this verse men began to worship the Lord-God using His real Name, Jehovah. (See The Sacred Name, at end of Chapter 1, this Commentary.)

SCMoses 6 5Moses 6 6VERSES 5-6. A Book of Remembrance was kept. That they should always remember their glorious ancestry and the goodness of God to their forefathers, the children of Adam were taught to read and write in the language of Adam an account of God's providential care.

SCMoses 6 5Moses 6 6They called the Record which they made, "A BOOK OF REMEMBRANCE." In it they wrote only those things which to them were inspired; only that which was of God. Thanks be to God such records were written. They were not left to mere tradition or to treacherous memory; they were not left to the diluting influence of oral transmission. They were not bequeathed to hearts, diseased and depraved who might corrupt them, but these Records were written at the express command of God Himself and some of them have come down to us [^2] in the Writings of Moses which we are now considering.

Moses 6 7VERSE 7. This same Priesthood which was in the beginning. Before the earth was created; before the foundation thereof was laid, God in His power and glory set apart and sanctified His purposes to the welfare of His children. God's might and grace were abundantly provided them, and they were empowered to represent Him in all His works. This delegation of authority to act for Him marks one as an especial administrator of affairs in the kingdom of God. That authority so delegated is the Holy Priesthood. [^3]

Moses 6 7This same Priesthood which was in the beginning, shall be in the end of the world also. Not that the world will become a thing of the past, or that it will have outgrown the purposes for which it was created, but the end of the world means that time when the earth has attained and fulfilled the object which God had for it when first its foundation was laid.

Moses 6 7When we say end, it is not to be interpreted to mean that point beyond which the earth cannot go; a conclusive or ultimate state, but a condition where perfectness is the watchword of the sons of God.

SCMoses 6 8Moses 6 9VERSES 8-9. This prophecy Adam spake. . . . The prediction made by Adam (v. 7) was uttered at a time when the Holy Ghost infused his whole being. The spirit of prophecy is the testimony of Christ, and we find that the Priesthood of which he bore record is the Priesthood after the Order of the Only Begotten Son of God. It was in the beginning and shall be in the end. This Priesthood did not commence, nor will it pass away, but all things that are and will be created shall be brought to an issue of perfectness through the workings of the Holy Priesthood, which is the Priesthood of Jesus Christ.

SCMoses 6 8Moses 6 9By Christ the earth was created. Through Him Eternal Life is man's portion. God will reward with the joy of being in His service all those who with steadfast hearts do His bidding. This Priesthood of which we speak has been entrusted into the hands of men on earth. By this Priesthood all things that are done, are done; all things accomplished in its Name. Christ's Priesthood will never end; His creations never cease.

SCMoses 6 8Moses 6 9A genealogy was kept of the children of God. That the children of God should not forget their glorious ancestry, and that the Gospel of His Son should be remembered by all succeeding generations, a genealogy of their forefathers was kept by them. That genealogy began with Adam himself and records the fact that God created him in His Own image, "In the likeness of God made He him."

SCMoses 6 8Moses 6 9Both male and female were created by God in His image, and He blessed them "and called their name, Adam." Not only was the first man so called, but the entire race that sprung from him was in like manner named. (See 1:34.)

SCMoses 6 10Moses 6 11Moses 6 12VERSES 10-12. Adam begat Seth. When one hundred and thirty years of age "Adam begat a son in his own likeness, after his own image, and he called his name Seth." Before Adam died, eight hundred years later, he became the father of many sons and daughters.

SCMoses 6 10Moses 6 11Moses 6 12We may obtain an idea of what Moses had in mind when he gave the names and ages of the patriarchs who lived before the flood when we consider once more the glorious ancestry of Israel, the chosen race, of which he was the leader. Also there were 1656 years according to Hebrew reckoning between the Creation and the Flood for which an accounting could thus be made. Many reasons have been advanced to explain the great number of years attributed to the lives of these seers and patriarchs, but none seem satisfactory. There are ten who are enumerated in direct succession, the shortest life of any being 365, and the longest 969 years. We cannot explain their longevity; therefore we think the wisest thing to do is resolve their length of days to the sovereign will of God.

SCMoses 6 13Moses 6 14Moses 6 15Moses 6 16VERSES 13-16. Seth begat Enos. "Seth lived one hundred and five years, and begat Enos." Seth served the Lord as did Adam, his father, and not as did Cain, his brother, who rebelled against keeping God's commandments. With an upright heart and fatherly compassion Seth passed on to Enos, his son, the glorious knowledge of their divine creation.

SCMoses 6 13Moses 6 14Moses 6 15Moses 6 16All the days of Seth's life, which were many, he prophesied of God's ways. God's ways are Gospel ways, and the burden of Seth's message was faith on the Only Begotten Son of God, and repentance of sin. All the prophets from Adam on down to Joseph Smith, and even unto our own day, have testified of Christ and have warned "that all men must come unto Him, or they cannot be saved." (I Nephi 13:40.)

SCMoses 6 13Moses 6 14Moses 6 15Moses 6 16The message borne by Seth was carried on by his son, Enos, who also was a prophet, and his Gospel cry of Repentance resounded throughout the whole land until its reverberations shook the earth.

SCMoses 6 13Moses 6 14Moses 6 15Moses 6 16In Seth's days the people began to multiply and spread far afield. However, little groups among them that at first appeared powerless, grew into numbers that thereafter sought unrighteous dominion over their brethren. Satan ruled the hearts and minds of men. War and bloodshed ravaged the homes of the righteous and unrighteous alike, "and a man's hand was against his brother in administering death because of secret works."

SCMoses 6 13Moses 6 14Moses 6 15Moses 6 16"And all the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years."

SCMoses 6 17Moses 6 18VERSES 17-18. Enos begat Cainan. "And Enos lived ninety years, and begat Cainan." The people in the Land of Shulon wherein Enos dwelt had waxed strong in iniquity. They neither sought to serve the Lord, nor render Him any obeisance whatsoever. Their wickedness imperiled the lives of the righteous among them, therefore Enos led the obedient to another land "by the sea east" which he called Cainan after his son, Cainan.

SCMoses 6 17Moses 6 18In this new land which to the people of Enos was a Land of Promise they grew into a mighty nation whose righteousness exalted it far above that from which they had fled. In this happy, holy state of affairs Enos lived yet another eight hundred and fifteen years, "And all the days of Enos were nine hundred and five years." "And," the historian records, "he died."

Moses 6 19VERSE 19. And Cainan lived seventy years, and begat Mahalaleel. After Cainan had begat Mahalaleel he lived another eight hundred and forty years which made him in all nine hundred and ten years of age when he died. He was also the father of other sons and daughters who with Mahalaleel formed a righteous generation.

Moses 6 20VERSE 20. Mahalaleel lived sixty-five years, and begat Jared. Mahalaleel, the fifth in succession in the line of patriarchs, was sixty-five years old when to him was born Jared. After he begat Jared he lived another eight hundred and thirty years, and became the father of other sons and daughters. "All the days of Mahalaleel were eight hundred and ninety-five years."

SCMoses 6 21Moses 6 22Moses 6 23Moses 6 24VERSES 21-24. Jared lived one hundred and sixty-two years, and begat Enoch. In the life of Jared whose years extended eight hundred beyond the birth of Enoch, Jared taught Enoch "in all the ways of God."

SCMoses 6 21Moses 6 22Moses 6 23Moses 6 24So far in this Chapter (6) we have seen a direct succession of the Priesthood from Adam, the first man, down to Enoch, the seventh to be crowned with its privileges and elections. The order in which they were ordained to this high and holy calling, was, beginning at the first, Adam, Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, and Enoch: Adam walked and talked with God. (See Doctrine and Covenants 107: 40-57.)

SCMoses 6 21Moses 6 22Moses 6 23Moses 6 24These patriarchs, all of them servants of the Most High, spent their days preaching righteousness; prophesying of the coming Messiah, and calling all men of every station in life and in all places of their habitation to repent and believe in God's Only Begotten Son through Whom redemption should come.

SCMoses 6 21Moses 6 22Moses 6 23Moses 6 24How this Priesthood descended from Adam to Noah is outlined by the authors hereof in the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary of which Janne M. Sjodahl was the author and compiler, and of which we quote: "Adam ordained Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah. Seth ordained Lamech, and Methuselah ordained Noah. All these patriarchs, except Noah, were born before Adam died; so that from him they might have received a full and authentic account of the Creation, the Fall, and the promise of redemption, as well as the ordination to the Priesthood." (See entire Section 107, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary— Janne M. Sjodahl.)

SCMoses 6 21Moses 6 22Moses 6 23Moses 6 24"And it came to pass that all the days of Jared were nine hundred and sixty-two years, and he died."

Moses 6 25VERSE 25. And Enoch lived sixty-five years and begat Methuselah. Enoch was sixty-five years of age when a son who was destined to live longer than anyone else of whom we have record, was born, Methuselah—969 years.

Moses 6 26VERSE 26. Enoch journeyed in the land. As Enoch traveled about the land wherein he lived, preaching righteousness to whomsoever should be within sound of his voice, and therein witnessing of the Only Begotten Son of God Who should come in the meridian of time to atone for the sin of Adam by which death came into the world, "the Spirit of God descended out of heaven, and abode upon him."

SCMoses 6 27Moses 6 28Moses 6 29Moses 6 30VERSES 27-30. He heard a voice from heaven . . . Enoch's call to the office of prophet was made by God Himself, Whose voice from heaven was unto Enoch, saying: "Enoch, My son, prophesy unto this people, and say unto them—Repent." God, by His Own voice, gave unto Enoch a divine command to warn the inhabitants of the earth that destruction awaited them unless they hearkened unto His voice.

SCMoses 6 27Moses 6 28Moses 6 29Moses 6 30The Owner of that voice, the Speaker, the Lord God Almighty, told Enoch and commissioned him to tell "the people" that He was angry because their hearts had become hard like granite, their ears stopped up by the promises of Satan, and their eyes blinded by the glitter of his ways. Little longer would His fierce anger be withheld from their punishment.

SCMoses 6 27Moses 6 28Moses 6 29Moses 6 30The Lord further instructed Enoch as to why His anger was thus inflamed, saying that from the time when first He created man, they had been rebellious. They had denied Him, their Creator, and without the light His presence sheds forth, seek their own counsel in darkness and infatuation. "In their own abominations have they devised murder," said the Lord, "and have not kept the commandments which I gave unto their father, Adam."

SCMoses 6 27Moses 6 28Moses 6 29Moses 6 30In their fallen state they testify falsely, and hesitate not in their oaths to swear to that which is untrue. They disclaim My guidance and have "brought upon themselves death; and a hell I have prepared for them, if they repent not."

SCMoses 6 27Moses 6 28Moses 6 29Moses 6 30This is a decree . . . In the beginning of the world, it coming from the mouth of the Lord and not from any other, therefore it is absolute and cannot return thereto unfulfilled, the Lord decreed the awful end of those who do not repent.

SCMoses 6 27Moses 6 28Moses 6 29Moses 6 30The decrees of heaven whether they come to us from God Himself or from the mouths of His holy servants are binding upon the fathers unto whom He speaks, and also upon their children throughout all generations for we imagine Him saying: "My servants whom I have sent unto you to declare good tidings" (Helaman 5:29), their words are My words for "I am He Who speaketh." (Ether 4:10; III Nephi 20:39.)

SCMoses 6 27Moses 6 28Moses 6 29Moses 6 30The decree spoken of in these verses is unto all people even unto the end of the earth, which is forever and ever.

Moses 6 31VERSE 31. Wherefore am I Thy servant? Enoch, a bit dismayed but still undaunted, when upon hearing the Voice of the Lord, recognized his unworthiness by bowing down to the ground and thereupon answered the Lord's call: "Why is it that I have found favor in Thy sight?" Enoch was perplexed; he was troubled. He like Moses, who many years later became Israel's leader, was slow of speech and because of which deficiency Enoch's associates were few and his friends not many. "I am but a lad," he protested "and all the people hate me," but Thou O Lord looketh beyond the outward appearance; pray, tell me: "Wherefore am I Thy servant?" ("Man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart." (1st Samuel 16:7.)

Moses 6 31As we have noted of Moses' speech, a similar incident took place between them when the Lord gave unto Moses the signs whereby Moses was to prove to the Children of Israel that he was sent by God. "And Moses said unto the Lord, O my Lord, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since Thou hast spoken unto Thy servant; but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue. And the Lord said unto him, Who hath made man's mouth? or Who maketh the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the blind? Have not I the Lord. Now therefore go, and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt say." (Exodus 4:10-12.)

SCMoses 6 32Moses 6 33Moses 6 34VERSES 32-34. Go forth and do as I have commanded thee. Enoch was commanded by the Lord to cast upon Him all his cares, and they would be answered in blessings upon his head. In spite of Enoch's weaknesses the Lord promised him that no man should overpower him; that in the Lord he would be made strong; that his infirmity of speech would be swallowed up in the tongue of men and of angels, for words of wisdom and counsel would thereafter be allotted him by the Lord's Spirit. Wherefore, "Go forth and do as I have commanded thee" said the Lord, "For all flesh is in My hands, and I will do as seemeth Me good."

SCMoses 6 32Moses 6 33Moses 6 34Choose ye this day . . . The Lord's commandment which was thereafter carried to the people by Enoch was one not to be put off in its keeping. This day was the authoritative edict. An order not to be procrastinated, but of immediate importance, was the main point of what mattered most.

SCMoses 6 32Moses 6 33Moses 6 34Here is a lesson we all may learn. It is not to delay our offerings of homage to God until it may be too late, perhaps until our backs are bent with the weight of years. Let our years be not a reason for relaxing our efforts, let it be the reverse. If our day's pilgrimage on earth is almost ended, let us hasten our footsteps lest night overtake us and we find our journey not yet finished. And to the youth, we say: Let us not fan ourselves into that silly delusion that tomorrow we will serve the Lord and keep His commandments. No, let us make up our minds and say as did God's servant of old, that from now on, henceforth and forever, I will serve God Who made me, and Him only will I serve.

SCMoses 6 32Moses 6 33Moses 6 34Behold My Spirit is upon you. In addition to the many blessings promised by the Lord, other great and marvelous gifts were pronounced upon Enoch by the Voice. The joy of being in the service of the Lord was to be manifest by the Lord's Spirit which should come upon him. Of the words of prophecy which Enoch should speak the voice of the Lord said: "Will I justify," meaning that in Me they all shall be fulfilled. The power of the Priesthood which Enoch held would be magnified within him, insomuch that all nature would at Enoch's command be made subject to the cause of the Lord, even that mountains should be flattened, and rivers made to flow where before was dry land.

SCMoses 6 32Moses 6 33Moses 6 34Thou shalt abide in Me, and I will in you. Rely on Me, we conceive the Lord told Enoch, and you shall see My Salvation, My purposes all be fulfilled. Thereafter all things done by Enoch were done with an eye that was single to God's glory, in which he recognized constantly the duty he owed God even though it might cost him all he held dear.

SCMoses 6 32Moses 6 33Moses 6 34Wherefore walk with Me. To walk with God was a common saying among the people of the East "denoting constant and familiar intercourse." Jewish tradition informs us that "Enoch walked with God," (Genesis 5:22) and suggests his "initiation into the mysteries of the universe, and the secrets of the past and future."

Moses 6 36SCMoses 6 35VERSES 35-36. Anoint thine eyes with clay. A simple command; yet we find that in compliance with the least of God's commandments often there comes the greatest rewards. Enoch joyously complied with the instructions given by the Voice, and joyously "beheld the spirits that God had created." Enoch's sight which was of the mortal man was immediately changed that "he beheld also things not visible to the natural eye." In vision Enoch saw behind the veil, and as if occurring naturally he prophesied of them.

SCMoses 6 35Moses 6 36The people were quick in recognizing that in Enoch the Lord had sent a prophet, and that in him evil was rebuked. They cried aloud, and the saying went throughout the land: "A seer hath the Lord raised up unto His people."

SCMoses 6 37Moses 6 38VERSES 37-38. Enoch went forth . . . testifying against their works. Obedient to the Lord's command Enoch went forth and without delay testified (See v. 27) to the people concerning their wickedness. Standing wherever he could gain audience, particularly upon hills and other places of prominence, he with boldness bore witness of their evil works. Unafraid and with a loud voice he vehemently arraigned their wrongdoing. He grew so bold in denouncing their vices that he posed an affront to all his listeners.

SCMoses 6 37Moses 6 38The people throughout the whole land were astonished at his pursuit of their follies and faults. What were then great numbers "came forth to hear him." Many who were keepers of flocks and herds and lived in tents, left their tents saying to their hired "tent-keepers" "tarry ye here and keep the tents, while we go yonder to behold the seer." They, half curious, and half afraid, wanted to hear what he said for it was noised around that "there is a strange thing in the land; a wild man hath come among us." Some thought him mad and beside himself, others that he was a person who lived in a state of nature—wild and unruled.

Moses 6 39VERSE 39. No man laid his hands on him. As we noted in the previous verse many came to see Enoch and hear him speak. Some came for one reason and some for another. But there were others who plotted against him; they came thinking to manhandle him. However the Lord was with him, and his words were spoken as the Holy Spirit gave him utterance. The people who were gathered about him immediately saw the justice of his prophecies and the awful consequences of ignoring them. Their import was not lost upon their quaking souls. Fear came upon Enoch's would-be defamers and those who sought to make sport of him. In consequence thereof "no man laid his hands on him; for he walked with God." (See v. 34.)

Moses 6 39We are reminded of a similar incident recorded of the Prophet Abinadi (Mosiah 13, Book of Mormon.) As was Enoch, Abinadi was sent by the Lord to cry repentance to a wicked and perverse generation. We may read the account of one and apply its teachings to the other.

Moses 6 39"1. And now when the king had heard these words, he said unto his priests: Away with this fellow, and slay him; for what have we to do with him, for he is mad.

Moses 6 39"2. And they stood forth and attempted to lay their hands on him; but he withstood them, and said unto them:

Moses 6 39"3. Touch me not, for God shall smite you if ye lay your hands upon me, for I have not delivered the message which the Lord sent me to deliver; neither have I told you that which ye requested that I should tell; therefore, God will not suffer that I shall be destroyed at this time.

Moses 6 39"4. But I must fulfil the commandments wherewith God has commanded me; and because I have told you the truth ye are angry with me. And again, because I have spoken the word of God ye have judged me that I am mad.

Moses 6 39"5. Now it came to pass after Abinadi had spoken these words that the people of king Noah durst not lay their hands on him, for the Spirit of the Lord was upon him; and his face shone with exceeding luster, even as Moses' did while in the mount of Sinai, while speaking with the Lord.

Moses 6 39"6. And he spake with power and authority from God; and he continued his words, saying:

Moses 6 39"7. Ye see that ye have not power to slay me, therefore I finish my message. Yea, and I perceive that it cuts you to your hearts because I tell you the truth concerning your iniquities.

Moses 6 39"8. Yea, and my words fill you with wonder and amazement, and with anger.

Moses 6 39"9. But I finish my message; and then it matters not whither I go, if it so be that I am saved."

Moses 6 40VERSE 40. There came a man unto him, whose name was Mahijah. . . Enoch's words called for serious consultation between his listeners. They wondered at the marvelous things he told them. Who he was and from whereat did he come? were the questions that bothered them most. One chosen from their own number, evidently a chieftain among them, summoned enough courage to be their spokesman.

Moses 6 40Timorously, Mahijah, for that was his name, asked him: "Tell us plainly who thou art, and from whence thou comest?"

Moses 6 41VERSE 41. I came out from the Land of Cainan. . . . Enoch, without hesitancy, answered Mahijah's abrupt query with a plain response: "I came out from the land of Cainan."

Moses 6 41We must not confuse this land with the land of Canaan spoken of in the Old Testament, or with the Holy Land of Christ's ministrations. Both latter two refer to the same area. The land of Cainan here mentioned was in the eastern part of what we know as the continent of North America.

Moses 6 41The land of Cainan was named after the son of Enos, the fourth in the line of patriarchs and the great-grandfather of Enoch. Enos who found that life among the people of Shulon, wherein he and his household resided, was a continual struggle between the righteous and the unrighteous; between those who kept God's commandments and the disobedient. He therefore led the upright of heart to a new land where they could worship God according to His laws. (v.17.)

Moses 6 41In that Promised Land (ibid.), the people of God with steadfast spirits grew into a mighty concourse of those who served God and who sought to do His will. There in God's service, therefore in service to one another and in the goodness of their deeds, they rejoiced in His great Name and exulted in His works. Their land was exalted in righteousness. This land to its inhabitants was not only a heritage of that portion of God's earth whereon they dwelt, but a far greater one of divine blessings.

Moses 6 41Enoch told the many who had gathered about him that in that blessed land, "My father taught me in all the ways of God." (v. 21.)

Moses 6 42VERSE 42. Enoch's own story. Thoroughly imbued with his father's teachings concerning God's ways, Enoch went about the whole land and wherever he found listeners proclaimed His holy purposes.

Moses 6 42On an occasion as he journeyed from the land of Cainan, his ancestral home, seeking to ferret out those who were pure in heart, he "beheld a vision," and described to Mahijah almost in detail the wonderful things he saw while in that glorious state. Not only did he see the marvelous creation God had caused to be made, but in addition thereto, "The Lord spake with me," Enoch said, "and gave me commandment" that I call this people to repent; (v. 27) "therefore to keep the commandment, I speak forth these words."

Moses 6 43VERSE 43. Enoch continued his speech, saying. . . . Enoch testified to those who heard him, and also to those unto whom his words should come by way of those who stood within sound of his voice, that "The Lord which spake with me, the same is the God of heaven, and He is my God, and your God, and ye are my brethren. . . ." Enoch proclaimed the great truth that the God of heaven and of earth is the loving Father of all men, and to seek His counsel is the part of wisdom.

Moses 6 43Why counsel ye yourselves [^4] and thereby put your own wisdom above that of a kind and wise Heavenly Father? "Know ye not," we conceive of him saying, "that your utmost wisdom is foolishness and your greatest strength but absolute weakness when compared to His of Whom I declare." Why deny His existence when you yourselves know that God counseleth in wisdom, and in justice, and in great mercy, over all His works. (See Jacob 4:10.)

SCMoses 6 44Moses 6 45Moses 6 46VERSES 44-46. The heavens He made. . . . In exultant tones Enoch extolled the Majesty On High. A glorious paean in praise of the Creator of heaven and earth left his lips as he proclaimed God's Holy Name. The earth is His and the very foundation thereof, He made it, and by Whose power it is sustained. In His wisdom and His might "an host of men hath He brought in upon the face thereof" to till and subdue it.

SCMoses 6 44Moses 6 45Moses 6 46And death hath come upon our fathers. Enoch noted in answer to his questioners that although death, that state of the soul from whose realm it has been said: "No traveler can return," (II Nephi 1:14) has taken from us the joy of their presence, still we know our fathers lived. As evidence of that fact, the first man of any, Adam, is still with us to this day.

SCMoses 6 44Moses 6 45Moses 6 46For a Book of Remembrance we have written. These things we know because we have kept a record of our forefathers in our own language. That record is known among us as a Book of Remembrance, and is patterned after a design prepared by "The Finger of God." The expression, Finger of God, is used throughout the scriptures and means the power, or the presence, or the purpose of God. It will be noted that when the magicians of Pharaoh's court could not do what they saw Moses and Aaron do, they said: "This is the Finger of God." (Exodus 8:19.)

Moses 6 47VERSE 47. The people trembled. . . . Notwithstanding Enoch's fierce denunciation of their wicked ways, and his dire predictions of things to come, Moses makes no mention that they heeded Enoch's call to REPENT. Instead they feared and trembled. Their whole frames were wracked with anxiety and dread. So smitten were they that they fell to the ground. "They could not stand in his presence," but some furtively slinked out of the sound of his voice.

Moses 6 48VERSE 48. Because that Adam fell, we are. Having commenced to fulfil his God-given command to cry repentance unto the people, Enoch journeyed throughout the land and recounted to all those who listened to his voice, the creation of Adam, the first man. He also reminded them of a fact they well knew: that a multitude of men had followed Adam, the father of all, in settlement of the earth.

Moses 6 48Enoch continued in his discourse to prove the necessity of repentance not only for Adam, but for each and all because every descendant of the First Man had inherited the misery and woe of their father. He showed the folly of attributing to Adam each and every sin and evil to which mortal man is heir. For Enoch drew forth from their innermost hearts that if it were not for Adam's transgression they would not be numbered among the living; not part of that "host of men" God hath brought in upon the face of the earth. (v. 44.)

Moses 6 48Continuing further, Enoch made mention of death which is a separation of the spirit and the mortal body. Such death also came by Adam's fall.

Moses 6 49VERSE 49. Men have become carnal, sensual, and devilish. In the very beginning when Adam and Eve were guests in the Garden of the Lord, Satan intruded upon their privacy and with excuses and pretexts offered them high honor and rich reward if they would transgress God's holy law. They fell to his blandishments and brought misery and suffering into the world. Ever since that time Satan has plotted to do the same thing with Adam's posterity. With flattering words and sophistries that please men's pride and satisfies their whims "he tempteth them to worship him."

Moses 6 49We may not immediately grasp its full significance, but nevertheless it is true that it matters little to Satan just what men believe so long as they do not believe in and worship God in the Name of Jesus Christ. That was a fact in Enoch's time as it is now. The Gospel of the Only Begotten Son was declared to Adam and his children by the voice of God and by angels sent down from heaven. Belief in God, repentance from sin, baptism in water, and reliance upon God's grace, were taught definitely in manifold ways.

Moses 6 49Satan rages at the very Name of Christ; he is the avowed enemy of the Anointed One; Christ is the friend of man; Satan will do anything to destroy that friendship. Therefore, he goes among "the children of men" seeking to make them miserable as he himself is miserable. (Alma 13:1-9.) One of Satan's choicest bits of propaganda lies in tempting men to seek happiness in doing iniquity. So much has he succeeded in deceiving the unwary that "men have become carnal, sensual, and devilish, and are shut out from the presence of God." Carnal, means fleshy, or of the flesh; sensual, devoted to the pleasures of sense and appetite, voluptuous, sometimes lewd; devilish, resembling, characteristic of, or pertaining to the devil. To be shut out of God's presence, means, to be deprived of His holy word, His wisdom and counsel; to be left alone without His guidance.

Moses 6 49That the reader may more fully understand the awful condition into which Satan has lured the children of men, after we quote Nephi, the son of Helaman—than whom there never was a greater prophet of God than he—we will refer such inquirers to the appended list of words spoken by other great men concerning the subject at hand; these words are equally true of Enoch's time:

Moses 6 49"O how foolish, and how vain, and how evil, and devilish, and how quick to do iniquity, and how slow to do good, are the children of men; yea, how quick to hearken unto the words of the evil one, and to set their hearts upon the vain things of the world! Yea, how quick to be lifted up in pride; yea, how quick to boast, and do all manner of that which is iniquity; and how slow they are to remember the Lord their God, and to give ear unto his counsels, yea, how slow to walk in wisdom's paths! Behold, they do not desire that the Lord their God, who hath created them, should rule and reign over them; notwithstanding his great goodness and his mercy towards them, they do set at naught his counsels, and they will not that he should be their guide." (Helaman 12:4-6.)

Moses 6 49Carnal, sensual, and devilish.

Moses 6 492 Nephi 28:21 And lull them away into c. security

Moses 6 49 Mosiah 4:2 Viewed themselves in their own c. state

Moses 6 49 16:3 For they are c. and devilish

Moses 6 49 3 The cause of all mankind becoming c.

Moses 6 49 5 He that persists in his own c. nature

Moses 6 49 12 Gone according to their own c. wills

Moses 6 49 26:4 Even in their c. and sinful state

Moses 6 49 27:25 Changed from their c. and fallen state

Moses 6 49 Alma 22:13 Laying . . . before him, and their c. state

Moses 6 49 30:53 They were pleasing unto the c. mind

Moses 6 49 36:4 Not of the c. mind, but of God

Moses 6 49 41:11 In a c. state, are in the gall of bitter

Moses 6 49 13 "Evil for evil, or c. for c., or devilish

Moses 6 49 42:10 As they had become c., sensual

Moses 6 49SHUT OUT OF GOD'S PRESENCE

Moses 6 49"And our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself; yea, to that being who beguiled our first parents, who transformeth himself nigh unto an angel of light, and stirreth up the children of men unto secret combinations of murder and all manner of secret works of darkness." (II Nephi 9:9.)

Moses 6 50VERSE 50. All men must repent. Repent, means to amend one's life, or to resolve to amend it, as a result of contrition for one's sins; to leave undone that which should not be done, and to do that which should be done. The doctrine of repentance is an essential part of the Gospel, but repentance is not only a doctrine. It is the manifestation of the new life of those who have been born again. It is the real evidence of the resolve to keep God's commandments, to be faithful unto the end, and assures the goodness of one's deeds.

Moses 6 50The Lord has commanded all men to repent. There are none among us who have no need to repent. Repentance leads to the gate (Baptism) through which we enter the kingdom of God. It is not optional with any. It is a must for all. He who will not repent and be baptized "must be damned." [^5]

Moses 6 50Repentance is not a conclusion of the mind, but a determination of the heart to be firm and steadfast in keeping the commandments of the Lord. The call to all men that they repent has been made by every prophet and seer who have ever spoken for the Lord. In every dispensation of the Gospel, and unto all people, faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and repentance from sin, have been declared. Adam, the first man, was told by an angel: "Do all things that thou doest in the Name of the Son, and thou shalt repent. . ." (5:8.) Moses also says of Adam: "Adam hearkened unto the voice of God, and called upon his sons to repent." (6:1.)

Moses 6 51VERSE 51. I am God. . . . Enoch continued to remonstrate to his listeners the folly of their ways in rejecting God's holy word, and in retrospcet showed them how their father Adam hearkened, and lo, he heard the voice of One Who is mighty and powerful; One Whose goings forth are unto all men; even the voice of the Eternal Father, the Everlasting God; the supreme Maker and Ruler of the heavens and the earth, the highest Judge in the Dominions above and the Courts below, saying to him: "I am God; I made the World, and men before they were in the flesh." (v. 3:5.)

Moses 6 51By these latter words the Speaker thereof, not without the desired end, sought to impress upon the First Man that He (God) had authority that could not be overruled; that He was the Utmost in all things: that what He proclaimed was true.

Moses 6 51Adam was still alive, [^6] and he himself was preaching the Gospel message when Enoch, yet a young man, received the divine commission to go through the land and declare repentance. We believe heartily that from Adam's own mouth Enoch heard about the glorious incident herein recorded. [^7]

Moses 6 52VERSE 52. Turn unto Me, and hearken unto My voice. . . . Enoch now proclaimed to the people the same glorious truths that were declared to Adam by the voice of God. In words most simple and beautiful God entreated Adam "To turn unto Me, and hearken unto My voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions (5:8,) and be baptized (7:11; 8:24), even in water, in the Name of Mine Only Begotten Son (1:6, 17) Who is full of grace and truth (1:6, 17), Which is Jesus Christ, (v. 57; 7:50; 8:24) the only Name Which shall be given under heaven whereby Salvation shall come unto the children of men, (5:8), [^8] ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost (1:24), asking all things in His (Christ's) Name, and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given you."

Moses 6 52In this verse is unfolded the everlasting truth that the Gospel of Jesus Christ in its purity was proclaimed in the days of the patriarchs, and was understood by them even as it is fully apprehended today by us.

Moses 6 53VERSE 53. And our father Adam spake unto the Lord. In the conversation between the Lord and Adam, our first parent appears to be somewhat confused or uncertain because he lacked experience to temper his judgment. Not that he doubted the wisdom of his Maker in commanding him to be baptized, but Adam exhibited one of the great characteristics of the true believer, of a Saint, a Christian. Adam sought for knowledge and understanding. Although he asked Why? it was not in the spirit of rebellion or even opposition. It was the showing forth in him of a high degree of intelligence, a desire for truth and light. The Lord God desires that his people obey His commandments, however, not to do so blindly. The ancient Hebrew brethren used to say: "With all thy learning, get understanding." Moreover they recognized as true: "There is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding." (Job 32:8.)

Moses 6 53Understanding is light. Therefore, Isaiah, with near perfect reasoning could say: "O House of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord," (Isaiah 2:5) and furthermore, the Jews long before Isaiah's time were wont to exclaim: "For in Thy light shall we see light." (Psalm 36:9.)

Moses 6 53It was so with Adam. We imagine his thought permeated the thinking of all his children: "Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light upon my path." (Psalm 119:105.) Therefore, Adam, quick to learn, sought the reason for baptism. The Lord answers such requests and did so promptly: "Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden," or in other words we conceive of the Lord saying: "Baptism is for the remission of sin."

Moses 6 54VERSE 54. The Son of God hath atoned for original sin. We need not wonder at it, but the people who lived in the days of the patriarchs understood the Gospel of Jesus Christ in its greatest aspect. The fathers of the human race walked and talked with God. Angels from the Courts of Glory counseled them. Revelations from heaven lighted the way before them. The purpose of Christ's atonement was to them a reality, and its meaning fully recognized. Speaking in terms known to us as Prophetic Past, the atonement made a satisfactory reparation for the transgression of Adam, a righteous reconciliation, through Christ, between God and man. It removed from the heads of little children who themselves are incapable of sinning, any culpability, or blameworthiness whatsoever, for the sins of their fathers. Little children are, they understood, alive in Christ; that is, little children receive the fulness of His redeeming grace. [^9]

SCMoses 6 55Moses 6 56VERSES 55-56. I have given unto you another law and commandment.

SCMoses 6 55Moses 6 56Inasmuch as thy children are conceived in sin, [^10] must not be interpreted to reflect any stain upon man's birthright as a son of God, but it points to worldly conditions brought about by Adam's transgression. The people of the earth had become carnal and sensual. Evil ways and men's sinful practices took the place of goodness and purity. Men sought for the divine blessings of earth and happiness thereon by themselves transgressing God's holy laws. In this state of worldly affairs children were "conceived in sin." When born, it was a sinful existence they entered in upon.

SCMoses 6 55Moses 6 56Sin conceiveth in their hearts. As they grew in years, they partook increasingly of the earth's bounties forgetting the while the Giver thereof. They became hard-hearted, and it was not long until the enticements of the flesh conjured up in their hearts all the sins evil power could suggest or human ingenuity devise. "They sought for happiness in doing iniquity." In this they were mistaken. "Wickedness never was happiness," (Alma 41:10) but a bitter concoction of fears and tears and trembling. Not until we taste the bitter do we "know to prize the good."

SCMoses 6 55Moses 6 56It is given unto them to know good from evil. The Lord has endowed His children with the power of reason to distinguish between right and wrong, and with freedom to choose between good and evil. He has put the bounties of earth's creation within our reach, and hath appointed us to do His will. Above the fleeting things of the world, all He asks is that we seek Him Who is ever near to those whose hearts are lowly.

SCMoses 6 55Moses 6 56For that reason and that we might have hope, He has given mankind the Law of Repentance which He commands be obeyed. The Lord does not desire the death of the sinner, but the transgressor live and return unto Him. To that end, He gave the Law herein spoken. Again we say: "That Law is Repentance," and as we have pointed out, the Lord commands all men to repent.

SCMoses 6 57Moses 6 58VERSES 57-58. Teach it unto your children, that all men, everywhere, must repent. A divine trust was imposed upon parents, even as long ago as the days of the patriarchs, that they teach their children "that all men, everywhere, must repent, or they cannot inherit the kingdom of God." If we read it rightly, it is a command, remembering: "Thy word O God, is my command." It is binding upon us as it was upon them. The Gospel requirements are the same throughout all the generations of every dispensation, the one as the other. Children today are the bearers of the Priesthood tomorrow. They must be taught aright. Lives of purity and holiness, of devotion and loyalty, are nurtured by the early training given them by their parents. In this generation, the Lord has said through the Prophet Joseph Smith: "I have commanded you to bring up your children in light and truth." (Doctrine and Covenants 93:40.)

SCMoses 6 57Moses 6 58In their famous exodus from Egypt the Children of Israel were commanded in like manner. In instructing them about things which were to come, Moses said: "Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God is one Lord: And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart: And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children. . . ." (Deuteronomy 6:4-7.)

SCMoses 6 57Moses 6 58To repent and be baptized is a witness unto God that the repentant one is indeed penitent at heart, and that thereafter and forever will serve his Maker and keep His commandments. If in truth one has complied with the requirements of the sacred Ordinance and fulfilled all its obligations, one's sins are forgiven. One is then as pure and innocent as were Adam and Eve before the tragedy in Eden. Such a Saint—for such they are—is then a rightful heir to a place in God's kingdom, and enters therein clean and spotless from the sins of the world. But we must remember that baptism alone will not save. The conditional stipulation is clearly and definitely stated: "and endures to the end." Ordinances themselves do not save. One can be baptized many times, yet not be saved in the kingdom of God.

SCMoses 6 57Moses 6 58No unclean thing can dwell in His presence. We hereby call upon some of the ancient Nephite worthies to comment upon this thought: "Therefore remember, O man, for all thy doings thou shalt be brought into judgment. Wherefore, if ye have sought to do wickedly in the days of your probation, then ye are found unclean before the Judgment-seat of God; and no unclean thing can dwell with God; wherefore, ye must be cast off forever. And the Holy Ghost giveth authority that I should speak these things, and deny them not." (I Nephi 20-22.) "But behold, I say unto you, the kingdom of God is not filthy, and there cannot any unclean thing enter into the kingdom of God; wherefore there must needs be a place of filthiness prepared, yea, even that awful hell of which I have spoken, and the devil is the foundation of it. . . " (I Nephi 15:34-35.) "And He doth not dwell in unholy temples; neither can filthiness or anything which is unclean be received into the kingdom of God. . . ." (Alma 7:21.) "And I say unto you again that He cannot save them in their sins; for I cannot deny His word, and He hath said that no unclean thing can inherit the kingdom of heaven; therefore, how can ye be saved, except ye inherit the kingdom of heaven? Therefore, ye cannot be saved in your sins." (Alma 11:37.) "But behold, ye have rejected the truth, and rebelled against your holy God; and even at this time, instead of laying up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where nothing doth corrupt, and where nothing can come which is unclean, ye are heaping up for yourselves wrath against the Day of Judgment." (Helaman 8:25.)

SCMoses 6 59Moses 6 60Moses 6 61VERSES 59-61. For by the water ye keep the commandment; by the Spirit ye are justified, and by the blood are ye sanctified. Because that Adam and Eve transgressed God's holy law and partook of the forbidden fruit, they fell from the exalted heights of celestial bliss down to the realm of earthly mortality where sorrow and suffering became their portion, and death the prescribed penalty of their disobedience. However, out of evil, God continuously brings forth good. In the case of the Fall which brought death unto all mankind He unfolded for the benefit of all, the Plan of Life and Salvation.

SCMoses 6 59Moses 6 60Moses 6 61What that Plan is, and the blessings which accrue to the obedient are made plain in these verses wherein the Lord, God Himself, explains to Adam its requirements and its ensuing benefits.

SCMoses 6 59Moses 6 60Moses 6 61Even as one is born into the world, one's entrance therein is made possible by water and blood coming from the mother that nourishes the as yet unborn, which together with the spirit that before had been created by God "became of dust a living soul." Just so, God's Plan of Salvation provides that His children must enter Eternal Life, or the kingdom of God in a manner like unto their entrance into earthly life. "Even so he must be born again into the kingdom of God, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of Mine Only Begotten." To what end? To the end that His children may be delivered from the effects of all sin, and be made holy unto their Father Who is in heaven. The Lord in His Own words puts it this wise: "That ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of Eternal Life in this world, and Eternal Life in the world to come, even immortal glory. For by the water ye keep the commandment; by the Spirit ye are justified, and by the blood are ye sanctified."

SCMoses 6 59Moses 6 60Moses 6 61To the faithful in Christ, the promise is herein made that the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, the Recorder of heavenly things and immortal glory, the Purveyor of Peace [^11]—the Lord's most precious gift—"will abide in you." And by it the truth of all things will be made known for it knoweth all things, and in It all things are made alive. Heavenly grace will clothe the righteous, and to the sanctified in Christ's blood all power will be made manifest "according to wisdom, mercy, truth, justice, and judgment."

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63VERSES 62-63. This is the Plan of Salvation. . . . Here in these verses we have recorded the Personal testimony of God Himself that the Plan of Salvation is unto all men "Through the blood of Mine Only Begotten, Who shall come in the Meredian of Time." Not only that, but God declared by His Own voice that they who by the Holy Spirit justify the remission of their sins, and are "born again" and are made holy by belief in "the blood" of Christ shall enjoy "Eternal Life in the world to come, even immortal glory."

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63All things are created and made to bear record of Me. In perusing this verse we are reminded of the words of King David, the Psalmist: "O Lord, our God, how glorious is Thy Name in all the Earth, Whose majesty is rehearsed above the Heavens. When I behold Thy Heavens, the work of Thy fingers, the Moon and the stars which Thou hast established; what is man, that Thou art mindful of him, and the son of man, that Thou thinkest of him. . . . O Lord, our God, how glorious is Thy Name in all the Earth." (Psalm 8; Hebrew Translation.) Also, a prayer offered by the Jews in their public assemblies:

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63"How manifold are Thy works, O Lord! In wisdom hast Thou made them all; the Earth is full of the riches of Thy bounty.

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63From the rising of the Sun, even unto the going down thereof, the Name of the Lord is praised.

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63With Him are wisdom and might, He hath counsel and understanding.

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63The Heavens are the Lord's, the Earth also and all that is therein.

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63He made great lights, the Sun to rule the day, the Moon and stars to rule the night.

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63He commanded and they were created, He gave a law they cannot transgress.

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63He covereth the Heavens with clouds, and prepareth rain for the Earth

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63He causeth the grass to spring up for the cattle, and herb for the service of man.

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63To bring forth bread out of the ground, and wine that maketh glad the heart of man.

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63Man goeth forth unto his work and to his labor until the evening.

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63God ruleth the proud swelling of the sea; when the waves thereof arise, He stilleth them.

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63He saith: Thus far shalt thou come, but no farther; and here shall thy proud waves be stayed.

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63The Everlasting God hath laid the foundation of the world; He hath placed the cornerstone thereof.

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63The Creator of the ends of the Earth fainteth not, neither is He weary; His discernment is past searching out.

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63The Way of the Lord is perfect, His word is tried, His counsels stand forever.

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63The Lord liveth. Exalted be the God of my Salvation."

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63(Union Prayer Book, Jewish.)

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63In praising God which these verses inspire, we feel constrained to quote part of the 36th Psalm; also a Hebrew Translation: "Thy lovingkindness, O Lord, is in the Heavens, Thy faithfulness reacheth unto the skies. Thy righteousness is like the mighty mountains; thy judgments are like the great deep; man and beast Thou preservest, O Lord. How precious is Thy lovingkindness, O God! And the children of men take refuge in the shadow of Thy wings. They are abundantly satisfied with the fatness of Thy House; and Thou makest them drink of the River of Thy pleasures. For with Thee is the fountain of life; in Thy light do we see light. O continue Thy lovingkindness unto them that know Thee; and Thy righteousness to the upright in heart." (Psalm 8.)

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63Surely, all things are made to bear record of Him. If we had made up our minds to that awful conclusion: "There is no God," we would be above all men most miserable, most deeply to be pitied. We could not rest from inquiry if peradventure we might be able to find Him. We would climb to all heights; we would descent into all depths; we would trace every acre of the globe to see if somewhere we might find indelibly inscribed: "There is a God." Verse 63 is a song of joy, a glorious paean of praise to God, In it all Creation is made to glorify Him, and to magnify His Holy Name. All things are created for and bear record of His goodness and greatness. All things both temporal and spiritual; "things which are in the heavens above, and things which are on the earth, and things that are in the earth, and things which are under the earth, both above and beneath: all things bear record of Him."

SCMoses 6 62Moses 6 63To see the sun, or the moon, or the stars, any of the majestic orbs that "roll upon their wings in their glory," (Doctrine and Covenants 88:45) is to see the power and majesty of God. The Psalmist calls them the "garment" and the "vesture" of the Almighty, that is, the Royal Robe and Crown, by which His majesty is visable to mortal man. Truly, "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth His handiwork." (Psalm 19.) The earth, also, is established as His Memorial.

SCMoses 6 64Moses 6 65Moses 6 66Moses 6 67Moses 6 68VERSES 64-68. And thus was Adam baptized. When the Lord had finished His words spoken to Adam concerning the Plan of Salvation, Adam sought to prolong the conversation between them. Probably Adam looked forward that he might add gladsome praise to his Creator (See v. 63), and also to witness that he had complied with she requirements therein set forth in said Plan. But Adam was estopped from speaking. Only his cry unto the Lord was heard. Suddenly and unforeseen by him, "he was caught away by the Spirit of the Lord, and was carried down into the water, and was laid under the water, and was brought forth out of the water." "And thus was Adam baptized."

SCMoses 6 64Moses 6 65Moses 6 66Moses 6 67Moses 6 68"And the Spirit of God descended upon him, and thus was he born of the Spirit (v. 59), and became quickened in the inner man." (See v. 61.) A voice from heaven was heard saying unto him: "Thou art baptized with fire, and with the Holy Ghost." In these words both the Father and the Son bore record that, now and forever, this would be the established pattern by which all men shall enter the kingdom of God.

SCMoses 6 64Moses 6 65Moses 6 66Moses 6 67Moses 6 68The Voice also assured Adam that he was a holder of God's Priesthood, making of him one like unto the Son of God "Who was without beginning of days or end of years, from all Eternity to all Eternity." And like Him Who is Eternal, by obedience to God's commands he thereby becomes a son of God, and in like manner, all who obey may become "My sons."

Footnotes

"Counsel with the Lord in all thy doings, and He will direct thee for good. . . ." (Alma 37:37.)

Also: II Nephi 9:28; II Nephi 15:19; II Nephi 27:27 "They seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord. . . ."

"And this is My doctrine, and it is the doctrine which the Father hath given unto Me; and I bear record of the Father, and the Father beareth record of Me, and the Holy Ghost beareth record of the Father and Me; and I bear record that the Father commandeth all men, everywhere, to repent and believe in Me." (Jesus Christ, III Nephi 12:32.)

"And moreover, I say unto you, that there shall be no other name given nor any other way nor means whereby Salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the Name of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent." (King Benjamin, Mosiah 3:17.)

"And under this head ye are made free, and there is no other head whereby ye can be made free. There is no other Name given whereby Salvation cometh; therefore, I would that ye should take upon you the Name of Christ, all you that have entered into the covenant with God that ye should be obedient unto the end of your lives." (King Benjamin, Mosiah 5:8.)

"Hear, O ye heavens, and give ear, O earth, and rejoice ye inhabitants thereof, for the Lord is God, and beside Him there is no Savior." (Doctrine and Covenants 76:1.)

"Wherefore, we search the prophets and we have many revelations and the spirit of prophecy; and having all these witnesses we obtain a hope, and our faith becometh unshaken, insomuch that we truly can command in the Name of Jesus and the very trees obey us, or the mountains, or the waves of the sea." (Jacob 4:6.)

"And in the Name of Jesus did he cast out devils and unclean spirits; and even his brother did he raise from the dead, after he had been stoned and suffered death by the people. And the people saw it, and did witness of it, and were angry with him because of his power; and he did also many more miracles, in the sight of the people, in the Name of Jesus." (III Nephi 7:19-20.)

See also III Nephi 8:1; 19:6-8; 26:17-21; 28:1; 29:1; 30:1; IV Nephi 1:5; Mormon 9:6; 9:27; Ether 5:5; Doctrine and Covenants 46:31.

"And little children also have Eternal Life." (Mosiah 15:25.)

"Listen to the words of Christ, your Redeemer, your Lord and your God. Behold, I came into the world not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance; the whole need no physician, but they that are sick; wherefore, little children are whole, for they are not capable of committing sin; wherefore the curse of Adam is taken from them in Me, that it hath no power over them; and the Law of Circumcision is done away in Me." (Mormon, Moroni 8:8.)

Against this gloomy conception of the status of an infant, the Revelation recorded in Section 93, Doctrine and Covenants, sets forth that the spirit of man comes into the world innocent, redeemed from the Fall of Adam through the Atonement of the Savior. True, there are certain consequences of the Fall which remain until Paradise is restored in its first glory, but the infant comes into the world as innocent and pure as our first parents came. As soon, however, as the child begins to awaken to consciousness of its own existence and the existence of the world around him, the adversary endeavors to take away light and truth from it, by planting within it the spirit of disobedience. That is how sin comes into the life of every individual, or human being, as it came to Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden. Parents should, therefore, take up the combat with the adversary from the very first for the mastery of the child by bringing it up in "light and truth." (Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, pp. 596-7.)

---
Notas:
[^1] And it came to pass that Enoch continued his speech, saying: Behold, our father Adam taught these things, and many have believed and become the sons of God, and many have believed not, and have perished in their sins, and are looking forth with fear, in torment, for the fiery indignation of the wrath of God to be poured out upon them. Read entire Genesis Chapters 6-7-8.
[^2] And from that time forth Enoch began to prophesy, saying unto the people, that: As I was journeying, and stood upon the place Mahujah, and cried unto the Lord, there came a voice out of heaven, saying—Turn ye, and get ye upon the mount Simeon. "And God spake unto Noah, and to his sons with him, saying, And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after you; And with every living creature that is with you, of the fowl, of the cattle, and of every beast of the earth with you; from all that go out of the ark, to every beast of the earth. And I will establish my covenant with you; neither shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood; neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth. And God said, this is the token of the covenant which I make between me and you and every living creature that is with you, for perpetual generations." (Genesis 9:8-12.)
[^3] And it came to pass that I turned and went up on the mount; and as I stood upon the mount, I beheld the heavens open, and I was clothed upon with glory; The Jews have a saying which evidently had its inception in these words of Moses: "Who is our King, but our Rock; and Who is our Rock but the Lord, and Who is the Lord save He be God." Of its many Hebrew meanings, Rock, as used here, means Creator.
[^4] And I saw the Lord; and he stood before my face, and he talked with me, even as a man talketh one with another, face to face; and he said unto me: Look, and I will show unto thee the world for the space of many generations. Read Chapters 8-9-10, III Nephi.
[^5] And it came to pass that I beheld in the valley of Shum, and lo, a great people which dwelt in tents, which were the people of Shum. One of Isaiah's celebrated Servant Poems is hereby made reference: "Behold My Servant, Whom I uphold; Mine Elect, in Whom My soul delighteth; I have put My Spirit upon Him: He shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles. He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause His voice to be heard in the street. A bruised reed shall He not break, and the smoking flax shall He not quench: He shall bring forth judgment unto truth. He shall not fail nor be discouraged, til He have set judgment in the earth: and the isles shall wait for His law. Thus saith God the Lord, He that created the heavens, and stretched them out; He that spread forth the earth, and that which cometh out of it; He that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein. I the Lord have called Thee in righteousness, and will hold Thine hand, and will keep Thee, and give Thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles; To open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house. I am the Lord: that is My Name. . . . (Isaiah 42:1-8.)
[^6] And again the Lord said unto me: Look; and I looked towards the north, and I beheld the people of Canaan, which dwelt in tents. Thou art possessed of all power, and can do all things, is the meaning here.
[^7] And the Lord said unto me: Prophesy; and I prophesied, saying: Behold the people of Canaan which are numerous, shall go forth in battle array against the people of Shum, and shall slay them that they shall utterly be destroyed; and the people of Canaan shall divide themselves in the land, and the land shall be barren and unfruitful, and none other people shall dwell there but the people of Canaan; "And not of myself, but through Thine Own grace," means, Thou hast done for me that which I could not do for myself.
[^8] For behold, the Lord shall curse the land with much heat, and the barrenness thereof shall go forth forever; and there was a blackness came upon all the children of Canaan, that they were despised among all people.
[^9] And it came to pass that the Lord said unto me: Look; and I looked, and beheld the land of Sharon, and the land of Enoch, and the land of Omner, and the land of Heni, and the land of Shem, and the land of Haner, and the land of Hanannihah, and all the inhabitants thereof;
[^10] And the Lord said unto me: Go to this people, and say unto them—Repent, lest I come out and smite them with a curse, and they die.
[^11] And he gave unto me a commandment that I should baptize in the name of the Father, and of the Son, which is full of grace and truth, and of the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of the Father and the Son.
