Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1965)

CHAPTER 7

THE WRITINGS OF MOSES

As revealed to Joseph Smith the Prophet in December, 1830—Continued

SCMoses 7 1Moses 7 2Moses 7 3Moses 7 4VERSES 1-4. Enoch continued his speech. . . . Enoch continued to exhort the people wherever they were willing to listen, saying as he did so: "Our father Adam taught these things." Enoch thereupon called them to believe Adam's words, coming as they did from the mouth of their great progenitor. Your father declares: "Ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of" the Only Begotten Son of God. Adam no doubt was still alive, and an appeal to him could be made whereby to re-enforce their belief. Many, Enoch pointed out, had heard Adam's words and have believed, thus becoming sons of God as He Himself promised, while in their wickedness, Enoch expostulated, others have refused to believe "and have perished in their sins."

SCMoses 7 1Moses 7 2Moses 7 3Moses 7 4The wicked, those who die in their sins, and as God commanded yet repented not look forward to the future with fear and trembling, in torment "for the fiery indignation of the wrath of God to be poured out upon them."

SCMoses 7 1Moses 7 2Moses 7 3Moses 7 4Enoch began to prophesy. The testimony of Christ which was burning within his breast inspired Enoch's great and urgent message. It was the spirit of prophecy that forced him onward. Not once did his zeal slacken. Although he was young, judged by the life of man in patriarchal times, his zeal was tempered with wisdom, and he was guided by a high regard for God's command which he had received. In boldness and with vigor he proclaimed the incidents of a vision vouchsafed to him as he journeyed throughout the land preaching Christ and repentance from sin.

SCMoses 7 1Moses 7 2Moses 7 3Moses 7 4On an occasion as Enoch traveled thusly, he "stood upon the Place Mahujah," and there in humble prayer cried unto the Lord for guidance in performing the mission to which he had been appointed. As he was in that lowly attitude, he heard a Voice which seemed to come out of heaven: "Turn ye, and get ye upon the Mount Simeon."

SCMoses 7 1Moses 7 2Moses 7 3Moses 7 4Obedient to the Voice, Enoch turned himself about and went up to the place commanded. As he stood there the majesty of the Lord came upon him, "and he was clothed upon with glory." He saw the heavens open, and the glorious splendor of the Majesty's presence filled his soul. A divine light shone round about him.

SCMoses 7 1Moses 7 2Moses 7 3Moses 7 4I saw the Lord. In this providentially adorned setting, Enoch saw the Lord, "And He stood before my face, and He talked with me, even as a man talketh one with another, face to face." Enoch was commanded to "Look, and I will show unto thee the world for the space of many generations." Enlightened by the spirit of holiness, Enoch obeyed the Lord.

SCMoses 7 5Moses 7 6Moses 7 7Moses 7 8Moses 7 9Moses 7 10Moses 7 11VERSES 5-11. And it came to pass that I beheld in the Valley of Shum a great people which dwelt in tents. Enoch looked as he was commanded, and saw the Valley of Shum in which dwelt "a great people." They were, with little doubt, keepers of sheep and goats. And as they lived in tents they could move about rapidly from pasture to pasture to tend their flocks.

SCMoses 7 5Moses 7 6Moses 7 7Moses 7 8Moses 7 9Moses 7 10Moses 7 11Again the Lord said to Enoch, "Look," and Enoch turned towards the north, "and beheld the people of Canaan" who also dwelt in tents.

SCMoses 7 5Moses 7 6Moses 7 7Moses 7 8Moses 7 9Moses 7 10Moses 7 11While Enoch was silently contemplating the scene before him, the Lord said unto him, "Prophesy." And Enoch's tongue was loosed that he foretold the future course pursued by those people. The people of Canaan "which are numerous" shall in the not far distant future make war upon "the people of Shum," and shall slay them, and utterly destroy them. The land taken by the Canaanites from the People of Shum will be divided among the victors, but because that it was cursed by the Lord, the ground will prove to be "barren and unfruitful." None other people but the Canaanites who were wanderers and nomads could find sustenance thereon.

SCMoses 7 5Moses 7 6Moses 7 7Moses 7 8Moses 7 9Moses 7 10Moses 7 11The Canaanites too were of bitter visage; they were black-skinned, and "despised among all people."

SCMoses 7 5Moses 7 6Moses 7 7Moses 7 8Moses 7 9Moses 7 10Moses 7 11Once more the Lord commanded Enoch to "Look," and Enoch testifies that he "beheld the land of Sharon, and the land of Enoch, and the land of Omner, and the land of Heni, and the land of Shem, and the land of Haner, and the land of Hannanihah, and all the inhabitants thereof."

SCMoses 7 5Moses 7 6Moses 7 7Moses 7 8Moses 7 9Moses 7 10Moses 7 11There was not a land in which the children of Adam lived that Enoch did not see, and the Lord commissioned him to cry unto them: "Repent, lest I come out and smite them with a curse, and they die."

SCMoses 7 5Moses 7 6Moses 7 7Moses 7 8Moses 7 9Moses 7 10Moses 7 11Enoch was commanded by the Lord to baptize the repentant ones "in the Name of the Father, and of the Son . . . and of the Holy Ghost. . . ." This is the same commandment which has been given to the Priesthood in every dispensation of the Gospel. The Prophet Nephi says that it is the gate through which we enter the kingdom of God; it is also a covenant in which we solemnly make a compact with God that we will serve Him, maintain our faith in Him, and be disciplined by His Holy Word.

SCMoses 7 12Moses 7 13VERSES 12-13. Enoch continued to call upon all people to repent, save it were the people of Canaan. Losing no time in idleness, or even to relax his tired frame, weary and worn with the toils in his Master's cause, Enoch went forth and as quickly as his divinely inspired efforts would permit, pronounced among every people, save it were the Canaanites, the words which the Lord had given unto him. "Repent," he cried, and thereby escape the Lord's wrath. His message was forceful and clear.

SCMoses 7 12Moses 7 13Soon the wicked and those who loved iniquity came to battle against the people of God, and Enoch whose voice was ever with those of the righteous led them to encounter the enemy of all that is good and pure.

SCMoses 7 12Moses 7 13Enoch led them not only with slings and swords, but with the word of God. Power was given to him that by the Holy Spirit mountains were removed, rivers were turned from their usual courses, and all things were made to serve God's purposes. So great was the power of Enoch's words that the wicked feared and trembled, and all nature took upon itself the exertion of its utmost strength to accomplish God's designs.

SCMoses 7 14Moses 7 15VERSES 14-15. There went forth a curse upon all the people that fought against God. In the last verse (13) we saw that the earth trembled, mountains fled, high places were made smooth, rivers of water flowed along channels not in their regular course; all nature combined to expedite truth and righteousness in the conduct of God's Plans.

SCMoses 7 14Moses 7 15So great were nature's convulsions brought about by God's power at Enoch's command that a new land appeared out of the ocean's depths. This made the enemies of God's people fear and quake exceedingly, and hoping to escape the wrath of God which threatened to cause them to be engulfed in the tumultuous waves, "went upon the land which came up out of the depths of the sea."

SCMoses 7 14Moses 7 15And the giants of the land . . . stood afar off . . . The Hebrew word for giants used in Genesis as it is used here implies that those referred to were not especially of great stature, but instead were ferocious, impious, and daring characters who delighted in carnage and devastation wherever they were to be found.

Moses 7 18SCMoses 7 16Moses 7 17VERSES 16-18. The Lord came and dwelt with His people. While the wicked raged; the devil laughed and his angels rejoiced because of wars and bloodshed, the righteous gathered together and the Lord Himself dwelt with them. In righteousness they lived in celestial bliss. Greater than the power of the sword were the peaceful pleasures of the Lord which lifted His people to unprecedented heights of tranquility and charity. Every man walked with God; they sought Him to glorify.

SCMoses 7 16Moses 7 17Moses 7 18The dread of those who fought the powers of righteousness became so great that fear came upon all nations lest they should be swallowed up. However, the righteous of every habitation rejoiced in God's Holy Name and exulted in His grace. The Lord blessed their dwelling places, even the whole land; the high places and the mountains brought forth the riches of their bounties insomuch so that all God's people flourished because of His goodness to them.

The Lord called His people, ZION. The Lord, seeing that His people desired to serve Him, in which they were of "one heart and one mind," called them Zion which means "the pure in heart." (Doctrine and Covenants 97:21.)

Moses 7 19VERSE 19. Enoch built a city that was called the City of Holiness, even Zion. The preaching of the Prophet Enoch was met with so much success that the number of God's people waxed even greater than the place of their habitation could contain. He therefore built a city and dedicated it to the purposes of God. He called it the CITY OF HOLINESS, EVEN ZION after the people of God. In the previous verse (18) we are told that the Lord called His people, ZION, because, He said, they "were pure in heart." Besides that quality which made them a people apart from any other they were united, righteous, and prosperous.

Moses 7 20VERSE 20. Zion have I blest. Enoch, although mighty in the strength of the Lord, was of all men most humble. Nothing did he do unless he first sought the Lord for guidance. He bowed before THE MAJESTY ON HIGH and besought His will. Enoch's concern was God's service, and in prayer entreated the welfare of Zion, that it would always dwell in safety above and beyond the tumult and strife of the wicked.

Moses 7 20In answer to Enoch's mighty supplication that "Zion shall dwell in safety forever," the Lord graciously told him, "Zion have I blessed, but the residue of the people have I cursed." We are reminded of the words of Solomon, the wise old Hebrew King: "The blessing of the Lord, it maketh rich, and He added no sorrow with it." (Proverbs 10: 22.)

Moses 7 21VERSE 21. The Lord showed Enoch all the inhabitants of the earth. Further answering Enoch's prayer the Lord showed him all the people that should inhabit the earth. In the vision that passed before his blessed eyes, Enoch saw that Zion, the city wherein dwelt God's people "was taken up into heaven," whereupon the assurance was given him that the Lord, by His Holy Spirit, will be and abide there forever; a direct answer to Enoch's prayer as recorded in the preceding verse (20).

Moses 7 22VERSE 22. Enoch also beheld the residue of the people. After the Lord had promised Enoch that His Spirit should abide in Zion forevermore, Enoch saw in prophetic vision the "residue" of the people and their proceedings. He noted that they were "a mixture of all the seed of Adam save it was the seed of Cain" who were black, and had not intermarried. The seed of Cain were because of the color of their skin and their unapproachable aspect, a people who lived unto themselves, "and had no place among" their fairer brethren.

SCMoses 7 23Moses 7 24Moses 7 25VERSES 23-25. All the nations of the earth were before Enoch. After Enoch saw that his prayer concerning the city which he builded, and its future safety would be answered in the blessings of the Lord, and that Zion would be preserved in holiness even in the heavens above, he beheld in addition thereto all the nations of the earth. Their course and their destiny came before him.

SCMoses 7 23Moses 7 24Moses 7 25He saw many generations come and go; he saw their righteousness and their wickedness, their faults and their follies, their foolishness. From the heavenly realm unto which he had been lifted, Enoch beheld that "The power of Satan was upon all the face of the earth." He also saw "angels descending out of heaven" bearing divine commissions to render aid and comfort to the children of men. In the midst of those perilous times, Enoch heard a loud voice saying: "Wo, wo unto the inhabitants of the earth."

Moses 7 26VERSE 26. Enoch beheld Satan . . . Satan roamed the earth, and Enoch saw him holding "a great chain in his hand" wherewith to bind the earth's inhabitants. It was the chain of darkness with which Satan designed to hold the children of men in ignorance, in error and superstition. "Darkness covered the earth, and gross darkness the people," and in his wicked way Satan took delight in tightening the links that bound men as his slaves. "He looked up" towards heaven "and laughed, and his angels rejoiced." (See III Nephi 9:2.)

Moses 7 27VERSE 27. Enoch beheld angels descending out of heaven. . . . To counteract the darkness with which Satan devoured the innocent and good among the children of men, angels sent from the Courts of Glory to men on earth bore witness to them of the Father and the Son, testifying to them that there is a God in heaven Who created them, and His Son, Jesus Christ, Who saved them. Many believed the words of the angels, and were "born again" as was commanded. "The Holy Ghost fell on many, and they were caught up by the powers of heaven into Zion" where On High the people of the Lord dwelt in safety.

Moses 7 28VERSE 28. God wept. The loving Father of all men looked upon the inhabitants of the earth whom He had created—but who had separated themselves from the ties that bound His great family into one—and wept. Seeing that His children chose only to do evil; constantly approaching that goal beyond which the last effort of human wickedness cannot pass, He was grieved, and the heavens "shed forth their tears as the rain upon the mountains."

SCMoses 7 29Moses 7 30Moses 7 31VERSES 29-31. How is it Thou canst weep? That God could weep, seeing that He is all powerful and all knowing, the same from all Eternity, disturbed Enoch, and he sought the reason therefore.

SCMoses 7 29Moses 7 30Moses 7 31We conceive that Enoch reasoned thusly: "The majesty of the Lord; the glorious splendor of His might; His boundless Creations; He Who stretched forth the canopy of the heavens, and laid the foundation of the earth; He Who let the curtains of evening fall, and in Whose mercy madest light to shine over the earth and its people; He Who reneweth daily the work of Creation; and yet being so powerful as Thou art, Thou art merciful and kind; Thou art in all things and about all things; at Thy word the mighty fall and the slave made free. Where can I go that Thou dost not abide therein? Where can I flee from Thy presence? If I go to the nethermost parts of the earth Thou art there, I am still in Thy bosom. Thy way, O God, is perfect; Thy councels stand forever. Thou, O Lord, from all Thy creations has taken Zion unto Thy bosom, where peace, justice, and truth, justify the righteous, and Thy mercy endures forever. 'How is it Thou canst weep?'"

SCMoses 7 32Moses 7 33VERSES 32-33. These thy brethren are the workmanship of Mine Own hands. Perceiving his wonderment in that sorrow and anguish overflowed the Almighty's very Being with tears, the Lord quickly assured Enoch that it was not because of weakness that He wept, or lack of firmness whatsoever, but compassion for the suffering, and pity for the wicked. Suffering and wickedness go hand in hand.

SCMoses 7 32Moses 7 33In explaining to Enoch the reason "Why He wept," the Lord told him that "These are thy brethren." I created them and thee in the spirit world before you were born upon the earth as mortals. "They are the workmanship of Mine Own hands." The Lord also informed Enoch that He had given them knowledge of His great purposes when He first created them that they could reason between right and wrong, "And in the Garden of Eden, gave I unto man his Free Agency," or the freedom to choose between good and evil.

SCMoses 7 32Moses 7 33They should love one another. At the very beginning of their existence the Lord commanded His children that as one great family, they should love as brethren one another, and "Choose Me, their Father" to serve. This commandment is like unto what the Lord Jesus Christ when He was here upon the earth called the first and great commandment: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might . . . and the second is like unto it, thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." (Matthew 22:37-39.) The Hebrew word translated as neighbor is best understood by interpreting it to mean brother.

SCMoses 7 32Moses 7 33Nevertheless, and in spite of their early teachings—"Thou shalt love one another" which in fact was a command—men became so engrossed in the pursuits and pleasures of life that all thoughts of God were crowded from their hearts. They became devoid of affection, and so much so did they despise the command of God that "They hate their own blood." They sought for happiness in doing iniquity (Samuel, the Lamanite).

SCMoses 7 32Moses 7 33We can do no better here than to quote in full the words of Samuel concerning the Nephites of his time, and compare his description of them with the "residue" of the people of Enoch's age. The same is true of each. It is therein to be noted that the devil has used the same allurements to entice unto wickedness throughout every generation of God's children.

SCMoses 7 32Moses 7 33"Behold, we are surrounded by demons, yea, we are encircled about by the angels of him who hath sought to destroy our souls. Behold, our iniquities are great. O Lord, canst thou not turn away thy anger from us? And this shall be your language in those days. But behold, your days of probation are past; ye have procrastinated the days of your salvation until it is everlastingly too late, and your destruction is made sure; yea, for ye have sought all the days of your lives for that which ye could not obtain; and ye have sought for happiness in doing iniquity, which thing is contrary to the nature of that righteousness which is in our great and Eternal Head." (Helaman 13:37-38.)

Moses 7 34VERSE 34. I will send in the floods upon them. To have kindled before one the fierce fire of God's indignation is indeed terrible. It discloses a long course of disobedience to His laws, and a self-determined rebellion against His mind and will. Whether it be one or many, an individual or a host of men, a nation or a people, continuation therein brings its own reward—destruction.

Moses 7 34Although the Lord is slow to anger and His mercy endures forever, He cannot, nor will He, allow the workmanship of His hands to be utterly wasted by the wickedness of men. Man's creation was for a glorious purpose, and we believe that notwithstanding man's faults and follies, "The eternal purposes of the Lord shall roll on, until all His promises are fulfilled." (Mormon 8:22.) But when in men's hearts they say: "We will destroy the work of the Lord, and He will not remember the purpose of our creation"—the same is in danger of being cast into the fire above mentioned.

Moses 7 34And so it was with the residue of the people of Enoch's time; the fierce flames of the fire of God's wrath were kindled against them. They, however, supplied the bellows by which the flames were blown. They plunged deeper and deeper into crime, degradation and filth; into depths that could not be fathomed. In the "hot displeasure" of the Lord because wickedness abounded where the seeds of righteousness had been sown, the Lord, not in anger, but in pity, solemnly declared: "Will I send in the floods upon them."

Moses 7 35VERSE 35. I am God; Man of Holiness is My Name. "I am God;" I rule in the heavens above, and in the earth beneath. In truth I counsel, and in holiness I command. All things that are done, are done in My wisdom. "Endless and Eternal is My Name."

Moses 7 35Again the Lord thought it wise to impress upon Enoch that He (the Lord) had all power and all wisdom, and commanded all things for good.

Moses 7 36VERSE 36. There has not been so great wickedness as among thy brethren. Because He (the Lord) is eternal and endless, and because of His wisdom and might, all things are made to come at His bidding. Also at His word the farthest away of His Creations present themselves to His vision. Nothing is there that He cannot see; nothing but what obeys His will. With his all-piercing eye He can mark even the smallest of His works.

Moses 7 36"And among all the workmanship of Mine hands, there has not been so great wickedness as among thy brethren."

SCMoses 7 37Moses 7 38VERSES 37-38. These which thine eyes are upon shall perish in the floods. Because iniquity abounded among the fathers, therefore little or no attempt was made to instruct their children in the ways of the Lord, the sins of the rising generations would be counted against their parents. Today this is a fundamental teaching of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The devil who is the father of all lies, is also the father of all that is evil. He begets the evil inclinations that occupy men's hearts, and thus he becomes the father of that which comes forth—he is a prototype of sin.

SCMoses 7 37Moses 7 38"And because he (Satan) had fallen from heaven, and had become miserable forever, he sought also the misery of all mankind" (II Nephi 2:18). Therefore the evil children like an evil father "shrink from the presence of the Lord into a state of misery and endless torment from whence they can no more return." (See Mosiah 3:25.) "Misery shall be their doom."

SCMoses 7 37Moses 7 38Sadness and that quality within that afflicts us because our loved ones are afflicted caused "all the workmanship of" God's hands to mourn, and "weep over them" for "Behold, these which thine eyes are upon shall perish in the floods." A small portion of God's Creation had failed in the purpose thereof, "wherefore should not the heavens weep, seeing these shall suffer?" However, a prison has been prepared for them where they may again be taught and learn of righteousness, and there awaiting their release, they will be shut up in misery and wo until the great and dreadful Day of the Lord.

SCMoses 7 39Moses 7 40VERSES 39-40. Wherefore, He suffereth for their sins. . . . In God's mercy, and His grace, a way has been prepared, and a pathway marked out by which the sinner, even those of Noah's day, may live and return unto Him.

SCMoses 7 39Moses 7 40The Great Mediator between God and man, Jesus Christ, Whom God has chosen as His representative in all matters pertaining to His children, has pled before God's face, personally offering to suffer for sins which He did not commit if only the sinner would repent and return unto God in the day of His forebearance. "But, until that Day they shall be in torment."

SCMoses 7 39Moses 7 40"Wherefore," this costly price for sin causes the heavens to weep, and all nature, the work of God's hands, mourns and refuses to be comforted.

Moses 7 41VERSE 41. The Lord . . . told Enoch all the doings of the children of men. Enoch's vision was not yet ended. He saw the perfidy and the wickedness of men as if they were in actual presence before him. The Lord explained the different scenes as they were made manifest to him. With exalted understanding Enoch looked upon the wicked ways into which mankind had fallen, and saw the misery evil entailed and that torment and wo encircled them about. Enoch's conpassion for the suffering could no longer be restrained although he knew that they were victims of their own corruption. Enoch wept. His sorrow for the distressed excited by pity for them knew no bounds. It could not be confined. Although they abounded in wickedness his love of mankind was intense. His hatred of evil was keen and inexhaustible, and almost overwhelmed with sadness he stretched forth his arms as if in prayer unto mercy. He wondered if in all Eternity they would be forgiven, and his heart "swelled" at the thought; his bowels yearned with compassion for he knew that God, the merciful Father, had them in charge in death as well as in life.

SCMoses 7 42Moses 7 43VERSES 42-43. Enoch saw that Noah built an Ark. Among the generations of Adam's posterity which Enoch saw there appeared Noah and his family. It was revealed to him that all the sons of that great patriarch would be saved from the waters that would flood the earth.

SCMoses 7 42Moses 7 43Enoch also saw that Noah built an Ark [^1] wherein to save himself and his family from a rainstorm that would flood the dwelling places of man. He saw that the Lord was its protector, and would deliver it from wind, and storm, and tempest. But, "upon the residue of the wicked the floods came and swallowed them up."

Moses 7 44VERSE 44. I cannot be comforted. When Enoch saw that disaster would overtake his brethren because of their iniquity of which they would not repent, his heart was filled with sorrow and his mind was troubled. He wept. "I refuse to be comforted," he cried unto the heavens. In despair and anguish of soul, he almost lost hope. When the Lord, seeing his distress, pitied him, and said: "Lift up your heart, and be glad; and look."

SCMoses 7 45Moses 7 46VERSES 45-46. When shall the Day of the Lord come? Joyously, the Lord commanded Enoch to be glad, and look; for the scenes that now were to be presented before Enoch's vision would unfold to him God's Plan to save even all who because of wickedness are drowned in the waters that presently would inundate the earth.

SCMoses 7 45Moses 7 46Enoch saw Noah, and that from him would come all the families of the earth. Noah, it was shown, and through his sons and their seed, would people anew the vast regions which God had created for man's use and benefit.

SCMoses 7 45Moses 7 46Enoch anxiously, but with great forbearance for the wicked, yet somewhat impatiently, cried unto the Lord Who was at his side: "When shall the Day of the Lord come? When shall the Blood of the Righteous be shed, that all they that mourn may be sanctified and have Eternal Life?" It is amply shown in these words that the atoning blood of Jesus Christ was not just a mysterious tradition in which the people vaguely believed, but was an active faith unto Salvation to those who were eager to serve the Lord.

SCMoses 7 45Moses 7 46In the Meridian of Time. The time of Christ's birth; generally believed to be about equidistant between the time of Adam, and the end of the millennium.

Moses 7 47VERSE 47. Enoch saw the day of the coming of the Son of Man. Not only did Enoch see the day when Christ would come and be born of the flesh, but he understood the great blessings which His coming would bring to all mankind. "His soul rejoiced"; he joyed in the Lord and exulted in His grace. He saw wherein the Righteous, even Jesus Christ, would be lifted up upon a cross and would be slain for men's sins. He saw that through faith on Christ's Name, he would be saved eternally with the Father and therein shall dwell in safety with Zion where the Lord shall always abide.

Moses 7 48VERSE 48. When shall I rest? As Enoch stood upon Mount Simeon contemplating the glorious event last referred to, he heard a voice coming as it were from deep inside the earth upon which he stood. It was not a harsh voice although it was long and loud; it was a voice raked with indignation and one of lamentation. Speaking of the inhabitants of the earth, we conceive that the meaning of its words was something like this: They have partaken of my bounties and have devoured them in riotous living; they have polluted my streams of living waters, and waters from the stinking springs of iniquity have flooded my fair face deep as the ocean with their impurities; they have accepted my gifts but have forgotten Him Who made all things. "Wo, wo, is me, the mother of men; I am pained, I am weary, because of the wickedness of my children. When shall I rest, and be cleansed from the filthiness which is gone forth out of me? When will my Creator sanctify me, that I may rest, and righteousness for a season abide upon my face?"

SCMoses 7 49Moses 7 50VERSES 49-50. O Lord, wilt Thou not have compassion upon the earth? When Enoch heard the doleful exclamations of the earth, and saw the pitiful sufferings and distress of his brethren who were consigned to death in the waters of a flood which was to come, compassion for them filled his soul. His heart was troubled, and in anguish cried unto the Lord to be merciful unto the children of Noah who thereafter would inherit the earth, and have compassion upon their dwelling place.

SCMoses 7 49Moses 7 50As was commanded (to ask all things of the Father in the Name of the Only Begotten Son-even Jesus Christ) Enoch, undeterred by the anguish of his soul, continued to plead with the Father to "have mercy upon Noah and his seed, that the earth might never more be covered by the floods." This, he asked of God "In the Name of Thine Only Begotten, even Jesus Christ."

SCMoses 7 51Moses 7 52Moses 7 53VERSES 51-53. I am Messiah, the King of Zion, the Rock of Heaven. The Lord, seeing that Enoch's trust in His mercy was so great, could not refrain from granting the blessings for which Enoch pleaded. The Lord therefore covenanted with Enoch, and "sware unto him with an oath," that never again would the floods come in upon the children of men. This same promise would continue in force and effect down through all the generations of Noah's seed, and what was still more, the Lord would confirm it for He said "He would call upon the children of Noah," and with His Own Voice make it known unto them. [^2]

SCMoses 7 51Moses 7 52Moses 7 53The Lord sent forth a decree that could not be altered, for the Lord Himself said it, and it cannot be changed, that Noah's descendants would always be found in the households of men as long as "the earth should stand."

SCMoses 7 51Moses 7 52Moses 7 53"Blessed is he through whose seed Messiah shall come"; the Lord pronounced and proclaimed a blessing upon Noah because through Noah He should be born as a mortal man. "I am Messiah, the King of Zion, the Rock [^3] of Heaven," which embraces all things both present and past and future, from Eternity to Eternity.

SCMoses 7 51Moses 7 52Moses 7 53Blessing not only Noah but also his seed who "cometh into My Kingdom at the Gate," the entrance to which leads the Straight and Narrow Path, "and climbeth up by Me shall never fall." They shall continue on until the end "for they shall come forth with songs of everlasting joy."

SCMoses 7 54Moses 7 55Moses 7 56Moses 7 57VERSES 54-57. When shall the earth rest? Enoch, still yearning for wisdom and knowledge, again cried unto the Lord: "When the Son of Man cometh in the flesh, shall the earth rest?" With a joyous hope Enoch awaited the Lord's answer.

SCMoses 7 54Moses 7 55Moses 7 56Moses 7 57Not in words, but in scenes foreshadowing the coming of Messiah, the King of Zion, the Rock of Heaven; His death upon the cross; His ministry and ascension into heaven; were all beheld by Enoch. Also he heard a loud voice proclaiming the Son of Man, the Only Begotten of God; and a mist darkened the heavens from view; and all Creation grieved; while the earth groaned and the rocks thereof were broken up; and the saints, those who were dead yet believed on Him, arose from their graves, "and were crowned at the right hand of the Son of Man, with crowns of glory." [^4]

SCMoses 7 54Moses 7 55Moses 7 56Moses 7 57Enoch also saw come forth the spirits of the righteous who were in prison, [^5] and they took the place prepared for them which was on the "right hand of God." The spirits of men who had been wicked while upon earth, were left in "chains of darkness" until the Day of Judgment, not knowing their fate and fearing their lot.

SCMoses 7 58Moses 7 59VERSES 58-59. Enoch again cried: "When shall the earth rest?" Not quite understanding the import of the scenes presented before him, Enoch again asked the Lord: "When shall the earth rest?" meaning, When shall the earth be cleansed from sin? When shall it be relieved of the afflictions wherewith it is afflicted by the wicked? When shall righteousness prevail, and wickedness be brought to naught?

SCMoses 7 58Moses 7 59The detached episodes of Christ's ministry that in panorama passed before his vision caused Enoch to wonder the more. He "Beheld the Son of Man ascend up unto the Father," and called after Him: "Wilt Thou not come again upon the earth? Forasmuch as Thou art God, [^6] and I know Thee, and Thou hast sworn to me, and commanded me that I should ask in the Name of Thine Only Begotten; Thou has made me, and given unto me a right to Thy Throne, and not of myself, but through Thine Own grace; [^7] wherefore, I ask Thee if Thou wilt not come again on the earth?"

SCMoses 7 60Moses 7 61Moses 7 62VERSES 60-62. As I live, even so will I come in the Last Days. At a time which to him was not far distant, Enoch envisioned the coming of a day when righteousness and peace should spread the earth over, and the earth be at rest. In prophetic vision he saw the day when unbelief should disappear and error be no more; a day when all men should invoke God's Holy Name; when all the inhabitants of the earth would know that Jesus is Christ, the Son of God. With an anxious heart he looked forward to that day, and again inquired of the Lord: "When shall the earth rest?" (See The Day of the Lord, at end of this Chapter.)

SCMoses 7 60Moses 7 61Moses 7 62Enoch's query was graciously answered by the Lord: "As I live, even so will I come in the Last Days, in the days of wickedness and vengeance." The Lord, mindful of the promise He had made to Enoch that He would visit Noah's children again—and we may presume that the Gospel would be preached to them was also promised—nevertheless explained to His servant that before that day comes, great tribulations would be visited upon those who choose to do iniquity. The Lord shall pour out vengeance upon the wicked and upon those who seek to take away the righteousness of the Saints of God. The Lord's vengeance is fierce, but He will spare His people.

SCMoses 7 60Moses 7 61Moses 7 62Again, before that day comes, the heavens will be darkened and no Voice will be heard therefrom. A veil of darkness shall cover the earth, and no light from God will penetrate the night; the Word of God will not dispel the blackness of that day. Ignorance and superstition will mock the glorious day of the Lord that then approaches. The Prophet Isaiah also saw this Day of Vengeance and said that it was because the wicked have "Cast away the Law of Lord of Hosts, and despised the Word of the Holy One of Israel." (Isaiah 5:14-25.) "But," the Lord says: "My people will I preserve."

SCMoses 7 60Moses 7 61Moses 7 62"Truth," that noble attribute of things unseen, but nevertheless are real, which the Lord said He will "send forth out of the earth to bear witness of Mine Only Begotten" shall be "truth" founded upon God's holy law, upheld and sustained by righteousness. "His resurrection from the dead; yea, and also the resurrection of all men" shall be heralded from one end of the earth to the other, and as a river of water that gives life to the thirsty soil, just so, truth, like a stream whose fountainhead is the Lord our God, will flood the earth as with a sea of glory, and righteousness and truth together will testify that Jesus is Christ, the Son of the Living God, the Savior and the Redeemer of the world.

SCMoses 7 60Moses 7 61Moses 7 62The people of the Lord, scattered throughout all the earth shall be gathered together into one place which will have been prepared by their Redeemer and Lord. It will be a Holy City where all men shall invoke God's Holy Name; a place where God's Spirit will reign in every heart and illumine every soul. The inhabitants of the city will be rich in heavenly treasures. Perfect peace—said to be God's most precious gift—will inspire and inspirit all; every man will deal justly with his neighbors; none will suffer wrong. There, angels from heaven will minister to the children of mortality, and heavenly revelations will be their constant guide. In peace they shall look forward to the coming of their Rock and Redeemer, for, the Lord says: "There shall be My Tabernacle, and it shall be called ZION, a New Jerusalem."

SCMoses 7 63Moses 7 64Moses 7 65Moses 7 66VERSES 63-66. Then shalt thou and all thy city meet them there. A joyous union awaits God's people whom He will gather together into the New Jerusalem. They will come from the four-quarters of the earth to raise the Standard of their King, and to dwell in holiness before Him. Enoch and all the residents of ZION will meet them there. The happiness and bliss of the saints, united not only by their physical presence but in serving God, will know no bounds. Their joy will be keen, their love for one another intense. "We," said the Lord to Enoch, "will receive them into our bosom," and with an holy kiss greet them.

SCMoses 7 63Moses 7 64Moses 7 65Moses 7 66Out of all God's creations, He has chosen a place where personally He may dwell. New Jerusalem, or ZION, is that place. There as King of kings and Lord of lords he will for a thousand years make His abode, and all during that time "the earth shall rest," and He shall counsel with His brethren regarding the welfare of Zion.

SCMoses 7 63Moses 7 64Moses 7 65Moses 7 66Another scene which filled Enoch with joy and therein he rejoiced, was the day when Christ should come again to earth. He saw the last days in which for a thousand years the Son of Man should reign in righteousness, the day when every knee should bow and every tongue confess that He is Christ, the Only Begotten of the Father, the Savior and Redeemer of the world.

SCMoses 7 63Moses 7 64Moses 7 65Moses 7 66However, the Lord warned Enoch that before the Day of the Lord comes, great suffering and afflictions would befall the wicked. He saw the mighty ocean, its troubled waters rushing madly against rocky shores and no one to say to the proud waves: "Hitherto and no farther." He also saw that the hearts of stout men failed to withstand the anguish of the merited justice of an outraged God. He saw that the wicked feared and trembled, and in tears awaited the Day of Judgment.

SCMoses 7 67Moses 7 68Moses 7 69VERSES 67-69. Enoch and all his people walked with God. Crowning his marvelous vision with scenes manifesting the glorious splendor of God's might, Enoch was shown all things pertaining to the kingdom of God upon the earth, and the doings of the righteous even down to the end of the world. He beheld that through the atonement of Christ all the righteous would be saved; he saw the hour of their redemption, and he himself partook of the spirit of that time for the Lord had answered his prayer: "When shall the earth rest?" Enoch was at rest and "received a fulness of joy."

SCMoses 7 67Moses 7 68Moses 7 69ZION, the New Jerusalem, prospered under the righteous leadership of Enoch for three hundred and sixty-five years. During that time he and all his people "walked with God," and God "dwelt in the midst of Zion," for its people were pure in their hearts.

SCMoses 7 67Moses 7 68Moses 7 69ZION IS FLED. With joy Enoch's people served the Lord. Their determination was to keep His commandments, and therefore was there no evil among them. They truly had reached a higher level of goodness and purity which mortals seldom attain, thereupon Enoch and his entire city was taken into heaven. Moses, the historian of those times, noted: "Zion was not, for God received it up into His bosom; and from thence went forth the saying, "ZION IS FLED."

SCMoses 7 67Moses 7 68Moses 7 69THE DAY OF THE LORD OR WHEN SHALL THE EARTH REST?

SCMoses 7 67Moses 7 68Moses 7 69In the beauty of holiness; in power and great authority; surrounded by an unnumbered concourse of angels singing praises to His Name; the Lord omnipotent, the King of Heaven; He Who was and is from all Eternity to all Eternity; the Mighty Prince of Peace, shall come down in Heaven clothed in the brightness of His glory to meet His kingdom which is set up upon the earth.

SCMoses 7 67Moses 7 68Moses 7 69No language, however sublime, can declare the majesty of His coming; no words can tell the glorious splendor of His habitation when again He shall abide in His Holy Mountain. From Mount Zion, His abode upon the earth, the New Jerusalem, shall go forth the law and the Word of the Lord. "How beautiful," says the Prophet, "upon the mountains are the feet of Him that bringeth good tidings; that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of good; that publisheth Salvation; that sayeth unto Zion, Thy God reigneth."

SCMoses 7 67Moses 7 68Moses 7 69Surely, He is our King; our Lord and our God, our Light and our Salvation. Good tidings of man's redemption through Him shall resound from one end of the earth to the other. Christ's Millennial Reign shall be inaugurated. Peace shall fill the earth. The Lord's Peace. Not any and every peace. Not the peace that is purchased upon the field of battle; not the peace that is woven into treaties in the far-away capitals of the earth; not the peace of political accord, nor the peace of mere idleness. But Peace that is founded upon truth, upheld and sustained by righteousness. Any peace in opposition to this is peace, peace, when there is no peace at all.

SCMoses 7 67Moses 7 68Moses 7 69It is the work of righteousness ever to establish peace. The Lord's Peace is our portion. It is the source whence springs our fulness of joy and our gladness; our happiness and content; our love for God's Law. "Great Peace have they which love Thy Law" (Psalm 119:165).

SCMoses 7 67Moses 7 68Moses 7 69When that peaceful Day, the Day of the Lord, shall come; when all men shall invoke His Holy Name; when evil and error shall be no more; when hatred shall disappear; when His Name shall be worshiped in all the earth, then shall our children be taught of the Lord and great shall be the peace of thy children. (Jesus Christ quoted from Isaiah; See III Nephi 22:13.)

SCMoses 7 67Moses 7 68Moses 7 69In that day, the Lamb, unafraid, shall lie down at the side of the lion; "the ramparts of cities shall become the gardens of her citizens; the olive and palm shall grow in the soil that is now beaten hard by the tramp of the soldiers' feet"; the understanding of God's Law shall fill the earth and men shall observe it with their whole hearts. The Voice of the Almighty, yea, a pleasant voice as if it were a whisper, shall swell into a mighty anthem, ceaselessly rendered and universally heard: "PEACE, PEACE, be unto you, because of your faith in My Well-Beloved, Who was from the foundation of the world" (Helaman 5:47). Then all Israel shall see Him and shall hear His Voice, and they shall know that "I am He that doth speak." (III Nephi 20:39.

SCMoses 7 67Moses 7 68Moses 7 69In that day and in our midst; in the midst of those whom He loved so well, yet who nailed Him to a cross, JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS, shall be enthroned above all and shall be crowned King of kings and Lord of lords. Then will the Hosts of heaven unite with the people of the earth in, not saying but shouting: "GLORY! HONOR! MIGHT! MAJESTY! and DOMINION! be unto Him, for He has been crowned our King and He shall reign forever and forever."

SCMoses 7 67Moses 7 68Moses 7 69THEN SHALL THE EARTH REST.

Footnotes

Also, "For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that He might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened in the Spirit: By which also He went and preached unto the spirits in prison; Which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the Ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water." (I Peter 3:18-20.)

Again, see Doctrine and Covenants 76:73; 88:99.

---
Notas:
[^1] And all the days of Enoch were four hundred and thirty years. Sons of God, and sons of men—In Genesis 6:2, it says "that the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair," which was not true; it is a mistranslation of the thought. The Pearl of Great Price says the reverse: "The sons of men saw that those daughters (that is the daughters of the sons of God) were fair." The daughters of the sons of men were not fair, they were black, and their countenances uninviting to the sons of God.
[^2] And it came to pass that Methuselah, the son of Enoch, was not taken, that the covenants of the Lord might be fulfilled, which he made to Enoch; for he truly covenanted with Enoch that Noah should be of the fruit of his loins. "For the Spirit of the Lord will not always strive with men. And when the Spirit ceaseth to strive with man then cometh speedy destruction. . . ." (II Nephi 26:11.)
[^3] And it came to pass that Methuselah prophesied that from his loins should spring all the kingdoms of the earth (through Noah), and he took glory unto himself.
[^4] And there came forth a great famine into the land, and the Lord cursed the earth with a sore curse, and many of the inhabitants thereof died.
[^5] And it came to pass that Methuselah lived one hundred and eighty-seven years, and begat Lamech;
[^6] And Methuselah lived, after he begat Lamech, seven hundred and eighty-two years, and begat sons and daughters;
[^7] And all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred and sixty-nine years, and he died.
