Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1965)

CHAPTER 8

THE WRITINGS OF MOSES

As revealed to Joseph Smith the Prophet in December, 1830—Continued.

SCMoses 8 1Moses 8 2Moses 8 3Moses 8 4Moses 8 5Moses 8 6Moses 8 7Moses 8 8Moses 8 9Moses 8 10Moses 8 11Moses 8 12VERSES 1-12. God truly covenanted with Enoch that Noah should be of the fruit of his loins. These verses contain a genealogy of the patriarchs from Enoch down to the sons of Noah: Methuselah the son of Enoch; Lamech the son of Methuselah, and Noah the son of Lamech, also Japheth, Shem, and Ham, sons of Noah.

SCMoses 8 1Moses 8 2Moses 8 3Moses 8 4Moses 8 5Moses 8 6Moses 8 7Moses 8 8Moses 8 9Moses 8 10Moses 8 11Moses 8 12The Lord had covenanted with Enoch promising him with an oath (7:51) "that Noah should be of the fruit of his loins." (v. 2.) Methuselah, Enoch's son, was not included with his father, nor his father's family when Zion was taken up into heaven, thus making possible the fulfillment of the promise the Lord had made.

SCMoses 8 1Moses 8 2Moses 8 3Moses 8 4Moses 8 5Moses 8 6Moses 8 7Moses 8 8Moses 8 9Moses 8 10Moses 8 11Moses 8 12Methuselah, undoubtedly boasted of his divine favor in that through Noah, who was to be his literal descendant, all "the kingdoms of the earth" would "spring" from him, and from that fact took honor and glory unto himself although it was providential.

SCMoses 8 1Moses 8 2Moses 8 3Moses 8 4Moses 8 5Moses 8 6Moses 8 7Moses 8 8Moses 8 9Moses 8 10Moses 8 11Moses 8 12Moses notes very briefly that a severe famine ravaged the land wherein dwelt both the righteous and the wicked. He also notes that because of this curse which the Lord put thereon "many of the inhabitants thereof died."

SCMoses 8 1Moses 8 2Moses 8 3Moses 8 4Moses 8 5Moses 8 6Moses 8 7Moses 8 8Moses 8 9Moses 8 10Moses 8 11Moses 8 12"And it came to pass that Methuselah lived one hundred and eighty-seven years, and begat Lamech; And Methuselah lived, after he begat Lamech, seven hundred and eighty-two years, and begat sons and daughters; And all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred and sixty-nine years, and he died. And Lamech lived one hundred and eighty-two years, and begat a son, And he called his name, Noah, saying: "This son shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed. And Lamech lived, after he begat Noah, five hundred and ninety-five years, and begat sons and daughters; And all the days of Lamech were seven hundred and seventy-seven, and he died." And Noah was four hundred and fifty years old, and begat Japheth; and forty-two years afterward he begat Shem of her who was the mother of Japheth, and when he was five hundred years old he begat Ham."

SCMoses 8 1Moses 8 2Moses 8 3Moses 8 4Moses 8 5Moses 8 6Moses 8 7Moses 8 8Moses 8 9Moses 8 10Moses 8 11Moses 8 12We notice from the ninth verse that Noah's father, Lamech, was comforted in the birth of his son, and through him saw surcease from the plague and pestilence of the famine that had sown havoc throughout the land.

VERSES 13-14: Noah and his sons were called the sons of God. Noah and his sons, Japheth, Shem, and Ham, unlike the majority of the people about them, gave ear to the Word of God and heeded the words therein spoken. They lived lives of righteousness and were known as "the sons of God." [^1]

SCMoses 8 13Moses 8 14Now when the children of Noah's sons began to increase in numbers and daughters were born to them the "sons of men saw that those daughters were fair," and took them to wife "even as they chose." [^2] They chose by what the eye revealed, not by the love of any righteous ideal, or of any religious affiliation. Thus the believers were unequally yoked with unbelievers, and it is axiomatic that the ungodly will sooner debauch the good "than the good reform the bad."

SCMoses 8 13Moses 8 14In this connection, the expression: sons of God used in Genesis 6:2, is, in the Pearl of Great Price, applied to Noah and his sons. It was the sons of Noah who were the sons of God. Sons of men refers to the disobedient.

Mixed marriages between races and parties of different religious beliefs and practices are the sources of interminable strife and corruption. To this folly we may attribute the abandonment of the people of Noah's time that in after times swallowed them up in the bottomless pits of crime and profligacy. Such unions almost inevitably end in disaster to a righteous cause. We have a classic example of this in the case of King Solomon; in his particular instance, we read:

"But King Solomon loved many strange women, together with the daughter of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonites, and Hittites; of the nations concerning which the Lord said to the Children of Israel, Ye shall not go in to them, neither shall they come in to you; for surely they will turn away your heart after other gods: Solomon clave unto these in love. . .For it came to pass, when Solomon was old, that his wives turned away his heart after other gods: and his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as was the heart of David his father." (I Kings 11:1-4.)

Solomon, as shown here, made social alliances with idolaters contrary to the commandments of God, and adopted features of their worship. It was this that kindled the anger of the Lord against him (ibid., vv. 5-11). It was exactly the same disobedience to God's holy law that caused the infamy into which the antediluvians fell.

Moses 8 15VERSE 15. The daughters of they sons have sold themselves. The Lord was displeased and so told Noah, because quite likely for gain the daughters of his sons had entered into unholy marriage alliances with the sons of men, who were the literal descendants of Cain. In this way the women sold themselves for the things of the world, and therein put upon their children the curse wherewith Cain was cursed. To commingle the blood of believer and unbeliever was against the will of God, for His anger had been aroused against them—that is the sons of men—for they refused to hearken unto His voice, and had rejected His Holy Word.

Moses 8 15Undoubtedly, Noah had other sons than Japheth, Shem and Ham, and when in the text it says: "The daughters of thy sons have sold themselves. . ." it very likely refers to these otherwise unmentioned sons. (v. 15.)

Moses 8 16VERSE 16. Noah preached the Gospel of Jesus Christ even as it was in the beginning. Noah sensing the awful depths of depravity into which the people of his generation had plunged, and seeing their wickedness and abandonment to the meanest purposes which human nature can suggest or evil power achieve, prophesied their utter destruction if they did not repent as God had commanded. He proclaimed the Gospel of Jesus Christ even as it was preached by Adam and his son, Seth, and as proclaimed by all his fathers. But the more Noah preached the principles of righteousness, not because of his diligence but in spite of it, fewer and fewer became the repentant. He was almost to despair, but the Holy Spirit urged him on. (See I Peter 3:20; II Peter 2:5; Jude 14.)

Moses 8 17VERSE 17. My Spirit shall not always strive with man. The merciful kindness of the Lord, and His longsuffering, are often looked forward to by wicked men who prolong their shame in doing iniquity until "the fire of Mine indignation is kindled against them." (7:34). Just so long as there is hope for repentance, the Spirit of the Lord will strive to awaken in man a responsibility of righteousness that shall eventually if not sooner lead them back to the right path from which he may have strayed. Also man's conscience, that court of righteous and holy decisions folded up in the bosom of even the humblest, if appeal is made thereto, often renders a judgment, pure and unspotted with the sins of the world. But there is a higher Judge from Whose decision there is no appeal. If men reject the impulses of conscience and of the Holy Spirit, there comes a time when neither one nor the other will prevail; the Spirit because of the hardness of heart, and the conscience because it is inured to sin and corruption. Thus, the Lord said to Noah: "My Spirit shall not always strive with man." [^3]

Moses 8 17Man having the freedom to choose between right and wrong and being imbued with reason to distinguish between good and evil, was given ample time to repent, and man knowing that all flesh shall die, yet the Lord gave him one hundred and twenty years to live and return unto Him. By then if there be no repentance, the Lord said: "I will send in the floods upon them."

Moses 8 18VERSE 18. Giants. (See Comments v. 15, Chapter 7.) These giants, we would call them hooligans or goons sought to slay Noah who was undoubtedly the reigning prince over the people, but the Lord watched over and protected him.

Moses 8 19VERSE 19. The Lord ordained Noah after His Own Order. "Noah was ten years old when he was ordained under the hand of Methuselah," who "was one hundred years old when he was ordained under the hand of Adam." (Doctrine and Covenants 107:50 and 52.)

Moses 8 19We may wonder at his youth when the Lord caused Noah to go forth and "declare His Gospel unto the children of men, even as it was given unto Enoch," but the number of years matters little when the Holy Spirit is one's constant companion. The Prophet Samuel was a child when he was called of the Lord to commence his ministry. The Prophet Joseph Smith was only fourteen years old when he received his glorious manifestation of the Father and the Son. Christ Himself was a youth twelve years of age when He commenced His ministry in the temple at Jerusalem. At any rate, Noah was a young man when he received his divine commission to preach the Gospel to the faltering antediluvians.

SCMoses 8 20Moses 8 21VERSES 20-21. Noah cried repentance, but they hearkened not unto his words. Obedient to the Lord's command, Noah went throughout the land as did Enoch declaring to the inhabitants thereof the Gospel of Jesus Christ. He decried iniquity, but proclaimed forgiveness through repentance. He called upon all men to leave their wicked ways, sin no more and return to Him Who gave them birth. However and notwithstanding his urgent message, because of the hardness of their hearts they refused to hearken unto his words.

SCMoses 8 20Moses 8 21In spite of the follies in which they indulged and the weakness of their efforts to heed Noah's warnings, they claimed God's blessings and boasted of their might. The sons of men nevertheless rejoiced in wickedness and wrongly claimed to be "the sons of God." They took unto themselves wives of "the daughters of men," thus spreading throughout the whole land the infamy of Cain and the bane of his cursing. Under such infamous qualifications and base neglect of their spiritual needs, the Priesthood of God could not survive in the hands of the wicked. We note elsewhere that without the Priesthood, the Plans of God would fail in bringing salvation unto His children. They also bragged that the children born unto them of the daughters of men whom they had taken unto wife were mighty men "which are like unto men of old, men of great renoun." In this connection we may observe that a people are indeed wicked when the greatest sinners among them are men of great renoun. "Wickedness is then great when great men are wicked."

Moses 8 22VERSE 22. God saw that the wickedness of men had become great in the earth. God looked upon the children of men and saw not only were their sins overwhelmingly great, but that they even contrived to do evil. They chose to do evil not because of false tradition nor ignorance, but from direct and wilful rebellion against God and apostasy from His laws. They did evil knowingly and deliberately. They designed to do evil. The wholesome checks to vice and misery found in the Plan of Salvation were intentionally removed, and the promptings of the Holy Spirit were defiantly repelled. Unbridled passions then bore sway. Disunion, dissension, violence, hatred, distress, dismay, bloodshed and havoc spread the earth over, and men's thoughts were to do "evil continually."

SCMoses 8 23Moses 8 24VERSES 23-24. Noah continued his preaching. Undismayed and untiringly, Noah persisted in the attempt to awaken in the peoples' minds the duty they owed to God, and rouse them from the lethargy into which they had been lulled by Satan.

SCMoses 8 23Moses 8 24"Believe and repent," was his cry never slackening his efforts to guide them aright, "and be baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ, even as our fathers, and ye shall receive the Holy Ghost." The Holy Ghost, he explained would make known to them the truth of all things, and make manifest the power of God unto salvation. Nevertheless, and in spite of Noah's diligence in proclaiming Christ's Gospel the children of men failed to heed his warning that the floods would swallow them up unless they did repent and did forevermore forswear evil.

SCMoses 8 25Moses 8 26Moses 8 27VERSES 25-27. The Lord said, I will destroy man. Noah was a bit discouraged and his heart ached because the people with whom he labored for righteousness' sake paid no attention to his words, but grew more and more in wickedness every day. It grieved him to the very center that God had ever made man and placed him here upon earth.

SCMoses 8 25Moses 8 26Moses 8 27I will destroy man. We are reminded of God's utter rejection of Judah, and the terrible punishments He pronounced against them, for: "Thou hast forsaken Me, saith the Lord, thou hast gone backward: therefore will I stretch forth My hand against thee and destroy thee; I am weary with repenting. . .I will destroy My people, since they return not from their ways." (Jeremiah 15:6-7.) In like respect many hundred years earlier the Lord being weary of man's continual subservience of evil, decided and so declared: "I will destroy man whom I have created, from the face of the earth, both man and beast, and the creeping things, and the fowls of the air." The Lord was cognizant of Noah's diligence in proclaiming His Holy Word, and therefore would not forsake him to the floods, and because the wicked sought to take his life the Lord would save Noah's life and preserve him as promised.

SCMoses 8 25Moses 8 26Moses 8 27Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord. Noah was just in all his ways. This pleased the Lord for also he was perfect "in his generation." With God, Noah had constant communion. He was not bold except in serving Him; he taught his sons the ways of the Lord. Therefore they as well as Noah himself walked with God.

SCMoses 8 28Moses 8 29Moses 8 30VERSES 28-30. The end of all flesh is come before Me. (See Comments v. 22.) It is probable that intermarriage between the righteous who were fair and the dark-skinned children of men, had, over a long period of time, so polluted the bloodstream of the Antediluvians the very fabric of life among them had gradually become infused with the blood of Cain and therefore none could hold the priesthood of God. Thusly, if one held that Holy Order—conditions as they were rapidly developing and if allowed to continue—only one result would befall mankind: God's purpose in a grand and glorious Creation would fail. This, He could not and would not countenance.

SCMoses 8 28Moses 8 29Moses 8 30God observed that the whole earth had become corrupt and was filled with violence. None there were except Noah and his family who in any way tried to serve Him, so, in deep regret, He cried: "Behold I will destroy all flesh off the earth."

SCMoses 8 28Moses 8 29Moses 8 30AND THE FLOODS CAME, AND ALL MEN WERE DROWNED IN THEIR WATERS, EXCEPT NOAH AND HIS SONS.

Footnotes

"And the Brother of Jared repented of the evil which he had done, and did call upon the Name of the Lord for his brethren who were with him. And the Lord said unto him: "I will forgive thee and thy brethren of their sins; but thou shalt not sin any more, for ye shall remember that My Spirit will not always strive with man; wherefore, if ye will sin until ye are fully ripe ye shall be cut off from the presence of the Lord. And. . . ." (Ether 2:15.)

"And he that repents not, from him shall be taken even the light which he has received; for My Spirit shall not always strive with man, saith the Lord of Hosts." (Doctrine and Covenants 1:33.)

---
Notas:
[^1] And all the days of Enoch were four hundred and thirty years. Sons of God, and sons of men—In Genesis 6:2, it says "that the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair," which was not true; it is a mistranslation of the thought. The Pearl of Great Price says the reverse: "The sons of men saw that those daughters (that is the daughters of the sons of God) were fair." The daughters of the sons of men were not fair, they were black, and their countenances uninviting to the sons of God.
[^2] And it came to pass that Methuselah, the son of Enoch, was not taken, that the covenants of the Lord might be fulfilled, which he made to Enoch; for he truly covenanted with Enoch that Noah should be of the fruit of his loins. "For the Spirit of the Lord will not always strive with men. And when the Spirit ceaseth to strive with man then cometh speedy destruction. . . ." (II Nephi 26:11.)
[^3] And it came to pass that Methuselah prophesied that from his loins should spring all the kingdoms of the earth (through Noah), and he took glory unto himself.
