Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1965)

ABRAHAM CHAPTER 1

Translated from the Papyrus by Joseph Smith.

A translation of some ancient records that have fallen into our hands from the Catacombs of Egypt . . . The Writings of Abraham while he was in Egypt, called the Book of Abraham. Written by his own hand upon papyrus. See History of the Church Vol. 2, pp. 235, 236, 348-351.

SCAbr 1 1Abr 1 2VERSES 1-2. In the land of the Chaldeans. Abraham, often called The Father of the Faithful, while in Egypt whereunto he had departed seeking asylum from the persecution of the wicked in the land of the Chaldeans wherein he lived, looked in retrospect upon the scenes of his troubled youth, and wrote about them calmly and dispassionately, telling of the baleful influence that governed the people in the region wherein his father and his father's household dwelt.

SCAbr 1 1Abr 1 2Notwithstanding his family ties and the bonds of the homeland, he left them both because he saw in them nothing that was consistent with the realization that his now maturing ideals could be satisfied. He could not see in the idolatrous worship of his friends and neighbors the accomplishment of the desires of his heart for which he hoped. By them, offerings to idols and human sacrifice which he despised, supplanted offerings of homage to the True and Living God.

SCAbr 1 1Abr 1 2Finding that he was not attaining to the "happiness, and peace, and rest," that comes to one who devotes his energies to the service of the Lord, Abraham looked about him and saw that to serve God was life's greatest freedom, and to worship Him man's truest happiness.

SCAbr 1 1Abr 1 2Therefore, filled with a righteous zeal and brim with hope, he marshalled all his strength and abilities and went forth in search of the blessings which his fathers had enjoyed from time immemorial. Abraham yearned for the right to administer the rites of the Priesthood. He saw in so doing greater service of righteousness, and in his ministrations thereof he could impart knowledge and understanding to those who like unto himself inquired after righteousness.

SCAbr 1 1Abr 1 2Abraham's youth, in spite of the antagonistic attitude of apostasy all about him, was preserved in righteousness. As he grew in years, he grew in grace and in the knowledge of God's glory. He became wise as to that which is just and true; hope in righteous living tempered every act of his life. His zeal for doing the upright (usually in some the effervescence of a day) was in him inexhaustible. His desire for understanding was an overwhelming craving for wisdom.

SCAbr 1 1Abr 1 2Through keeping God's commandments, by his faithfulness in every sphere of duty, by his patience under trial, by the goodness of his deeds he became "a rightful heir, a High Priest holding the right belonging to the fathers."

SCAbr 1 1Abr 1 2Father of many nations. Abraham, in prophetic language, prayed for that which was later promised him of the Lord. That many generations of his progeny should rise up in many lands and be holy unto the Lord was one of his utmost desires. That righteousness should be established throughout the earth by the fruit of his loins marked the path he solemnly prayed would be prepared for the accomplishment of God's purposes.

To this end he prayed the Lord, and the Lord blessed him, saying "And I will make thee a great nation. . .and make thy name great. . ." (Genesis 12:2). Again, "And I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and I will make nations of thee, and kings shall come out of thee." (Ibid., 17:6.) Also, "And the Lord said, shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do; Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him." (Ibid., 18:18.)

SCAbr 1 1Abr 1 2A Prince of Peace. Melchizedek, in the days of Abraham, was the great High Priest of God's Church and also the King of Salem where he reigned under his father who was king of the whole land. Salem is said to be the name of ancient Jerusalem, and is a Hebrew word meaning Peace. By right of birth he was a Prince and ruled over a kingdom called Peace. His reign is a monument to righteousness and is hallowed by the peace which therein found an abiding place. Therefore Melchizedek was known as The Prince of Peace.

SCAbr 1 1Abr 1 2As we have said that Abraham was a contemporary of Melchizedek and to him Abraham paid as tithing one-tenth of all he possessed. (Alma 13:15.) We learn many things about Melchizedek from the Book of Mormon that are not contained in the Hebrew scriptures. For instance: "Now this Melchizedek was a king over the land of Salem; and his people had waxed strong in iniquity and abomination; yea, they had all gone astray; they were full of all manner of wickedness. But Melchizedek having exercised mighty faith, and received the office of the High Priesthood according to the Holy Order of God, did preach repentance unto his people. And behold, they did repent; and Melchizedek did establish peace in the land in his days; therefore he was called the Prince of Peace, for he was King of Salem; and he did reign under his father." (Ibid., 17:18.)

SCAbr 1 1Abr 1 2Abraham knew Melchizedek personally for he, that is Abraham, had received the Priesthood by way of him [^1] and to him had paid tithes. Abraham beheld in Melchizedek a wise and just Prince of Peace and desired to be like unto him.

SCAbr 1 1Abr 1 2The peace envisioned by Abraham and for which he sought was peace founded upon truth, upheld and sustained by righteousness. Any peace in opposition to this peace Abraham knew was Peace! Peace! when there is no peace. "There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked." (Isaiah 57:21.) "And the work of righteousness shall be peace." (Ibid., 32:17.) The words of Isaiah quoted by the Savior to the Nephites when speaking of the last days, are worthy of note: "And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children." (Ibid., 54:13; III Nephi 22:13.)

Abr 1 3VERSE 3. The Priesthood was conferred upon me from the fathers. That Abraham might confirm and verify the unerring lineage of the Priesthood conferred upon him by Melchizedek, the High Priest residing in Salem, Abraham recited the steps in detail that had been taken when the Priesthood was bestowed upon his fathers even from the time of Adam, the first man, or from the beginning.

Abr 1 3"Abraham received the Priesthood from Melchizedek, who received it through the lineage of his fathers, even till Noah; and from Noah to Abel, who was slain by the conspiracy of his brother, who received the Priesthood by the commandments of God, by the hand of his father, Adam, who was the first man." (Doctrine and Covenants 84:14-16.)

SCAbr 1 4Abr 1 5Abr 1 6Abr 1 7VERSES 4-7. I sought for mine appointment unto the Priesthood according to the appointment of God unto the fathers concerning the seed. All about him were priests who served gods of wood and stone and who offered sacrifice to them, but none who labored as servants of the God of Abraham's fathers. There is little doubt that Abraham could have made their cause his own by espousing their beliefs and practices. But, he would not! He cried unto them, telling of their wickedness. He proclaimed unto them the God of Glory, and called for a return to righteousness. However, he says that his fathers (then living) had turned from their righteousness, and had adopted heathen worship, paying homage to idols. They, he added, "Utterly refused to hearken to my voice."

SCAbr 1 4Abr 1 5Abr 1 6Abr 1 7There were many gods to whom the Priests offered immolation. The victims of this dreadful practice were the children of the god's devotees whose fanatical devotion crowded all thoughts of the God of their Fathers from their hearts. They became servants of evil.

SCAbr 1 4Abr 1 5Abr 1 6Abr 1 7On an occasion, Abraham notes, these zealots attempted to seize him "to take away my life by the hand of the priest of Elkenah." He identifies "the priest of Elkenah" as "the priest of Pharaoh."

SCAbr 1 4Abr 1 5Abr 1 6Abr 1 7Under these conditions the "appointment unto the Priesthood according to the appointment of God" (the nomination and arrangement) could not be undertaken. Succession in the Priesthood from father to son, as God had so decreed, was broken and what was left was merely a sham, a counterfeit priesthood, an imitation of the real, not God's Holy Order.

SCAbr 1 4Abr 1 5Abr 1 6Abr 1 7Abraham would not accept any so called priesthood, he decried the one so depraved as that before him and which purported to mitigate the anger of the gods. Therefore and in obedience to the inspired promptings of his own heart he sought for ordination unto the Priesthood according to the way God had instituted it and in the same manner God intended it to be carried down.

SCAbr 1 8Abr 1 9Abr 1 10Abr 1 11VERSES 8-11. At this time it was the custom of the priest of Pharaoh, the King of Egypt, to offer up . . . men, women, and children upon the altar which was built in the land of Chaldea. We may presume that at the time of year herein spoken, a religious festival in the land of Chaldea fanned the populace to extremes of fanatic zeal which even their unhallowed ecstasy knew no bounds. Unwilling men and women were forced victims of the lust for blood that there pervaded. Innocent little children were sacrificed upon the altar of strange gods. Satan reigned supreme.

SCAbr 1 8Abr 1 9Abr 1 10Abr 1 11Chaldea was then the home of a Semitic tribe that became dominant in Babylonia. Egypt, the land of Pharaoh, exercised great influence over her government and religion. Hence, it is not surprising to find in Abraham's writings that the priest of Pharaoh officiated at these atrocities.

SCAbr 1 8Abr 1 9Abr 1 10Abr 1 11Not only did the priest of Pharaoh make an offering to Pharaoh's god in the manner indicated, but also with human flesh and blood after the same manner of the Egyptians he made an offering to the "god of Shagreel which was the sun." Upon an altar which stood by a hill they called Potiphar's, meaning devoted to the sun which as we have noted was an Egyptian God, Pharaoh's priest offered a child as a thank-offering to that great luminary for its boundless watchfulness.

SCAbr 1 8Abr 1 9Abr 1 10Abr 1 11From reading Abraham's story it is apparent that those who resisted the illicit purposes of the idol worshipers, and refused to bow down to gods of wood and stone, were violently seized, and notwithstanding their fidelity to The Only True and Living God, were offered as a sacrifice upon the altar of a god whom they never knew.

SCAbr 1 8Abr 1 9Abr 1 10Abr 1 11One Onitah, a descendant of Ham a son of Noah, was the father of three young daughters. These girls, virgins, [^2] as Abraham denominates them, because they would not render obeisance to dumb idols, "Were killed upon this altar, (which was near the base of Potiphar's Hill at the head of the Plain of Olishem) and it was done after the manner of the Egyptians."

SCAbr 1 12Abr 1 13Abr 1 14VERSES 12-14. The priests laid violence upon me, that they might slay me also. On Plate No. 1, at the beginning of this Chapter is a drawing made by Abraham himself depicting in a rather obscure way the substance of these verses. As the priests in the manner of the Egyptians had slain the three virgins before mentioned on the same altar as they now sought to slay Abraham, he made this drawing that we may obtain a more graphic description of the scene herein presented. Abraham desired that we in the fullest know that God, the Maker and Creator of all, hears the cry of His faithful servants and delivers them at all times from the hands of the adversary.

SCAbr 1 12Abr 1 13Abr 1 14The altar Abraham depicts in his drawing was built "after the form of a bedstead, such as was had among the Chaldeans." For a background it stood before wood or stone idols representing the gods of Elkenah, Libnah, Mahmackrah, Korash, and "a god like unto that of Pharaoh, king of Egypt."

SCAbr 1 15Abr 1 16Abr 1 17Abr 1 18Abr 1 19VERSES 15-19. And as they lifted up their hands upon me, that they might offer me up and take away my life. . . . Abraham, like unto others who refused to pay homage to their idols, was seized by the priests and made ready as a sacrifice to please the gods upon whose altar they planned his immolation.

SCAbr 1 15Abr 1 16Abr 1 17Abr 1 18Abr 1 19Bound with stout thongs with which they had fastened him, Abraham's resistance to their violence was to no avail. He therefore cried mightily unto the Lord, his own God, for deliverance, "And the Lord hearkened and heard" his cry of anguish. Immediately Abraham was filled with God's Holy Spirit and in vision saw the Almighty. An angel from God's presence stood by him (Abraham) and unloosed the cords that bound him.

SCAbr 1 15Abr 1 16Abr 1 17Abr 1 18Abr 1 19The Lord God Almighty Who appeared unto Abraham in his hour of peril, spoke unto him in words of comfort and encouragement. "Abraham, Abraham," He said, "behold My Name is Jehovah (See The Name Jehovah, at end of Chapter 1, Writings of Moses, Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price, Reynolds and Sjodahl), and I have heard thee, and have come down to deliver thee, and to take thee away from thy father's house, and all thy kinsfolk, unto a strange land which thou knowest not of."

SCAbr 1 15Abr 1 16Abr 1 17Abr 1 18Abr 1 19The reason for which the God of Abraham called him to another land is made known herein. Because Abraham's kinsfolk had forsaken Him, The Only True and Living God, for the worship of gods of wood and stone which had no feeling, no power, and no compassion. The Lord was angry in that after the many blessings which He had vouchsafed to them and their fathers, the Chaldeans had forsaken Him and defied His watchful care over them, and had taken the heathen gods to their bosoms.

SCAbr 1 15Abr 1 16Abr 1 17Abr 1 18Abr 1 19"I have come down to visit them," the Lord declared, and we may judge what were the effects of His decree in the famine and pestilence that afterwards visited that land.

SCAbr 1 15Abr 1 16Abr 1 17Abr 1 18Abr 1 19Abraham's God, the God of his fathers, spread over him a canopy of protection in destroying the priest who had sought to slay him.

SCAbr 1 15Abr 1 16Abr 1 17Abr 1 18Abr 1 19Behold, I will lead thee by My hand. A long journey unto a land of which Abraham knew nothing, held no terrors for him and no hazards he could not overcome. Abraham was strong in faith for he had with his own eyes seen the Mighty God, and with his ears heard the voice of the Great Jehovah telling him that in the power of His might he (Abraham) would be set free and that he would be delivered. It was so as the Voice declared. Had not God proved to Abraham that He was more powerful than together were all the heathen gods? "I will lead thee by My hand," was the faithful promise to him of the Lord; "I will take thee, to put upon thee My Name, even the Priesthood of thy fathers, and My power shall be over thee." The Priesthood of Abraham's fathers was the Priesthood after the Order of the Only Begotten Son of the Father, Who is God.

SCAbr 1 15Abr 1 16Abr 1 17Abr 1 18Abr 1 19The promise of the Lord to Abraham reminds us of an incident recorded of John, Christ's youthful Apostle. It appears that Jesus and His Apostles had been on a tour of preaching the Gospel throughout the land of Jerusalem. As they neared the end of their journey, they, because of the rigors of foot-travel, became weary; they were almost exhausted and sought much needed rest. In a nearby field they laid themselves upon the ground, and John, whom Christ loved, put his head upon the Savior's breast and slept. In John's dreams, we imagine, he journeyed on. Peaceful and quiet and full of hope, is the scene presented here.

SCAbr 1 15Abr 1 16Abr 1 17Abr 1 18Abr 1 19As it was with Noah so shall it be with thee. Noah was ordained of God after His Own Order, and forthwith commanded to go out and declare the Gospel which Enoch himself preached unto the inhabitants of the earth. Noah vainly called all men unto repentance, but pretexts and excuses combined to make his appeal of no avail. The children of men had hardened their hearts and imagined that they were immune from censure because they attributed to themselves only that which was good and pure. They said in answer to Noah's preaching: "Behold we are the sons of God; have we not taken unto ourselves the daughters of men? And are we not eating and drinking, and marrying and giving in marriage? And our wives bear unto us children, and the same are mighty men, which are like unto men of old, men of great renown." As if by so doing they kept God's commandments, and had no need to repent. They refused to "hearken unto the words of Noah."

SCAbr 1 15Abr 1 16Abr 1 17Abr 1 18Abr 1 19Abraham, like unto Noah, was commissioned to go forth and declare God's holy word, but unlike Noah's mission which ended when a few besides himself were saved from drowning when all others were engulfed in the waters that flooded the earth, Abraham's ministry should never end. Through it (that is Abraham's ministry) the Name of God should be known among its people as long as the earth should last, or the Sacred Writing says, "forever." This prophecy was made by God Himself.

SCAbr 1 20Abr 1 21Abr 1 22VERSES 20-22. The Lord broke down the altar of Elkenah. Potiphar's Hill, which we have already discussed, was in the land of Ur, in Chaldea. Ur evidently was the ancestral home of Abraham, and means light or fire. Its meaning is readily understood when we remember that the inhabitants thereof, most of whom were fire-worshipers, rendered homage to the sun, that fiery orb which was one of their gods.

SCAbr 1 20Abr 1 21Abr 1 22It is recorded in these verses that "the Lord broke down the altar of Elkenah," the altar upon which it was planned to sacrifice Abraham, "and utterly destroyed" it "and smote the priest that he died." In a manner unknown to us, but nevertheless in its entirety, the heathen altar of Elkenah was destroyed. It may have been by some natural convulsion such as by earth-tremors or by the fury of wind or fire. The priest also was smitten that he died. He may have been the victim of sudden disease, or the same violent disturbance that destroyed the altar upon which he officiated.

SCAbr 1 20Abr 1 21Abr 1 22His destruction caused great mourning throughout all the land of Chaldea, and in Pharaoh's court, for he no doubt was considered a member of the royal household. In this verse also is given the meaning of the name, Pharaoh; Pharaoh signifies king by royal blood, or one born to that lofty estate. Some commentators on Bible texts and Egyptian words, say the name, Pharaoh, is the Egyptian word Pro, denoting great house. In its original form it was applied to the king's palace and his real estate, but later to him personally. It is not difficult to harmonize the Pearl of Great Price definition with that of modern scholarship.

SCAbr 1 20Abr 1 21Abr 1 22This King of Egypt was a descendant from the loins of Ham. Ham, the third son of Noah, took unto himself a wife who was a descendant of Cain. She accepted the Gospel of Christ which was preached by her father-in-law, but nevertheless the curse pronounced by God upon Cain and his posterity was perpetuated in her offspring. Her name was Egyptus, and in his writings Abraham notes in speaking of her grandson who was ruler in Egypt, the land named after her, that "he was a partaker of the blood of the Canaanites by birth."

SCAbr 1 20Abr 1 21Abr 1 22The land of Canaan is the Palestine of the New Testament, and from it came the thousands and tens of thousands who afterwards reclaimed vast areas in the northeastern part of the dark-continent. In this manner Egypt was settled by dwellers from Canaan, and "thus the blood of the Canaanites was preserved in the land."

SCAbr 1 23Abr 1 24VERSES 23-24. The land of Egypt was discovered by a woman. The land of Egypt whereunto the descendants of Cain gathered as settlers was first discovered by a woman named Egyptus. She was the daughter of Ham, Noah's son, and Egyptus, Ham's Canaanite wife. Both mother and daughter were named Egyptus which in the Chaldean means that which is forbidden.

SCAbr 1 23Abr 1 24The Lord forbade the marriage of his faithful children to descendants of Cain who callously murdered his brother, Abel.

SCAbr 1 23Abr 1 24In early days when names of children did not follow from parents to their offspring as now, it was customary to give children a descriptive or qualifying appellation which set them apart as something their names implied; hence, the name, Egyptus. Thus Ham being one of the righteous who was saved in the Ark from the waters of the Flood, was forbidden to comingle his blood with one who was accursed by reason of her lineage. Egyptus, whom Ham took to wife, was a descendant of Cain, and as such her offspring was deprived of the privilege of succession in the Priesthood of God. Her descendants themselves, no matter who, could not hold that Holy Order. She was blessed in many ways, but in that she was forbidden. Noah and the others in the Ark knew of her disbarment, that she, in fact, was forbidden as a proper wife to Ham.

SCAbr 1 23Abr 1 24When Egyptus, Ham's daughter, first laid her eyes upon what to her was a vast domain, it was covered by water. More than likely it was the region we know of as the great Nile Delta. In certain seasons of the year it lies inundated by the overflow of that river, and it follows that as the waters recede an immense area of fertile land was made visable. Here she settled her sons whose great-grandfather was Noah. Notwithstanding their lineage through the patriarch on the one side they perpetuated the curse of Cain on the other. This explains the dilemma which afterwards the Egyptian priests found themselves as regards holding the Holy Priesthood.

SCAbr 1 25Abr 1 26Abr 1 27VERSES 25-27. The first government of Egypt. . . . After the sons of Egyptus had settled in the newly discovered land, and had established homes greatly increasing their numbers, a government was set up among them. It was patriarchal in order having as its head or ruler the eldest son of Egyptus. He was called Pharaoh which we understand to mean King by royal blood.

SCAbr 1 25Abr 1 26Abr 1 27This first Pharaoh was a righteous man and therefore his kingdom was established in uprightness, after his own heart. He judged his people justly, and without guile sought to guide them even as had the patriarchs in the days before the flood. He followed as a pattern their reigns of righteousness hearkening back to the sovereign rule laid down by Adam who was the first man. He also incorporated into his rule (imitated it) the order of succession in which his great-grandfather Noah, had so valiantly served, and "who," Abraham tells us, "blessed him with the blessings of the earth, and with the blessings of wisdom, but cursed him as pertaining to the Priesthood."

SCAbr 1 25Abr 1 26Abr 1 27The Pharaohs would fain claim the Priesthood from Noah. Although the first Pharaoh was a righteous man he could not have the right to hold the Priesthood, he being of the lineage of Cain, who with his progeny were denied that privilege. But his successors unmindful of their cursing through Cain, were constrained to overlook their lot and with a show of gladness and with joy, claimed that right from Noah through Ham. It was with that sort of argument in proof of their supposed right that Abraham's father had been beguiled by the idolatry of the Egyptians.

SCAbr 1 28Abr 1 29Abr 1 30VERSES 28-30. The Records of the Patriarchs concerning the right of Priesthood, the Lord preserved in mine own hands. Notwithstanding his father's apostasy from belief in the God of their Fathers, and the worship by him of idols, which shook his father's household, Abraham stood firm and steadfast, continuing in the beliefs and practices of the men of old. As he grew in years, he grew in grace and in the knowledge of Him Who created all things, and in the knowledge of that which is just and true.

SCAbr 1 28Abr 1 29Abr 1 30The claims made by the idolatrous priests of Pharaoh that they held the Holy Priesthood were repugnant to him. To show unto his posterity that such claims were false, and also prove to them that succession in the Priesthood had come down to him in an unbroken sequence from the beginning, or from the time of Adam, the first man, he proposed to show by certain Records which he says, "Have come into my hands, which I hold unto this present time," (v. 28; See also v. 31.)

SCAbr 1 28Abr 1 29Abr 1 30Famine in the land of Chaldea. The Lord's promise to visit (v. 17) the inhabitants of Chaldea was fulfilled when to their utter destruction famine and pestilence came as a guest and refused to leave until the ruin of their country was complete. The famine was so intense, the affliction thereof so depressing that Abraham's father "was sorely tormented," and to escape the effects of starvation and sickness, "repented of the evil he had determined against" Abraham, to offer him as a sacrifice upon the altar at Potiphar's Hill, and we imagine seek help from his son whom he had so recently offended.

Abr 1 31VERSE 31. The records contained an account of the fathers. The records of which mention is made in v. 28, are more fully described herein. They not only contain an account of the patriarchs "concerning the right of Priesthood," but also the story of the Creation. Nor do they end with a statement and explanation of the earth's beginning, but they continue with a reckoning "of the planets, and of the stars, as they were made known unto the fathers."

Abr 1 31These records, Abraham again informs us "have I kept even unto this day, and I shall endeavor to write some of these things upon this record for the benefit" of those that shall come "after me."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Now the Lord God caused the famine to wax sore in the land of Ur, insomuch that Haran, my brother, died; but Terah, my father, yet lived in the land of Ur, of the Chaldees. Haran, supposed by many to be about midway between Mesopotamia and the land of Canaan, the ancient name of Palestine. About 300 miles either way.
[^2] And it came to pass that I, Abraham, took Sarai to wife, and Nehor, my brother, took Milcah to wife, who were the daughters of Haran. Terah, "And the days of Terah were two hundred and five years; and Terah died in Haran." (Genesis 11:32.)
