Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1965)

ABRAHAM CHAPTER 2

Abr 2 1VERSE 1. The Lord caused the famine to wax sore in the land of Ur. Because of the wickedness and idolatry of its inhabitants the Lord brought about a famine in all the land of Chaldea which in intensity grew until it affected the lives of even the most shielded from hunger, pestilence, and disease. It waxed so sore in Ur, the home of Abraham's father, that Haran, his brother, died; but Terah, his father, undaunted by reverses and all manner of wants clung tenaciously to the old home.

Abr 2 2VERSE 2. I, Abraham, took Sarai to wife. Haran, Abraham's brother who died in the land of Ur from the effects of the famine that then was ravaging the greater land of Chaldea, left two daughters whose names were Sarai and Milcah. Abraham married the first named, and Nehor, another brother, married the second.

SCAbr 2 3Abr 2 4Abr 2 5VERSES 3-5. Abraham, get thee out of thy country. . . . Obedient to the Lord's command (v. 1:16) that he "get out of" the land of his birth, and leave behind him all his kinsfolk, and also those of his father's household, and go unto a new land, Abraham "left the land of Ur, of the Chaldeans, to go into the land of Canaan."

SCAbr 2 3Abr 2 4Abr 2 5The command of the Lord came to Abraham by the voice of Jehovah Himself (ibid.,) and its divine authority was immediately recognized by him. Abraham saw in the repetition of its demands an emphasis on the requirement that he completely sever all the ties that bound him to his homeland, also to his relatives and friends. "Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will show thee," was the unmistakable edict of the Voice which to Abraham was forthright and trustworthy.

Abraham's unflinching obedience to the command of the Lord, and his unwavering fidelity to its Giver, are frequently mentioned in the New Testament as proof of his faith in the providential care which like a canopy of divine affection continually hovered over him (See Acts 7:2ff. and Hebrews 11:8ff). He commenced his journey; whither he went, he knew not, but, surely, he did know with Whom he was to go.

SCAbr 2 3Abr 2 4Abr 2 5Not only did the Holy Spirit go before them to lead and guide, but Abraham took with him when he left the ancestral home, his nephew, Lot, the son of his brother, Haran, and Lot's wife, and Sarai his own wife. It was not long until Terah, Abraham's father, left behind in Ur, almost in want and despair followed after his son. As Abraham's family had been a pastoral one, they settled in a valley wherein they found many green pastures. They named their place of refuge, Haran, [^1] after Abraham's dead brother.

SCAbr 2 3Abr 2 4Abr 2 5In Haran they dwelt for several years; near the end of which time the famine that had scourged the greater land of Chaldea abated somewhat in its intensity. This was especially true in and about Haran. Here, Abraham's father, Terah, being skilled in keeping sheep, prolonged his stay even after Abraham and his entourage had departed hence. As there were many flocks of sheep thereabout we imagine it was not difficult for him to hire out, and besides, tarrying there gave him, for he was getting old, a much easier task than what the rigors of a long journey might impose. [^2] Then, too, Terah was saturated with thoughts of the past; imbued with the idea of idolatry, and to it he returned.

Abr 2 6VERSE 6. I, Abraham and Lot, my brother's son, prayed unto the Lord . . . Feeling that the call of the Lord was not being properly answered by him lingering in Haran with Terah, his father, Abraham, joined by Lot "prayed unto the Lord" seeking to know the Lord's will concerning the thing to be done.

Abr 2 6Abraham's supplication was immediately answered. While yet beseeching the Lord for guidance, the Lord manifested Himself unto him. The Lord then commanded Abraham to arise and make ready to depart "and take Lot with thee," for it was the divine purpose to take them away out of Haran. The Lord further made it plain to Abraham what were His purposes in that "strange" land whereunto He proposed to lead him.

Abr 2 6"I will make of thee a minister to bear My Name," or My Priesthood which will sanctify thy seed unto Me for an everlasting inheritance of that choice land "when they hearken to My voice." To hearken unto the voice of the Lord is to obey His commands.

Abr 2 7VERSE 7. I am the Lord thy God. Thus the Lord proclaimed to Abraham His authority to speak. He was not like the gods of Elkenah, or of Pharaoh, which had no voice, no thought, or no feeling. He was not the god of the sun which was Shagreel (1:9), or the moon, for He (the Lord) had created the sun, the moon, and the stars. The heavens wherein He dwelt and the earth, His Footstool (denoting something solid), were both made by Him. We conceive of Him saying: "I am the God of thy fathers, the Only True and Living God." However, He did say: "I stretch My hand over the sea and it obeys My voice; I cause the wind and the fire to be My chariot; I say unto the mountains—"Depart Hence"—and behold they are taken away by a whirlwind, in an instant, suddenly." In these words the Lord sought to impress upon Abraham the power and might in Him as opposed to that possessed by the heathen gods which were devoid of these qualities whatsoever.

Abr 2 7To strengthen Abraham's faith in the promises of the Lord, and to fit him for the perilous journey he was about to undertake, the Lord appeared and declared Himself to him. Since childhood Abraham had been in the midst of heathen worship. Gods of wood and gods of stone were constantly set before him. His kinfolk in Ur worshiped the sungod, and his newly found friends in Haran adored Sin, the moongod. Little doubt is there that all this pretense and show influenced his life and gave shape and form to some of his conclusions. That was one reason why the Lord commanded him "to get out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house."

Abr 2 8VERSE 8. My Name is Jehovah. Abraham was undoubtedly acquainted with this Name because the Lord had preserved in his hands some records which were written by the ancient patriarchs. (Moses 6:5; Abraham 1:28.) Then too when Abraham was about to be offered as a sacrifice by the priest of Pharaoh, and angel of the Lord appeared to him and loosed his bands. At the same time Abraham heard a Voice saying: "Abraham, Abraham, behold, My Name is Jehovah . . ." (1: 16). In the writings above referred to, it says: "then began these men to call upon the Name of the Lord. . . ." That Name was Jehovah. Jehovah means Creator. The Hebrew from of the word, Jehovah, is Yahweh, and is much older than the time of Abraham. Jehovah, is the Name of the Lord. (See Jehovah, at the end of Chapter 1, Writings of Moses, this Commentary.)

Abr 2 9VERSE 9. I will make of thee a great nation. The intent of the Lord in thusly blessing Abraham may best be understood by considering the vast multitudes of good men and women in every part of the globe whose lineage bears record that in Abraham they have a common ancestor. Great numbers of his seed scattered throughout the earth, children of this promise have inherited a divine mission to proclaim the Everlasting Gospel and the Eternal God, and by right of kinship minister to all people. In the ministry thus appointed by Him Who is the loving Father of all men, they shall bear God's Priesthood unto all Abraham's children. (See The Seed of Abraham at end of Chapter 5.)

SCAbr 2 10Abr 2 11VERSES 10-11. In thy seed . . . shall all the families of the earth be blessed. This is a prediction made by God Himself pointing to the life and ministry of the Savior of mankind, Jesus Christ, our Lord.

SCAbr 2 12Abr 2 13Abr 2 14Abr 2 15VERSES 12-15. Thy servant has sought Thee earnestly: now I have found Thee. Although the Lord had ceased to speak words of comfort and cheer to him, and in spite of the fact that the presence of the Almighty no longer was before him, Abraham was not alone. The Spirit of the Lord was still with him. Filled to brim with the joy of being in God's service, Abraham responded to the heavenly manifestation with heartfelt gratitude, saying as he mediated thereon: "Thy servant has sought Thee earnestly; now I have found Thee." Those words expressed his innermost thoughts as he contemplated the glorious scene just ended.

SCAbr 2 12Abr 2 13Abr 2 14Abr 2 15Abraham pondered the time when an angel from the Courts of Glory appeared and delivered him from being sacrificed to the god of Elkenah. To him this was a marvelous display of the power of God, the God Whom his fathers knew, and it betokened for him a future of peace and safety. This and many other expressions of providential care over him behooved Abraham to regard as a duty obedience to the Lord's commands. Therefore, with a prayer in his heart and a resolve to hearken unto the Voice of the Lord, he humbly admonished himself in prayer to the Almighty God: "Let Thy servant rise up (make ready) and depart in peace."

SCAbr 2 12Abr 2 13Abr 2 14Abr 2 15So I, Abraham, departed as the Lord had said unto me. Obedient as the Lord commanded, Abraham, then 62 years of age, (Genesis 12:4, gives Abraham's age as 75 years) departed out from Haran taking Lot with him. Also he took Sarai, his wife, and all those who since leaving Ur had joined with him in worshiping the God of their fathers, leaving behind all thoughts of the sun-gods and the moon-gods, and gods of wood and stone which they could feel and touch. Also they gathered together all the "substance" which they had accumulated since leaving the land of their nativity and took it along with them. Guided by inspiration and protected by the Lord's might, the little company led by Abraham "came forth," he afterwards wrote "to the land of Canaan, and dwelt in tents as we came on our way."

SCAbr 2 16Abr 2 17VERSES 16-17. Eternity was our covering . . . . Putting their trust in God, Whose watchful care is over all who love to do His will, the little band of colonists seeking a new home "journeyed by way of Jershon, to come to the land of Canaan." Their trust in God, like a canopy of peace, covered and protected them from all harm. Their Rock (Creator) was the Lord, as was He their Salvation; the ancient Hebrews used to say: "Who is our Rock but our King; and Who is our King but the Lord; and Who is the Lord save He be God?" The thought expressed in those few words were inherited by the Jews and came down from the time of Abraham, therefore, it undoubtedly expressed his thought.

SCAbr 2 16Abr 2 17I, Abraham, built an altar in the land of Jershon. Faithful to the trust God had imposed in him, Abraham, together with the souls who with him had taken it upon themselves to render homage to the true God, built an altar in the land of Jershon, and thereon "made an offering unto the Lord." Building an altar for the purpose of sacrifice unto God was the recognized form of worship used in patriarchal times, and at a later date became the established pattern after which Israel was reminded of God's glorious promises of Salvation.

SCAbr 2 16Abr 2 17Forgetting their own struggles and vicissitudes, but not the trials of their loved ones left behind in the Chaldees where an intensive famine was raging, Abraham saw fit to intercede in their behalf and prayed to God on this solemn occasion that "they might not perish."

Abr 2 18VERSE 18. Abraham's itinerary from Haran to the land of Canaan. Haran, as we have noted (v. 5), was about equidistant between Mesopotamia and the land of Canaan (say 300 miles each way.) In journeying southward and to the west, it has been suggested that Abraham and the little group around him went through Syria, probably stopping for refreshment and also to recruit their strength at Damascus (See 15:2). After reviving their frayed spirits, and restoring their physical well-being, they left Damascus proceeding southward through Bashan to a place near the Sea of Galilee, and thence to the Place of Sechem in the center of Canaan, the ancient name of Palestine. It has been pointed out to us that at this time the Amorites, an idolatrous race, occupied much of Syria and Canaan.

Abr 2 18The Place of Sechem, situated in the Plains of Moreh. The Place of Sechem is generally thought to be an ancient sanctuary consecrated to heathen gods, and the Plains of Moreh infer the same thing. At any rate, Sechem was a pastoral valley which at the time of Abraham was unoccupied. Here the "terebinth" tree, very common in Palestine, provided shelter from the burning rays of the sun. "It is remarkable for its widespreading branches and its dark green leaves." It is very probable that, because of its inviting shade and cool-resort, Abraham chose a grove of these trees as a good encampment. Then too it offered some protection from marauding bands of nomads who generally infest such areas.

Abr 2 18Feeling unsecure without the protecting care of the Almighty God, Abraham offered sacrifice at the place of encampment, and prayed devoutly that they might be shielded from harassment, they being "already come into the land of this idolatrous nation."

Abr 2 19VERSE 19. Unto thy seed will I give this land. The Lord in answer to Abraham's supplications once more appeared unto him, thus assuring him that no harm would befall from the roving bands of tribesmen that roamed the countryside. Also the Lord confirmed to Abraham the promise He had made: "Unto thy seed will I give this land." (See v. 6.)

Abr 2 19Not only did the Lord make covenant with Abraham as an individual, but also that many generations of his descendants would be the beneficiaries of the solemn compact the Lord herein spake. "The land his posterity was for centuries to inhabit as a peculiar people; the seeds of divine knowledge were to be sown there for the benefit of all mankind; and considered in its geographical situation, it was chosen in divine wisdom as the fittest of all lands to serve as the cradle of a divine revelation designed for the whole world."

Abr 2 20VERSE 20. I, Abraham . . . called again upon the Name of the Lord. Abraham, not fully comprehending to their greatest measure, God's purposes in leading him to a strange land, one of which he knew not (1:16), now that he and his little band had reached the land of Canaan, constantly looked about him for a suitable place to establish a permanent home where he would see the satisfaction of his highest ideals (1:2.)

Abr 2 20Some sites were inviting, others not so much. It must be remembered that Abraham's had been a pastoral life, and it may be presumed that an increasing number of sheep followed his encampments wheresoever set up. Not content with the conditions surrounding Sechem which was situated in the Plains of Moreh he moved his entire camp to a place eastwardly of Bethel in a range of mountains where the higher elevation was conducive of more grass and greener pastures. Thereat his flocks of sheep and other animals which had been domesticated could forage for themselves.

Abr 2 20At this latter place Abraham again built an altar unto the Lord, and in humble prayer called upon His Name.

Abr 2 21VERSE 21. And I, Abraham, journeyed still farther south. Finding no place satisfactory to his demands, perhaps because the Holy Spirit urged him onward so that God's purposes in him could be fulfilled, Abraham left the mountain encampment "going on still towards the south." The famine that had brought so much waste to Chaldea was now devastating the land of Canaan wherein Abraham dwelt as a stranger, and had become very sore to all its inhabitants.

Abr 2 21Still farther to the south lay Egypt. Abraham determined to sojourn there until at least the famine was less grievous in the north.

Abr 2 21Egypt was a land discovered by a woman named Egyptus, which means forbidden (1:23); a great river ran the full extent of its territory. The Valley of the Nile, and particularly its Delta, were than covered with water (1:24; Genesis 13:10); It now would offer Abraham that for which he searched.

SCAbr 2 22Abr 2 23Abr 2 24Abr 2 25VERSES 22-25. Sarai, thy wife, is a very fair woman to look upon. As Abraham neared entry into Egypt, the Lord whose watchful care was ever over him, warned Abraham that his wife, Sarai, was a very "fair woman to look upon. Therefore it shall come to pass when the Egyptians shall see her they will say—She is his wife; and they will kill you, but they will save her alive; therefore see that ye do on this wise: Let her say unto the Egyptians, she is thy sister, and thy soul shall live."

SCAbr 2 22Abr 2 23Abr 2 24Abr 2 25Sarai coming from a country of mountains and uplands had a fresh and glowing complexion, while the Egyptians, being descended from Egyptus, the wife of Ham, Noah's son, were black—Egyptus being a descendant of Cain, had bequeathed to her offspring the dark skin she herself had inherited in the curse that followed Cain's seed. "And it came to pass, that, when Abraham was come into Egypt, the Egyptians beheld the woman that she was very fair. The princes of Pharaoh saw her, and commended her before Pharaoh: and she was taken into Pharaoh's house" (Genesis 12:14-15).

SCAbr 2 22Abr 2 23Abr 2 24Abr 2 25It was through Sarai's beauty that the king of the Egyptians first gained a knowledge of Abraham, her husband. The king possessed sheep and oxen, he asses, menservants and maidservants, and other riches that with which the Egyptians put a value on everything. These he offered Abraham "for her sake," wanting to buy her. "And the Lord plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of Sarai, Abraham's wife." (Ibid., 17.) And she was set free.

SCAbr 2 22Abr 2 23Abr 2 24Abr 2 25To the student of Abraham's life these last verses do not indicate a God-inspired attempt on his part to deceive the Egyptians, but a providential covering that protected him from the wiles of an idolatrous people; also that the Only True and Living God should show forth to them His power, for among the Egyptians Abraham had a glorious mission to perform.

SCAbr 2 22Abr 2 23Abr 2 24Abr 2 25Moses wrote what is now the eight Chapters of the Book called after his name in the Pearl of Great Price and which we have in its deleted form in the Book of Genesis of the Hebrew Scriptures, gathering his information from records then existing but now no longer extant, and from the abundant Source of all truth. Very likely some of those records were written by Abraham himself; by his own hand, and were more in detail concerning the incidents of his travels than were those recorded in the Book of Abraham, now before us. It is quite evident that the writings of Abraham as we have them in the Book called after his name, are a doctrinal expose' intended to convey celestial truths and an abounding knowledge pertaining to God's grand and glorious Creation. (The authors hereof suggest that the reader peruse carefully the entire Chapter 12, Book of Genesis.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And I, Abraham, had the Urim and Thummim, which the Lord my God had given unto me, in Ur of the Chaldees; LXX, Septuagint, The pre-Christian Greek Version of the Old Testament still used in the Eastern Church. It is so-called because of the legend that the translation was made by seventy emissaries from Jerusalem for Ptolemy II, about 250 B. C. The Septuagint is thought to be the translation which was used by the Savior and His Apostles.
[^2] And I saw the stars, that they were very great, and that one of them was nearest unto the throne of God; and there were many great ones which were near unto it;
