Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1965)

ABRAHAM CHAPTER 3

Abr 3 1VERSE 1. And I, Abraham, had the Urim and Thummim. According to the Hebrew (Exodus 28:30), the literal signification of the words, Urim and Thummim, is, lights and perfections, or the shining and the perfect. Truly, we may understand them to denote a light that shines in the darkness and perfect understanding. According to the Septuagint [^1] (LXX) it is manifestation and truth. While St. Jerome interprets it to mean, doctrine and judgment. They were two stones or crystals worn in or attached to the breastplate of the High Priest when inquiring of God (Ibid.)

Abr 3 1We read of only two sets of such stones. The one given by the Lord to Abraham, and the other from that same source to the Brother of Jared, Mahonri Moriancumer, before he descended from the scene of his wonderful vision on the mount whereunto he had gone to seek the Lord's help. They were delivered to Moriancumer with the admonition that they be sealed up, together with the sacred records that were kept, and thus hidden from the eyes of the world until they, in the due time of the Lord, were to come forth. Their purpose is stated to be (Ether 3:24) to "magnify," that is to make clear, "the things which ye shall write." (Read Ether 3 and 4.)

Abr 3 1According to the Doctrine and Covenants (17:1), the Sacred instrument that was deposited in the Hill Cumorah and delivered to the Prophet Joseph Smith was the same Urim and Thummim which was received by the Brother of Jared while on the mount. When the Prophet Joseph himself received the stones, Sept. 22, 1827, they were framed in silver bows and fastened to a breastplate (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith 2:35).

Abr 3 1When Moriancumer had received the Urim and Thummim, the Lord opened his vision, possibly by means of these stones, and he was shown the human race, past and future, passing as if in panorama.

Abr 3 1Enoch had a similar view of "many generations" while he stood on Mount Simeon (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 7:2-6, 22-69.) Abraham, who received the Urim and Thummim while he was in Ur (v. 1) had marvelous visions and revelations concerning the creation of the universe and the intelligences that were organized "before the world was" (Abraham 1:28, also Chapters 4 and 5, Writings of Moses.) He was thus prepared for his mission to Egypt (Abraham 3:15). Moses, also, who may have had in his possession the same Urim and Thummim that had been given to Abraham, had similar visions (Moses 1:1ff). Moses "beheld the earth, yea, even all of it; and there was not a particle of it which he did not behold." . . . "And he beheld also the inhabitants thereof, and there was not a soul which he beheld not; and he discerned them by the Spirit of God . . . . And he beheld many lands; and each land was called earth, and there were inhabitants on the face thereof." (Moses 1:27-29.)

SCAbr 3 2Abr 3 3VERSES 2-3. I saw the stars. . . . Through the instrumentality of the Urim and Thummim, Abraham had great visions and in them saw the glorious firmament of the heavens as if transported there in his living person. He saw the stars and the greatness thereof. He discerned that one of these stars was greater than any other and nearer to the throne of God; yet he perceived many that were also near to the one which was greatest of all.

SCAbr 3 2Abr 3 3These are the governing ones. The vision was so tremendous and awe-inspiring to Abraham that the Lord interceded to explain to him the meaning thereof, and His purposes in the arrangement of the heavenly bodies. "These," which you see, "are the governing ones," and each is placed in its rightful sphere where it may control the movements of a lesser one. "The name of the great one is Kolob, because it is near unto Me, for I am the Lord thy God." Through Me all the universe is ruled, and "I have set this one to govern all those which belong to the same order as that upon which thou standest."

SCAbr 3 4Abr 3 5Abr 3 6Abr 3 7Abr 3 8Abr 3 9Abr 3 10Abr 3 11Abr 3 12VERSES 4-12. Kolob was after the manner of the Lord. . . . The Urim and Thummim was the instrument through which Abraham discerned the wonderful truths herein recorded. The voice of the Lord accompanied the scenes presented to his vision, describing them to Abraham almost in detail.

SCAbr 3 4Abr 3 5Abr 3 6Abr 3 7Abr 3 8Abr 3 9Abr 3 10Abr 3 11Abr 3 12The great astronomical truths revealed by God to Abraham are so vast in their extent, so inclusive that the human mind without divine help cannot grasp their import; the knowledge imparted by them so apperceptive, that no uninspired man ever searched out their depths or ascended their glorious heights.

SCAbr 3 4Abr 3 5Abr 3 6Abr 3 7Abr 3 8Abr 3 9Abr 3 10Abr 3 11Abr 3 12We learn through Abraham's vision that the great planets spoken of in the preceding verses control all others in their revolutions, or in other words are the centers around which the others revolve. As the moon revolves around the earth, and the earth with the other primary and secondary planets belonging to this solar system revolve around the sun, so has the sun a center around which it, with all its earths and moons, revolves, while this grand center has a governing planet also, a sun or world around which it, with all its attendant systems of suns and worlds, revolves, and so on until we reach to Kolob, the nearest unto the throne of God, which is the grand center which governs all the suns and systems of suns "which belong to the same order" as our earth and those that move with it.

SCAbr 3 4Abr 3 5Abr 3 6Abr 3 7Abr 3 8Abr 3 9Abr 3 10Abr 3 11Abr 3 12Concerning the greatest of these celestial orbs, the Book of Abraham teaches us, that,

SCAbr 3 4Abr 3 5Abr 3 6Abr 3 7Abr 3 8Abr 3 9Abr 3 10Abr 3 11Abr 3 12Kolob is the greatest of all the stars which Abraham saw.

SCAbr 3 4Abr 3 5Abr 3 6Abr 3 7Abr 3 8Abr 3 9Abr 3 10Abr 3 11Abr 3 12It is so because it is nearest to the residence of God.

SCAbr 3 4Abr 3 5Abr 3 6Abr 3 7Abr 3 8Abr 3 9Abr 3 10Abr 3 11Abr 3 12It is nigh unto the throne of God.

SCAbr 3 4Abr 3 5Abr 3 6Abr 3 7Abr 3 8Abr 3 9Abr 3 10Abr 3 11Abr 3 12It governs all the planets which belong to the same order as the earth.

SCAbr 3 4Abr 3 5Abr 3 6Abr 3 7Abr 3 8Abr 3 9Abr 3 10Abr 3 11Abr 3 12It is after the reckoning of the Lord's time.

SCAbr 3 4Abr 3 5Abr 3 6Abr 3 7Abr 3 8Abr 3 9Abr 3 10Abr 3 11Abr 3 12It is after the manner of the Lord according to its times and seasons and the revolutions thereof.

SCAbr 3 4Abr 3 5Abr 3 6Abr 3 7Abr 3 8Abr 3 9Abr 3 10Abr 3 11Abr 3 12One revolution is one day with the Lord.

SCAbr 3 4Abr 3 5Abr 3 6Abr 3 7Abr 3 8Abr 3 9Abr 3 10Abr 3 11Abr 3 12One day, in Kolob, is equal to a thousand years according to the measurement of time of this earth.

SCAbr 3 4Abr 3 5Abr 3 6Abr 3 7Abr 3 8Abr 3 9Abr 3 10Abr 3 11Abr 3 12Kolob signifies first creation.

SCAbr 3 4Abr 3 5Abr 3 6Abr 3 7Abr 3 8Abr 3 9Abr 3 10Abr 3 11Abr 3 12It is the first in government, and last pertaining to the measurement of time. The measurement according to Celestial time signifies one day to a cubit.

SCAbr 3 13Abr 3 14VERSES 13-14. I will multiply thee, and thy seed after thee, like unto these. Abraham saw the Lord stretch forth His hand as if to encompass all His Creations. "My son, My son," He said to Abraham, "behold I will show you all these." The number of God's Creations multiplied before Abraham's astonished eyes. Of the stars and their attendant planets he saw no end.

SCAbr 3 13Abr 3 14Abraham, no doubt, was profoundly moved by the things which the Lord showed him, and in wonderment looked upon the immensity of God's Creations. However he was undaunted by the perplexities that rose in his mind, but the Lord seeing Abraham's perturbance, hastened to identify and explain to him so that Abraham understood many of the stars and planets that moved in their heavenly courses. First, the Lord drew Abraham's attention to the sun, which He said is SHINEHAH; and KOLOB, which is star; OLEA, the moon, and KOKAUBEAM, which signifies stars, or "all the great lights which were in the firmament of heaven."

SCAbr 3 13Abr 3 14God's servant was so engrossed in the things he saw and so enrapt with their majesty, that not until that moment did Abraham realize that it was nighttime. In the surrounding darkness which the curtains of night drew about him, he saw God's innumerable Creations as bright shining objects in a dark sky. Abraham could not count them because in number they were like unto the sands by the sea. In amazement Abraham looked upon the scene here presented, as suns and moons and stars multiplied in number until his vision could not behold them all. It is here where the Lord promised Abraham: "I will multiply thee and thy seed after thee, like unto these." (v. 14.)

SCAbr 3 13Abr 3 14The sentiments expressed in these verses were echoed many years later by the Psalmist: "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth His handiwork" (Psalm 19:1). Also, "O Lord our God, how glorious is Thy Name in all the earth; Whose majesty is rehearsed above the heavens. When I think of Thy heavens, the work of Thy fingers, the moon and the stars which Thou hast established: What is man, that Thou art mindful of him, or the son of man that Thou thinkest of him? . . . O Lord our God, how glorious is Thy Name in all the earth" (Psalm 8, Hebrew Translation).

Abr 3 15VERSE 15. And the Lord said unto me: Abraham . . . . The Lord, for a wise purpose in Himself, showed these great things to Abraham. That purpose is discussed more freely on pages 322-323 of Seed of Abraham. Briefly, it was to teach to the Egyptians, to whom Abraham journeyed, all the words the Lord had spoken.

Abr 3 15We repeat here one verse which we caused to be printed therein (the above mentioned Book of Abraham), "That God did use Abraham, as stated in his writings, to convey astronomical knowledge to the Egyptians, is, we think, fully demonstrated by the following: (Josephus Book 1, Chapter 8) wherein it is stated that Abraham communicated to them (the Egyptians) arithmetic, and delivered to them the science of astronomy, for before Abraham came into Egypt they were unacquainted with those parts of learning, for that science came by the Chaldeans into Egypt, and from them to the Greeks also.'"

Abr 3 16VERSE 16. There shall be greater things above them. In the economy of the heavens each and every created thing has a place to serve the whole Creation which God has given to it. Order rules all things. To the suns, and moons, and stars, that move in their celestial courses, a law has been appointed unto them which they cannot transgress.

Abr 3 16For instance, if two planets or stars exist and have an actual being, and one of them is above the other in the designation given it by the Creator, "there shall be greater things above them" . . . "until thou come nigh unto Kolob, which Kolob is after the reckoning of the Lord's time; which Kolob is nigh unto the throne of God, to govern all these planets which belong to the same order as that upon which thou standest." (v. 9.) "Therefore Kolob is the greatest of all the Kokaubeam that thou hast seen, because it is nearest unto Me."

SCAbr 3 17Abr 3 18Abr 3 19VERSES 17-19. I am the Lord thy God, I am more intelligent than they all. That Abraham should comprehend fully the great truth imparted to him by the Lord, and recorded by him in the previous verse (16), the Lord explained to him that the moon although it "be above the earth" was not the end of His Creations, "but it may be that a planet or a star may exist above it," and so on unto the Eternal Throne.

SCAbr 3 17Abr 3 18Abr 3 19To accomplish His purposes in the Creation, God may bring unto His assistance forces of which we know nothing. The suns, moons, and stars, He controls them all. All God's purposes are consecrated to the good of His children. If, in His heart, He says, "I will." He will! Thus we know that a grand and glorious Creation is about us. Steps we may take unto the Eternal Home, God's Abode, are provided for us in the stars that abide from the earth unto Kolob.

SCAbr 3 17Abr 3 18Abr 3 19The Law that rules the suns, and moons, and stars, the whole universe, the Works of God's hands, is now compared to the law which governs the spirits of men. A principle which is the same is evident in both: there is always one above, or more intelligent than the other. Now if there exists two spirits "and one shall be more intelligent than the other," although both are co-existent—that is, having no beginning or end—and therefore are eternal, the one that is more intelligent than the other, shall itself have even another which is more intelligent than it. And so on until is reached the Eternal throne of God: "I am the Lord thy God, I am more intelligent than they all."

SCAbr 3 20Abr 3 21VERSES 20-21. I dwell in the midst of all the intelligences. . . . The Lord, Abraham's God Who dwells Above surrounded by many concourses of angels, reminded Abraham that He sent one of them, an angel from His presence "to deliver thee from the hands of the priest of Elkenah" when that idol-worshipper was about to offer him (Abraham), as a sacrifice to the sun-god, or to some lifeless image made of wood and stone. In his miraculous deliverance God showed forth to Abraham His power and might. How He presides in wisdom and in truth over the angels in heaven and over men on earth, is but a token of God's majesty and dominion. All the Works of His hands, the sovereignty of His power, the glorious splendor of His presence, together magnified the Lord and exalted His Holy Name. Abraham saw the magnificence of the Courts of Glory.

SCAbr 3 20Abr 3 21All this, and more, Abraham saw and heard, but we conclude that the Lord in enumerating the facts mentioned in verses 20 and 21, was preparing Abraham's mind for the reception of other truths which He was about to impart to him.

SCAbr 3 22Abr 3 23VERSES 22-23. Among all these were many of the noble and great one. Abraham saw the innumerable hosts of heaven. In their midst God ruled. Their number was so great that Abraham marvelled at the multitude who surrounded the Throne of Grace. All anxiously served Him. Among those who offered their homage "were many of the noble and great ones." Abraham realized that although some excelled in their devotion to duty and loyalty, they all were equal in point of birth as spirit-children of God Who is the Father of all. Abraham understood that the intelligences which he saw were organized (born to God) "before the world was," and that they had no beginning or have they an end. They were eternal.

SCAbr 3 22Abr 3 23These will I make My rulers. God, the Father of them all, saw that some of His spirit-children were more diligent in serving Him than were others. He perceived that they were good. So standing in their midst, He declared: "These will I make My rulers." "Abraham," the Lord called him by name, "thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born."

SCAbr 3 24Abr 3 25Abr 3 26VERSES 24-26. And there stood One among them Who was like unto God. Among the noble and great was One Who among the great was greatest. He was an Architect and Builder. His plans and the blueprints thereof were already drawn. In counsel with their Father He had formulated a complete design of an "earth whereon these (God's children) may dwell." He observed to His associates that in God's dominions was a great unused "space" and a plentiful supply of "materials" wherewith to consummate His plans. His object was to assemble into one vast area the forces and energies that abound in the sphere wherein God is supreme, and to create therein a home for His many brothers and sisters in the world of Spirits. He, as we have said: "Would be the Architect and Builder." Come, He said to those who also were noble and great: "We will go down . . . and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell."

SCAbr 3 24Abr 3 25Abr 3 26"And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." "And those who keep their First Estate"—that is those who are loyal and true to God's purposes while in the Spirit World—shall have greater blessings added to their birthright as children of The Majesty On High. But, He who was the Greatest of the great, said by way of prophetic repudiation: "They who keep not their First Estate," and are loathe in keeping God's commandments and rebel against His Word, shall not receive the gracious gifts that will be bestowed upon the obedient, and therefore will not be rewarded with that glory with which the righteous will be crowned in God's kingdom. However they who enter upon their Second Estate, which is earth-life, and who seek first the kingdom of God, shall have increasing joy and little by little, and bit by bit, have everlasting "glory added upon their heads."

SCAbr 3 27Abr 3 28VERSES 27-28. Whom shall I send? The earth, completed according to the plans and specifications of the Architect and Builder thereof, was envisioned by Him as suitable for man's residence. That its purpose might be fully realized as a dwelling place for the spirits whom God had created and who were to be clothed upon with bodies of flesh and blood, a Great Council was held in heaven. It was a Council of the Gods, or the noble and great ones. Presiding over its deliberations was the Chiefest of all, the supreme Ruler of the universe.

SCAbr 3 27Abr 3 28There in that Council the future of man and his welfare were unfolded and freely discussed. A Plan providing for his development both as a mortal and also as an exalted person was presented by his wise Father, who was the ultimate arbiter and from Whose decisions there was no appeal. That Plan was the Plan of Life and Salvation.

SCAbr 3 27Abr 3 28When all other arrangements were complete, and the sons of God shouted for joy, the greatest question to come before the Council was propounded by the Supreme Head thereof: "Whom shall I send?" That the first man should transgress God's Holy Law, and in doing so would bring misery and sin into a celestial sphere, was agreed upon. To deliver mankind from the effects of that transgression entailed that a Redeemer should be sent to earth to rescue him from the thralldom of sin. He must needs be One who was qualified to pay the Ransom. Who was it to be?

SCAbr 3 27Abr 3 28The Architect and Builder of the earth quickly answered His Father's query: "Here am I, send Me." Another also expressed a willingness to serve: "Here am I, send me." "I will send the first," was the conclusive declaration of the Presiding Officer of the Council. (See Moses 4:1-2.)

SCAbr 3 27Abr 3 28The second one to offer his services kept not his First Estate. (See Moses 4:3-4. This Commentary.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And then the Lord said: Let us go down. And they went down at the beginning, and they, that is the Gods, organized and formed the heavens and the earth.
