Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price ( 1965)

THE SYMBOLISM OF THE GREAT PYRAMID

The concensus of some who have made it a real study, is, as Sir Isaac Newton is alleged once to have said: "The Great Pyramid is a veritable miracle in stone." The builders thereof, it is thought, knew how to square the circle, and demonstrated that problem in the dimensions of that huge structure. They knew the exact length of the axis of rotation of the earth, and the distance between the earth and the sun. They were aware of the expression of the equinoxes, and by the location of the building they indicated the very center of the land-surface of all the earth. They also proved that they had a perfect system of weights and measures.

All these propositions seem to be well proved. And there can be no reasonable doubt of the high scientific knowledge of the architect, or architects, of the structure.

Some students of the pyramid go further than this, and find in the passages, galleries, and chambers of the pyramid's interior also the evidence of prophetic foresight.

Even this is by no means impossible. Prophetic knowledge has from time to time been given to man since the beginning of history. Adam, our venerable ancestor, before his death, called his descendants together and, "being full of the Holy Ghost, predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the last generation." (Doctrine and Covenants 107:56.) Enoch, too, "the seventh from Adam" (Jude 14), prophesied of the coming of the Son of Man and the Millennium (Pearl of Great Price); and Noah, after the flood, predicted some of the main features of the future of his descendants through his three sons. The children of men, therefore, had the prophetic word from the very beginning.

Josephus, in a paragraph that will be quoted later, tells us that the descendants of Seth erected two pillars on which the knowledge they had was engraved for the benefit of coming generations. It is certainly not improbable that prophecies were part of the text on such monuments.

Granting then that the Great Pyramid is a monument of the marvelous scientific achievements of man at the very beginning of recorded history, and also an irrefutable proof of prophetic insight, or inspiration of the builders, the question still remains as to whether the interpreters in our day have offered us the correct interpretations in every detail. Can they really read it? Do their explanations agree with the revealed Word of God, and with known established facts of history? No student of pyramidal literature can afford to ignore these questions, nor to take all that is said for granted.

Referring to a pyramidal diagram, we find the entrance to the structure on the north side about fifty feet up from the foundation. This entrance admits us to a narrow descending passage, barely three and one-half feet from side to side, and four feet from floor to roof. This narrow tunnel terminates in a chamber hewn in the rock on which the pyramid stands. The chamber is called "the Pit." The length of the passage is 4,402 inches.

In the pyramid chronology a pyramid inch is a year.

This narrow descending passage, we are told, symbolizes the course of degraded, natural man from the Fall of Adam to the bottomless "Pit."

At a point, 986 inches from the entrance, the descending passage opens to the first ascending passage, the entire length of which is 1542.4 pyramid inches. The entrance is closed by a huge granite plug.

This descending passage is said to represent the "Israelitic Age," from the Exodus, B.C. 1486, to the time of our Lord.

At this point of the termination of the said Age, two passages branch off in different directions. One follows a horizontal line, 1725 pyramid inches, and then terminates in a room known as the "Queen's Chamber." This horizontal passage is said to represent the Jews who did not accept Jesus as the Messiah, while the Queen's Chamber, somehow, symbolizes the participation of the latter-day Jews in the events preceding the Second Advent.

At the junction of the First ascending and the horizontal passages, we find the yawning mouth of a shaft called "the Well." Seven hundred and two pyramid inches farther down, this shaft passes through a "Grotto," or natural cave, and then continues on downward until it joins the descending passage a short distance from the entrance to the Pit. The entire depth of the shaft is 1596 pyramid inches.

Interpreters tell us that the Well represents the descent of man into Hades, the realm of the dead, and that there is at the mouth of it the evidence of an explosion symbolizing the Resurrection of our Lord, "Who thus opened up the new and living way to life and immortality."

It has been noted that two passages form a junction at the southern terminus of the first ascending passage. One is the horizontal passage leading to the Queen's Chamber, as just stated; the other is the "Grand Gallery," a continuation of the first ascending passage on a greatly enlarged scale. This gallery leads to the "King's Chamber." The entire length of this gallery is 1882 pyramid inches. Its vertical height is 339.5 inches. Breadth of the floors between the so-called "ramps" is 42 inches; above the ramps, 82 inches. (The ramps are shelves along the walls of the gallery, 21 inches high and 20 inches wide.)

Near the southern end of the gallery there is a "step," thirty-six inches high, and 61 inches from north to south. Here, we encounter a low passage leading into the "Ante-chamber, the entire length of which is given as 116.26 inches; breadth, at top, east and west, 62.5 inches; height 149.3 inches.

From the Ante-chamber, there is an exit passage, horizontal, 100.2 inches long; height at the north end, 43.7 inches; at the south end, 42 inches; breadth, 41.8 inches.

Through this low and narrow passage, or corridor, we come to the King's Chamber, a rectangular room lined entirely with massive granite. It is 412.132 inches long; 206.066 inches wide, and 230.389 inches high from floor to ceiling; or from base to ceiling, 235.350, all pyramid inches.

The furniture of the Chamber consists of a coffer of granite: length, 89.62 to 89.92 inches; breadth, 38.68 to 38.61, and height, 41.23 to 41.13. The inside measures are 77.85 inches, breadth 26.71, depth, 34.31; (thickness) of bottom, 6.91 and of sides, 5.98 pyramid inches. The internal cubical measure of this coffer is, according to C. Piazzi Smyth, "the grand standard of capacity," and the chamber is "the final and crowning apartment of the whole of the interior of our earth's earliest and most gigantic monument of stone."

The Grand Gallery, we are told, represents the Gospel Age. The low passages from the Grand Gallery to the King's Chamber symbolize the latter-day tribulations previous to the reign of righteousness, and the time of tribulation is shortened by the Ante-chamber, as our Lord promised His Disciples, in order to save mankind from annihilation.

The King's Chamber, we are told, is the Hall of Judgment of the nations and the establishment of our Lord's government on earth for His Millennial Reign.

It may be stated here that the dimensions given in the preceding paragraphs are from "Our Inheritance in the Great Pyramid," by C. Piazzi Smyth. The explanations offered are from, "The Great Pyramid, its Spiritual Symbolism," by Morton Edgar and other recent publications.

Perhaps the following from an article on the pyramid by Thomas W. Greenwell, published in the Millennial Star, December 2, 1878, may be helpful. The author mentioned says: "According to the Pyramid Astronomy, the flood took place B.C. 2790. The first entrance-passage or gallery commenced with the symbolic date answering to B.C. 2528—the era of the first dispersion of mankind. On the scale of an inch to the year, the passage gradually descends to a point B.C. 2170, which was the date of the erection of the pyramid. This is singularly marked by two fine lines ruled in the stone on the east and west sides of the gallery. The descent then continued 628 inches (representing, of course, 628 years), to what is called "the Grand Portcullis (B.C. 1542); this is a junction, or new departure in the pyramid's symbolism."

Our author gives the date of the Exodus as B.C. 1542.

Concerning the Grand Gallery, the length of which he gives as 1881 pyramid inches, he says: "There is nothing particular in its whole course until a remarkable change takes place at the point of 1815 inches from its commencement, corresponding with the year 1815."

Mr. Greenwell finds that the elevation of the floor level corresponding to the year 1815 indicates a new era in history. France at that time shook off religion for a season and endeavored to introduce new creeds, new times, laws, seasons, and even measures.

On the accepted theory that a pyramid inch represents a year, the plan hastily sketched comprises human history from Adam, 4000 B.C., to the year 1936 A.D., when after great tribulation, counting from August 4, 1914, the King's Chamber is reached.

Now, in the words of the Apostle Paul, "What shall we say, then?"

With regard to the Patriarchal and Mosaic eras, there is little to say. As far as we know, there is no way of ascertaining whether the pyramid inches coincide with the true chronology or not, for the simple reason that we have no complete system of chronology that goes as far back as the Creation, or even the Flood.

As is well known, we have three different tables founded upon as many different versions of the Bible. Scholars who have tried to calculate the age of the human race from the Biblical genealogies find that the Hebrew text has 1656 years between Adam and the Flood, while the Samaritan has only 1307 years, and the Septuagint 2242 years. There is a similar discrepency in the number of years between the Flood and the birth of Abraham. The Hebrew text seems to give 290 years, the Samaritan, 940, and the Septuagint, 1170 (See The Popular and Critical Bible Encyclopedia under "Chronology.") It is pointed out in this work that no date prior to B.C. 700 is absolutely certain, though many are approximate.

Nor is this strange. The earliest chroniclers did not attach importance to dates as we do. They were satisfied when they had stated that an event occurred within a period of years, or within the years of a generation, or within the years of a known ruler. Monuments may have been erected years after the events they commemorated had occurred, and the dates, where dates are given, may be only traditional. Often round numbers were used instead of exact dates, as when we speak of the Hundred Year's War between England and France which lasted at least 116 years. Sometimes genealogies are incomplete, the names of grandsons or great grandsons being given as those of sons. Sometimes rulers mentioned as if one were the successor of the other, while they were either partly or entirely contemporary. For these and other reasons, all chronological tables of the early ages are uncertain.

The genealogical records of the Bible prove the unity of the human family as to its origin, and the lineage of our Lord through the channels foretold—Shem, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Judah, David—and as such they are the greatest value and important; but they do not give the age of the earth, or the human race as we measure ages in our days and years. They were not intended so to do.

It is obvious, therefore, that we have really no absolutely reliable data whereby to test the theory offered concerning the symbolism of the descending passage. Bishop Usher's dates which give both the creation and appearance of Adam as B.C. 4004 are no longer accepted. Nor is his date, B.C. 1491, as the date of the Exodus generally accepted. [^1]

But when we come to examine the explanations offered concerning the symbolism of the Grand Gallery, we are on, comparatively speaking, firmer historical ground. We also have the prophetic word which the Apostle Peter says is "more sure" even than history (II Peter 1:19), and of which he says, "Take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place."

The interpreters say, as we have seen, that this Grand Gallery represents "the Gospel Age" extending over a period of about 1914 years counting from the birth of the Savior till about the time of the First World War (Great Britain entered war August 4, 1914). Mr. C. Piazzi Smyth says on this subject: "We have already in Chapter 22, concluded that the north wall of the Grand Gallery represents the date of the birth of Christ; and that thence upwards along the said Gallery's inclined floor stretches Christian religious history since that time." The end of this religious history, this Gospel Age, he finds at the south end of the Gallery "And a positive end, too, it is," he says. Then he asks, "How close, then, may such an end be?" His measurements give two results, depending on the method used. One yields 1881.4, which Mr. F. Petri corrects to 1881.8. The other result is 1910. When these results are applied to chronological tables, which have no year 0, he says, he obtains 1882.4 or .8 and 1911. "Something, then," he concludes "seems to be appointed to take place between the two times of the ending, viz., between 1882.4 and 1911 A.D."

This was written in February 1890, and the author did not have the advantage of the First World War to fall back upon.

Mr. Morton Edgar has this statement: "The Grand Gallery represents the condition of the justified by faith, those who are redeemed by God as perfect human beings because of their faith and are with the high or heavenly calling to sacrifice (Romans 12:1), that they may become joint heirs with Christ in His glory." (The Great Pyramid, p. 121.) That is his way of describing the Gospel Age, supposedly represented by the Grand Gallery.

How this theory originated is a question as interesting as it is important. Mr. C. Piazzi Smyth tells this story. (The Great Pyramid pp. 307 et. seq.) He says that in 1872, a friend, Mr. Charles Casey, wrote him that unless the Great Pyramid could be shown to have some acknowledgment of the divinity of Christ, "its sacred claim is a thing with no blood in it; it is nothing but mere sound." Already in 1865 Mr. Smyth had received a letter from a young shipbuilder by the name of Menzaries, in which the Messianic symbolisms of the pyramid were explained. He declared that the immense superiority in height of the Grand Gallery over every other passage in the pyramid "arose from it representing the Christian Dispensation; while said passages typified only human devised religious, human histories, or little else."

That is the origin of the theory. Mr. Menzaries, whose name (Menzaries) may be a variant of Manasseh, was the first also to our knowledge to think of it.

"This Israelite, then, but no Jew," Mr. Smyth says, "it was, who first, to my knowledge, broke ground in the Messianic symbolisms of the Great Pyramid, so intensified subsequently by Mr. Casey."

Now, we are afraid we will have to confess our inability to find in the prophetic word or in history the needed confirmation of this ingenious theory. We can find no Great Gallery in the written Word of God. The prophets of the Lord do not, as we understand it, predict a Gospel Age in uninterrupted existence from the days of Christ until the tribulations preceding the Second Coming of our Lord.

On the contrary.

The Apostle Paul, as is well known, gives us to understand that there was to be a "falling away," led by an usurper of divine authority and attributes: "So that he as God sitteth in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God." Falsely, of course. This "Mystery of iniquity" was already at work the Apostle says, in his day; only, "he who now letteth will let." The Roman imperial power was the obstacle in the way. With the removal of that obstacle, the blasphemous usurpation with its improper seizure of divine authority will appear. But the usurper, himself, would stay on the stage of history until the coming of the Lord. (2 Thessalonians 2:2-10.)

From this we can gather that a considerable part of the time between the First and the Second Advents would be occupied by an anti-Christian power. It would be a time of absolute apostasy from the Gospel Dispensation.

In the revelations given to the Apostle John, that fact is further set forth. There we see the "great dragon," "the old serpent," active in the world while the "woman" (Zion the Church, according to Isaiah 66:6-10, and Micah 4:8-10) existed only in the "wilderness," where she is nourished for 1260 days. She was to be in a position similar to that of the Prophet Elijah by the brook Cherith during a portion of the reign of Ahab and Jezebel.

History corroborates amply the prophetic word concerning the apostasy. It shows us that the foundation of the "falling away" was laid in the days of the Apostles, that the superstructure was raised by degrees and that several centuries passed before it was completed.

The apostasy began by a denial of the divine nature of our Lord and Savior. (I John 4:3; II John 1:7.)

The next step was the prevalence in the churches of false doctrines and immorality, as is evident from the divine messages to the seven churches in Asia Minor. (Revelation 2-3.)

The next stage was the contention between the bishops in the principal cities for the honor of primacy.

To begin with, the bishops in the Church were equals. They were "overseers" of their flocks and if any of them wielded more influence than the rest, they did so on account of their greater knowledge, superior intelligence, or abundant Christian virtues. By and by, however, bishops in larger cities began to claim a degree of superiority over those in the smaller communities. They assumed the title of patriarchs. Questions of doctrine and rules of conduct were referred to them and their decisions became law in their own districts. The bishops in Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, Constantinople, Rome, and Alexandria, all claimed the first place.

The Bishop in Jerusalem could truthfully claim that the Church was established there by the Apostles of our Lord. The Bishop of Antioch could with equal force reply that Antioch became a gathering place for the Christians when persecution drove them from Jerusalem; that both Peter and Paul labored there; that it became the starting point of Paul and Barnabas for their first mission. Constantinople became the capital of the Roman Empire, Constantine and the bishop there could claim supremecy on that account. The bishop in Rome could found his claim on the fact that Rome was the capital of the Roman Emperors, but when the bishop in Constantinople could make a similar boast for his city, the Roman prelate found it necessary to present some further reason for his claim to primacy. It was then that the legend concerning the foundation of the church in Rome by the great Apostle Peter was foisted upon the world as history. The city of Alexandria had a better claim to the first place than Rome. It was an important center of culture and commerce. It was known as the Metropolis of the East. The Church there, according to tradition, was founded by Mark, the close companion of Peter. In its famous school, and not in Rome, the Christian doctrine was formulated in the early centuries by such men as Arigen, Athanasius, and others. The bishop in Ephesus also had strong arguments for primacy. That city was a great religious center, it being the site of the famous Shrine of Diana. There Paul made his headquarters for three years (Acts 20:31), and from there the Gospel of Christ went forth to the world, so that Demetrias was very nearly correct when he accused the Apostle (Acts 19:26) of having "turned away" people "throughout Asia" from the Goddess. And then, with the death of Paul, the direction of the affairs of the churches in Ephesus and the other settlements in that district was turned over to the Apostle John, who established himself at Ephesus, not Rome.

Let us consider this. During the first four and a half centuries of our era, after the departure of the Apostles, there was no "universal bishop," no "pope," no "Catholic church," as we know it. Leo, the Great, after the Council at Chalcedon 451 A.D., gained some recognition for Rome, but the final establishment of papacy must be credited to Emperor Phocas and Pope Boniface III, 150 years later.

You remember the story. At the time of Gregory I, the controversy for supremacy had narrowed down to a contest between Rome and Constantinople. In the year 602 A.D. Phocas, a Roman Centurian, caused Emperor Maurice to be cruelly murdered. Phocas took his place. The bishop in Rome had a personal representative in Constantinople, who did not hesitate to "recognize" the blood-bespattered usurper as the ruler of the Empire. When this ambassador happened to be elected Bishop of Rome, Phocas, naturally, "recognized" him in return, and in the year 607 A.D., he issued the imperial edict in which the newly elected potentate in Rome, Boniface III, was made Pope. The Emperor ordained that, "The see of blessed Peter, the Apostle," should be "the head of all the churches," and that the title of "universal bishop" belonged exclusively to the Bishop in Rome.

This Boniface held the office of pope only a few months, or from February 19 to November 12, 607 A.D. Death ended his part in the drama. But the Great Apostasy had been completed.

There ought to be some indication of this epoch-making date in the Grand Gallery. Even secular historians designate the period from the beginning of the sixth century to the time of the discovery of America (1492), or the reformation by Luther (1517) as the "Dark Ages." That period was not a Gospel Age. It was an age in which paganism restored was the dominating religion in Europe. Machiavelli calls it "heathenish." "The Second Commandment forbids worshiping God by images, and yet Rome papacy has introduced the image worship of pagan Rome, only changing the names." (J. M. Foster, in Rome, the Antagonist of the Nation.

Ought not the Grand Gallery to have been reduced to the height and width of the preceding passages, if not made even lower and narrower, so as to represent history correctly?

When we speak of a Gospel Age of more than 1900 years of uninterrupted duration, we conjure up an imaginary world in which the teachings of Jesus Christ have been dominant for that length of time.

Even in the Christian world, few have understood the philosophy and ethics of our Lord, and still fewer have practiced. There seems to be no consistency in conceiving the present Christianity as occupying a Grand Gallery in comparison with other religions of the world, even now.

Josephus has been quoted by some of the pyramid students, not indeed as an exponent of the modern theory concerning the prophetic symbolism, for he has not one word in favor of that theory, or against it; but as a witness to the high antiquity of the venerable structure.

We are of the opinion, however, that the passage in Josephus quoted in this connection does not refer to the pyramid at all. Josephus says in speaking of the descendants of Seth: ". . . so that it happens that not any of them in any sort did injury to any man. To these we owe the science of astronomy and all that which concerneth the beauty and order of the heavens. And to the end that their inventions might not wear out of the memory of man, nor perish before they were perfectly known (insomuch as Adam had foretold them of the general destruction of all things after two sorts, the one by force of fire, and the other by the violence and abundance of waters), they made two pillars; the one of brick and the other stone, and engraved in each of them such things as they invented; to the end, if that of brick should be abolished by the overflowing and rage of waters, that other of stone might remain and declare unto man that which was imprinted thereon for their instruction. That of brick was destroyed by the deluge, but the other of stone is to be seen in the country of Syna even to this day." (The Works of Josephus, London, 1676.)

From this it is seen that the Jewish historian writes about two "pillars." It is possible that "pillars" may mean pyramids, but ordinarily one would expect that word to stand for obelisks.

But let that pass.

He tells us, however, that the pillars he refers to had inscriptions concerning the beauty and order of the heavens, and the other "inventions" of the ante-diluvians. That excludes the Great Pyramid from consideration in connection with that text; for no inscriptions of any kind have been found there, except some marks possibly made by working men.

Some have even thought that no pyramid had any writings; but in 1880, inscriptions were found in three other pyramids, and there are now five pyramid texts, but none from the Great Pyramid. Those inscriptions cover a period of from 150 to 200 years. According to one calculation they date back from 2625 to B.C. 2475, while Flinders Petri considers them much older, or from B.C. 4275 to 4090. But they do not at all answer to the inscriptions mentioned by Josephus as engraved on the "pillars." They consist merely of pass words and formulas intended for the deceased to help him to advance in the realm of the dead. Does not this prove that Josephus did not, in the lines quoted, refer to the pyramids?

To be sure, the great Jewish historian writes about the pillars as if one of them was still to be seen at the time of his writing. According to some versions, that stone pillar was standing in the Land of "Sinad," a country we have been unable to identify. In the version of Josephus' works from which we have quoted, the land of the pillars is called Syna, which may possibly be Syene, or Aswad, in upper Egypt immediately below the First Cataract. But that does not fit the geographical location of the Great Pyramid.

Josephus makes use of a similar expression in connection with the story of Lot's wife. We read: "But Lot's wife, as they retired thence [from Sodom], looking back toward the city, and more curiously beholding the destruction thereof, contrary to the commandment of God, was transformed into a pillar of salt, which is to be seen until this day." (Josephus, History of the Jews, p. 39.

Josephus relies, evidently, in both instances on tradition accepted as true in his day, without critical analysis. Lot's wife died, and, as some scholars understand the Hebrew narrative, a monument of "salt" was raised over her grave. The "salt" may have been of the bitumen-variety, which in olden times was used as mortar. But whatever the pillar was, it was not standing at the time of Josephus, at least 1900 years after the destruction of Sodom. [^2]

We mention this because we believe that the stone pillar at Syna, of which Josephus speaks, was no more to be seen in his day than the salt pillar raised by Lot. Both were historical objects, we have no doubt, but were probably not standing when Josephus wrote. If that is true, he does not refer to the pyramid.

The next question is whether the Great Pyramid is mentioned in the sacred scriptures.

The main passage relied upon as a Bible reference to the pyramid is Isaiah 19:19-20: "In that day shall there be an altar to the Lord in the midst of the land of Egypt, and a pillar at the border thereof to the Lord. And it shall be for a sign and for a witness unto the Lord of Hosts in the land of Egypt."

Isaiah lived between the years B.C. 760-692 (or as others think, 765-698.) The pyramid was then centuries, if not thousands of years old. How could the Prophet speak of the pyramid as something that "shall be," in the future, when it was already there? He certainly predicted civil war, drought, scarcity of provisions, and a general breakdown of government in Egypt, (Isaiah 19:2-17), and also deliverance from the consequences of these visitations through contact with the chosen people of the Lord, the Hebrews.

This prophecy may refer to the Assyrian oppression, and the deliverance through Persian influence through Cyrus; for Cyrus, who recognized Jehovah as God (Ezra 1:2), diffused knowledge of Him throughout the world. Further, the Jewish exiles in Egypt acted as leaven. Under the Ptolomies, the Jewish scriptures were translated into Greek in Egypt, and long before that the Jews had erected two temples in the land. Is it not more probable that the prophecy of Isaiah was fulfilled in the construction of these Hebrew sanctuaries in Egypt?

Just below the First Cataract, at Aswan, also called Syene, a number of papyri have been found, which prove that there was a considerable Jewish colony in that part of Egypt as early as B.C. 471-410. They had a temple there, which always was referred to as "the Altar of Yahu." The papyri discovered show that Aramaean, the language of Syria, was commonly spoken there, and that the people in their legal documents swore by Yahu. Flinders Petri finds that the Jews before B.C. 525 had a temple and an altar at this place. It is built of cut stones, with stone columns and a roof of cedar.

The other temple was located not far from Cairo, "in the midst of the land."

About the year B.C. 160, during the commotion caused by the Maccabean War for Judaism, a young boy, Oniah, fled to Egypt. There he progressed and prospered and became one of Cleopatra's generals.

In the course of time he conceived the idea of building a temple for the purpose of uniting the Jewish factions in Egypt, and strengthening the influence of the Jews in that country. Consequently, he sent a petition to the king, Ptolemy Philometer, asking for a temple site and permission to build a structure "after the pattern of that in Jerusalem, and of the same dimensions." The petition was readily granted, and Oniah built the temple. He understood that Isaiah had referred to this undertaking, as he so explained the prediction to the king when he asked for a building lot as a royal grant.

There are no other scripture passages, so far as we know, that can be construed to refer to the Great Pyramid. Job 38:4 speaks of the "earth." That is the land that stands out of the depths of the ocean; the entire Chapter and the three following refer to the Works of God in Creation. "Where wast thou when I laid the foundation of the continents and islands?" "Who shut up the sea with doors?" "Where is the way where light dwelleth?" What do you know about the snow, the rain, the stars, the clouds, the dust, the animals, and so on? Job is taught his ignorance of the works of God in the Creation in order that he might realize his dependence on the Almighty, and "repent in dust and ashes." (Job 42:6.)

It is sometimes thought that the cornerstone spoken of by Isaiah and Peter (I Peter 2:3-8) applies to the capstone of the Great Pyramid; but how can it refer to any particular pyramid if it equally well fits every pyramid as it certainly does? Besides, the stone to which Isaiah and Peter refer was laid in Zion. "Behold, I lay in Zion a chief cornerstone, elect, precious; and he that believeth in Him shall not be confounded." Is Egypt in the scriptures ever referred to as "Zion."

For the reasons here stated, we are inclined to believe that the entire theory of the prophetic symbolism of the Great Pyramid ought to be re-examined and the measurements checked off. We notice that Elder Orson Pratt found this necessary in the consideration of the south step at the south end of the Grand Gallery. The thought came to him like a flash of inspiration in the stillness of the night. The incident is related in an editoral in the Millennial Star of May 5, 1879, which, we have no doubt, appeared in print with the consent of Elder Pratt.

In the article, we are informed that Mr. Pratt believed the authors of the articles printed on the Great Pyramid had made a miscalculation of the length of the Grand Gallery. It seems that Piazzi Smyth had used pyramidal inches on the ascending floor line until he reached the great Step where he "substituted an English foot, or twelve English inches for a year." When Elder Pratt, we read, had corrected this mistake he found the date of the foundation of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints indicated at the end of the Gallery.

It was, undoubtedly, with this experience of Orson Pratt's in mind that a contributor to the Millennial Star of December 2, 1878, wrote: "It should be understood that, however reasonable the hypothesis, we do not take the positive ground that the theories of the authors quoted, in relation to the symbolism of the Great Pyramid, are correct. But the contemplation of such subjects are not unprofitable." That was, undoubtedly the attitude of Orson Pratt.

We mentioned that the pyramid texts found, all to relate to ceremonies to be performed for the benefit of the dead, and for the glory of God. They tell of purification with water, incense, anointings, and offerings of meat and drink. "The texts and ceremonies were intended to supply the spirits of the departed with every thing which was necessary for their well-being in the other world. The meat and drink offerings were a score or more in number, and each thing was presented with appropriate words, which had the effect of transmuting the food and of giving it such a nature that the deceased might feed upon it. Such food was offered to a figure, or statue, of the deceased king or noble, which food was purified, anointed, scented, and dressed in garments which transferred to it magical powers, and made it to be a suitable dwelling place for his 'Ka' or 'double.'" (E. S. Budge, Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection, Volume I, p. 253.)

Seeing then that the pyramid texts deal so largely with the dead, the resurrection, and the hereafter, it is a natural supposition that if we understood the symbolism of the Great Pyramid perfectly, we would find in it some reference to the glorious doctrine of salvation for the dead, not unknown to the Egyptians, but more fully revealed in our day.

We believe that the Lord will come; that His advent is near at hand. That He will establish His kingdom on this earth. That the kingdoms of the entire world will become His kingdom. We believe that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was established as the beginning of a new era of peace, justice, and righteousness. That the Prophet Joseph was an Elijah, sent to prepare the way for the Second Coming of our Lord, and that his successors have held, and now hold, that same office with its power, duties, authority, and responsibilities. When CHRIST shall come, we know not. And since our Lord Himself, when in the flesh, did not know the hour, and since even the angels in heaven were ignorant of the set-time, it is not likely to be found in the pyramid. But this we do know, that if we are faithful in the performance of our duties, be they ever so humble; if we live the Gospel and follow our inspired leaders, as they are following our great Captain of Salvation, we shall have the privilege of seeing the King in His glory, and receiving our portion in His kingdom. We believe the wonderful promise: "He that overcometh shall inherit all things; and I will be his God, and he shall be My son." (Revelation 21:7.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Flinders Petri, in "Egypt and Israel," pp. 38 and 53, gives the following dates which are at variance with those of Bishop Usher: Abraham enters into Egypt, B.C. 2110; Israelites wax strong, B.C. 1650; Beginning of oppression, B.C. 1580; Exodus, B.C. 1220; Temple of Solomon, B.C. 973.
[^2] "Had Lot's wife been changed in the way that many have supposed, and had she been still presumed somewhere in the neighborhood of the Dead Sea, surely we might expect some account of it in after parts of the scripture history; but it is nevermore mentioned in the Bible, and occurs nowhere in the New Testament but in the simple reference of our Lord to the judgment itself, as a warning to the disobedient and backsliding." (Luke 17:32.) "Remember Lot's Wife!" (Clarke, Commentary on Genesis 19:26.)
