Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Section 7

The Galilean Ministry Reaches Its Peak

Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God. (Matt. 16:16.)

This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him. (Matt. 17:5.)

Jesus our Lord, in whose mortal life we so much rejoice, now comes to a day of deepening opposition, even in Galilee.

He departs thence to visit the lost sheep among the heathen. In the coasts of Tyre and Sidon and throughout Decapolis his voice is heard, his miracles abound, and he feeds the four thousand.

He is challenged to show a sign from heaven, a sign of the sort the Messiah of Jewish expectation should show.

He warns his disciples of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.

Then in the coasts of Caesarea Philippi, Peter makes the great confession, with which all the disciples accord.

Jesus promises to give Peter the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Then upon Mount Hermon those keys are conferred upon Peter, James, and John. Shortly thereafter all of the Twelve receive them and have power, thus, to bind and loose both on earth and in heaven.

Over and over again he who came to die speaks of being delivered into the hands of evil men, and of his death in Jerusalem, and of his rising again the third day.

On the Holy Mount, Jesus and the chosen three are transfigured. Moses and Elias minister unto them.

There on the heights of Hermon, Peter, James, and John see the wonders of eternity, including the transfiguration of the earth.

The Shekinah returns to Israel. Even the Father visits the Son and testifies: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him."

Jesus foretells the coming of Elias of the Restoration.

He begins the descent from the Mountain of Glory to the Valley of Humiliation and Death.

In the valley, he heals the demoniac youth, and he provides, miraculously, the temple-tax for himself and for Peter.

He discourses on meekness, on humility, on the salvation of children, on forgiveness, and on the sealing power. And he gives the parable of the unmerciful servant.

Then, from among his Galilean friends, he chooses the Seventy to stand with the Twelve, in bearing witness of his holy name in all the world.

And so closes his Galilean ministry—a ministry of preaching and healings and miracles and keys and powers and authorities and visions and heavenly confirmation of his divine Sonship.

As God's Son he goes to Jerusalem to do the thing for which he came into the world.
