Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 60

The Lost Sheep among the Heathen

From the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the same my name shall be great among the Gentiles; and in every place incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure offering: for my name shall be great among the heathen, saith the Lord of hosts. (Mal. 1:11.)

A Day of Deepening Opposition

(Matthew 15:21; John 7:1)

Lucifer is now loosing his legions to fight the Lord of Life. Heretofore opposition to him has centered mainly in the scribal-sectarian ministers, in the rabid Rabbinists, in the Sanhedrists, in the religious rulers and leaders of the people—all of whose crafts are endangered by the New Order. Among the peasant people, among the Galilean multitudes, among the common folk—whose thoughts, however, are greatly influenced by their leaders—there has been a division of opinion. Some have followed him gladly. He has been rejected twice by his own at Nazareth. There are those who believe he is the Messiah, and others who accept the Pharisaic sophistry that he is Satan Incarnate and casteth out devils and worketh miracles by the power of Beelzebub.

The foul murder by Antipas of the blessed Baptist has left the people in an excitable state. Herod was seeking Jesus to do to him what he did to John. [^1] It was in the midst of this popular excitement that Jesus and the Twelve sought refuge from persecution and surcease from toil by sailing to the area of Bethsaida-Julias. In the green and solitary fields near that city—now famed forever for what took place there—Jesus fed the five thousand, and there was a brief, dazzling tide of popular acclaim that sought to force an earthly crown upon that head destined only, while on earth, to wear a crown of thorns.

Then came the sermon on the bread of life, which winnowed the chaff from the wheat and cleared the threshing floor of those who sought only the loaves and fishes and who chose not to eat the Bread that came down from heaven.

Next came the spies and scribes from the Sanhedrin—renewed in their persecuting zeal by the enthusiasm and emotion of their Passover worship—to confront him on the issue of the traditions of the elders.

And at this point Jesus himself declared war. His acts and those of his disciples in eating with unwashen hands—and many such like things—had no defense except that the traditions were evil, false, and base, and would lead men to hell. And he said so, plainly, clearly, emphatically.

"But the craft and violence of the half-heathen Antipas, was a slight evil compared with the hatred which glowed ever more intensely in the breasts of the Rabbis and priests of Jerusalem, and in those of the Pharisees, and other disciples of the schools, scattered over the country. The demands of Jesus were far beyond the mere summons of the Baptist, to prepare for a new and better time. He required immediate submission to a new Theocracy. He excited the fury of the dominant party, not like the Baptist, by isolated bursts of denunciation, but by working quietly, as a King in His own kingdom, which, while in the world, was something far higher. Hence, the feeling against Him was very different from the partial, cautious, and intermittent hatred of the Baptist. The hierarchy and the Rabbis, as the centre of that which, with all its corruptions, was the only true religion on earth as yet, felt themselves compromised directly and fatally by Him, and could not maintain themselves as they were, if He were tolerated. The whole spiritual power of Israel was thus arrayed against Him; a force slowly created by the possession, for ages, of the grandest religious truths known to the ancient world, and by the pride of a long and incomparably sublime national history. It had been assailed in the past, at long intervals, from without, but in recent years it had been for the first time attacked from within, by the Baptist, and now felt itself still more dangerously assaulted by this Galilean. To crush such an apparently insignificant opponent—a peasant of Nazareth, rising, singly and unsupported, against a power so colossal—seemed easy; nor could it be fancied more difficult to scatter and destroy His small band of followers, as yet, mostly, despised peasants." (Geikie, pp. 532-33.)

Now the war is open and fierce; opposition against him has spread out among the Galilean and Judean multitudes; and it is the people and the nation, not alone their religious leaders, who wield the sword. Lucifer's legions are fighting the saints on all fronts, and the warfare will not cease until the cross of crucifixion becomes the weapon of death; or, rather, until the great dragon himself, along with the false prophets who carry his banner, are cast into the bottomless pit.

Jesus is still in need of the rest he sought when he and his disciples set sail from Capernaum to the site where the five thousand Passover pilgrims were fed. The fires of political unrest, fanned by the Herodians, and the fires of religious hatred, fanned by the scribes and rulers from Jerusalem, are everywhere ablaze. Lest the fiery holocaust burn the scarcely built house of faith that he is building in the hearts of men, he must withdraw from Galilee and go far to the north, into Phoenicia. As to the opposition in Judea, which has been intense for a long time, John says: "After these things Jesus walked in Galilee: for he would not walk in Jewry, because the Jews sought to kill him." And as to the opposition now burning even in Galilee, Matthew says: "Then Jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon."

Tyre and Sidon! Cities of abominations, cities of wickedness, cities like Sodom and Gomorrah! They were Canaanitish, heathen, pagan cities, the home of the worship of Baal and Ashtoreth. Ashtoreth, whose worship Jezebel had imposed on Israel, was the goddess of sensual love; she was worshipped as a sacred prostitute and a divine courtesan, if such words may be used without committing blasphemy. For millenniums the Canaanitish worship had been lewd, lascivious, and immoral. Prostitute goddesses were the order of the age, and their devotees sought to be like those upon whose altars they offered their sacrifices. Such was the area into which the holy party now traveled to continue those labors which collectively are known as the Father's business.

Ministering among the Heathen

(Mark 7:24-30; JST Mark 7:22-23, 26-27; Matthew 15:22-28)

Whether Jesus entered Tyre and Sidon proper we do not know, only that he was in the area or region. It was not his practice to seek out Gentiles as such to hear his voice, though there would have been many Jews in the cities themselves. In Jesus' day Tyre, the larger of the two cities, was probably more populous than Jerusalem, and it would appear that he remained two or three months in the area before going on to Decapolis and his ministry in the cities there.

We have heretofore shown that the Gospels contain only selected sayings and doings of Jesus. Of the months he spent in the borders of Tyre and Sidon, like the period he spent visiting all of the cities and towns of Judea in the early Judean ministry, we know very little. It is inherent in the very nature of things that he taught the gospel, testified of his own divine Sonship, and worked miracles. Such words and deeds as have come down to us of any parts of his mortal ministry have been recorded by the Gospel authors, as guided by the Holy Spirit, to preserve the specific teachings intended for us by an all-wise Providence.

Once we have learned how and under what circumstances certain miracles are wrought, for instance, there is no compelling need to record numerous similar illustrations. Generally speaking our evangelist friends have selected matters to record that we need to know about and that, taken as a whole, give us the knowledge and understanding we need in order to follow him whose words and deeds should guide our lives.

As pertaining to the ministerial service here involved, this selection concerns a Syro-Phoenician woman. Mark, who gained his knowledge from Peter, begins the account by saying that when Jesus came "into the borders of Tyre and Sidon," he "entered into a house, and would that no man should come unto him. But he could not deny them; for he had compassion upon all men." Two things are apparent from this: first, that even here the Lord Jesus failed to find the rest he sought; and second, that the disciples, being present and aware of all that transpired, saw in our Lord's acts a reaffirmation of his compassion for all men, not for the house of Israel only.

Phoenicia, or Syria, lies to the north of Galilee and extends from the Mediterranean Sea to the river Jordan. It is ruled by Rome. Tyre and Sidon, about twenty miles apart, are on the seashore. Between them is Zarephath (Sarepta), where dwelt the widow whose son Elijah raised from death. Somewhere in this region now dwelt a Gentile woman of faith who believed that Jesus was the Messiah, the one by whom salvation comes. How she gained her testimony and how many other true believers, either Jews or Gentiles, there were in the area we do not know; perhaps there were whole congregations, and Jesus was visiting them as he ministered among those who were surrounded by pagans and heathens.

This we do know, the "woman of Canaan" came out of "the coasts of Tyre and Sidon" and, finding Jesus, cried out: "Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David; my daughter is grievously vexed with a devil." Matthew says: "But he answered her not a word."

Mark says she was a Greek and a Syro-Phoenician by nation. She would thus be a subject of Rome. Accordingly, she was a Canaanite by birth, a Greek by ancestry, a Syro-Phoenician by political allegiance, and thus also a subject of the empire ruled by Rome. In other words, she was a Gentile of the Gentiles, a pure Gentile, who could claim no descent whatever from Abraham; in whose veins flowed none of the believing blood of Jacob; and who was outside the royal lineage and could not be classed, in any sense, as one of the chosen people. This we must know to envision what here transpired.

Her pleas fell on deaf ears. Jesus, compassionate and merciful as none other has ever been, would not even speak to her, let alone reward her faith and heal her daughter, as he had been doing in like cases in all Israel for more than two years. Her importunings must have been extended and repetitious, both to Jesus and to the Twelve, for the disciples, knowing that on occasions he had healed Gentiles, though he had instructed them to go only to the lost sheep of Israel in their ministries, "came and besought him, saying, Send her away; for she crieth after us." Implicit in this request is the plea, 'Grant her petition, let her daughter be healed,' as is evident from Jesus' reply, not to the woman but to the Twelve: "I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel."

Jesus is declining not only to heal, but even to give a courteous response, to a Gentile woman who has faith, for no other reason than the fact that she is a Gentile and not an Israelite. Sectarian commentators—not knowing the plans and purposes of the Lord; having no knowledge of preexistence and foreordination; incapable of explaining why and how a just God can show mercy and compassion to one person and deny it to another, and how he can "make one vessel unto honour, and another unto dishonour" (Rom. 9)—sectarian commentators almost go wild devising reasons and explanations to justify the course here pursued by the Compassionate One.

In reality he is doing only what he has always done. In all the earth he chose only Noah and his family to enter the ark; upon all the rest of mankind—men, women, and children—he sent the flood to sweep them into a watery grave. In all of Chaldea he chose only Abraham of Ur to be his friend; upon the others he poured out wrath. In all of Sodom and the cities of the plains he chose only Lot and his wife and two daughters to be saved; upon the masses of people he rained fire and brimstone, destruction and death. Out of Egypt he called only the seed of Jacob, leaving millions of Pharaoh's minions to temporal and spiritual ruin. And so it has always been: the Canaanites and Hittites and Philistines he destroyed, to make room for his people. Assyria and Babylon and Greece were all denied the blessings of his law. The word was sent to Israel, and to Israel only.

Why? Because the house of Israel is composed of the spirits from preexistence who there developed a talent for spirituality, and who are therefore entitled to the blessings of heaven in this life on a preferential basis. All men, in due course, either in this life or in the spirit world, will be offered the blessings of salvation. But there is an eternal system of priorities; there is a law of election, a doctrine of foreordination; and Israel is entitled to the blessings of the holy word ahead of their Gentile fellows. During his lifetime Jesus took the gospel and its blessings, with isolated exceptions, to his kinsmen in Israel; after his resurrection he will send his apostolic witnesses to all men, irrespective of creed or race or ancestry. The Lord Jehovah—Jesus in the flesh—is simply conforming to the eternal law of gospel priorities that he and his Father ordained from before the foundations of the world, and such a limited exception to the eternal provisions of the eternal law as may properly be made is about to be shown forth.

By combining the accounts of Matthew and Mark we are led to believe that the importunings of our Gentile friend began before Jesus entered the house, that they were made both to him and to his disciples, and that his refusal even to converse with her was in the open for all men to see. Then, after he sought seclusion in the house, she yet entered—we can suppose she insisted upon so doing—and fell at his feet importuning and worshipping. "Lord, help me," she pled, as "she besought him that he would cast forth the devil out of her daughter." It was as though she had made the suffering of her daughter her own sorrow, even as He would do who came to bear the griefs and carry the sorrows of all men on conditions of repentance.

No longer could Jesus remain silent, but even now his spoken words carried little hope to the sorrowing mother. "Let the children of the kingdom first be filled," he said—'Let the gospel and its blessings go in this day to the Jews; it is the right and privilege of the chosen seed first to hear the message'—"for it is not meet to take the children's bread, and to cast it unto the dogs."

"But not all the snows of her native Lebanon could quench the fire of love that was burning on the altar of her heart, and prompt as an echo came forth the glorious answer" (Farrar, p. 367): "Yes, Lord; thou sayest truly, yet the dogs under the table eat of the children's crumbs."

How common it was among the Jews to refer to those without—to the Gentiles—as dogs. The Jews were the children of the kingdom, as they supposed: the heathen, none of whom were more accursed than the Canaanites, were the dogs who growled and sniveled and snapped at those within. But here the reference is more particularly to the little dogs, the household pets, who, though still Gentile dogs, yet fed themselves with such cast-off food as fell from the Jewish table.

"O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee even as thou wilt," Jesus said. "And her daughter was made whole from that very hour." The woman of Canaan triumphed; hers were not only the crumbs, but she ate of the children's bread; by faith she was adopted into the house of Israel. At Jesus' invitation she now came from without and joined those within. She was no longer a Gentile; she was now a daughter of Abraham. [^2]

"For this saying go thy way," Jesus said, "the devil is gone out of thy daughter. And when she was come to her house, she found the devil gone out, and her daughter laid upon the bed."

The Miraculous Healings in Decapolis

(Mark 7:31-37; Matthew 15:29-31)

From the heathen lands of Tyre and Sidon to the semi-pagan lands of Decapolis is a long, wearisome route. His work finished among the pagans of the Syro-Phoenician area, Jesus and his loyal friends now travel by an unnamed ministerial circuit to that area of ten cities located south and east of the Sea of Galilee. The Decapolis, or confederacy of ten cities, whose identities are only partially known, [^3] was wedged between the tetrarchies of Philip and Antipas. These were free Greek cities subject only to the governor of Syria. Anciently this part of the promised land fell primarily to Gad and Manasseh, but since the Babylonian exile it had been the habitat primarily of Gentile peoples who worshipped idols and devils. [^4]

As the holy party made their way to their new fields of labor, we cannot doubt that they preached and healed and baptized in the cities and villages en route. Divine voices, fired with a zeal borne of the Spirit, are wont to speak forth on every available occasion; the worth of souls is great, and the holy word must be sounded in every ear. Our next recorded miracle of wonder and healing, however, is the giving of speech and hearing to a deaf and speech-impeded man. Jesus and his power were not unknown among the pagans and Jewish people of Decapolis. Nor would the accounts of his miracles in Gennesaret and Capernaum and all Galilee be unknown to them. News of this sort traveled rapidly by word of mouth; it was spoken everywhere by the tongues of believers and belittlers alike.

It comes as no surprise, then, to see them bring to Jesus "one that was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech." Their plea is that our Lord will heal him by the laying on of hands, a request showing that they knew both of his power to heal and of the procedure he used in healing.

Whether Jesus did in fact bless this afflicted man by the laying on of hands is not recorded; he was at liberty to follow such formalities as he chose, as also are his servants who perform miracles in his name and by his power. Elijah stretched himself three times upon the dead body of the widow's son as he pled with the Lord that the child's soul might return, which it then did. When Elisha raised a child from death, he lay upon the child so that their eyes and mouths and hands touched, and after much struggling in the Spirit, life came again into the dead body. Naaman was required to immerse himself seven times in Jordan before his leprous flesh became again as the flesh of a child. And so it goes; such formalities and rituals are followed as will increase the faith of the person, or even of the prophet in whose hands is found the power of God. The Urim and Thummim itself is an instrument that increases the faith of the seer who is privileged to use it for holy purposes.

Mark, who alone preserves the account of this miracle, records these four things that Jesus did, and for each of them we can see a valid reason and an intelligent purpose:

"St. Mark preserves for us the sigh, and the uplifted glance, as He spoke the one word, 'Ephphatha! Be opened!' Here again it is not revealed to us what were the immediate influences which saddened His spirit. He may have sighed in pity for the man; He may have sighed in pity for the race; He may have sighed for all the sins that degrade and all the sufferings which torture; but certainly He sighed in a spirit of deep tenderness and compassion, and certainly that sigh ascended like an infinite intercession into the ears of the Lord God of Hosts." (Farrar, p. 371.) [^6]

Jesus, Matthew tells us, "went up into a mountain, and sat down there." Hearing of this miracle, knowing of other wondrous things attributed to him, and, no doubt, having heard him speak words of infinite wisdom in their hearing, "great multitudes came unto him, having with them those that were lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many others, and cast them down at Jesus' feet; and he healed them."

Were there Gentiles as well as Jews among those restored to health and vigor? The people of the area were made up of both cultures; and, as we have seen, in the case of the Syro-Phoenician woman who pled for the crumbs that fall from Israel's table, the compassion of the Great Healer, following great faith, extends beyond the children of the kingdom and takes in the Gentiles who are without. Matthew says simply: "The multitude wondered, when they saw the dumb to speak, the maimed to be whole, the lame to walk, and the blind to see: and they glorified the God of Israel." It is, thus, the same thing we have seen before in Galilee where Israel dwelt. The new dimension here is not what was done, but those upon whom the blessings were showered.

"Let us try to realize the scene. They have heard of Him as the wonder-worker, these heathens in the land so near to, and yet so far from, Israel; and they have brought to Him 'the lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many others,' and laid them at His feet. Oh, what wonder! All disease vanishes in [the] presence of Heaven's Own Life Incarnate. Tongues long weighted are loosed, limbs maimed or bent by disease are restored to health, the lame are stretched straight; the film of disease and the paralysis of nerve-impotence pass from eyes long insensible to the light. It is a new era—Israel conquers the heathen world, not by force, but by love; not by outward means, but by the manifestation of life-power from above. Truly, this is the Messianic conquest and reign: 'and they glorified the God of Israel.' " (Edersheim 2:46.)

Jesus Feeds the Four Thousand

(Mark 8:1-10; JST Mark 8:3, 6-7; Matthew 15:32-39; JST Matthew 15:34)

Jesus has now been in the Decapolis area for some time, preaching, healing, declaring his own divine Sonship, giving his apostolic witnesses time to mingle among the people and do in their own right the same things the Chief Apostle is doing. As to the actual time period involved, we can only speculate; certainly it involved weeks and may have been a month or even two. It is the summer of A.D. 29. We know the places he went and certain of the things he said and did, but not how long he stayed in each place. During this season, from spring through autumn, he was in the region of Tyre and Sidon, the area of the Decapolis, back again in Galilee, in the region of Caesarea Philippi (where Peter bore his witness), and at Mount Hermon (where the transfiguration occurred). Now he is about to climax his ministry in the Decapolis area and return to Galilee.

We are about to see the Giver of Manna spread another table in the wilderness—not for all Israel as they dwelt in the deserts, awaiting the trumpet call to cross the famous river and enter their promised land; not for the Passover pilgrims, symbolical of all Israel, as they wended their way to the Paschal feast in the Holy City, but a table in the wilderness where Jews and Gentiles, as brethren in the new kingdom, will first feast upon his word and then eat the multiplying loaves and fishes together. Jesus is about to feed four thousand men, besides women and children, with seven loaves and a few small fishes.

This miracle and the prior one near Bethsaida-Julias have much in common, but also some major and vital differences. Who knows, for that matter, whether the Giver of Manna may not have fed many multitudes during his mortal ministry, multitudes who had faith to be fed and for whom he multiplied such provisions as were available. It may be that the inspired authors preserved only these two accounts so that we may know the basic foundation on which all such miracles rest, as well as the distinctive message proclaimed by each of these.

Here in Decapolis we are nearing the climax of our Lord's ministry among a semi-heathen people. He has now done what he did at Bethsaida-Julias: he has taught the plan of salvation; testified of his own divinity; invited all men to come unto him and be saved; performed many mighty miracles; and been accepted and glorified as the God of Israel. There is a spirit of faith and devotion and true worship among the people. Those about to partake of his bounty have been with him for three days in a wilderness area; many of them have traveled great distances from their home cities, and such provisions as they may have brought with them have long since been exhausted.

"I have compassion on the multitude, because they have now been with me three days, and have nothing to eat: And if I send them away fasting to their own houses, they will faint by the way: for divers of them came from far," Jesus said. "From whence can a man satisfy these men with bread here in the wilderness?" his disciples responded.

"They knew that there was in Him no prodigality of the supernatural, no lavish and needless exercise of miraculous power. Many and many a time had they been with multitudes before, and yet on one occasion only [of which we know] had he fed them; and moreover, after He had done so, He had most sternly rebuked those who came to Him in expectation of a repeated offer of such gifts, and had uttered a discourse so searching and strange that it alienated from Him many even of His friends. For them to suggest to Him a repetition of the feeding of the five thousand would be a presumption which their ever-deepening reverence forbade, and forbade more than ever as they recalled how persistently He had refused to work a sign, such as this was, at the bidding of others.

"But no sooner had He given them the signal of His intention, than with perfect faith they became His ready ministers. They seated the multitude on the ground, and distributed to them the miraculous multiplication of the seven loaves and the few small fishes; and, this time unbidden, they gathered the fragments that remained, and with them filled a large basket of rope seven times, after the multitude—four thousand in number, besides women and children—had eaten and were filled. And then kindly, and with no exhibition on the part of the populace of that spurious excitement which had marked the former miracle, the Lord and His Apostles joined in sending away the rejoicing and grateful throng." (Farrar, pp. 371-73.) [^7]

When Jesus fed the five thousand, he was dealing with Jews and Jews alone; with those who kept the law of Moses; with a people who expected their Messiah to feed them temporal bread in the deserts of mortality; with brethren en route to Jerusalem to participate in those sacrifices which testified of the atoning sacrifice of the Lamb of God. Thereafter they sought to make him king, and he preached to them the sermon on the bread of life, with the deliberate intention of winnowing the chaff from the wheat.

Here in Decapolis the symbolism is quite different. Both Jews and Gentiles surround the sacred board; the table set in the wilderness is not for Israel only, but for all mankind. Here is the prefiguring of the Gentile harvest, the harvest scheduled to begin when he sends the apostles into all the world to preach the gospel to every creature. Here is the prefiguring of that day when the gospel will go to all mankind and there will truly be one God and one Shepherd over all the earth.

After this miracle and the witness it bore, the Decapolis ministry ended. Jesus and his associates returned by ship to Magdala, or as Mark says, "the parts of Dalmanutha," which must have been an area on the western side of the lake, there to continue his light-giving ministry among those who sat in darkness. Our next view of him, however, will be in Capernaum, when he again discourses about signs.

All things, as we would expect, are going forward as foreordained and designed; the work is being done as decreed by Him who governeth all things by his own omnipotent power. Jesus, the Son, is representing his Father, as that Holy Being designed, intended, and expected. The Father's business is well managed by the Son. And blessed be his holy name forever.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "They had already found by experience that the one most effectual weapon to discredit His mission and undermine His influence was the demand of a sign—above all, a sign from heaven. If He were indeed the Messiah, why should He not give them bread from heaven as Moses, they said, had done? where were Samuel's thunder and Elijah's flame? why should not the sun be darkened, and the moon turned into blood, and the stars of heaven be shaken? why should not some fiery pillar glide before them to victory, or the burst of some stormy Bath Kol ratify His words?" (Farrar, p. 375.) As to the meaning of the Bath Kol here named, and also as illustrative of the kind of signs sought, we take these words from Edersheim: "As regards 'a sign from heaven,' it is said that Rabbi Eliezer, when his teaching was challenged, successively appealed to certain 'signs.' First, a locust-tree moved at his bidding one hundred, or according to some, four hundred cubits. Next, the channels of water were made to flow backwards; then the walls of the Academy leaned forward, and were only arrested at the bidding of another Rabbi. Lastly, Eliezer exclaimed: 'If the Law is as I teach, let it be proved from heaven!' when a voice fell from the sky (the Bath Qol): 'What have ye to do with Rabbi Eliezer, for the Halakhah is as he teaches?' " (Edersheim 2:69.)
[^2] In a footnote to this passage, Farrar notes a comparison of "the sects of the Jews to modern schools of thought." It is: Pharisees as pietists; Essenes as mystics; Sadducees as rationalists; Herodians as political clubs and the like; Zealots as radicals; and Samaritans as schismatics—all of this points up to the truism that Lucifer repeats himself, generation after generation, as he seeks to destroy the souls of men.
[^3] See footnote 1 above.
[^4] There is a striking parallel between the demands of the ancient Pharisees that Jesus show them a sign, and the demands of modern Pharisees that the Latter-day Saints produce the gold plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated, and the Urim and Thummim used in the translation process. Such, of course, is not the Lord's way of proving the truth and divinity of his work. With reference to this latter-day demand, the Lord said to Joseph Smith: "If they will not believe my words, they would not believe you, my servant Joseph, if it were possible that you should show them all these things which I have committed unto you. Oh, this unbelieving and stiffnecked generation—mine anger is kindled against them. . . . But this generation shall have my word through you." (D&C 5:7-8, 10.)
[^6] "Strange bedfellows these—Sadducees and Pharisees, bitter religious enemies of each other, now uniting in an unholy alliance to fight Jesus and his doctrines. But such is ever the case with the various branches of the devil's Church. One thing always unites warring sects of religionists—their common fear and hatred of the pure truths of salvation. Sects of modern Christendom fight each other on nearly all fronts save one—on that they unite to oppose Joseph Smith and the gospel restored through his instrumentality." (Commentary 1:378.)
[^7] Similarly: Beware the leaven of the modern sects of Christendom—sects so near in one sense to salvation, and yet so far away in the eternal sense—sects that believe false doctrines. Beware of the leaven of the Baptists, that belief in Christ without more brings a spiritual rebirth. Beware of the leaven of the Lutherans, that men are justified by faith alone, without works of righteousness. Beware the leaven of all the sects and cults, for among them the fulness of the everlasting gospel is not found.
