Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 61

The Leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees

If there arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and giveth thee a sign or a wonder, And the sign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spake unto thee, saying, Let us go after other gods, which thou hast not known, and let us serve them; Thou shalt not hearken unto the words of that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams: for the Lord your God proveth you, to know whether ye love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul. Ye shall walk after the Lord your God, and fear him, and keep his commandments, and obey his voice, and ye shall serve him, and cleave unto him. And that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, shall be put to death; because he hath spoken to turn you away from the Lord your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed you out of the house of bondage, to thrust thee out of the way which the Lord thy God commanded thee to walk in. So shalt thou put the evil away from the midst of thee. (Deut. 13:1-5.)

False Ministers Seek Signs

(Matthew 16:1-4; JST Matthew 16:2-3; Mark 8:11-12; JST Mark 8:12)

We have somewhat more to say about signs, sign-seekers and the state of the souls of those whose hearts are centered on such portents. We have heretofore heard Jesus—it was in Capernaum, his own city—utterly defeat and discomfit certain of the scribes and of the Pharisees who demanded that he show them a sign from heaven. (Book 2, chap. 48.) The only sign for them, he then testified, was the sign of Jonah, the sign of his own resurrection, the sign of the glory and triumph of that kingdom which is not of this world.

That former dialogue created a division among the people. Those who believed and understood the truth from heaven as it fell from the lips of Jesus knew full well that signs of the sort sought by the scribes would do nothing but demean the One called upon to give them. True prophets—least of all earth's Chief Prophet—do not go about calling down fire from heaven, turning rivers upstream, or drying up seas, to prove their prophetic powers. Those whose hearts were hardened remained darkened in mind and spirit and continued to whine that he did his miracles by the power of Beelzebub—the lord of idolatrous worship—because he did not produce the heavenly display of fire and power that they said they would accept as a sign. They had learned by experience that however contrary to the true order their demand for a supernatural display might be, it would have the effect of prejudicing many people against him. [^1]

This time the challenge is hurled not only by certain scribes and Pharisees, but by the Pharisees and the Sadducees combined, by the united power of all the rulers of the people. "Every section of the ruling classes—the Pharisees, formidable from their religious weight among the people; the Sadducees, few in number, but powerful from wealth and position; the Herodians, representing the influence of the Romans, and of their nominees the tetrarchs; the scribes and lawyers, bringing to bear the authority of their orthodoxy and their learning—were all united against Him in one firm phalanx of conspiracy and opposition, and were determined above all things to hinder His preaching, and to alienate from Him, as far as was practicable, the affections of the people among whom most of His mighty works were done." (Farrar, p. 375) [^2]

Their reasoning was persuasive; however false their premises, their arguments had the effect of destroying the influence of Jesus. If he gave no sign from heaven—which it was generally believed the Messiah would do—then he could not be the Messiah, and it must be true that his miracles were wrought by Satan's power. If, on the other hand, he did give a sign from heaven, of the sort Rabbi Eliezer would have given, [^3] he was still a false prophet and worthy of death because his teachings did not conform to the Rabbinical standards. Had not Jehovah said by the mouth of Moses that if a prophet gave a sign or wonder that came to pass, the prophet nevertheless should be put to death, if his teachings controverted their system of revealed religion? (Deut. 13:1-5.) And surely everyone knew—it was common knowledge, and no proof need be offered—that the teachings of the Man of Nazareth were false because they contradicted what Moses said as interpreted by the scribes and Rabbis. This matter of demanding a sign from heaven, they reasoned, was truly the way to destroy this Galilean peasant who had attended none of their schools and certainly was not learned in Rabbinic lore.

But suppose, just suppose, he had given them a sign? What then? Would it have proved the truth and divinity of his work? "If He had granted their request, what purpose would have been furthered? It is not the influence of external forces, but it is the germinal principle of life within, which makes the good seed to grow; nor can the hard heart be converted, or the stubborn unbelief removed, by portents and prodigies, but by inward humility, and the grace of God stealing downward like the dew of heaven, in silence and unseen. What would have ensued had the sign been vouchsafed? By its actual eye-witnesses it would have been attributed to demoniac agency; by those to whom it was reported it would have been explained away; by those of the next generation it would have been denied as an invention, or evaporated into a myth. (Farrar, pp. 375-76.) [^4]

The demand that their Messiah prove his claim to divine Sonship by showing a sign from heaven has now been made again. His answer: The signs of the times are everywhere to be seen; they abound on every hand; all men are bound to interpret them correctly and to prepare for the storms ahead. "When it is evening ye say, The weather is fair, for the sky is red; and in the morning ye say The weather is foul today; for the sky is red and lowering." 'Ye hear me speak words of eternal truth whose verity is attested by the power of the Spirit. Ye hear my witnesses that God is my Father. Ye see me cast out devils, cleanse lepers, and raise the dead. Ye know that I have stilled storms, walked on water, and multiplied a few loaves and fishes to feed thousands. If I say I am the Son of God, and I then do all these wondrous works, can my words be other than true? What more do you want in the way of a sign?' "O hypocrites! ye can discern the face of the sky; but ye cannot tell the signs of the times." [^5] Then came the biting denunciation:

A wicked and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given unto it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas.

"The only sign to Nineveh was Jonah's solemn warning of near judgment, and his call to repentance—and the only sign now . . . was the warning cry of judgment and the loving call to repentance." (Edersheim 2:70.)

With this Jesus left his detractors, going by boat from Magdala toward the coast of Bethsaida-Julias, en route to the coasts of Caesarea Philippi where Peter will make his great confession.

Beware of the Leaven of Evil Men

(Matthew 16:5-12; JST Matthew 16:8-9; Mark 8:13-21; JST Mark 8:16)

Jesus came from the semiheathen region of the Decapolis to the Israelite area of Magdala. "For some time He had been absent from home. He had been sought out with trustful faith in the regions of Tyre and Sidon. He had been welcomed with ready gratitude in heathen Decapolis; here, at home, He was met with the flaunt of triumphant opposition, under the guise of hypocritical zeal." In Decapolis the multitudes believed his words, rejoiced in his miracles, ate of the loaves and fishes provided by his providence, and glorified him as the God of Israel. Back among his own he found "all the self-satisfied hypocrisies of a decadent religion drawn up in array to stop His path!" (Farrar, p. 376.) There among his own he was assailed by the rulers of the people, who, under the guise of demanding a sign from heaven, proclaimed their utter disbelief in and complete rejection of his Messianic claims.

Thus the issue was squarely set. It is the doctrine of the Almighty that Jesus Christ is the Son of the living God; that salvation comes by him and him alone; that he has abolished death and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel; and that all men everywhere must believe in him, repent of their sins, be baptized in water, receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and work the works of righteousness, or they can in nowise enter into the kingdom of God.

It was the doctrine of the Pharisees—and all who joined with them in opposing Jesus [^6] —that salvation came by the law of Moses alone; that the man Jesus was a deluded fanatic without divine power; that he was a rabble-rouser, an anarchist, a subverter of all that was great and good in their traditions; that he was a blasphemer worthy of death; that he performed miracles by the power of the prince of devils, yea, that he was even Beelzebub Incarnate; and that he should be rejected, cast out, and stoned to death as one who prophesied falsely and led the people away from their ancient moorings.

And so Jesus, after deriding the sign-seekers as wicked and adulterous, chose to leave them and minister and heal among other people. Thanks to their darkened minds, their perverted consciences, and their stony hearts, he would go elsewhere to preach. "He did not press His mercies on those who rejected them. As in after days His nation were suffered to prefer their robber and their murderer to the Lord of Life, so now the Galileans were suffered to keep their Pharisees and lose their Christ." (Farrar, pp. 376-77.) He and his disciples set sail, leaving Magdala for the area of Bethsaida-Julias on the north and east of the sacred sea.

Their departure was made in haste, and the disciples failed to take food for their sustenance. Apparently after they landed at their destination, Jesus—ever anxious to strengthen them spiritually; concerned lest any of them be tainted in any degree by the damning doctrine of his enemies; and using their failure to bring bread as a teaching aid—took occasion to raise a warning voice. "Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees," he said. Mark tells us that he also warned them against "the leaven of Herod."

Those same disciples, at Jacob's Well, had missed the true meaning of his statement that he had meat to eat that they knew not of. But a short time back the metaphors about eating the bread which came down from heaven had failed to find quick and easy lodgment in their souls; and yet in the future they would miss the deep meaning of the expression about Lazarus sleeping and needing to be awakened. At this stage of their spiritual development, metaphors seemed to give them some trouble. They therefore "reasoned among themselves, saying, He said this because we have taken no bread."

Jesus, perceiving how foolish and spiritually immature they were, responded with a severe and stern rebuke. "O ye of little faith, why reason ye among yourselves, because ye have brought no bread?" he said. "Perceive ye not yet, neither understand? have ye your heart yet hardened? Having eyes, see ye not? and having ears, hear ye not? and do ye not remember? When I brake the five loaves among five thousand, how many baskets full of fragments took ye up? They say unto him, Twelve. And when the seven among four thousand, how many baskets full of fragments took ye up? And they said, Seven. And he said unto them, How is it that ye do not understand?" "How is it that ye do not understand that I spake it not to you concerning bread, that ye should beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees?"

Only then, after such a rebuke, was Matthew able to conclude: "Then understood they how that he bade them not beware of the leaven of bread, but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees." And, of course, of the Herodians and every other sect, party, cult, or denomination, for all such are not of God, and have not the fulness of the gospel, which alone sets forth the doctrine of God.

"Leaven was one of the very commonest types of sin, and especially of insidious and subterranean sin." (Farrar, p. 379.) Leaven—the fermenting, defiling, contaminating influence of those who opposed him! Leaven—the debasing, damning doctrines of those who would one day cause his death! Leaven—the views and feelings of those who were anti-Christ and who sought to keep others from accepting him as their Messiah and Deliverer! The leaven of the Pharisees, Sadducees, Herodians, scribes—of all who believed and preached false doctrine—such leaven was evil. They must beware lest they be tainted in the slightest degree. [^7]

Jesus Restores Sight by Stages

(Mark 8:22-26)

Every miracle is unique; no two are alike. Two blind men have their eyes opened by divine power, and each wondrous deed is as different from the other as are the two recipients of the heavensent goodness. Those few of Jesus' miracles which are recorded in any sort of detail were selected from the many by the spirit of inspiration; such accounts preserve for us patterns and types of miraculous acts, with a view to encouraging us—whatever our disabled or diseased condition may be—to ourselves rely on Him by whose power miracles are wrought, and to seek to gain an outpouring of his goodness and grace in our own lives.

Further, all healings do not happen instantaneously; the prophetic fingers do not always snap and cause a prostrate sufferer to leap from his pallet as though by magic. A sightless one may be sent to wash the spittle and clay from his eyes in the pool of Siloam; a leper may be required to immerse seven times in Jordan; a suffering soul may be tested to the full before hearing the blessed words: "Be it unto thee according to thy faith." It is no less a miracle when shattered bones weld themselves together gradually than when they reform in an instant. A withered arm that attains its proper and perfect frame through a growth process may be an exhibition of as great a miracle as one that bursts suddenly into being. And so we come to the miracle at hand, the only New Testament instance of a person being healed by stages.

Jesus is in Bethsaida-Julias. A blind man is brought to him. For reasons that are not recited, Jesus chooses not to perform a miracle in the city; perhaps the idolatrous infidels of this Gentile city are not even worthy to see a wonder wrought on one whose faith and works warrant such divine intervention in his behalf. "All that we can dimly see is Christ's dislike and avoidance of these heathenish Herodian towns, with their spurious and tainted Hellenism, their tampering with idolatry, and even their very names commemorating, as was the case with Bethsaida-Julias, some of the most contemptible of the human race. (Farrar, pp. 380-81.) [^8]

Rather, Jesus began a series of acts, each of which was designed to increase faith in the heart of the sightless one. First he led the blind man by the hand out of town; then he spat in his eyes, an act that was a well-known Jewish remedy for diseases of the eye; and then he performed the gospel ordinance of the laying on of hands. We cannot doubt that words of encouragement and exhortation and healing were spoken as he performed the ministerial service that is usually incident to the laying on of hands.

After this Jesus asked the man "if he saw ought." His reply: "I see men as trees, walking." Then the initial miracle was added upon. "He put his hands again upon his eyes, and made him look up: and he was restored, and saw every man clearly." Then Jesus sent the man away—not back into Bethsaida-Julias, but to his own house. "Neither go into the town, nor tell it to any in the town," Jesus said.

"Certainly the manner in which this healing took place teaches that men should seek the Lord's healing grace with all their strength and faith, though such is sufficient for a partial cure only, following the receipt of which, however, they may then gain the added assurance and faith to be made whole and well every whit. Men also are often healed of their spiritual maladies by degrees, step by step as they get their lives in harmony with the plans and purposes of Deity." (Commentary 1:379-80.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The relationship between the bearing of testimony by the power of the Holy Ghost and the forgiveness of sins illustrates a glorious gospel truth. It is that whenever faithful saints gain the companionship of the Holy Spirit, they are clean and pure before the Lord, for the Spirit will not dwell in an unclean tabernacle. Hence, they thereby receive a remission of those sins committed after baptism. This same eternal verity is illustrated in the ordinance of administering to the sick. A faithful saint who is anointed with oil has the promise that "the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him." (James 5:14-15.) The reasoning of the ancient apostle James, in this instance, is that since the miracle of healing comes by the power of the Holy Ghost, the sick person is healed not only physically but spiritually, for the Spirit who comes to heal will not dwell in a spiritually unclean tabernacle.
[^2] "Behold, I am God; Man of Holiness is my name; Man of Counsel is my name; and Endless and Eternal is my name, also." (Moses 7:35.)
[^3] These words from the King Follett Sermon, delivered by the Prophet Joseph Smith, are the high point of Latter-day Saint doctrine on the points here involved: "God himself was once as we are now, and is an exalted man, and sits enthroned in yonder heavens! That is the great secret. If the veil were rent today, and the great God who holds this world in its orbit, and who upholds all worlds and all things by his power, was to make himself visible,—I say, if you were to see him today, you would see him like a man in form—like yourselves in all the person, image, and very form as a man; for Adam was created in the very fashion, image and likeness of God, and received instruction from, and walked, talked and conversed with him, as one man talks and communes with another. "In order to understand the subject of the dead, for [the] consolation of those who mourn for the loss of their friends, it is necessary we should understand the character and being of God and how he came to be so; for I am going to tell you how God came to be God. We have imagined and supposed that God was God from all eternity. I will refute that idea, and take away the veil, so that you may see. "These are incomprehensible ideas to some, but they are simple. It is the first principle of the Gospel to know for a certainty the Character of God, and to know that we may converse with him as one man converses with another, and that he was once a man like us; yea, that God himself, the Father of us all, dwelt on an earth, the same as Jesus Christ himself did." (Teachings, pp. 345-46.)
[^4] This same distinction between the Almighty and his servants was also carefully set forth by the spirit Jesus, before his mortal birth, when he gave the keys of the kingdom to Nephi the son of Helaman. "Blessed art thou, Nephi, for those things which thou hast done," the Lord said. "Behold, thou art Nephi, and I am God. . . . ye shall have power over this people. . . . Whatsoever ye shall seal on earth shall be sealed in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." (Hel. 10:4, 6-7.) The same heavensent power is, of course, in the true Church today. (D&C 132:46-47.)
[^5] "What rock? Revelation." (Teachings, p. 274.) So said the inspired seer of latter days. Edersheim, without the light of latter-day revelation, reached a somewhat similar conclusion. "Perhaps it might be expressed in this somewhat clumsy paraphrase," he said: " 'Thou art Peter (Petros)—a Stone or Rock—and upon this Petra—the Rock, the Petrine—will I found My Church.' " Thus, he reasons, the Church is to be built on "the Petrine in Peter: the heaven-given faith which manifested itself in his confession." That is, Christ "would build His Church on the Petrine in Peter—on his faith and confession." This is akin to saying that the rock is revelation; it is the heavensent faith, the Spirit-borne testimony, the revealed truth—the fact that God speaks by the power of the Spirit to mortal man. "Nor would the term 'Church' sound strange in Jewish ears," our learned friend continues, "The same Greek word, as the equivalent of the Hebrew Qahal, 'convocation,' 'the called,' occurs in the LXX rendering of the Old Testament, and in 'the Wisdom of the Son of Sirach' and was apparently in familiar use at the time. In Hebrew use it referred to Israel, not in their national but in their religious unity. As here employed, it would convey the prophecy, that His disciples would in the future be joined together in a religious unity; that this religious unity or 'Church' would be a building of which Christ was the Builder; that it would be founded on 'the Petrine' of heaven-taught faith and confession; and that this religious unity, this Church, was not only intended for a time, like a school of thought, but would last beyond death and the disembodied state: that, alike as regarded Christ and His Church—'the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it.' " (Edersheim 2:83-84.) Farrar, also without the benefit of latter-day revelation, reaches the same general conclusion, which he climaxes by quoting these words of Origen: "If any one thus confess, when flesh and blood have not revealed it unto him, but our Father in heaven, he, too, shall obtain the promised blessings; as the letter of the Gospel saith indeed to the great St. Peter, but as its spirit teacheth to every man who hath become like what that great Peter was." (Farrar, p. 386.)
[^6] "The gates of hell are the entrances to the benighted realms of the damned where the wicked go to await the day when they shall come forth in the resurrection of damnation. Those beckoning gates prevail against all who pass through them. But those who obey the laws and ordinances of the gospel have the promise that the gates of hell shall not prevail against them. In this instance, Jesus is telling Peter that the gates of hell shall never prevail against the rock of revelation; that is, as long as the saints are living in righteousness so as to receive revelation from heaven, they will avoid the gates of hell and the Church itself will remain pure, undefiled, and secure against every evil. But when, because of iniquity, revelation ceases, then the gates of hell prevail against the people and also against the organization of which they are members. "Similarly, the Lord, by revelation, has said in our day: 'Open your mouths and they shall be filled, saying: Repent, repent, and prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight; for the kingdom of heaven is at hand; Yea, repent and be baptized, every one of you, for a remission of your sins; yea, be baptized even by water, and then cometh the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost. Behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel; and remember that they shall have faith in me or they can in nowise be saved; And upon this rock I will build my church; yea, upon this rock ye are built, and if ye continue, the gates of hell shall not prevail against you.' " (Commentary 1:388-89.)
[^7] Of the Catholic view of the text in question, Farrar uses these aptly chosen words: "Were it not a matter of history, it would have been deemed incredible that on so imaginary a foundation should have been rested the fantastic claim that abnormal power should be conceded to the bishops of a Church which almost certainly St. Peter did not found, and in a city in which there is no indisputable proof that he ever set foot. The immense arrogancies of sacerdotalism; the disgraceful abuses of the confessional; the imaginary power of absolving from oaths; the ambitious assumption of a right to crush and control the civil power; the extravagant usurpation of infallibility in wielding the dangerous weapons of anathema and excommunication; the colossal tyrannies of the Popedom, and the detestable cruelties of the Inquisition—all these abominations are, we may hope, henceforth and for ever, things of the past." (Farrar, p. 385.)
[^8] 8. In his footnote to this passage, Farrar says: "Herod Philip had named his renovated capital in honor of Julia, the abandoned daughter of the Emperor Augustus."
