Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 62

The Testimony Of Our Lord

Ye are blessed, for the testimony which ye have borne is recorded in heaven for the angels to look upon; and they rejoice over you, and your sins are forgiven you. (D&C 62:3.) [^1]

‘I Am the Son of Man’

(Matthew 16:13; Mark 8:27; Luke 9:18; JST Luke 9:18)

Jesus is now constrained to hold a testimony meeting with the disciples. He himself opens with prayer, names the subject for discussion, and invites any of those present who so desire to bear witness of what God, by the power of the Holy Ghost, has revealed to them. Whether others than the Twelve were present is not stated. On previous missionary journeys mention has been made of the presence of Mary Magdalene and other women, possibly wives of some of the apostles. Whatever the attendance on this occasion, we are sure it was only a select and favored few who were present to hear the witnesses borne and to feel the Spirit about to be poured out upon them.

The need for this meeting was real. The intimate friends of the Master had been subject to severe trials of their faith in the days just past, and Jesus now planned for them some sacred moments of spiritual uplift. There had been disaffection and falling away when, though urged by thousands of his Israelite kin, he refused to step forth as King-Messiah and wear their proffered crown.

The winnowing effect of his bread of life sermon had blown Israelitish chaff to the four winds. His confrontation with the united leaders of the people, when they challenged him to show a sign from heaven—a sign of the sort the Jewish-Messiah was expected to show—had weakened his influence with many people. Multitudes who once basked in the light of his presence had now gone back to their wallowing in the mire of ritualistic Judaism. Jesus was now virtually an outcast and an escapee from Galilee, from Antipas, who had slain John, and from the people who no longer savored his sermons and believed his doctrines. Was it not true, they reasoned, that his miracles, as the Rabbis said, were done by the power of the devil? Indeed, so severe were the circumstances and so widespread the falling away that he had even felt constrained to warn his closest friends against the leaven of the Jewish leaders. In these dark and dire days, what was more natural than to assemble his friends around him for a period of spiritual refreshment?

Jesus himself bore the first testimony of his own divinity on this memorable occasion. Luke introduces his account by saying: "As he went alone with his disciples to pray, he asked them, saying, Who say the people that I am?" Matthew records the query as "Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?" What other things he may have said by way of introduction we do not know; perhaps it suffices to understand what he meant by saying, 'I am the Son of Man,' a designation he so frequently applied to himself.

To his Jewish disciples—who knew that the Almighty was their Father in heaven; who knew that God was a personal being in whose image man is created; who knew that Deity was a holy man—to his Jewish disciples, to say 'I am the Son of Man' meant 'I am the Son of God.' The two name-titles are and were totally synonymous. The Son of Man and the Son of God are one and the same because the Man involved is God, they are simply two designations of the same exalted person. From earliest times, speaking of the Father of us all, holy writ has testified: "In the language of Adam, Man of Holiness is his name, and the name of his Only Begotten is the Son of Man, even Jesus Christ, a righteous Judge, who shall come in the meridian of time." (Moses 6:57.) [^2]

As we ponder the profound and deep import of Jesus' declaration that he is the Son of Man and therefore the Son of God, we must remind ourselves anew of the single most important truth in all eternity. It is that God himself, the Supreme Being, the maker, upholder, and preserver of all things, the creator of the universe, our Eternal Father, is a glorified and perfected man. [^3] A knowledge of this truth is the beginning of all spiritual progression. This truth is the foundation upon which the whole plan of salvation rests. God himself, the Father of us all, ordained and established the plan of salvation to enable us, his children, to advance and progress and become like him. Salvation consists in becoming as God is. He is a holy man—Man of Holiness is his name—and his beloved Son is the Son of Man of Holiness, or, as Jesus now expresses it, The Son of Man.

"Thou Art the Christ"

(Mathew 16:14-16; Mark 8:28-29; JST Mark 8:31; Luke 9:19-20; JST Luke 9:19-20)

Our Lord has now testified to these favored few that he is the Son of God—a witness he has borne to many people in many places on many occasions. It is, as it were, a new and an everlasting testimony—new each time its burning fire sinks into a human heart; everlasting because it is always borne by Gods, angels, and men, whenever receptive hearers can be assembled to hear an inspired voice.

To Joseph and Mary the Lad of Twelve spoke of being about his Father's business; to the Passover throngs the Cleanser of the Temple spoke of his Messiahship and the death and resurrection that would attend it; to Nicodemus the Teacher sent from God spoke of his coming crucifixion and identified himself as the Only Begotten Son of God; to the woman of Samaria the Weary Traveler testified, "I who speak unto thee am the Messias"; to his own in Nazareth the Promised Messiah acclaimed that in him were the Messianic prophecies fulfilled; to the messengers who came from John, Jesus said his miracles and his teachings bore record that he was the promised one who should come; to the throngs in Capernaum the Bread from Heaven taught that men must eat his flesh and drink his blood to be saved; to thousands upon thousands of the house of Israel, in all the cities of Judea and Galilee and beyond, the Preacher, the Healer, the Witness of Truth preached the gospel of the kingdom, which is that men are saved through his atoning sacrifice; on occasions without number, the son of Mary, in plain words and in clear similitudes, taught that he was the Son of God.

It comes as no surprise, then, here in the coast of Caesarea Philippi, for his disciples to hear him say what they have heard him say before: 'I am the Son of that Holy Man who is God!' It is the same witness he has always borne; it is a testimony that burns with heavenly fire in their hearts; it is a simple truth that they believe in their souls. As we shall see shortly, they did not as yet envision in full how and in what manner their holy Messiah would accomplish his work and bring life and immortality to light through his gospel. But they knew who he said he was, and they believed the witness he bore of himself.

What then of the question he now asked: "Whom do men say that I am?" It is as though he said: 'My words and my works bear testimony of my divine commission. If men do not accept me as the Son of God, how do they explain these things? Who do they suppose that I am? Am I a devil, as the Pharisees say? How do they explain me and my words if I am not the Son of Man?' Such ever is the dilemma facing unbelievers. How can the work prosper so gloriously if it be not true!

That these same questions tormented the minds of many people is clear from the response of the disciples. The human mind cries out for an explanation of the divine wonders everywhere to be seen. "Some say that thou art John the Baptist; some, Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets" is the response; and it is a reply that shows how false and foolish Jewish traditions were, and how far those who believed them would go to avoid accepting revealed truth.

Antipas, who slew John—fearful, superstitious, with a sin-laden conscience, and exhibiting a touch of the madness and mental derangement that tortured the body and tormented the soul of his evil father—Antipas saw in Jesus the slain Baptist risen from death. Others, also darkened in mind and spirit, adopted the overcredulous superstitions of their depraved ruler, and this in spite of the fact Jesus and John were contemporaries. Such a way to account for Jesus and his works seems wholly incredible to us.

Some said he was Elias, who was to come and restore all things, according to one of their scriptures, which we no longer have; or he was Elijah, who was to return before the great and dreadful day of the Lord. Some also had thought that John the Baptist was one or the other of these prophets.

Others thought Jesus was Jeremiah, around whom Jewish tradition had spun a wondrous web of supernatural foolishness. They believed that this ancient prophet—he was ministering in Israel when Lehi left Jerusalem—had hidden the ark in a cave on Mount Nebo when their capital city was overrun by Nebuchadnezzar; that he had called Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Moses from their tombs to wail with him over the destruction of the temple; and that he and Elijah would prepare the way before the Messiah by returning the ark and the Urim and Thummim to the Holy of Holies.

And yet others supposed our Lord was this or that ancient prophet returned again. There is never agreement among those who believe false doctrine; it matters not to their master what they believe so long as they do not believe the truth. And we can suppose there was a reservoir of rumors and a mountain of explanations relative to Jesus and his works.

"But whom say ye that I am?" he asks. It matters not what carnal men may think. The things of God are known only by the power of the Spirit. Where Christ and his gospel are concerned, the only witness of worth comes from his disciples. Thus Peter—for himself, for the Twelve, for the little group there assembled, for all truth believers in all ages—gives answer: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." 'As thou hast said, Lord, thou art the Son of Man; thou art the Messiah; thou art the One of whom Moses and the prophets spoke; thou art the Son of God.'

Peter thus speaks that which they all believe and of which they all are sure. He confesses the Lord Jesus with his lips. No doubt he then said more than is recorded, and no doubt others bore like witness on this same occasion. But as for Peter, he is only repeating what he has said before. It is not a new testimony, simply a reaffirmation of that which has long been in his heart and which has often fallen from his lips. One of the most fluent and fervent of these prior testimonies of Peter was the one we heard following the sermon on the bread of life. As others dissembled, as the loaves-and-fishes disciples departed from the Living Bread, Peter testified—and it is the equal of his great Messianic confession here beyond the borders of Israel—

Lord . . . thou hast the words of eternal life. And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God. (John 6:68-69.)

"The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven"

(Matthew 16:17-20; Mark 8:30)

"The Son of the living God." An awesome thought; in itself a solemn sermon; wonder of wonders, miracle of miracles: that God should have a son! The Almighty, the First Great Cause, the Supreme Being, the Creator of all things from the beginning—God the Eternal Father begets a son! That holy Man, who is omnipotent and omniscient, who sits enthroned in eternal glory—the maker, preserver, and upholder of all things, before whom all things bow in humble reverence—that holy being, who is immortal and eternal, the Supreme God, fathers a son after the manner of the flesh. An immortal Man—glorified and exalted, having a body of flesh and bones—sires a son in mortality, a son who has a body of flesh and blood.

"The Son of the living God." Such a thing transcends human comprehension. How can it be, and if it is, how can such a truth be known? We are not dealing here with physical facts or chemical formulas; we are not solving geometric theorems or learning the principles of astronomy. That which pertains to God is in the realm of the Spirit. God stands revealed or he remains forever unknown. And if he has a son, such an awesome reality can only be known in the same way—by revelation.

"No man can say [know] that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost," Paul says. (1 Cor. 12:3.) "The testimony of our Lord"—of which Paul says we ought not be "ashamed" (2 Tim. 1:8)—what is it? It is to know by revelation that the man Jesus is the Son of Man. The Holy Ghost is a revelator whose mission is to bear witness of the Father and the Son. "To some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God." (D&C 46:13.) "I am thy fellowservant, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus," was the angelic word to John, "for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy." (Rev. 19:10.) And so Peter, who is one of the prophets, proclaims his testimony: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." To this Jesus can give but one answer:

Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven.

All who bear testimony by the power of the Holy Ghost are blessed; their inspired utterances are recorded in heaven for the angels—their fellowservants—to look upon. Peter is thus blessed. In contrast to Christ, who is the Son of God, Peter is the son of Jonah. Though he is blessed, he is as other men, born of a mortal father. There is only one whose Father was immortal, and Jesus maintains that distinction in dealing even with his intimate friends whom he is training to be his apostolic witnesses.

Mortal though Peter is, his testimony has come to him by revelation—not from reason, not by logic, not from man, but by revelation from the Father by the power of the Holy Ghost. It is a true testimony.

And I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

Yet again Jesus reaffirms the difference between himself and his disciples. He calls Peter, Simon Bar-jona, Simon the son—not of God as He was, but of Jonah; Simon, who is called Peter, is distinguished from Jesus, who is called Christ. [^4]

And having thus testified again of his divine Sonship, Jesus promises that upon the rock of revealed truth, the rock of revelation, the rock of personal testimony received by the power of the Holy Ghost—upon this rock he will build his church. [^5] And thus it has ever been. Whenever God speaks and men hear; whenever there is revelation by the power of the Holy Ghost; whenever men enjoy the gift of the Holy Ghost—then they have the true church. And where any of these things are not, there the true church is not. And further, as long as the true saints walk in this light of heaven, the gates of hell do not and cannot prevail against them. Thus, in thought content, Jesus acclaims:

'Blessed art thou Peter, for thy unwearying devotion to my cause and for the testimony which thou hast borne of my divine Sonship; and this testimony was not revealed to thee by mortal man, but it came by revelation from my Father, by the power of the Holy Ghost. And now Peter, my chief apostle, know this: It is upon this very rock of revelation that I have built up my Church in all ages past, and upon which I will build and perfect it in this your day; for after I have ascended to my Father, ye and your brethren and all the worthy saints shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, so that you may receive revelation from me and learn all things that are expedient for you to know concerning the building up and rolling forth of my kingdom.' (Commentary 1:386.) [^6]

And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.

"The kingdom of heaven": the kingdom of God on earth; the Church of Jesus Christ organized among men; the earthly kingdom designed to prepare men for the heavenly kingdom of the Father—such is the meaning of the language of our Lord.

"The keys of the kingdom": the governing, controlling, regulating power over the Church or kingdom; the instrumentality that opens the door to the receipt of peace in this life and eternal life in the world to come—such is what Jesus meant by keys.

Since the earthly church, which is a kingdom, prepares men for the heavenly kingdom, which is in the celestial world, it follows that what is bound on earth is bound in heaven, and what is loosed on earth is loosed in heaven. If the Lord's legal administrators baptize repentant and worthy souls on earth, that baptism is binding in heaven and admits the faithful to celestial rest. If those legal administrators seal a worthy and faithful man to a worthy and faithful woman in the everlasting covenant of marriage, that marriage is binding in heaven and the blessed recipients of so great a bounty come forth in the resurrection as husband and wife and enter into eternal glory. And if the Lord's lawfully empowered servants, acting in his name and with his authorization, sever sinners from among the saints and turn them over to the buffetings of Satan on earth, all that might have been theirs is loosed in heaven, and they shall fail to gain what might have been theirs. It matters not whether the binding or loosing is done by the mouth of the Lord himself or by his servants who do and say what he directs. "Whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same," he says. (D&C 1:38.)

Strange as these expressions about binding and loosing may seem to an apostate Christendom, they were understood by the Jewish disciples to whom Jesus then spoke. "No other terms were in more constant use in Rabbinic Canon-Law than those of 'binding' and 'loosing.' . . . In regard to some of their earthly decrees, they were wont to say that 'the Sanhedrin above' confirmed what 'the Sanhedrin beneath' had done. But the words of Christ, as they avoided the foolish conceit of His contemporaries, left it not doubtful, but conveyed the assurance that, under the guidance of the Holy Ghost, whatsoever they bound or loosed on earth would be bound or loosed in heaven." (Edersheim 2:85.) [^7]

That Jesus, after hearing the witness of Peter and perhaps of others, charged them all "that they should tell no man that he was Jesus, the Christ" is not strange in the light of the historical circumstances. This very witness of his divine Sonship had been borne in congregations without number by him and his disciples for some two and a half years. Now, however, the opposition was so great, the hatred so intense, the desire to hinder the work so well organized, that it seemed the course of wisdom, for the moment, not to hold him forth as the Messiah. He had many things yet to accomplish before Jewish Sanhedrists turned him over to Roman soldiers to drive nails in his hands and feet and hurl a spear into his side.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This summary is taken from Commentary 1:391.
[^2] These questions are framed from expressions made by Farrar in footnote 5, p. 388, who also quotes Stier as saying: "Those whose intentions towards us are the best, are the most dangerous to us when their intentions are merely human."
[^3] "And whoso layeth down his life in my cause, for my name's sake, shall find it again, even life eternal. Therefore, be not afraid of your enemies, for I have decreed in my heart, saith the Lord, that I will prove you in all things, whether you will abide in my covenant, even unto death, that you may be found worthy. For if ye will not abide in my covenant ye are not worthy of me." (D&C 98:13-15.)
[^4] It may be that they are the ones of whom our revelation says: "I will that all men shall repent, for all are under sin, except those which I have reserved unto myself, holy men that ye know not of." (D&C 49:8.)
[^5] "What rock? Revelation." (Teachings, p. 274.) So said the inspired seer of latter days. Edersheim, without the light of latter-day revelation, reached a somewhat similar conclusion. "Perhaps it might be expressed in this somewhat clumsy paraphrase," he said: " 'Thou art Peter (Petros)—a Stone or Rock—and upon this Petra—the Rock, the Petrine—will I found My Church.' " Thus, he reasons, the Church is to be built on "the Petrine in Peter: the heaven-given faith which manifested itself in his confession." That is, Christ "would build His Church on the Petrine in Peter—on his faith and confession." This is akin to saying that the rock is revelation; it is the heavensent faith, the Spirit-borne testimony, the revealed truth—the fact that God speaks by the power of the Spirit to mortal man. "Nor would the term 'Church' sound strange in Jewish ears," our learned friend continues, "The same Greek word, as the equivalent of the Hebrew Qahal, 'convocation,' 'the called,' occurs in the LXX rendering of the Old Testament, and in 'the Wisdom of the Son of Sirach' and was apparently in familiar use at the time. In Hebrew use it referred to Israel, not in their national but in their religious unity. As here employed, it would convey the prophecy, that His disciples would in the future be joined together in a religious unity; that this religious unity or 'Church' would be a building of which Christ was the Builder; that it would be founded on 'the Petrine' of heaven-taught faith and confession; and that this religious unity, this Church, was not only intended for a time, like a school of thought, but would last beyond death and the disembodied state: that, alike as regarded Christ and His Church—'the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it.' " (Edersheim 2:83-84.) Farrar, also without the benefit of latter-day revelation, reaches the same general conclusion, which he climaxes by quoting these words of Origen: "If any one thus confess, when flesh and blood have not revealed it unto him, but our Father in heaven, he, too, shall obtain the promised blessings; as the letter of the Gospel saith indeed to the great St. Peter, but as its spirit teacheth to every man who hath become like what that great Peter was." (Farrar, p. 386.)
[^6] "The gates of hell are the entrances to the benighted realms of the damned where the wicked go to await the day when they shall come forth in the resurrection of damnation. Those beckoning gates prevail against all who pass through them. But those who obey the laws and ordinances of the gospel have the promise that the gates of hell shall not prevail against them. In this instance, Jesus is telling Peter that the gates of hell shall never prevail against the rock of revelation; that is, as long as the saints are living in righteousness so as to receive revelation from heaven, they will avoid the gates of hell and the Church itself will remain pure, undefiled, and secure against every evil. But when, because of iniquity, revelation ceases, then the gates of hell prevail against the people and also against the organization of which they are members. "Similarly, the Lord, by revelation, has said in our day: 'Open your mouths and they shall be filled, saying: Repent, repent, and prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight; for the kingdom of heaven is at hand; Yea, repent and be baptized, every one of you, for a remission of your sins; yea, be baptized even by water, and then cometh the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost. Behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel; and remember that they shall have faith in me or they can in nowise be saved; And upon this rock I will build my church; yea, upon this rock ye are built, and if ye continue, the gates of hell shall not prevail against you.' " (Commentary 1:388-89.)
[^7] Of the Catholic view of the text in question, Farrar uses these aptly chosen words: "Were it not a matter of history, it would have been deemed incredible that on so imaginary a foundation should have been rested the fantastic claim that abnormal power should be conceded to the bishops of a Church which almost certainly St. Peter did not found, and in a city in which there is no indisputable proof that he ever set foot. The immense arrogancies of sacerdotalism; the disgraceful abuses of the confessional; the imaginary power of absolving from oaths; the ambitious assumption of a right to crush and control the civil power; the extravagant usurpation of infallibility in wielding the dangerous weapons of anathema and excommunication; the colossal tyrannies of the Popedom, and the detestable cruelties of the Inquisition—all these abominations are, we may hope, henceforth and for ever, things of the past." (Farrar, p. 385.)
