Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 63

God's Son—A Suffering Servant

Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. . . . But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities. . . . He was oppressed, and he was afflicted. For the transgression of my people was he stricken. . . . Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him: he hath put him to grief. . . . He shall see of the travail of his soul, . . . for he shall bear their iniquities. (Isa. 53:4-11.)

The Messiah Shall Die and Rise Again

(Matthew 16:21-23; Mark 8:31-33; Luke 9:21-22; JST Luke 9:21)

We have seen Peter—like a giant redwood in the forest of the world—standing on the mountain height; receiving revelation from the Revelator; testifying of the divine Sonship; gaining a blessed benediction from the lips of Him whom he loved.

The revelation: 'Thou art the Messiah; thou art the Son of Man; thou art the Son of the living God.'

The divine benediction: 'Blessed art thou, Simon. Thy testimony has come to thee from the Father by the power of the Spirit; it is recorded in heaven, and the angels rejoice over it.'

The yet future promise of power and dominion and glory: 'Thine are the keys. Thou shalt preside over the earthly kingdom, and the true Sanhedrin in heaven shall be bound by thy decisions on earth.'

Peter and the favored few who surround the person of Him whom they all now know to be the Messiah have received the testimony of Jesus. They know, in a way and by means beyond their mortal powers to explain, that Mary's son had God for his Father. Jesus now plans to build on this foundation of revealed truth and to expound to them in plainness some of the mysteries of that new kingdom to which their testimonies bind them. New converts, having testimonies, are soon tested with new and deep doctrines that often do not accord with their preconceived notions about religion and salvation. From the mesas of exultation, where testimonies flourish, they are often led through the lowlands of despair, where deep doctrines test their allegiance. Having gained glory on the mountains of praise, they must prove their worthiness in the valleys of rebuke.

The witness has been borne as to who Jesus is; now he must teach them what he is destined to do to fulfill his life's mission. First, "he must go unto Jerusalem." His great Galilean ministry is drawing to a close; he has visited and preached and healed in every village and city, time and again. He has proclaimed in Galilee, from one end to the other, the everlasting word; his voice has been heard in all of the adjacent coasts, in Phoenicia (the Roman province of Syria), and in Decapolis, and through the tetrarchy of Herod Philip. And his own, if so they may be called, have rejected him. The gladsome acceptance with which his ministry began in his homeland has turned into a Satan-guided rejection. The leaven of the scribes and Pharisees has turned the populace against him. He will live in Galilee for another month or six weeks, two months at the most, and will then go to Jerusalem.

Jerusalem, the Holy City! There "the Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected of the elders, and of the chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise again." Such now became the burden of his teachings. Galilee was the land of his miracles and preaching for most of his ministry; Judea, the land of his sorrow and suffering; in it was found the valley of the shadow of death. He had ministered among the rude peasants of Galilee, whose dialect and dress were ridiculed by the conceited and self-righteous in Judea, but he must now go up to the religious capital of the world to confront the leaders; to rebuke the rulers; to cleanse the temple again; to finish his work; and, finally, to die where so many of the prophets had been slain.

This announcement of his destined death and his assured resurrection was no new doctrine. Among the Jews there were some who waited for a Messiah who would be a suffering servant. Isaiah's words about One who would be smitten and afflicted, wounded and slain, were part of their prophetic library. And Jesus himself had, during his whole ministry, made frequent allusion to his future demise and his coming forth in a newness of resurrected life. He had spoken openly of the bridegroom being taken from the children of the bridechamber; of the Son of Man spending three days in the earth, as Jonah spent a like period in the whale's belly; of the raising up of the temple of his body after three days; of the Son of Man being lifted up, even as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness; and of the need to eat his flesh as the living bread in order to inherit eternal life—all referring to his atoning sacrifice, death, burial, and resurrection. [^1]

The doctrine is not new nor the concept strange. But now, coupled with the testimonies of Peter and the others of the divine Sonship, which give it a new dimension, and because of its apparent nearness—he "must go unto Jerusalem" for that very purpose—Jesus' teaching causes a tide of fear to rise up in the hearts of the disciples. It is one thing to have a general awareness that death will overtake us at some future time, and quite another to come face to face, suddenly and unexpectedly, with the destroyer's sword.

"Then Peter took him"—apparently aside from the others—"and began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord: this shall not be unto thee." Or better: 'God forbid; this shall certainly not happen to thee.' Or: 'God forbid it; God be merciful to thee and keep this evil far from thee.' Peter is appealing, as had Lucifer before, to the human element in Christ's nature. 'Lord, this cannot be; you must prevent it by thy divine power. Thy kingdom cannot prosper if evil men afflict and slay its King. Such indignities must not fall upon thee, of all men."

Temptation from the lips of a faithful friend and confidant is even worse than from the mouth of the archtempter himself. Are not a man's worst foes they of his own household when they seek to dissuade him from the course of duty and right? Do not his friends, who love him best, become his worst enemies, when they seek to drag him down from heights of self-sacrifice to the vulgar, the conventional, the comfortable? [^2] To Lucifer Jesus had said, "Get thee behind me, Satan"; can he say less to the same allurement when it is proposed by the one whom he has just praised for the verity of his testimony? The answer comes like lightning, in a blazing flash of indignant fire:

Get thee behind me, Satan: thou art an offence unto me: for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men.

"This thy mere carnal and human view—this attempt to dissuade me from my 'baptism of death'—is a sin against the purposes of God. Peter was to learn—would that the Church which professes to have inherited from him its exclusive and superhuman claims had also learnt in time!—that he was far indeed from being infallible—that he was capable of falling, aye, and with scarcely a moment's intermission, from heights of divine insight into depths of most earthly folly." (Farrar, p. 388.)

Losing One's Life to Save It

(Matthew 16:24-26; JST Matthew 16:26-29; Mark 8:34-37; JST Mark 8:37-38; Luke 9:23-25; JST Luke 9:24-25)

Jesus, whom they acclaim as King-Messiah, shall die. He shall lose his life to save it. He shall suffer many things of the Rabbinic rulers, and finally be slain, that he may rise again the third day. He shall lay down his life in his Father's cause that he may take it up in eternal glory and then receive an everlasting inheritance in the kingdom that is prepared.

Horrible thought? So Peter presumed, for he saw only the cross and not the crown; he looked only upon the loss of the Lord to the earthly kingdom and not upon the eternal blessings that would flow to all men through the atonement. Accordingly, to his sorrow—with the piercing sword of righteous indignation—he was rebuked by the Lord. And then, before the thunder of Christ's words ceased to roll in his tingling ears, the Master Teacher "called the people unto him with his disciples," that all might hear his further words on the death, the demise, yet to descend—not on the Lord Jesus only, but also on Peter and those who accepted the burdens of full discipleship.

The servants shall be as their Lord. If they suffer with him, they shall also be with him when men shall sorrow no more and all tears shall cease. If they lay down their lives in his cause, they shall take them up again in immortal glory and receive that eternal life which he came to prepare. Jesus has now taught his disciples—and angelic ministrants before an open tomb shall remind them that he did so—Jesus has now taught those who believe on his name that he, the mighty Messiah, shall, after suffering many things, be slain in Jerusalem. But such is only the beginning of sorrow, if sorrow it is. True disciples also must be prepared and willing to lay down their own lives in his cause, for his name's sake. He shall come forth, the firstfruits of them that sleep, to receive all power in heaven and on earth; and if his disciples expect to come forth and inherit eternal life, they must be prepared to suffer and die with him. His death is but the beginning; Peter, who dreaded to see Jesus suffer and die, must himself also step forward and be martyred.

Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross, and follow me.

And now for a man to take up his cross, is to deny himself all ungodliness, and every worldly lust, and keep my commandments.

Break not my commandments for to save your lives; for whosoever will save his life in this world shall lose it in the world to come.

'Come Peter; come James; come John; come all ye saints who seek salvation—come. Take up your cross; take it up daily and follow me. Your cross is to overcome the lusts of the flesh—all ungodliness—and to keep my commandments. Your cross is to bear the burdens placed on the backs of the saints. Your cross is to keep my commandments, and, if I will it, to lay down your lives even as I shall permit evil men to slay me. I shall carry my cross; if you are to be with me, you must carry yours. And whosoever will lose his life in this world, for my sake, shall find it in the world to come. Therefore, forsake the world, and save your souls.'

For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it; or whosoever will save his life, shall be willing to lay it down for my sake; and if he is not willing to lay it down for my sake, he shall lose it.

But whosoever shall be willing to lose his life for my sake, and the gospel's, the same shall save it.

Here indeed is strong doctrine. Jesus the Lord shall suffer before he enters into his glory. "Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?" he shall ask two disciples on the Emmaus road. (Luke 24:26.) Truly, he shall do the will of the Father and withhold nothing, not even his own life. And so it must be with all who are his. Though they do not court martyrdom, some shall be so honored, and all must be willing, if need be, so to die. "For he who is not able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom cannot abide a celestial glory." (D&C 88:22.) It is the law of heaven and the royal road to eternal life. [^3]

Therefore, forsake the world and save your souls; for what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

For what doth it profit a man if he gain the whole world, and yet he receive him not whom God hath ordained, and he lose his own soul, and he himself be a castaway?

"What value is to be placed on a human soul? How can we determine its worth? Two things will give some indication of the priceless value of the souls of men: (1) What these souls have cost up to this point—the labor, material, and struggle that has gone into their creation and development; and (2) The effective use to which they can be put—the benefits that result when souls fill the full measure of their creation and take their rightful place in the eternal scheme of things.

"To use these standards of judgment it is necessary to view human souls in their relationship to the eternal plan of creation, progression, and salvation. Souls had their beginning, as conscious identities, when they were born as the spirit offspring of Deity. There then followed an infinitely long period of training, schooling, and preparation, so that these spirits might go on and attain their exaltation. 'God himself,' as the Prophet Joseph Smith expressed it, 'finding he was in the midst of spirits and glory, because he was more intelligent, saw proper to institute laws whereby the rest could have a privilege to advance like himself.'

"As part of this schooling process this earth was created; spirits were given temporal bodies; gospel dispensations were vouchsafed to men; prophets were sent forth to labor and preach; oftentimes they were persecuted, tormented, and slain; and even the Son of God taught and served among mortals, climaxing his ministry by suffering beyond mortal endurance in working out the infinite and eternal atonement. All this is included in the price already paid toward the purchase of human souls.

"Such of these souls as keep all the commandments shall attain eternal life. They shall go on to exaltation and glory in all things, becoming like the Father, begetting spirit offspring, creating worlds without number, and forever and endlessly rolling forth the eternal purposes of the Infinite God.

"How much is a human soul worth? No man can say, no tongue can tell, no mind can comprehend it. How apt, then, is Jesus' illustration. If a man—even if such a thing were possible—should gain the whole world, and lose his soul in the process, the acquired wealth would be slight indeed as compared to the value of his own soul.

"It is because of their understanding of this doctrine of the worth of souls that our Lord's ministers go forth with all the energy and capacity they have to labor in the vineyard, pleading with men to repent and save their souls, that they may have eventual eternal joy in the Father's kingdom." (Commentary 1:393-94.)

The Second Coming—A Day of Rewards

(Matthew 16:27-28; Mark 8:38; 9:1; Mark 8:40-44; Luke 9:26-27; JST Luke 9:26-27)

If ever there was a sermon showing that men do not live for this life only; if ever the saints were taught that the rewards for righteous works are reserved for a life to come; if ever the scant worth of worldliness was weighed in the balance and found wanting—such is found in Jesus' counsel that his disciples, his saints, must take up their cross, forsake the world, keep the commandments, and be willing to die martyrs' deaths, if they are to gain eternal life.

Eternal life: what is it and when shall its glories and blessing rest upon the saints? It is full salvation; it is an inheritance in the highest heaven; it is exaltation. It is to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of God, to go no more out. It is the greatest of all the gifts of God, for it is to be like God, to inherit, receive, and possess as he does. It is to be a joint-heir with Christ of all the glory of his Father's kingdom. And it shall come to the faithful in that day when the Son of Man comes to make up his jewels. It is gained when those who so inherit come forth in the resurrection of the just.

For the Son of Man shall come in the glory of his Father with his angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his works.

The Second Coming is a day of judgment, a day of rewards, a day of vengeance for the wicked, a day of glory and honor for the righteous. It is a day for which all men prepare by the lives that they live. Those who live as becometh saints shall be as their Lord; those who walk in carnal paths shall be cast out. (Commentary 1:396.)

Therefore deny yourselves of these, and be not ashamed of me. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.

And they shall not have part in that resurrection when he cometh. For verily I say unto you, That he shall come; and he that layeth down his life for my sake and the gospel's, shall come with him, and shall be clothed with his glory in the cloud, on the right hand of the Son of Man.

This, then, is the promised day. The martyrs, who lost their lives here, shall find their lives there. With Him they shall reign in eternal glory. What matter our momentary sorrows and sufferings—even though they be unto death—if we gain eternal life in the coming day? In that day "he shall come in his own kingdom, clothed in the glory of his Father, with the holy angels," and those on his right hand shall be in glory even as he is.

There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom.

Enoch and his whole city were translated, taken up bodily into heaven without tasting death. There they served and labored with bodies of flesh and bones, bodies quickened by the power of the Spirit, until that blessed day when they were with Christ in his resurrection. Then, in the twinkling of an eye, they were changed and became immortal in the full sense of the word. So it was also with Moses and Elijah, who were taken up bodily into heaven for reasons that will be manifest on the Mount of Transfiguration. They too were with the Lord Jesus in his resurrection. (D&C 133:54-55.)

Of those here promised that they should "not taste of death" until the Second Coming, we have no knowledge except that the Beloved John was one of them, as shall hereafter be noted. The others are not named, nor has the Lord revealed their whereabouts or ministries to us in this dispensation. [^4] Manifestly, there are many things that we do not know; but those things of which we have knowledge are sufficient to enable us to gain eternal life with the ancients if we, in our day, will live as they did in theirs.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] There can be little doubt that the Mount of Transfiguration is Mount Hermon, north of Caesarea Philippi, though Mount Tabor in the south of Galilee has been so considered by many. In the sixth century three churches were erected on Mount Tabor to commemorate Peter's desire to erect three tabernacles on "the holy mount." Jesus and his party are known to have been near Caesarea Philippi the week before, and Mark expressly says they did not return to Galilee until after the Transfiguration. (Mark 9:30.)
[^2] Something akin to this, though lesser in degree, happened to Moses. After spending forty days and nights with the Lord in the mountain, "the skin of his face shone," and he had to wear a veil when he talked with the children of Israel. (Ex. 34:28-35.)
[^3] Such also has been the case with many prophets in many ages when they have seen the wonders of eternity. "I was transfigured before him," Moses says as he recounts how he beheld God with his "spiritual eyes." (Moses 1:11.) "They were caught up into heaven, and saw and heard unspeakable things," the Nephite record says of the three Nephite disciples, the three who were comparable in the New World to Peter, James, and John in the Old World. "And it was forbidden them that they should utter; neither was it given unto them power that they could utter the things which they saw and heard; And whether they were in the body or out of the body, they could not tell; for it did seem unto them like a transfiguration of them, that they were changed from this body of flesh into an immortal state, that they could behold the things of God." (3 Ne. 28:13-15.) As to the transfiguration of Peter, James, and John, the Prophet Joseph Smith says: "The Savior, Moses, and Elias, gave the keys to Peter, James, and John, on the mount, when they were transfigured before him." (Teachings, p. 158.)
[^4] Moses and Elijah were translated-taken into heaven with physical bodies-so they could return, with their bodies, to confer keys upon Peter, James, and John on the Mount of Transfiguration. Of these two ancient prophets, President Joseph Fielding Smith says: "They had a mission to perform, and it had to be performed before the crucifixion of the Son of God, and it could not be done in the spirit. They had to have tangible bodies. Christ is the first fruits of the resurrection; therefore if any former prophets had a work to perform preparatory to the mission of the Son of God, or to the dispensation of the meridian of times, it was essential that they be preserved to fulfill that mission in the flesh. For that reason Moses disappeared from among the people and was taken up into the mountain, and the people thought he was buried by the Lord. The Lord preserved him, so that he could come at the proper time and restore his keys, on the heads of Peter, James, and John, who stood at the head of the dispensation of the meridian of time. (Deut. 34:5-6; Alma 45:18-19.) He reserved Elijah from death that he might also come and bestow his keys upon the heads of Peter, James, and John and prepare them for their ministry. "But, one says, the Lord could have waited until after his resurrection, and then they could have done it. It is quite evident, due to the fact that it did so occur, that it had to be done before; and there was a reason. There may have been other reasons, but that is one reason why Moses and Elijah did not suffer death in the flesh, like other men do. "After the resurrection of Christ, of course, they passed through death and the resurrection, and then as resurrected beings came to fulfill a mission of like import in the dispensation of the fulness of time. (D&C 110:11-16; 133:54-55.)" (Doctrines of Salvation 2:110-11.) The concept here presented ties in with and is related to the pronouncements in section 129 of the Doctrine and Covenants about mortals being able to feel the bodies of resurrected persons but not the bodies of spirit beings.
