Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 64

The Transfiguration

For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty. For he received from God the Father honour and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy mount. (2 Pet. 1:16-18.)

And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father,) full of grace and truth. (John 1:14.)

Peter, James, and John Receive the Keys of the Kingdom

(Matthew 17:1-3; Mark 9:2-4; JST Mark 9:1-3; Luke 9:28-32; JST Luke 9:28-32)

Our Synoptic authors make brief mention of—in reality it is scarcely more than an allusion to—what happened on the heights of Hermon when they and Jesus spent a sacred night enwrapped in the visions of eternity. This blessed night was one of those seeric periods when the mysteries of the kingdom, "which surpass all understanding," are shown forth to souls who are in tune with the Infinite. So marvelous are such revealed truths that it is "not lawful for man to utter" them, "Neither is man capable to make them known, for they are only to be seen and understood by the power of the Holy Spirit." They are reserved by the Lord for those prophets and seers who, "while in the flesh," are yet able "to bear his presence in the world of glory." (D&C 76: 114-18.)

In the providences of the Lord the saints know some things that the world does not know about the spiritual outpouring of divine grace that fell on the Mount of Transfiguration. But even latter-day revelation does not set forth the full account, and until men attain a higher state of spiritual understanding than they now enjoy, they will continue to see through a glass darkly and to know only in part the visionary experiences of the presiding officers of the meridian Church. That which is known, however, singles out this night as one of the most important and glorious in the lives of those who saw within the veil and who heard the voices of the heavenly participants.

Near Caesarea Philippi, Peter—a mortal man: impetuous, bold, highly spiritual—had borne a heavensent testimony, one revealed by the power of the Holy Ghost, of the divine Sonship of Christ. Then Jesus, of whom Simon testified, promised to give his chief apostle the keys of the kingdom, including the power to bind and loose on earth and in heaven. After this, Jesus taught them of his coming death and resurrection.

Now on the Mount of Transfiguration, a heavenly voice—that of the Almighty Father who is visiting his Son on planet earth—bears holy witness of the same divine Sonship. And now Jesus and angelic visitants, who do his bidding, join in conferring upon Peter, James, and John the promised keys of the kingdom with their sealing powers. And these angelic ministrants—fellowservants of the apostles, who like their mortal friends need the blessings of the coming atonement—also speak with Jesus of his coming death and resurrection. The bearing of testimony, the use of the keys of the kingdom, the reality of the atonement—all these are operative on both sides of the veil. Both men on earth and the angels of God in heaven are saved and blessed by the same eternal laws.

From the great confession until Jesus took Peter, James, and John "into a high mountain apart by themselves" was either six or eight days, depending upon whether the day of the confession and the day of travel up the mountain slopes are counted. There is no record of the teachings of that week, but they must have centered around the sad and shocking announcement of the nearness of the death of their Messiah. We do know that the three apostles "asked him many questions concerning his sayings," as they journeyed up what Peter later called "the holy mount." [^1] No doubt Jesus, by his answers, prepared them for the spiritual experiences ahead.

After they arrived at a proper and solitary place where they would be undisturbed in their worship and prayer, Luke tells us that Jesus prayed and that the apostles "were heavy with sleep." We are left to conclude that while they slept, even as it would be in Gethsemane, Jesus' prayers ascended to his Father, and—we say it reverently—he received such comfort and reassurance as he needed. Though he were a Son yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered; and in Gethsemane itself he was strengthened by angelic assistance.

At the proper time the three chief apostles—the First Presidency of the Church—awoke; the time for their participation in the two-realm wonders of that night was at hand. They beheld their beloved Lord in prayer. We can suppose his petitions ascended up on high for himself and for the three spiritual giants who were about to receive the keys of the kingdom and view the wonders of eternity.

From the slivers of knowledge preserved for us in the New Testament of what then transpired, and from the allusions to the spiritual experiences then vouchsafed to those mortals, we can reconstruct the hallowed happenings somewhat along this line: "It was the evening hour when He ascended, and as He climbed the hill-slope with those three chosen witnesses—'The Sons of Thunder and the Man of Rock'—doubtless a solemn gladness dilated His soul; a sense not only of the heavenly calm which that solitary communion with His Heavenly Father would breathe upon the spirit, but still more than this, a sense that He would be supported for the coming hour by ministrations not of earth, and illuminated with a light which needed no aid from sun or moon or stars. He went up to be prepared for death, and He took His three Apostles with Him that, haply, having seen His glory—the glory of the only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth—their hearts might be fortified, their faith strengthened, to gaze unshaken on the shameful insults and unspeakable humiliation of the cross.

"There, then, He knelt and prayed, and as He prayed He was elevated far above the toil and misery of the world which had rejected Him. He was transfigured before them, and His countenance shone as the sun, and His garments became white as the dazzling snow-fields above them. He was enwrapped in such an aureole of glistering brilliance—His whole presence breathed so divine a radiance—that the light, the snow, the lightning are the only things to which the Evangelist can compare that celestial lustre." (Farrar, pp. 394-95.)

The apostles "were eyewitnesses of his majesty." (2 Pet. 1:16.) "And his raiment became shining, exceeding white, as snow; so white as no fuller on earth could whiten them." He himself "was transfigured before them." [^2] Nor is this all. Peter, James, and John, as the powers of heaven fell upon them, were also transfigured and tasted themselves of the heavenly gifts. [^3]

Then our apostolic friends, quickened by the power of the Spirit—their souls attuned to the infinite; their spirit eyes wide open; their spirit ears unstopped—saw two men, Moses and Elijah, "who appeared in glory, and spake of his death, and also his resurrection, which he should accomplish in Jerusalem." Moses, whose very name is the personification of the law, the law of Jehovah, the law by which all Israel lived; Elijah, the prophetic defender of that law, the one whose name personified all the prophets; these two, both of whom were translated and taken up into heaven without tasting death, now discussed with their Lord that infinite and eternal atoning sacrifice by which their translated bodies would gain full immortality and yet shine forth with celestial glory. John the Baptist, a spirit personage whose mortal ministry completed what Moses had begun, was also present, rejoicing with his fellow laborers over the atonement about to be wrought.

Hear, O ye heavens, and give ear, O earth; let mortal men and angelic ministrants join hands; let all who belong to the family of the Father, whether on earth or in heaven, rejoice in the great atonement. By it redemption comes; by it the dead are raised; by it eternal life is gained. Truly, there is nothing of greater concern to men and angels than the "decease which he should accomplish at Jerusalem."

At this point, the angelic witness of the atoning sacrifice having been borne by Moses and Elijah, and no doubt by John the Baptist also—the two men from ancient Israel, having retained their physical bodies so they might confer priestly authority upon mortals—these two joined with Jesus in conferring upon Peter, James, and John the keys of the kingdom. [^4] Moses conferred the keys of the gathering of Israel, Elijah the keys of the sealing power, so that whatever they bound or loosed on earth would be bound or loosed in heaven. Jesus himself gave them all else that they needed to preside over his earthly kingdom; to lead all men to eternal salvation in the mansions on high; to send the gospel to the ends of the earth; and to seal men up unto eternal life in the kingdom of his Father. [^5] Truly Peter, James, and John, while on this holy mount, received their endowments and were empowered from on high to do all things for the building up and rolling forward of the Lord's work in their day and dispensation. (Commentary 1:399-404.) "Peter says that while there, they 'received from God the Father honour and glory,' seemingly bearing out this conclusion. It also appears that it was while on the mount that they received the more sure word of prophecy, it then being revealed to them that they were sealed up unto eternal life." (Commentary 1:400; 2 Pet. 1:16-19; D&C 131:5.)

Next came the great vision of the transfiguration of the earth; at least we cannot suppose it came earlier in the great spiritual outpourings of this night of nights. How many prophets have been blessed with such seeric foresight of the millennial state of this lowly orb we do not know. Perhaps Enoch, who saw the day when the earth should rest, when the New Jerusalem should come down from God out of heaven to men on earth, and who saw the Son of Man dwell a second time among men. (Moses 7:58-65.) Perhaps Isaiah, who spoke so much of the great age of restoration, and who wrote so plainly about the new heaven and the new earth, when "the wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall eat straw like the bullock," and when "there shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days: for the child shall die an hundred years old." (Isa. 65:17-25.)

But however much others may have known, the Lord himself, there on Mount Hermon, as part of the wonders of eternity then opened to the view of mortal men, showed unto the Three the transfiguration of the earth. We ourselves are not prepared to see or understand what then transpired. As of now we know only that those who come forth in the resurrection of the just "shall receive an inheritance upon the earth when the day of transfiguration shall come; When the earth shall be transfigured, even according to the pattern which was shown unto mine apostles upon the mount" the Lord who was on the mount is speaking these words to Joseph Smith in August of 1831—"of which account the fulness ye have not yet received." (D&C 63:20-21.) How many things there are that we have not yet received because we have not attained the spiritual stature of the ancients to whom they were once revealed!

Elohim, the Shekinah, and the Son

(Matthew 17:4-9; JST Matthew 17:5; Mark 9:5-10; JST Mark 9:6; Luke 9:33-36; JST Luke 9:33, 36)

At some time that night on the holy mount something happened—we know not what—that caused Peter to make an inappropriate statement about the practice followed by Israel at the Feast of Tabernacles, the practice of dwelling and worshipping in booths or tabernacles made of wattled boughs. Perhaps amid all the glory and wonder of that night shouts of hosanna and praise, like those that came from worshipful lips at Tabernacle Time, came from the united voices of Christ's servants on both sides of the veil. How could they have contained their joy as they came to understand the infinite scope of the infinite atonement soon to be made by the Infinite One, or as the visions of eternity, including the millennial destiny of the earth, rolled before their spiritually opened eyes? Or perhaps, amid the glory and wonder of it all, Peter sought simply to restrain the departure of those ancient ones whom all the faithful revered so highly. What is more natural than for spiritually endowed mortals, having gained the fellowship of heavenly beings, to desire to prolong that divine association? Whatever the cause, Peter, speaking impetuously, as was his nature, said: "Lord, it is good for us to be here"—and truly it was—"if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias."

"As the splendid vision began to fade—as the majestic visitants were about to be separated from their Lord, as their Lord Himself passed with them into the overshadowing brightness—Peter, anxious to delay their presence, amazed, startled, transported, not knowing what he said—not knowing that Calvary would be a spectacle infinitely more transcendent than Hermon—not knowing that the Law and the Prophets were now [that is, soon would be] fulfilled—not fully knowing that his Lord was unspeakably greater than the Prophet of Sinai and the Avenger of Carmel," made the quoted statement which we, for want of full knowledge, cannot understand. "But it was not for Peter to construct the universe for his personal satisfaction. He had to learn the meaning of Golgotha no less than that of Hermon. Not in cloud of glory or chariot of fire was Jesus to pass away from them, but with arms outstretched in agony upon the accursed tree; not between Moses and Elias, but between two thieves, who 'were crucified with Him, on either side one.'" (Farrar, p. 396.)

All else of that night's wonders was but preliminary to what now was destined to be. Had they seen their Lord transfigured before them, his face and clothes shining as the sun in his strength? Had the Personifier of the Law and the Symbol of the Prophets—both holy men who were taken up into heaven without tasting death—conferred keys and powers upon their fellow servants? Had they seen in vision the transfigured earth in its millennial glory? Had their eyes and ears and souls been opened to understand the infinite and eternal import of the death and resurrection soon to be in Jerusalem? Had there been other spiritual outpourings of like magnitude and import? Truly all this was so. And yet now, on this foundation, the Father himself, the Almighty Elohim, that Holy Being who is the source of all things and all men, the Father himself is about to manifest himself to mortals.

The ancient Shekinah, the luminous cloud, the visible manifestation of the Divine Presence; the bright and flashing glory that rested upon Sinai when Jehovah conversed face to face with the man Moses; the divine brilliance out of which anciently a voice spoke from between the cherubim in the Holy of Holies—the Shekinah came down from heaven to shield the face and form of God from his earthbound creations.

Elohim was there in the cloud. That he was seen by the Son we cannot doubt. Whether our Lord's three companions saw within the veil we do not say. We do know that even now those who have been sealed up unto eternal life, whose calling and election has been made sure, have the privilege of receiving the Second Comforter; and that this Comforter "is no more nor less than the Lord Jesus Christ Himself," who then appears to them "from time to time"; and that "He will manifest the Father," and "they will take up their abode" with him, and the visions of heaven will be opened unto them. (Teachings, pp. 150-51.) Let each man determine for himself what happened there on the slopes of Mount Hermon in the summer or autumn of A.D. 29. All that is preserved for us in the New Testament account is that while Peter yet spake of making the three tabernacles for Moses, Elias, and Jesus, "behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them: and behold a voice out of the cloud, which said,

This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him.

Thus, once again the Divine Voice—the Father of us all; the one above all others whose right it is to command obedience and invite worship of himself—affirmed the eternal truth that Christ is the Son; that salvation comes by the Son; that all men must honor the Son and believe his words; that the only approved course for all men of all races in all ages is: "Hear ye him!" To say more about this, at this point, would but detract from the glorious simplicity of this great truth upon which salvation rests.

Hearing the Divine Voice, the three disciples fell on their faces "and were sore afraid." Thereupon Jesus touched them and in tender solicitude said simply, "Arise, and be not afraid." They did so, and "when they had looked round about with great astonishment, they saw no man any more, save Jesus only, with themselves. And immediately they departed."

As they came down the mountain, Jesus said, "Tell the vision to no man, until the Son of man be risen again from the dead." The wonders they had seen could not then lawfully be uttered even to the others of the Twelve, nor could they be understood by any without the enlightening power of the Holy Ghost. After the resurrection of their Lord, after the day of Pentecost when the promised enlightening gift would be given, it would be time enough to tell even those spiritual giants with whom they and Jesus associated on such intimate terms.

Mark, at this point, says they questioned "one with another what the rising from the dead should mean." Their questions could not have been about the reality of the resurrection; nor about its universal nature; nor about the fact Jesus would die and rise again the third day. All this Jesus has already taught them in plainness. In recent weeks his own decease, and his own rising as the firstfruits of them that sleep, has been the burden of his teachings. He has spoken openly and plainly about his own death and resurrection. They know what the resurrection as such is, and in fact have just seen in vision the resurrection that will usher in the millennial day, when the earth itself shall be transfigured. And they know what Jesus said at the Feast of the Passover: that all who are in their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of God and come forth, either in the resurrection of the just or that of the unjust.

It is true that there were many false doctrines taught by the Rabbis about the resurrection. "Current Jewish theology" abounded in conflicting views and unresolved problems in this field. There was no basic agreement among the Rabbis on any major points. "They had heard from some of the preachers in the synagogues, that Israel alone would rise; from others, that the resurrection would include godly heathen also, who had kept the seven commands given to the sons of Noah; from some, that all the heathen outside the holy land would be raised, but only to shame and everlasting contempt before Israel; while still others maintained, that neither the Samaritans, nor the great mass of their own nation, who did not observe the precepts of the Rabbis, would have part in the resurrection. But if there was confusion as to who should rise again, there was still more contradiction between what they had always heard before, of the occasion and time of the resurrection. . . . They had been trained to believe that all Israel would be gathered from the four quarters of the earth at the coming of the Messiah, and that the dead would be raised immediately after. . . . They had always, moreover, heard the synagogue preachers say that the holy dead, when thus raised, were to take part in the kingdom of the Messiah, at Jerusalem, and once more become fellowcitizens with the living." (Geikie, pp. 561-62.) For that matter, the Sadducees did not believe in any resurrection at all.

But none of this could have had any bearing on the questioning discussions the three disciples had among themselves. Their questions must have been the kind any believing disciples would have asked in similar circumstances: When will the resurrection be? How will it be brought to pass? With what body will we arise? Where do resurrected beings dwell? Does the family unit continue among them? And so forth. And like questions can be heard to this day in the congregations of the saints.

We know of one other subject discussed by Jesus and the Chosen Three as they descended the slopes of Hermon—that of Elias and the Restoration—and of this we shall now make more particular mention as we see the Son of Man begin the journey from sunshine into shadow, from the Mount of Transfiguration to the Valley of Humiliation and Death.

Elias of the Restoration

(Matthew 17:10-13; JST Matthew 17:10-14; Mark 9:11-13; JST Mark 9:10-11)

Elias—that figure of ancient renown about whom the world knows so little; whose mission is to bring to pass the restoration of all things before the great and dreadful day of the Lord—who is he and when shall he minister among men?

The Chosen Three, but hours before, had seen and conversed with translated Elias, who is Elijah, and with translated Moses, and from them and from Christ received the keys of the kingdom of heaven. These two ancient worthies had now departed to realms unknown without revealing themselves to the people generally. Further, they had come after—nearly three years after—the Messiah had commenced his ministry, not before as the scribes taught and as their scriptures testified. How could this be?

Nor had this vanishing and evanescent Elias, who had ministered in glory on Hermon's slopes, done any of the things he was expected to do. According to Jewish legend and scribal teaching, Elias was to come "three days before the coming of the Messiah." Then, they taught, "he will stand and weep and lament on the hills of Israel, over the desolate and forsaken land, till his voice is heard through the world." Further, "he will then cry to the mountains, 'Peace and blessing come into the world, peace and blessing come into the world!'—'Salvation cometh, salvation cometh!'" Then, he will "gather all the scattered sons of Jacob, and restore all things in Israel as in ancient times." He will "turn the hearts of all Israel to receive the Messiah gladly." (Geikie, p. 562.) Further, "the Jewish expectation" of the coming of Elias was so "well known" that "a thing of unknown ownership" might "be kept by the finder 'till the coming of Elias.' He was to restore to the Jews the pot of manna, the rod of Aaron," and so forth, and his coming generally was to be "a time of restoration." (Farrar, p. 397, footnote 2.) Indeed, at the Feast of the Passover it was customary to set an extra place at the table for Elias should he then choose to come and commence his legendary labors.

There had been no hint of any of this on the part of the now invisible being who had talked not of the life and temporal triumph of their Messiah, but of his sorrows and sufferings and death. Were all of the Rabbinic traditions and all of the scribal teachings wrong? To Jesus they said, "Why then say the scribes that Elias must first come?"

Jesus' companions knew that John the Baptist—whose spirit body they had seen on the holy mount—as Gabriel promised, had come before the Lord "in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord." (Luke 1:17.) They knew that when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask John, "Who art thou? . . . Art thou Elias?" the Son of Zacharias had said "he was Elias," but that he was "not that Elias who was to restore all things." They knew that John, speaking of Christ, had then testified: "He is that prophet, even Elias, who, coming after me, is preferred before me, whose shoe's latchet I am not worthy to unloose, or whose place I am not able to fill." (JST John 1:20-28.) They also knew that when John, imprisoned by Antipas in Machaerus, had sent messengers to Jesus, that they might learn for themselves of his divine Sonship, Jesus had said of John: "If ye will receive it, this is Elias, which was for to come." (Matt. 11:14.)

Clearly, they knew of John's mission as an Elias, as a forerunner, as one appointed to prepare the way, as the one who would prepare a people for the Lord. Yet, learning line upon line and precept upon precept, as the Lord's servants always do, there were still unanswered questions about that Elias who was to restore all things. And well might this have been, for the great restoration was not for their day, as they would learn on the Mount of Olives, after Christ's resurrection, when, still not fully advised in the premises, they will ask: "Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?" Then they will be told that the great restoration is not for their time; the return of Elias to restore all things is destined to occur in the last days, before the Second Coming of the Son of Man. (Acts 1:6-8.)

For their present edification, Jesus chose to teach them that Elias the Forerunner was one thing, Elias of the Restoration another. The one had already come; the ministry of the other lay ahead. "Elias truly shall first come, and restore all things, as the prophets have written," Jesus said. Peter, learning his doctrine from the Lord, will later testify to all Israel that all the holy prophets "since the world began" have spoken of the latter-day "times of restitution." (Acts 3:19-21.) But now, Jesus continues:

And again I say unto you that Elias has come already, concerning whom it is written, Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me; and they knew him not, and have done unto him, whatsoever they listed. Likewise shall the Son of Man suffer of them.

But I say unto you, Who is Elias? Behold, this is Elias, whom I sent to prepare the way before me.

Such is the Lord's own testimony of the one whose voice, crying in the wilderness of sin and evil, called out to fallen Israel: 'Prepare ye the way of the Lord; make his paths straight; come unto him; repent; be baptized for the remission of your sins; live righteously and be ready to be numbered among his people, for the time is at hand.'

As we are aware, each Gospel author recorded fragments only of much longer conversations. In this instance Mark gives us this account:

Elias verily cometh first, and prepareth all things; and teacheth you of the prophets; how it is written of the Son of Man, that he must suffer many things, and be set at naught.

Again I say unto you, That Elias is indeed come, but they have done unto him whatsoever they listed; and even as it is written of him; and he bore record of me, and they received him not. Verily this was Elias.

John's work was well done; his mortal ministry was over; the way had been prepared for the Coming One. Elias had first come; he had come before the face of Him in whose hand is all power. But Elias also would yet come to restore all things; and so the inspired account attests: "Then the disciples understood that he spake unto them of John the Baptist, and also of another who should come and restore all things, as it is written by the prophets." [^6]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This chapter title is also the one used by Elder James E. Talmage as he begins his description of what befell our Lord after the glorious happenings on the Mount of Transfiguration.
[^2] "And so great was the faith of Enoch, that he led the people of God, and their enemies came to battle against them; and he spake the word of the Lord, and the earth trembled, and the mountains fled, even according to his command; and the rivers of water were turned out of their course." (Moses 7:13.)
[^3] Such also has been the case with many prophets in many ages when they have seen the wonders of eternity. "I was transfigured before him," Moses says as he recounts how he beheld God with his "spiritual eyes." (Moses 1:11.) "They were caught up into heaven, and saw and heard unspeakable things," the Nephite record says of the three Nephite disciples, the three who were comparable in the New World to Peter, James, and John in the Old World. "And it was forbidden them that they should utter; neither was it given unto them power that they could utter the things which they saw and heard; And whether they were in the body or out of the body, they could not tell; for it did seem unto them like a transfiguration of them, that they were changed from this body of flesh into an immortal state, that they could behold the things of God." (3 Ne. 28:13-15.) As to the transfiguration of Peter, James, and John, the Prophet Joseph Smith says: "The Savior, Moses, and Elias, gave the keys to Peter, James, and John, on the mount, when they were transfigured before him." (Teachings, p. 158.)
[^4] Moses and Elijah were translated-taken into heaven with physical bodies-so they could return, with their bodies, to confer keys upon Peter, James, and John on the Mount of Transfiguration. Of these two ancient prophets, President Joseph Fielding Smith says: "They had a mission to perform, and it had to be performed before the crucifixion of the Son of God, and it could not be done in the spirit. They had to have tangible bodies. Christ is the first fruits of the resurrection; therefore if any former prophets had a work to perform preparatory to the mission of the Son of God, or to the dispensation of the meridian of times, it was essential that they be preserved to fulfill that mission in the flesh. For that reason Moses disappeared from among the people and was taken up into the mountain, and the people thought he was buried by the Lord. The Lord preserved him, so that he could come at the proper time and restore his keys, on the heads of Peter, James, and John, who stood at the head of the dispensation of the meridian of time. (Deut. 34:5-6; Alma 45:18-19.) He reserved Elijah from death that he might also come and bestow his keys upon the heads of Peter, James, and John and prepare them for their ministry. "But, one says, the Lord could have waited until after his resurrection, and then they could have done it. It is quite evident, due to the fact that it did so occur, that it had to be done before; and there was a reason. There may have been other reasons, but that is one reason why Moses and Elijah did not suffer death in the flesh, like other men do. "After the resurrection of Christ, of course, they passed through death and the resurrection, and then as resurrected beings came to fulfill a mission of like import in the dispensation of the fulness of time. (D&C 110:11-16; 133:54-55.)" (Doctrines of Salvation 2:110-11.) The concept here presented ties in with and is related to the pronouncements in section 129 of the Doctrine and Covenants about mortals being able to feel the bodies of resurrected persons but not the bodies of spirit beings.
[^5] When Peter, James, and John came to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in May or June of 1829, they conferred upon their mortal fellow laborers the Melchizedek Priesthood, including the holy apostleship, and "the keys of [the] kingdom, and a dispensation of the gospel for the last times." (D&C 27:12-13.) Of this divine conferral of power, the Prophet Joseph Smith said: "The voice of Peter, James, and John in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county, and Colesville, Broome county, on the Susquehanna river, declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom, and of the dispensation of the fulness of times!" (D&C 128:20.) That mortal men might receive again all that was possessed by their ancient counterparts, Moses and Elias and Elijah-and what others we do not know-came to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery on April 3, 1836, and perhaps at other times, each conferring their "keys, and powers, and glories." (D&C 110; 128:18-21.) There may have been other messengers besides Moses and Elijah who also came to the Mount of Transfiguration, as for instance a translated person from Enoch's day, who also gave keys and authorities to the chosen heads of the dispensation of the meridian of time. We know so little-for want of spiritual preparation on our part-of what transpired on the holy mount.
[^6] For an analysis of the various usages of the name-title Elias, with particular reference to the coming of Elias of the Restoration in modern times, see Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., pp. 219-22.
