Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 65

From Sunshine to Shadow [^1]

And whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you. (3 Ne. 18:20.)

The Healing of the Demoniac Youth

(Matthew 17:14-21; Mark 9:14-29; JST Mark 9:15, 17-20, 23; Luke 9:37-43)

Edersheim, in concluding his account of the Transfiguration, says: "To all ages it is like the vision of the bush burning, in which was the Presence of God. And it points us forward to that transformation, of which that of Christ was the pledge, when 'this corruptible shall put on incorruption.' As of old the beacon-fires, lighted from hill to hill, announced to them far away from Jerusalem the advent of solemn feast, so does the glory kindled on the Mount of Transfiguration shine through the darkness of the world, and tell of the Resurrection-Day.

"On Hermon the Lord and His disciples had reached the highest point in this history. Henceforth it is a descent into the Valley of Humiliation and Death!" (Edersheim 2:101.)

Elder James E. Talmage, at this same point in his analysis of the same transcendent happenings, makes this explanation: "Our Lord's descent from the holy heights of the Mount of Transfiguration was more than a physical return from greater to lesser altitudes; it was a passing from sunshine into shadow, from the effulgent glory of heaven to the mists of worldly passions and human unbelief; it was the beginning of His rapid descent into the valley of humiliation. From lofty converse with divinely-appointed ministers, from supreme communion with His Father and God, Jesus came down to a scene of disheartening confusion and a spectacle of demonized dominion before which even His apostles stood in impotent despair. To His sensitive and sinless soul the contrast must have brought superhuman anguish; even to us who read the brief account thereof it is appalling." (Talmage, p. 378.)

Farrar speaks in similar tones: "The imagination of all readers of the Gospels has been struck by the contrast—a contrast seized and immortalized forever in the great picture of Raphael—between the peace, the glory, the heavenly communion on the mountain heights, and the confusion, the rage, the unbelief, the agony which marked the first scene that met the eyes of Jesus and His Apostles on their descent to the low levels of human life." (Farrar, p. 398.)

At the foot of the holy mount, amid "the low levels of human life," Jesus and his three intimate apostles found the other members of the Quorum of the Twelve surrounded by a great multitude in the midst of an unseemly contention. His disciples were being accused, maligned, and ridiculed by the scribes, those self-exalting interpreters of the law who kept alive the traditions and legends of the past.

In their ministries the Twelve had gone forth on missions, preaching, healing, casting out devils, perhaps even raising the dead. They had done, in Jesus' name and by his will, what none others had power to achieve. But this day, though they had tried, they had failed to call down the powers of heaven to heal a poor, suffering soul. And their failure was the source of great satisfaction to the scribes. Had not multitudes forsaken the Galilean when he failed to place manna in their mouths that their bellies might bulge? Had he not failed the Messianic test when he did not show them a sign from heaven, not just a healing that could be done by Satan's power, but one of the great expected Messianic signs? How could he be their Messiah and Deliverer if he was going to die in Jerusalem? And now his disciples could work no miracles! Surely his influence was declining and soon they would be rid of this imposter who made such self-serving claims for himself!

Jesus' sudden appearance "greatly amazed" the people, though for what reason we do not know. Some have supposed that his face still shone to some extent as had Moses' when he came down from his holy mount. They all ran to him and saluted him, and he immediately assumed the part of his disciples in the contentious affray then in progress. "What question ye with them?" he asked the scribes.

There was no answer. His bearing, his dignity, their knowledge of what he had theretofore done, perhaps their fear of what he might yet do—for sinners always fear the righteous indignation that may burst forth at any time from godly souls—all these combined to lay a blanket of silence over the scribes. Nor did the disciples have opportunity to state their case. Rather, from the multitude came a certain man who said: "Master, I have brought unto thee my son, who hath a dumb spirit that is a devil; and when he seizeth him he teareth him; and he foameth, and gnasheth with his teeth, and pineth away: and I spake to thy disciples that they might cast him out; and they could not."

How sad a case is this! The boy is possessed with a devil—not an ordinary devil, though they all are evil and vicious beyond mortal comprehension, but a particularly violent and offensive follower of the father of lies. This evil spirit has imposed upon the lad all the misfortunes of lunacy, epilepsy, dumbness, atrophy, and suicidal mania. Though alive, the youth suffers a thousand deaths daily. "And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not cure him," the father said.

Then Jesus, addressing himself to the disciples—whom he loved and to whom he had given power over diseases and evil spirits—and also to the multitudes in general, said: "O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? bring him hither to me."

Heeding Jesus' command, they brought forth the lad. Luke says he was the man's "only child," though he must by now have been more than twelve years of age, for the account says: "And when the man saw him, immediately he was torn by the spirit: and he fell on the ground and wallowed, foaming."

Jesus seemed to be in no hurry to ease the burden and remove the sufferings imposed by the evil spirit. Perhaps, in part at least, he was letting the multitude assemble and giving them opportunity to envision how serious the affliction was. "How long a time is it since this came upon him?" Jesus inquired of the father. "When a child," came the response. "And ofttimes it hath cast him into the fire and into the water, to destroy him, but if thou canst, I ask thee to have compassion on us, and help us."

"If thou canst"—so importuned the father who had made the agony of his son the suffering of himself. "If thou canst"—there is little or no faith in such a plea, and to it Jesus does not even respond. He feels no need to tell anyone what he can or cannot do; his deeds speak for themselves.

"If thou wilt believe all things I shall say unto you, this is possible to him that believeth," he says. "If thou wilt believe"—that is the issue. The issue is not what Jesus can do—he is God and has all power—but what the man will do. All things are possible to those who have faith. This man has yet to learn the truths that will enable him to have faith. He is just beginning to believe. But no man has all faith and all assurance to begin with, and if anyone covenant in his heart to believe all that is spoken to him by the Lord or his servants, then the desired blessing will flow unto him.

In tears, the man who but moments before had knelt before Jesus pleading for mercy now cries out the twofold feelings of his heart. "I believe," and "help thou mine unbelief." And so it is with all of the Lord's suffering saints. They believe—nay, they know—that Jesus is their Lord and has all power and can do all things to bless and help them, and yet their need is for that divine assurance which will enable them to know that the divine help will be forthcoming in their case.

Having allowed time for the people to come running together, for this healing must not be done in secret, Jesus now speaks directly to the evil spirit within the man: "Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee, come out of him, and enter no more into him." There is a piercing scream; the spirit cries out; agony envelops the man; the spirit rends him; he falls to the earth as though dead; the evil spirit leaves; and many say, "He is dead." Jesus, however, takes him by the hand and lifts him up, and he arises and is delivered to his father. "And the child was cured from that very hour." That which could not be done by the disciples, to the joy of the scribes, has now been done by the Master, to their sorrow and discomfiture.

Jesus' triumph—as always—is complete. And yet his disciples are ill at ease; a feeling of failure fills their breasts. Alone in the house, they ask: "Why could not we cast him out?" The reply is clear, incisive, instructive:

Because of your unbelief: for verily I say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it shall be removed; and nothing shall be impossible unto you.

Faith is power; by faith the worlds were made; nothing is impossible to those who have faith. If the earth itself came rolling into existence by faith, surely a mere mountain can be removed by that same power. 'Let Mount Hermon be cast into the Great Sea.' Such would not be one whit different than the brother of Jared saying "unto the mountain Zerin, Remove—and it was removed." (Ether 12:30.) [^2]

However, in a less severe tone, Jesus gives this further explanation as to the failure of the disciples. "Howbeit this kind goeth not out but by fasting and prayer," he says. Clearly there are degrees of malignity and evil powers among the demons in hell. Just as there is a heavenly hierarchy so is there a satanic government that puts one evil spirit in charge of another; and just as there are degrees of righteousness and glory, so are there levels of lewdness and evil. And it takes greater faith to overcome greater evils. "If a man has not faith enough to do one thing," the Prophet Joseph Smith says, "he may have faith to do another: if he cannot remove a mountain, he may heal the sick." (History of the Church 5:355.)

And on this occasion of which we now speak, so great was the faith and so wondrous the miracle that Luke concludes: "They were all amazed at the mighty power of God."

Jesus Foretells His Death and Resurrection

(Matthew 17:22-23; Mark 9:30-32; JST Mark 9:27; Luke 9:43-45; JST Luke 9:44)

Our Lord, who but a few weeks ago left his Galilean homeland, seeking peace and rest in the coasts of Caesarea Philippi is now about to return again to Capernaum, his own city. He came with a few of his intimate disciples to these northern reaches of the Holy Land to escape the scribal scrutiny and Rabbinic wrath that is now sweeping like a flood through all Galilee. He came to find rest from the throngs who scarcely allow him time to eat or sleep. Here he desired to be alone with and to teach his apostolic associates and the limited few of like spiritual stature who hold constant converse with him. And he came to be at the appointed place, on the heights of Hermon, there to meet with Moses and Elias, and there to confer upon Peter, James, and John the keys of the kingdom of heaven.

While in this half-Gentile area he has also received with approbation the testimony of Peter; has taught his intimates plainly concerning his death and resurrection; and he has cast out a particularly vicious and malignant devil from a suffering lad.

Now, however, the scribes and Rabbis have found his party and are again tempting, tormenting, and harassing them; the multitudes, aware of his presence, are again thronging about; and the day for his decease in Jerusalem is drawing near. There is time only for a brief visit in Capernaum and then he must go to the Holy City to keep the Feast of Tabernacles and do a certain few appointed and remaining deeds, there and in Judea and Perea, before the day of his demise. Thus we see him leaving the area around Caesarea Philippi and Dan, leaving the majestic mountain masses called Hermon and Lebanon, and traveling by an unusual and little-used route back to Capernaum. Mark says the blessed party "departed thence, and passed through Galilee privately." The reason: "He would not that any man should know it." The day of his public ministry in Galilee is past. His desire now is to instruct the favored few and prepare them for the coming ordeal and the burdens they must bear when it falls their lot to stand in his place and stead in taking salvation to a weary world of spiritually illiterate souls who prefer worldliness to godliness.

As they traveled, "and while they abode in Galilee," Jesus came back again to the matter that weighed most heavily upon him, the chief reason he came into the world—to die and be resurrected. "Let these sayings sink down into your hearts," he counseled as he spoke of his coming betrayal and death. As though the agonies of that hour were passing before his view, he said: "The Son of man is delivered into the hands of men, and they shall kill him; and after that he is killed, he shall rise the third day."

It was not intended that the full significance of this teaching should dawn upon all of them at this time. Such a full view of the eternal plan that centered in Him whose friends they were was reserved for a future day—a day when the women who then heard his words would weep before an open tomb and hear an angelic voice say: "He is not here, but is risen: remember how he spake unto you when he was yet in Galilee, Saying, The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again." (Luke 24:6-7.) But for the present, as Luke expresses it, "they understood not this saying, and it was hid from them, that they perceived it not: and they feared to ask him of that saying."

The Miraculous Payment of the Temple Tribute

(Matthew 17:24-27)

Jesus and his disciples are now back in Capernaum, and a situation is about to arise that will enable him to reaffirm his divine Sonship to Peter in a miraculous way. He is about to perform an unusual and unique miracle, one like none other ever wrought by his hands. He will pay a tax he does not owe, with money he has not earned, to appease those whom he prefers not to offend. He will use his gift of seership to find the needed coin, and Peter, in the process, will have another rough edge ground off from that impetuous nature which one day, smoothed and refined to perfection, will guide the destinies of the earthly kingdom.

Those who collect the tax for the temple in Jerusalem come to Peter and ask: "Doth not your master pay tribute?" Or better: "Doth not your master pay the half-shekel?" for, properly speaking, no tribute was involved. Tribute is payable to foreign powers; this was a tax, the "half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary" which every Jew, who had reached the age of twenty years, paid to the Lord as a "ransom for his soul." (Ex. 30:11-16.) This was money due Jehovah; it was comparable to the tithes imposed by the Lord upon his people. Its use: the repair and upkeep of the Lord's House; payment for the public sacrifices, the scapegoats and red heifers, and the incense and the shewbread; and the payment of the Rabbis, bakers, judges, and others connected with the temple services.

To the query of the tax collectors, which apparently was asked in good faith—for the annual tax was nearly six months in arrears, and it was the custom of the collectors to compel compliance—Peter said, "Yes." "If he had thought a moment longer—if he had known a little more—if he had even recalled his own great confession so recently given—his answer might not have come so glibly. This money was, at any rate, in its original significance, a redemption-money for the soul of each man; and how could the Redeemer, who redeemed all souls by the ransom of His life, pay this money-ransom for His own? And it was a tax for the Temple services. How, then, could it be due from Him whose own mortal body was the new spiritual Temple of the Living God? He was to enter the veil of the Holiest with the ransom of His own blood. But He paid what He did not owe, to save us from that which we owed, but could never pay." (Farrar, p. 406.)

Deservedly, when Peter entered the house—no doubt his own, for this is Capernaum—"Jesus rebukes him." "What thinkest thou Simon?" he asked, "of whom do the kings of the earth take custom or tribute? of their own children, or of strangers?" To this there is only one reply: "Of strangers." Jesus' answer: "Then are the children free."

How inconsistent for the Messiah, who is the Son of God, to pay tribute for the upkeep of his Father's House, which is also the Son's House. If even earthly princes are exempt from capitation taxes, will not the Highest free his Son from such a burden? He who came to give his own soul a ransom for all surely should not pay a ransom for his own. Should he do so, he would be withdrawing his claim to Messiahship and attesting that he was a man like other men.

Notwithstanding all this, Jesus says, "Lest we should offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast an hook, and take up the fish that first cometh up; and when thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt find a piece of money: that take, and give unto them for me and thee."

Jesus will not raise the issue of his divine Sonship with the tax collectors. Let them consider him as a man only if they choose, though it is of note that they addressed their query not to him, but to Peter. All men, believers and nonbelievers alike, held the Master in awe. Thus he pays the tax but does it in such a manner that distinctive and divine powers are reaffirmed, not alone to Peter but to all who learn of the miracle. How could any but divine wisdom devise such a teaching situation, and how could any but divine power place the coin in the mouth of the first fish to take the hook of an impetuous Peter? Again wisdom is justified of her children.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] When Edersheim speaks of Jesus' self-exinanition, he means that our Lord voluntarily abased himself, or, rather, emptied himself of all his divine power, or enfeebled himself by relying upon his humanity and not his Godhood, so as to be as other men and thus be tested to the full by all the trials and torments of the flesh.
[^2] "It is a well-known law, that every sacrifice burned on the Altar must be salted with salt. Indeed, according to the Talmud, not only every such offering, but even the wood with which the sacrificial fire was kindled, was sprinkled with salt. Salt symbolized to the Jews of that time the incorruptible and the higher. Thus, the soul was compared to the salt, and it was said concerning the dead: 'Shake off the salt, and throw the flesh to the dogs.' The Bible was compared to salt; so was acuteness of intellect. Lastly, the question: 'If the salt have lost its savour, wherewith will ye season it?' seems to have been proverbial, and occurs in exactly the same words in the Talmud." (Edersheim 2:121-22.)
