Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 66

The Discourse on Meekness and Humility

Little children are whole, for they are not capable of committing sin. . . . Teach parents that they must repent and be baptized, and humble themselves as their little children, and they shall all be saved with their little children. . . . I love little children with a perfect love; and they are all alike and partakers of salvation. . . . All little children are alive in Christ. (See Moro. 8:5-26.)

And little children also have eternal life. (Mosiah 15:25.)

On Becoming as a Little Child

(Matthew 18:1-5; Mark 9:33-40; JST Mark 9:31, 34-35; Luke 9:46-50; JST Luke 9:49-50)

During the wearisome hours of walking between the area of Caesarea Philippi and Capernaum, the disciples, no doubt out of earshot of Jesus, contended among themselves over the issue of precedence and position in the coming kingdom. Perhaps the fires of jealousy blazed forth because Jesus took only three of the Twelve with him on special occasions—into the home of Jairus when the maiden was raised from death, alone on the slopes of Hermon for what purpose the others did not even then know. Perhaps they still envisioned, to some degree, that their Messiah would be the Messiah of Jewish expectation with a court of courtiers, a cabinet of ministers, and an army of captains and generals. Who among them would serve as his prime minister, his secretary of state, the chief justice in his judiciary? Will Matthew collect the taxes, Judas keep the treasury, and the Sons of Thunder—who one day soon will speak of calling down fire from heaven upon their enemies—will they command the armies? Through it all Jesus is either not aware or takes no apparent note of the bickerings of the brethren.

But now, back in Peter's home in Capernaum, away from prying eyes and surrounded only by those whom he loves, Jesus chooses to disabuse their minds on this matter of position and rank and preferment. Even the slightest leaning toward that Pharisaic practice of seeking the highest seats in the synagogue must be corrected. The eyes of the disciples must be opened so as to see wherein true greatness lies and what manner of men they must be even to gain an inheritance in the kingdom of the saints.

"What was it that ye disputed among yourselves by the way?" he asked. There was silence, the silence of shame; none dared to answer him. As Mark says, "They held their peace, being afraid, for by the way they had disputed among themselves who was the greatest among them." Further, as they traveled by the way, there had arisen "a reasoning among them, which of them should be greatest." 'Who is the greatest among us now, and who shall reign supreme in the heavenly kingdom ahead? Who shall sit on his right hand and who on his left?' Such had been their thoughts and such their words as they had given vent to the jealousies of their hearts. "It must have been part of His humiliation and self-exinanition to bear with them," Edersheim says as he contrasts "this constant self-obtrusion, self-assertion, and low, carnal self-seeking, this Judaistic trifling," with the "utter self-abnegation and self-sacrifice of the Son of Man." (Edersheim 2:116.) [^1]

Jesus then said, "If any man desire to be first, the same shall be last of all, and servant of all." Men should not seek to assign themselves to positions of preferment, in which one outranks the other, either in this world or in the world to come. True greatness consists in doing best those things which are the common lot of all mankind. Service to one's family and to his fellowmen in general—in such a course lies true greatness. It is greater to be a loving and wise father than a commanding general or a corporate executive.

At this point the disciples asked: "Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?" In answer, "Jesus called a little child unto him," no doubt one of Peter's children, "and set him in the midst of them." Mark says he took the child "in his arms." With the scene thus set, Jesus said:

Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven.

Little children—holy and pure infants, scarcely out of the presence of their Eternal Father—come into this world free from any taint of sin. They are alive in Christ through the atonement, and of them, thus saith the Father: "Little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world through mine Only Begotten; Wherefore, they cannot sin, for power is not given unto Satan to tempt little children, until they begin to become accountable before me." (D&C 29:46-47.) Should they die before they partake of the sins and evils of this wicked world—being still pure and spotless; being yet qualified to dwell in that Celestial Presence whence they just came—they are thus saved in the kingdom of God.

Accountable men, to gain salvation, must become as their little children. The refining powers of the gospel must operate in their lives. Sin and evil must be burned out of them as though by fire; they must receive the baptism of fire. They must be converted—changed from their carnal and fallen state to a state of righteousness, becoming again pure and spotless as they were in their infancy. Such is the state of those who become heirs of salvation. Then they will be "greatest in the kingdom of heaven." That is to say, all who gain salvation, which is eternal life, shall be greatest in the kingdom of heaven, "for there is no gift greater than the gift of salvation." (D&C 6:13.) All shall inherit alike in that eternal kingdom; all shall be greatest, for they shall possess, inherit, and receive all that the Father hath. Thus, Jesus continues:

Whosoever shall humble himself like one of these children, and receiveth me, ye shall receive in my name. And whosoever shall receive me, receiveth not me only, but him that sent me, even the Father.

Recently we saw Peter rebuked for his rash and intemperate views. Jesus said Peter was an offense unto him and that his doctrine was satanic, when the chief apostle tried to dissuade the Lord from following the course to crucifixion. Now the beloved John comes in for censure. Having heard the instruction that they must receive in Christ's name all who humble themselves as little children, John confesses what he and the others had done. "Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy name, and he followeth not us: and we forbad him, because he followeth not us."

"He followeth not us," or, better, as Luke has it, "He followeth not with us"—he was not one of the Twelve, not one of the intimate group of disciples who traveled with Jesus and his party. They were contending over precedence and rank, debating who was the greatest among them and who would be the greatest in the kingdom of heaven! And, lo, they found another member of the Church, another faithful saint of the Most High—for "there was not any man who could do a miracle in the name of Jesus save he were cleansed every whit from his iniquity" (3 Ne. 8:1)—they found another priesthood holder casting out devils as they themselves had done. Him they rebuked lest he be greater than they.

Jesus' response—harmonious with his counsel that they must receive "in his name" all who humbled themselves and came unto him, for all men are equal in his kingdom: the apostles are to be as the seventies, and the seventies as the elders—Jesus' response was: "Forbid him not: for there is no man which shall do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil of me. For he that is not against us is on our part." And further, again as Luke has it, "Forbid not any" who cast out devils or do good works in the name of Jesus, for he had many faithful followers, and the more of them who exercised their priesthood and worked righteousness the better.

On Casting Sinners Out of the Church

(Matthew 18:6-11; JST Matthew 18:9, 11; Mark 9:41-50; JST Mark 9:40-50)

All things have their opposites. Having spoken of the blessings awaiting those who receive his little ones in his name, Jesus now sets forth the curses that shall befall those who lead these guileless ones astray. If, as he said, "Whosoever shall give you a cup of water to drink in my name, because ye belong to Christ, verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward," then those who withhold water, or who give wine and vinegar to drink, as it were, shall be condemned.

"Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning." We all started out in preexistence on an equal footing, though in due course Lucifer and one-third of the hosts of heaven rebelled. "And God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God." We all commence mortal life on an equal footing. No sin or taint attaches to any newborn infant: all are alike unto God; all leave his presence to come to earth; all are prepared to return to his presence if death overtakes them before they become subject to sin. But once again, in due course, sin and evil enter their lives. "And that wicked one cometh and taketh away light and truth, through disobedience, from the children of men, because of the tradition of their fathers." Hence the Lord's command to his saints "to bring up" their "children in light and truth." (D&C 93:38-40.)

When Judas of Galilee led an insurrection, the Romans in Galilee captured some of the leaders, tied millstones around their necks, and drowned them in the sea. Such was a Roman manner of execution in the days of Augustus. To show how serious it is to bring up children in a house of iniquity—to lead them into unbelief and wickedness "because of the tradition of their fathers"—Jesus says:

But whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea.

Then Jesus reaches out with his words to include all his saints of whatever age: "Woe unto the world because of offences! for it must needs be that offences come, but woe to that man by whom the offence cometh!" Though the plan of salvation calls for a tempter; though man cannot be saved unless he overcomes opposition; though the Son of God must be betrayed by a traitor's kiss—yet the tempter, the opposer, the Judas, shall all suffer the wrath of God. Wo unto them.

Therefore, if thy hand offend thee, cut it off; or if thy brother offend thee and confess not and forsake not, he shall be cut off. It is better for thee to enter into life maimed, than having two hands, to go into hell.

For it is better for thee to enter into life without thy brother, than for thee and thy brother to be cast into hell; into the fire that never shall be quenched, where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.

Horrible as the prospect may be, it is better to saw off a gangrenous leg and walk through life on a wooden stump than to keep the mortified flesh and die an agonizing death. And so it is with church members who teach false doctrines and foster evil and lewd practices." All those who preach false doctrines, and all those who commit whoredoms, and pervert the right way of the Lord, wo, wo, wo be unto them, saith the Lord God Almighty, for they shall be thrust down to hell!" (2 Ne. 28:15.)

In the course of this sermon, Jesus says. "And a man's hand is his friend, and his foot, also; and a man's eye, are they of his own household." It is better to sever evil people from the family of Christ, which is the Church, than, by retaining them in fellowship, to destroy those who otherwise would have been saved. It is better that one evil and wicked soul burn in the everlasting fires of Gehenna—where rats and worms and crawling things feast upon the garbage—which is his assured destiny in any event, than to permit him to poison the souls of others and lead them to a like damnation.

And again, if thy foot offend thee, cut it off; for he that is thy standard, by whom thou walkest, if he become a transgressor, he shall be cut off. It is better for thee, to enter halt into life, than having two feet to be cast into hell; into the fire that never shall be quenched.

Men must not pin their faith on others. Faith centers in the Lord Jesus Christ, who alone was perfect. All others fall short to one degree or another. It is the doctrine and the principles of the gospel that are true. If men—weak, struggling, sinning mortals—fail and lose their souls, so be it. Let not others in the kingdom go down to hell with them.

Therefore, let every man stand or fall, by himself, and not for another; or not trusting another.

Seek unto my Father, and it shall be done in that very moment what ye shall ask, if ye ask in faith, believing that ye shall receive.

And if thine eye which seeth for thee, him that is appointed to watch over thee to show thee light, become a transgressor and offend thee, pluck him out.

It is better for thee to enter into the kingdom of God, with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast into hell fire.

For it is better that thyself should be saved, than to be cast into hell with thy brother, where their worm dieth not, and where the fire is not quenched.

Jesus now—after teaching his disciples that salvation comes only to those who are converted and become as a little child; after showing them that true greatness, here and hereafter, is reserved for those who serve their fellowmen; after rebuking the false zeal that had forbidden others of his saints than the Twelve from casting out devils; after discoursing on the offenses that would come upon church members; and after dramatizing the need to cut off even leaders in the family and leaders in the Church who draw men astray, lest the pupil and the teacher both go down to hell—after all this (and certainly it is but a brief summary of what Jesus taught), Jesus now climaxes these teachings with a powerful illustration. It is one that only those then living in their Jewish social order could understand fully. We, however, can put ourselves in their position and view much of the brilliance and beauty of the words of the Master Teacher.

"For every one shall be salted with fire," he said. That is, "Just as salt is sprinkled over every sacrifice for its purification, so must every soul be purged by fire; by the fire, if need be, of the severest and most terrible self-sacrifice. Let this refining, purging, purifying fire of searching self-judgment and self-severity be theirs." (Farrar, p. 403.) Or, "Every member of the Church shall be tested and tried in all things, to see whether he will abide in the covenant 'even unto death,' regardless of the course taken by the other members of his family or of the Church. To gain salvation men must stand on their own feet in the gospel cause and be independent of the spiritual support of others. If some of the saints, who are themselves the salt of the earth, shall fall away, still all who inherit eternal life must remain true, having salt in themselves and enjoying peace one with another." (Commentary 1:421.)

"And every sacrifice shall be salted with salt," Jesus continues. That is, "No one is fit for the sacrificial fire, no one can himself be, nor offer anything as a sacrifice, unless it have been first, according to the Levitical Law, covered with salt, symbolic of the incorruptible." (Edersheim 2:121.)

But the salt must be good. For if the salt have lost his saltness, wherewith will ye season it? (the sacrifice;) therefore it must needs be that ye have salt in yourselves, and have peace one with another.

"If the salt, with which the spiritual sacrifice is to be salted for the fire, 'have lost its savour, wherewith will ye season it?'" That is, 'If ye yourselves are not purified and clean; if ye have not risen above worldly things, including your bickerings about greatness; if ye have lost the spirit of the gospel, how shall your spiritual sacrifices be purified?' "Hence, 'have salt in yourselves,' but do not let that salt be corrupted by making it an occasion of offence to others, or among yourselves, as in the dispute by the way, or in the disposition of mind that led to it, or in forbidding others to work who follow not with you, but 'be at peace among yourselves.'" (Edersheim 1:121.) [^2]

To understand Jesus' next pronouncement, we yet again must turn to the Jewish theological context in which it was made; we must know "the Rabbinic teaching about the Angels." It was: "In the Jewish view, only the chiefest of the Angels were before the face of God within the curtained Veil, or Pargod, while the others, ranged in different classes, stood outside and awaited his behest. The distinction which the former enjoyed was always to behold His Face, and to hear and know directly the Divine counsels and commands." (Edersheim 2:122.) Thus, we suppose with Peter's son still enfolded in his arms, Jesus said:

Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones, for I say unto you, That in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven.

To the disciples this was more than a refutation of the Jewish concept that in the hierarchy of the angelic world only Michael and Raphael and Gabriel and the great and mighty stood in the divine presence. The words "my Father" were, of course, a renewed witness of Jesus' divine Sonship, but the whole statement was an allusion to preexistence; perhaps it was an outright teaching of that doctrine, for the words recorded may be only a small part of what Jesus then said. Truly, the spirits of all children, prior to entering the mortal body, dwell in the presence of the Father. They see his face, hear his voice, and know his teachings. What a monstrous evil it is to lead little children—born with angelic purity—into the pit of false doctrine and the mire of worldly living!

For the Son of Man is come to save that which was lost, and to call sinners to repentance, but these little ones have no need of repentance, and I will save them.

At this point Jesus gave the parable of the lost sheep with the emphasis "on keeping the sheep from getting lost, on showing how precious the sheep are, and on how reluctant the Shepherd is to lose even one." (Commentary 1:508.) Later, in Perea, he will give the same parable again in an expanded form and with an entirely different application. At that time he will make the scribes and Pharisees the shepherds, and it will be more appropriate for us to consider both versions together in the latter setting.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] When Edersheim speaks of Jesus' self-exinanition, he means that our Lord voluntarily abased himself, or, rather, emptied himself of all his divine power, or enfeebled himself by relying upon his humanity and not his Godhood, so as to be as other men and thus be tested to the full by all the trials and torments of the flesh.
[^2] "It is a well-known law, that every sacrifice burned on the Altar must be salted with salt. Indeed, according to the Talmud, not only every such offering, but even the wood with which the sacrificial fire was kindled, was sprinkled with salt. Salt symbolized to the Jews of that time the incorruptible and the higher. Thus, the soul was compared to the salt, and it was said concerning the dead: 'Shake off the salt, and throw the flesh to the dogs.' The Bible was compared to salt; so was acuteness of intellect. Lastly, the question: 'If the salt have lost its savour, wherewith will ye season it?' seems to have been proverbial, and occurs in exactly the same words in the Talmud." (Edersheim 2:121-22.)
