Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 67

Discourses on Forgiveness and the Sealing Power

My disciples, in days of old, sought occasion against one another and forgave not one another in their hearts; and for this evil they were afflicted and sorely chastened. Wherefore, I say unto you, that ye ought to forgive one another; for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord; for there remaineth in him the greater sin. (D&C 64:8-9.)

On Forgiving One Another

(Matthew 18:15-17, 21-22)

We are still with Jesus, in the blessed home of Peter, in the evil city of Capernaum, upon which dire woes rest. The Master continues to counsel our souls and to enlighten our minds. Some of us have been offended by the words and deeds of our fellow disciples, and we have not forgiven them. Our brethren in the Church—the very people with whom we should be joined together as though we were one flesh—these our brethren have trespassed against us. We hear Jesus say:

Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother.

The burden is not on the guilty but upon the innocent. It is the one whose hands are clean and whose conscience is clear, not the culprit, who is to start the processes of reconciliation. "It is not the sinner, the trespasser, the offender, who is to take the initiative in restoring peace and unity among brethren. If perchance he should do so, well and good. But the Lord commands the innocent person, the one without fault, the one who has been offended, to search out his brother and seek to repair the breach. Thus: If thy brother trespass against thee, wait not for him to repent and make restitution; he is already somewhat hardened in spirit because of the trespass itself; rather, go to him, extend the hand of fellowship, shower him with love, and perchance 'thou hast gained thy brother.'" (Commentary 1:422-23.)

"I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men; And ye ought to say in your hearts—let God judge between me and thee, and reward thee according to thy deeds." (D&C 64:10-11.)

But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every work may be established.

How much better it is if brethren settle their differences in private, apart from the courts of the land, apart even from the judicial system of the Church. If an offense is known by others they may themselves take offense also. The mere knowledge of the existence of sin may be an invitation to commit sin.

And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church: but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican.

Even if a matter must be brought before the Church itself, even if it must come before the organized body of believers who comprise the earthly kingdom, it is not to come before the congregation generally. "If thy brother or sister offend thee" is the divine decree, "thou shalt take him or her between him or her and thee alone; and if he or she confess thou shalt be reconciled. And if he or she confess not thou shalt deliver him or her up unto the church, not to the members, but to the elders. And it shall be done in a meeting, and that not before the world." (D&C 42:88-89.) Thus, if all else fails, and the offense is sufficiently serious, there remains no alternative but to withdraw from the offending brother the blessings of fellowship with the saints and membership in the earthly kingdom. He must be excommunicated and dropped from the brotherhood of Christ, becoming thus as the heathen and the publican.

Peter's reaction to all this was typically Jewish. Rabbinism called upon the offender to initiate a course of reconciliation with his brother and specified that forgiveness should not be extended more than three times to any offender. His soul as yet not afire with the Holy Spirit, Peter asked a question that, as he must have then supposed, assumed a far more liberal rule than that imposed by the Rabbis. "Lord, how oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven times?" Jesus answered: "I say not unto thee, Until seven times: but, Until seventy times seven," meaning there is no limit to the number of times men should forgive their brethren. Forgiveness is qualitative, not quantitative. Forgive and be forgiven, for there will be a day when the Lord shall "measure to every man according to the measure which he has measured to his fellow man." (D&C 1:10.)

On the Sealing Power

(Matthew 18:18)

Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.

Sometime after Jesus and the Three came down from Hermon's slopes; sometime before these words were spoken in Capernaum; on some sacred, holy, and unnamed occasion, the remainder of the Twelve, all nine of them, received the keys of the kingdom of heaven. These keys, in their nature, were the right and power of full presidency, the right and power to preside over and direct all of the affairs of the kingdom of God on earth, and the right and power to bind and loose on earth and in heaven.

How wondrous are the ways of Him of whom Isaiah said, "His name shall be called Wonderful." (Isa. 9:6.) He, on the holy mount, assisted by Moses, Elias, and possibly by others, conferred upon the First Presidency of his earthly church all of the keys and powers they needed to govern the earthly kingdom and to seal men up unto eternal life in the heavenly kingdom.

Then he and the Three—acting, we may suppose, in concert—conferred those same keys and powers upon the others, all of whom (save Judas) used them for the salvation and exaltation of their fellowmen.

How glorious is the voice we hear from heaven! Keys and sealing powers are vested in mortal hands. Mortal men can now say to their fellow mortals: "We seal thee up to come forth in the morning of the first resurrection, clothed with glory, immortality, and eternal lives; we seal thee up to pass by the angels and the gods which guard the way, so that you may enter into the fulness of the glory of Him who is in all things, and through all things, and round about all things, even God, who sitteth upon his eternal throne; we seal thee up to be a Joint-Heir with the Natural Heir, to inherit, receive and possess as he does, and to sit with him in his throne even as he sits with his Father on the Great White Throne."

The sealing power! The apostolic power possessed by Adam and all the ancients; the heavenly endowment enjoyed by Enoch and Abraham and Elijah; the power of the Great God without which man cannot ascend to heights beyond the stars! Such now is resident with all of the Twelve—not with Peter only, to whom it was promised; not with the Chosen Three, who received it by angelic and divine conferral on the mount of Transfiguration, but with all of the Twelve.

True, keys are the right of presidency, and only one man on earth can exercise them in their eternal fulness at any one time; but all other possessors of these powers can exercise them at any time under the direction of the senior apostle of God on earth.

And so Jesus now has his Twelve—holy men who hold the keys and have the sealing power; holy men, any one of whom has power to preside over and direct all of the affairs of the Church; holy men who shall now bind and seal on both sides of the veil, and who shall retain and remit sins as seemeth good to them and to the Holy Ghost.

Be it known that now, with the conferral of these keys and powers, the Church of Jesus Christ for the Meridian of Time is duly organized and officered, and all things can now go forward as seemeth good to Him whose kingdom it is.

On Faith and Unity

(Matthew 18:19-20; JST Matthew 18:19)

Again, I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree on earth as touching any thing that they shall ask, that they may not ask amiss, it shall be done for them, of my Father which is in heaven.

For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.

We have almost no way of knowing the wonders and marvels that would attend the Lord's work on earth if all of those who are engaged in it were perfectly united together in the same mind and in the same judgment. "Be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine," he says. (D&C 50:29.) Our souls can scarcely conceive of the gifts and blessings that would be showered upon each of us individually if we possessed that faith which it is within our power to receive. "By faith all of the righteous desires of the saints can be gained. There are no limits to the power of faith: nothing is too hard for the Lord. Prayer is the mode of communication by which the petitions of the saints are presented to their Eternal Father. 'Ye must always pray unto the Father in my name,' Jesus said to the Nephites. 'And whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you.'" (Commentary 1:427.)

Now Jesus tells the Twelve that if any two of them are united—"that they may not ask amiss"—the Father will grant their petition. And as with the Twelve so with all the saints; there is no spiritual gift or heavenly endowment available to the Twelve that will not flow, following obedience to the same law, to the least and last of the saints. Jesus, by the power of his Spirit, will always be with even two or three of his true believers.

If the saints desire to be led, guided, and preserved by the power of the Holy Ghost, let them importune the Lord in unity and faith, and their petition shall be granted. If they desire eternal life in the kingdom of God, let them ask in faith, nothing doubting, and it shall be granted. If they desire new revelations from the Lord, by the voice of his prophet, let them make their united wants known, and the Lord will loose the tongue and open the spiritual eyes of the one who presides over his earthly kingdom. Deity gives unto his people according to their desires, and his promise to the Twelve and to all his people is: "If ye are purified and cleansed from all sin ye shall ask whatsoever you will in the name of Jesus and it shall be done." (D&C 50:29.)

Parable of the Unmerciful Servant

(Matthew 18:23-35; JST Matthew 18:26-27)

After teaching his disciples the gospel standard that requires men to forgive one another their trespasses, and after telling Peter that, contrary to Rabbinic standards, there was no limit to the number of times brethren should forgive each other, Jesus gave the parable of the unmerciful servant. It illustrates the glorious truth that "as Deity forgives men the immeasurable debt they owe to him, so men should forgive their fellowmen the relatively slight debts incurred when brethren sin against each other." (Commentary 1:428.) Part of a petition to the Lord for forgiveness is the spoken or unspoken pledge to forgive, in turn, one's fellowmen.

"Therefore," that is, in the light of all I have told you about forgiveness, "is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain king," Jesus said, "which would take account of his servants." The kingdom of heaven here named is the Church, the Church of Jesus Christ; it is the kingdom of God on earth, the earthly kingdom that prepares men to inherit the heavenly kingdom. The King is the Lord himself—the heavenly King and the earthly King—the One who reigns supreme over all the creatures of his creating, but to whom the members of his earthly kingdom have sworn an especial and a particular allegiance. And his servants are the members of his church, perhaps more especially those members who have been called to positions of trust and responsibility. Though all his saints will be called to account for their stewardships, those who are appointed to lead and guide others have a fiduciary relationship with the King, a relationship that calls for the exercise of special trust.

"And when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him, which owed him ten thousand talents." Clearly this servant was a high and trusted officer in the kingdom, one of the king's ministers perhaps, one who collected revenue and cared for treasures. An attic silver talent is worth about twelve hundred dollars, a Hebrew talent nearly twice that sum, and a gold talent about twenty-five times as much. The servant's debt is thus some twelve or twenty-four or three hundred million dollars, as the case may be—a sum indicative of the infinite debt the Lord's people have, and his servants in particular owe to him.

"But forasmuch as he had not to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife, and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made." His infinite debt, admitted and acknowledged by him, was to be paid by his own suffering, as provided in the law of Moses. (Ex. 22:3; Lev. 25:39, 47.) No endorsement of slavery is intended; the procedure for payment is simply the established order found universally in the codes of antiquity.

"And the servant besought him, saying, Lord, have patience with me, and I will pay thee all. Then the lord of that servant was moved with compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him the debt. The servant, therefore, fell down and worshipped him."

"A more accurate representation of our relation to God could not be made. We are the debtors of our heavenly King, Who has entrusted to us the administration of what is His, and which we have purloined or misused, incurring an unspeakable debt, which we can never discharge, and of which, in the course of justice, unending bondage, misery, and utter ruin would be the proper sequence. But, if in humble repentance we cast ourselves at His Feet, He is ready, in infinite compassion, not only to release us from meet punishment, but—O blessed revelation of the Gospel!—to forgive us the debt.

"It is this new relationship to God which must be the foundation and the rule for our new relationship towards our fellow-servants." (Edersheim 2:295.) "But the same servant went out," forgetting the infinite forgiveness that was his, "and found one of his fellowservants, which owed him an hundred pence"—an almost inconsequential sum, a mere pittance as it were, a thin dime as compared to millions of dollars—"and he laid hands on him, and took him by the throat, saying, Pay me that thou owest." There is no mercy here, no feeling for the sorrows and sufferings of another, just a harsh, avaricious grasping to receive the uttermost farthing that is due.

"And his fellowservant fell down at his feet, and besought him, saying, Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all"—the very words the unmerciful servant had used in his own importuning before the king. "And he would not: but went and cast him into prison, till he should pay the debt." It is always sinners who seek to imprison those who sin against them. Men whose hearts are attuned to the gospel follow instead the counsel of Paul: "Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the Spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted." (Gal. 6:1.)

"So when his fellowservants saw what was done, they were very sorry, and came and told unto their lord all that was done." How meet and proper it is for the saints to importune at the throne of grace for the well-being of their fellowservants!

"Then his lord, after that he had called him, said unto him, O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me: Shouldest not thou also have had compassion on thy fellowservant, even as I had pity on thee? And his lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due unto him." "And so it is in the dealings of the Eternal King with his servants. Sooner or later all face an enforced rendering of accounts, all are subjected to temptation, trials, and impending death, and all are rewarded with mercy or justice as their situations merit. Mercy is for the merciful; justice, retribution, and punishment fall upon those who have dealt harshly with their fellow servants. 'With what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.' 'Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.'" (Commentary 1:429.)

"So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses."

"Men are indebted to God for all that they have and are—for life itself, for the probationary experiences of mortality (including some measure of food, clothing, and shelter), for redemption from death, and for the hope of eternal life in his presence. These and all other debts owed to Deity are listed on an account that shall never be marked paid. As King Benjamin expressed it, 'In the first place, he hath created you, and granted unto you your lives, for which ye are indebted unto him. And secondly, he doth require that ye should do as he hath commanded you; for which if ye do, he doth immediately bless you; and therefore he hath paid you. And ye are still indebted unto him, and are, and will be, forever and ever.'" (Ibid.)
