Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 68

Jesus Sends Forth the Seventy

And the Lord said unto Moses, Gather unto me seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be the elders of the people, and officers over them; . . . And I will take of the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them; and they shall bear the burden of the people with thee, that thou bear it not thyself alone. (Num. 11:16-17.)

Seventies: Their Position and Power

What of seventies? Who are they, and how do they fit into the eternal scheme of things? That their mission and ministry is unknown among the cults of Christendom is one of the great evidences of the apostate darkness that engulfs those who call themselves by the name of Him who called seventies to stand as especial witnesses of that very name. As it is with apostles, so it is with seventies: where they serve and minister, there is the Church and kingdom of God on earth; and where they are not, there is no earthly kingdom of that King who is preparing subjects to dwell with him in a heavenly realm.

As it was with Moses anciently, so it was with the Prophet like unto Moses in the meridian of time. Both had their Twelve and both had their Seventy, and if we had the full scriptural accounts, it is assumed we would know that in both dispensations these officers had like powers and ministered in a like manner. We do know that the Twelve in Moses' day were chosen, one from each tribe, to rule over their brethren; that they were "the princes of Israel, heads of the house of their fathers, . . . the princes of the tribes," who in Joshua's day were called "the princes of the congregation." It was their offerings that were used to dedicate the altar in the tabernacle of the congregation, and their names are given in the Holy Record as Nahshon, Nethaneel, Eliab, Elizur, Shelumiel, Eliasaph, Elishama, Gamaliel, Abidan, Ahiezer, Pagiel, and Ahira. (Num. 7; Josh. 9:15.)

We also know that when, thereafter, Moses needed added help to bear the burdens of the ministry, he was commanded to choose from among the elders of Israel seventy men, wise men, men of renown, men whom he knew to be leaders, so that they might "bear the burden of the people" with him. We do know that this was an occasion of such moment that Jehovah himself came down, met with the Seventy, and poured out his Spirit upon them so that "they prophesied, and did not cease." This is the occasion when Eldad and Medad, the only two of the Seventy who are named, prophesied in the camp, and when Moses made his great proclamation: "Would God that all the Lord's people were prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them!" (Num. 11.) These Seventy are the ones who, with Moses, Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, "saw the God of Israel" when he appeared in his glory and majesty, all of them becoming thereby especial witnesses of his holy name. (Ex. 24:9-11.) We suppose that the Great Sanhedrin of Jesus' day, with its seventy members and judicial powers, was but a continuation or outgrowth of this ancient administrative body.

In our dispensation the first Twelve and the first Seventy were chosen from among those tested and tried souls who had laid their all on the altar in the march of Zion's camp. Of these two great councils, both of which operate as did their ancient counterparts, our revelations say: "The twelve traveling councilors are called to be the Twelve Apostles, or special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world. . . . The Seventy are also called to preach the gospel, and to be especial witnesses unto the Gentiles and in all the world. . . . The Twelve are a Traveling Presiding High Council, to officiate in the name of the Lord, under the direction of the Presidency of the Church, agreeable to the institution of heaven; to build up the church, and regulate all the affairs of the same in all nations, first unto the Gentiles and secondly unto the Jews. The Seventy are to act in the name of the Lord, under the direction of the Twelve or the traveling high council, in building up the church and regulating all the affairs of the same in all nations, first unto the Gentiles and then to the Jews. . . . It is the duty of the traveling high council to call upon the Seventy, when they need assistance, to fill the several calls for preaching and administering the gospel, instead of any others." (D&C 107:23-38.)

Jesus Appoints Other Seventy

(Luke 9:57-62; 10:1; Matthew 8:19-22)

Jesus now—still in Galilee, but soon to depart for Judea—is about to appoint "other seventy" and send them "two and two before his face into every city and place, whither he himself would come." They are to be heralds of salvation, chosen witnesses who step forth to prepare a people for the coming of the Lord. As John the Baptist raised his voice in doctrine and testimony to prepare all Israel for the Coming One, so the apostles and seventies, called by the one who came, now go forth to teach and testify that he has come and now ministers among them.

What say the seventies? 'Forsake your vineyards and fields; leave your nets and plows; lay down your tools. Come to the synagogue; join the congregations in the streets and at the market place. He is here; give heed to his voice; he is the Messiah of whom John testified. Salvation is in Him. You must believe his words and live his law to gain eternal life. We join our testimony with that of Peter and the Twelve. Come and hear; believe the gospel message; this is he of whom Moses and the prophets spoke. The hour is at hand. He is the Son of God.'

When Jesus chose "the first seventy" we do not know, but suppose it must have been at the time he called the Twelve or soon thereafter. [^1] In our dispensation the Twelve and "the first seventy" were called in February 1835. In the Mosaic age the Twelve Princes in Israel were regulating the affairs of their tribes before the seventy elders were chosen to bear with them and with Moses the burdens of the kingdom. We are left to assume that seventies have been serving in the meridian dispensation for almost as long as have the apostles, but that only now, as the final great witness of Christ is borne in Galilee, does the account call for an announcement of their ministry. Heretofore the emphasis, properly, has been upon the Twelve, as they ministered and taught and received the keys of the kingdom. Now as the kingdom expands, the Seventy are identified, instructed, and endowed with apostolic power.

Luke tells us that before the selection of these "other seventy," Jesus spoke pointedly and plainly to three different persons about service in the kingdom. These were: the scribe who offered to follow the Master wherever he went, and who was told, "The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head." Also, the reluctant disciple who, having been called to the ministry, asked if he might first go and bury his father, and who was told, "Let the dead bury their dead: but go thou and preach the kingdom of God." And finally, the delaying disciple who sought to bid farewell to loved ones at home, and who was told, "No man, having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God."

We have considered these or almost identical incidents in connection with the stilling of the storm on the sea of Galilee, which is the setting in which Matthew places them. (Chapter 51, Book 2.) If, however, they were an immediate prelude to the calling of additional seventies, then the persons involved may have been among those called to this apostolate, and the events mentioned were part of the testing that prepared them for their high ministerial responsibilities. Thus, with reference to the disciple who sought to bury his father before engaging in the ministry to which he had been called, Edersheim says: "We feel morally certain, that, when Christ called this disciple to follow Him, He was fully aware that at that very moment his father lay dead. Thus, He called him not only to homelessness—for this he might have been prepared—but to set aside what alike natural feeling and the Jewish Law seemed to impose on him as the most sacred duty. . . . There are higher duties than either those of the Jewish Law, or even of natural reverence, and a higher call than that of man. No doubt Christ had here in view the near call to the Seventy—of whom this disciple was to be one—to 'go and preach the kingdom of God.' When the direct call of Christ to any work comes, . . . then every other call must give way. For, duties can never be in conflict—and this duty about the living and life must take precedence of that about death and the dead. . . . There are critical moments in our inner history, when to postpone the immediate call, is really to reject it; when to go and bury the dead—even though it were a dead father—were to die ourselves!" (Edersheim 2:133.)

The Seventy: Their Charge and Commission

(Luke 10:2-11, 16; JST Luke 10:2, 7, 17)

These seventies—having been called of God, as was Aaron; having been ordained and set apart to their high and holy callings either by Jesus personally or by members of the Twelve, at his direction; having thus received a divine commission to stand as especial witnesses of the Holy Name—these seventies are now sent forth into the missionary service. They go forth as representatives of the Lord Jesus Christ. They stand in his place and stead in administering salvation to the children of men. Their words are his words; their acts are his acts; the heed men give to them is the heed they would have given to the Messiah himself.

He that heareth you heareth me; and he that despiseth you despiseth me; and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me.

What an awesome thing it is when the servants of the Lord stand before the people and teach the word of truth! It is as though the Lord himself were there, for their words, spoken by the power of the Holy Ghost, are his words. And so we now see these seventies go forth, with apostolic power, to preach Jesus Christ and him crucified. And as it had been with the Twelve, under whose direction they now served, so would it be with them.

Thus Jesus said: "The harvest truly is great, but the labourers are few: pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth labourers into his harvest." O that there were laborers enough to preach to all who will give ear. Always—except in the days of Noah, when all flesh had become corrupt before the Lord—there have been more receptive souls who would heed the message of salvation than there have been ministers to teach its truths. Those who have desires to serve God are always called into his ministry, and every missionary strives to bring souls into the kingdom so the newly found converts may in turn take the glad tidings of salvation to others of our Father's children.

"Go your ways: behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves." 'Ye are the sheep of my fold. I, the Good Shepherd, have called you out of the deserts of the world into the sheepfold of Zion; now I send you forth among the wolves of wickedness to lead other sheep into my fold.'

"Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes." [^2] 'Have faith. Rely upon your Father which is in heaven; he will care for your needs. Do not be encumbered by worldly possessions; your mission is more important than any temporal concerns.' "And salute no man by the way." 'Your mission is urgent. Be about your Father's business; do not stop by the way to make or renew personal friendships.'

"And into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house. And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it: if not, it shall turn to you again." 'You are sent forth to preach the gospel of peace; your message assures men of peace in this world and eternal life in the world to come. If those to whom you preach are worthy to hear your words, they shall find peace and rest to their souls; otherwise, the peace gained through the gospel will be yours only and will not come into their lives.'

"And into whatsoever house they receive you, remain, eating and drinking such things as they give: for the labourer is worthy of his hire. Go not from house to house. And into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such things as are set before you." 'Those who believe will account it a privilege to care for your needs. Their compensation is to hear my words from your lips. Seek not to be feasted and banqueted in the houses of the rich; eat the common fare of the people. Preach and receive sustenance in the homes of those who are receptive.' [^3]

"And heal the sick that are therein, and say unto them, The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you." Heal the sick! These signs shall follow them that believe. Among the true saints healing miracles are always found. True ministers, endowed with power from on high, always walk in Jesus' path and do the things he did. Say to the faithful: 'You are citizens of the earthly kingdom, which is the Church, and heirs of the heavenly kingdom, which is found in celestial realms.'

"But into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go your ways out into the streets of the same, and say, Even the very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against you: notwithstanding be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you." [^4] Cursings as well as blessings attend the preaching of the gospel. Those who believe and obey are blessed eternally; those who harden their hearts, reject the truth, and continue to walk in worldly ways shall be damned.

The Damning Doom of Disbelief

(Luke10:12-15: JST Luke 10:12-16: Matthew 11:20-24)

How awful it is—how fearful and damning; how fraught with the most disastrous consequences—for men to reject the revealed truth that would save them. It is bad enough to live in spiritual darkness when the gospel sun does not shine, and to be denied the privilege of walking in the light; but it is far worse to see the sun shine, to turn away from the gospel light, and to walk willfully in the dark abyss of sin.

The seventies are now to go forth and carry the gospel light to a people who sit in darkness. The effect of their preaching will be as it is with their modern ministerial counterparts to whom the Lord says: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, they who believe not on your words, and are not baptized in water in my name, for the remission of their sins, that they may receive the Holy Ghost, shall be damned, and shall not come into my Father's kingdom where my Father and I am. And this revelation unto you, and commandment, is in force from this very hour upon all the world, and the gospel is unto all who have not received it." (D&C 84:74-75.)

And so, with reference to any city that rejected the seventies and their witness of revealed truth, Jesus said: "I say unto you, That it shall be more tolerable in the day of judgment for Sodom, than for that city. Then began he to upbraid the people in every city wherein his mighty works were done, who received him not, saying, Woe unto thee, Chorazin! Woe unto thee, Bethsaida! For if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon, which have been done in you, they would have repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes. But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day of judgment, than for you." As to his own city, the place where he abode in the home of Peter, he acclaimed: "And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell: for if the mighty works, which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained unto this day."

Matthew says these upbraiding words were spoken of "the cities wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they repented not." Most of his mighty works! How little we know of the mortal ministry of Jesus! We know of a blind man who was healed in Bethsaida and of a number of miracles wrought in Capernaum, but Chorazin is not so much as mentioned elsewhere in the scriptures, and if it were not for the statement here quoted we would not even know that such a city ever existed.

Tyre and Sidon were famous Gentile-Phoenician seaports, renowned for their moral decadence and spiritual degeneracy. Sodom sank to such degenerate depths in Abraham's day that the Lord rained fire and brimstone upon it and destroyed every living creature within its walls. Its very name was and is the symbol of all that is base and evil and lewd and lascivious in the world. Yet the judgment eternally destined for the inhabitants of these Gentile strongholds will be more tolerable than that of the cities of Israel that rejected their King. Truly "it shall be more tolerable for the heathen in the day of judgment" than for houses and cities which reject the servants of the Lord. (D&C 75:18-22.) Why? Because of the eternal law that says: "For of him unto whom much is given much is required; and he who sins against the greater light shall receive the greater condemnation." (D&C 82:3.) [^5]

We thus come, in our prayerful and Spirit-guided study of the one life that brought hope and life to a despairing and dying world, to the point where that One has been fully rejected by his own in Galilee. He has been rejected in Galilee of the Gentiles; in Galilee where Israelite blood had partaken of Gentile disbelief, "For they are not all Israel, which are of Israel" (Rom 9:6); in Galilee where stony hearts refused to receive his message—a message presented with such power that had it come in like manner to those centers of iniquity and immorality among the ancient heathen, the people would have believed and repented.

"Galilee had rejected Him, as Judea had rejected Him. On one side of the lake which He loved, a whole populace in unanimous deputation had besought Him to depart out of their coasts; on the other, they had vainly tried to vex His last days among them by a miserable conspiracy to frighten him into flight.

"At Nazareth, the sweet mountain village of His childish days—at Nazareth, with all its happy memories of His beloved boyhood and His mother's home—they had treated Him with such violence and outrage, that He could not visit it again. And even at Chorazin, and Capernaum, and Bethsaida—on those Edenshores of the silver lake—in the green delicious plain, whose every field He had traversed with His apostles, performing deeds of mercy and uttering words of love—even there they loved the whited sepulchres of a Pharisaic sanctity, and the shallow traditions of a Levitical ceremonial, better than the light and the life which had been offered them by the Son of God.

"They were feeding on ashes; a deceived heart had turned them aside. On many a great city of antiquity, on Nineveh and Babylon, on Tyre and Sidon, on Sodom and Gomorrah, had fallen the wrath of God; yet even Nineveh and Babylon would have humbled their gorgeous idolatries, even Tyre and Sidon have turned from their greedy vanities, yea, even Sodom and Gomorrah would have repented from their filthy lusts, had they seen the mighty works which had been done in these little cities and villages of the Galilean sea." (Farrar, pp. 450-53.)

We must not leave this part of our account without recounting how desolation and death, in a few short years, overtook the cursed cities of Galilee. And was not this temporal doom but a type and a shadow of the spiritual fate that awaits those rebels in Israel when they shall stand before the bar of Him whose judgments are just to be judged according to the deeds done in the flesh?

'Woe unto thee Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum—cities in Israel who rejected their King! Wo unto thee!' As the Divine Voice decreed, so it was; as the heavenly judgment went forth, so the woes fell. "On all this land, and most of all on the region of it, the woe has fallen. Exquisite still in its loveliness, it is now desolate and dangerous. The birds still sing in countless myriads; the water-fowl still play on the crystal mere; the brooks flow into it from the neighbouring hills, 'filling their bosoms with pearl, and scattering their path with emeralds;' the aromatic herbs are still fragrant when the foot crushes them, and the tall oleanders fill the air with their delicate perfume as of old; but the vineyards and fruit-gardens have disappeared; the fleets and fishing-boats cease to traverse the lake; the hum of men is silent; the stream of prosperous commerce has ceased to flow.

"The very names and sites of the towns and cities are forgotten; and where they once shone bright and populous, flinging their shadows across the sunlit waters, there are now grey mounds where even the ruins are too ruinous to be distinguishable. A solitary palm-tree by one squalid street of huts, degraded and frightful beyond any, even in Palestine, still marks the site, and recalls the name of the one little town where lived that sinful penitent woman who once washed Christ's feet with her tears and wiped them with the hairs of her head.

"And the very generation which rejected Him was doomed to recall in bitter and fruitless agony these peaceful happy days of the Son of Man. Thirty years had barely elapsed when the storm of Roman invasion burst furiously over that smiling land. He who will, may read in the Jewish War of Josephus the hideous details of the slaughter which decimated the cities of Galilee, and wrung from the historian the repeated confession that 'it was certainly God who brought the Romans to punish the Galileans,' and exposed the people of city after city 'to be destroyed by their bloody enemies.'

'Immediately after the celebrated passage in which he describes the lake and plain of Gennesareth as 'the ambition of nature,' follows a description of that terrible sea-fight on these bright waters, in which the number of the slain, including those killed in the city, was six thousand five hundred. Hundreds were stabbed by the Romans or run through with poles; others tried to save their lives by diving, but if once they raised their heads were slain by darts; or if they swam to the Roman vessels had their heads or hands lopped off; while others were chased to the land and there massacred. 'One might then,' the historian continues, 'see the lake all bloody, and full of dead bodies, for not one of them escaped. And a terrible stink, and a very sad sight there was, on the following days over that country; for, as for the shores, they were full of shipwrecks and of dead bodies all swelled; and as the dead bodies were inflamed by the sun, and putrefied, they corrupted the air, insomuch that the misery was not only an object of commiseration to the Jews, but even to those that hated them, and had been the authors of the misery.'

"Of those that died amid this butchery; of those whom Vespasian immediately afterwards abandoned to brutal and treacherous massacre between Tarichea and Tiberias; of those twelve hundred 'old and useless' whom he afterwards caused to be slain in the stadium; of the six thousand whom he sent to aid Nero in his attempt to dig through the Isthmus of Athos; of the thirty thousand four hundred whom he sold as slaves—may there not have been many who in their agony and exile, in their hour of death and day of judgment, recalled Him whom they had repudiated, and remembered that the sequel of all those gracious words which had proceeded out of His lips had been the 'woe' which their obduracy called forth!" (Farrar, pp. 453-55) [^6]

The Mortal Messiah Leaves Galilee

(John 7:1-10; Luke 9:51-56)

Our Blessed Lord is now going to leave his homeland forever. He will not again in mortality gaze upon those rugged Galilean hills nor sail securely over the fish-filled waters of Gennesareth. Nazareth and Nain, Capernaum and Chorazin, Bethsaida and Magdala—cities of sin in which he has converted a few righteous souls—will not again see his face or hear his voice. Their lepers will be left to suffer and die in caves and tombs; their blind and deaf and lame shall neither see nor hear nor walk; their dead bodies shall rot and decompose in their graves, awaiting such a resurrection as they merit. But what is worse, sin-sick souls, who might have gained spiritual health and life by heeding the words of Him who came with healing in his wings, shall remain in their sins. It is a dark and dreary day. The Son of God is leaving Galilee.

Yes, the Son of God is leaving Galilee to go to Jerusalem. He will have a short ministry in Judea and Perea. Then, as the Paschal Lamb, he will be slain for the sins of the world. This will occur at the time of Passover. Now, however, it is the Feast of Tabernacles that approaches. And it is incumbent upon all the males in Palestinian Israel to appear before the Lord in his temple at Tabernacles Times. Jesus' "brethren," the other sons of Mary, say to him: "Depart hence, and go into Judea"—not as their intent should have been, that he keep the Feast of Tabernacles as required of faithful Israelites—but, "that thy disciples also may see the works that thou doest. For there is no man that doeth any thing in secret, and he himself seeketh to be known openly. If thou do these things, shew thyself to the world."

This is an ironical statement, a chiding challenge. John appends to it the explanation that "his brethren" did not "believe in him." John also tells us that Jesus was in Galilee and not in Judea "because the Jews sought to kill him." His brothers, then, those in whose veins flows the same blood bequeathed by Mary to him, are making this argument: 'If you are what you claim to be, then all men should see your miracles and hear your message. We know you are one of us; we had the same parents; we grew up with you in Nazareth. But if you are really what you claim, why do you hide out here in Galilee, when you could go to Jerusalem where all Israel will be assembled to keep the Feast of Tabernacles? There before all the people and before the rulers whose position it is to judge these matters, your claims can be adjudicated. If you are the Messiah, now is the time to show it in the Temple in the Holy City.'

Jesus replies: "My time is not yet come: but your time is alway ready. The world cannot hate you; but me it hateth, because I testify of it, that the works thereof are evil. Go ye up unto this feast: I go not up yet unto this feast; for my time is not yet full come." [^7]

Jesus' response means that he will determine when to go to Jerusalem. He and his party will not go with the great caravans that parade openly and ostentatiously to the festive celebration. Such a journey befits Mary's other sons; they are of the world, and they can mingle with evil men without fear; the world loves its own. But the Son of Man is hated by worldly people because he testifies of their iniquities. Let his kinsmen travel as they choose, he will yet abide in Galilee and travel to Jerusalem at a time of his own choosing and with his own associates.

But even then he will walk in a troublesome way. When the time of his own choosing came to make the journey, he "sent messengers," possibly some of the seventies, "before his face: and they went, and entered into a village of the Samaritans, to make ready for him." Apparently all he sought was the normal hospitality—food, shelter, and a place to lay his head—which by oriental standards was offered freely to all who journeyed through any part of Palestine, Samaria included. That he also would have preached to the people, teaching gospel truths and proclaiming his own divine Sonship, is implicit in the proposal of his messengers. All itinerant Rabbis preached and taught as they traveled, and all Palestinians now knew that this rare and unusual Rabbi from Nazareth preached and taught everlastingly and accompanied his words with wondrous deeds.

But, Luke tells us, the Samaritans would "not receive him, because his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem." Their hatred of all things Jewish—including this Jewish Messiah, as he was acclaimed—was so great that they withheld from him and his associates even the normal civilities of life. And we cannot but think that in this instance they were joining with the Galileans in rejecting his Messianic pronouncements. In an earlier day, as he traveled away from Jerusalem, many Samaritans received him gladly, rejoiced at his teachings, and hailed him as the Promised Messiah. Since then the wonders of his word and the might of his miracles have been made known to them; apostles and seventies have taught and testified in their streets. But now this one who many say is the Messiah is going up to Jerusalem to minister and to worship. He cannot, therefore, be the Messiah; if he were, they reasoned, he would go to Mount Gerizim, not to Jerusalem, there to worship the Father in spirit and in truth. All of this dramatizes how false beliefs, false doctrines, false forms of worship—used as they so often are, as a standard to measure the truth—cause men to reject even God himself. [^8]

"And when his disciples, James and John"—two of the favored Three; two whose valiance knew no bounds; two who were called the Sons of Thunder—saw that they would not receive him, they said, "Lord, wilt thou that we command fire to come down from heaven and consume them, even as Elias did?"

That James and John should propose such a penalty for Samaritans who worshipped false gods—"Ye worship ye know not what," Jesus had once said to them (John 4:22)—is far from strange. Harsh and pitiless as it may sound in Christian ears, it was akin to much that prevailed in the Mosaic system. When King Ahaziah lay at death's door, he sent messengers to "enquire of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron" whether he should recover of his disease. The angel of the Lord, however, sent Elijah "to meet the messengers of the king of Samaria, and say unto them, Is it not because there is not a God in Israel, that ye go to enquire of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron?" Further, Elijah pronounced the divine judgment that the king should surely die. When the king, hearing this message, sought to bring Elijah before him, that prophet twice called down fire from heaven to destroy a total of 102 armed men who would have taken him. (2 Kgs. 1.)

We can suppose that James and John reasoned that these Samaritans who now rejected the true King of Israel, because they worshipped Baalzebub the god of Ekron, as it were, were guilty of as gross a crime as the Samaritans of old whose lives were taken by the fiery flames from heaven. Further, they knew that the Messiah in whose presence they then stood would, in fact, destroy all the wicked by fire at his second coming. If the God of Israel destroyed his enemies by fire in days of old, and will do so again in days to come, why not execute a like judgment upon them now? The logic, though Mosaic and rational, was contrary to the new spirit of the new age with its new gospel. Jesus' rebuke came enveloped in a fire of righteous indignation:

Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. For the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

How often the Lord's servants in all ages—as they are pressed by prejudices, anxieties, rebuffs, and persecutions, to curse rather than to bless—how often they must remind themselves of this eternal truth: The gospel is given to save and not to damn, "For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved." (John 3:17.)

"And they went to another village." Had he not but recently said to the seventies that when rejected in one village or city they should go to another? And so shall it ever be until that day when the judgment is set, and the books are opened, and the wicked become as stubble, and the vineyard is cleansed by fire, and the lowly Messiah comes again to reign in might, power, and dominion on earth for a thousand years.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] After the Seventy were called in our dispensation, the Lord empowered their presidents, who are seven in number, "to choose other seventy besides the first seventy" until there were "seven times seventy, if the labor in the vineyard of necessity requires it. (D&C 107:95-96.) The meaning of this is that there can be as many seventies as are needed to administer the affairs of the earthly kingdom and to take the message of salvation to all men.
[^2] "And thou shalt take no purse nor scrip, neither staves, neither two coats, for the church shall give unto thee in the very hour what thou needest for food and for raiment, and for shoes and for money, and for scrip." (D&C 24:18.)
[^3] "Whoso receiveth you receiveth me; and the same will feed you, and clothe you, and give you money. And he who feeds you, or clothes you, or gives you money, shall in nowise lose his reward. And he that doeth not these things is not my disciple; by this you may know my disciples." (D&C 84:89-91.)
[^4] "And in whatsoever place ye shall enter, and they receive you not in my name, ye shall leave a cursing instead of a blessing, by casting off the dust of your feet against them as a testimony, and cleansing your feet by the wayside." (D&C 24:15.)
[^5] It was on this same basis that Jehovah said to rebellious Israel: "You only have I known of all the families of the earth: therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities." (Amos 3:2.)
[^6] Similar judgments of God-also rained forth in the providences of Him who does all things well-rested upon that Missouri area which persecuted and ravaged and slaughtered the Latter-day Saints in the early days of this dispensation. The punishment fell upon those persecutors of the saints and rejectors of the revealed word when the Civil War battles raged in their area. God will not be mocked.
[^7] That these blood brothers of God's Son were later converted and numbered with the saints is a matter of consolation for them and rejoicing for us all. One of them was "James the Lord's brother" (Gal. 1:19), who ministered in the holy apostleship; another Judas, who called himself "Jude, the . . . brother of James" (Jude 1), who wrote the epistle of Jude. Two others were named Joses (Joseph) and Simon. (Matt. 13:55.)
[^8] In like manner, how often it is that modern Samaritans, as it were, reject the living words of the latter-day witnesses of gospel truth, because the witness borne does not conform to the false creeds of an apostate Christendom. How can the words of those Mormon elders be true when they do not even believe the Nicene Creed?
