Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Section 8

The Later Judean Ministry

The right way is to believe in Christ, and deny him not; and Christ is the Holy One of Israel; wherefore ye must bow down before him, and worship him with all your might, mind, and strength, and your whole soul; and if ye do this ye shall in nowise be cast out. (2 Ne. 25:29.)

Our Galilean Friend—the Man from Nazareth—now returns to Judea, to minister again among those who are thirsting for his blood and devising his death.

He appears suddenly in the midst of the Feast of Tabernacles, mingles with the millions then in the Holy City, and speaks as never man spake before.

His message, then and throughout this whole Judean ministry: He is the Son of God who came into the world to do the will of the Father; all who believe in him shall be saved.

As the priests pour water from Siloam on the Great Altar, he invites all men to come to him and he will give them living water.

The woman taken in adultery is commanded: "Go, and sin no more."

Before those gigantic candelabra, fifty cubits in height, from which light goes forth from the temple, he acclaims: "I am the light of the world."

'Believe in me, or die in your sins,' he says.

To Abraham's seed comes the message: "The truth shall make you free," and 'Before Abraham, was I Jehovah.'

We hear the Seventies report on their apostleship; learn how Christ is the Father and the Son; are edified by the parable of the good Samaritan; and sit in on a familial scene in Bethany as Martha and Mary minister to the Master.

Other parables—the friend at midnight, the rich fool, the barren fig tree—salute our ears with joy.

Then we see how a man born blind is healed; how Pharisaic opposition mounts with satanic zeal; how the man is wiser than the Pharisees in council; and how Jesus says plainly he is the Son of God.

And finally—wonder of wonders—there is the matter of the Good Shepherd who giveth his life for the sheep; the Good Shepherd who has power over death; who says, again, "I am the Son of God"; and who teaches that all who believe and obey shall be gods themselves.

Truly, this later Judean ministry—with its Pharisaic opposition, its strong doctrine, its plain testimony—gives us a view of God's Son that will dwell in our hearts forever.
