Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 69

Jesus Ministers at the Feast of Tabernacles

And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left of all the nations which came against Jerusalem shall even go up from year to year to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, and to keep the feast of tabernacles. And it shall be, that whoso will not come up of all the families of the earth unto Jerusalem to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, even upon them shall be no rain. (Zech. 14:16-17.) [^1]

He Preaches the Gospel at the Feast

(John 7:11-17)

Never from that day, a millennium and a half before, when Moses, the man of God, speaking for Jehovah, ordained and established the Feast of Tabernacles; never during their long and wearisome wanderings in the wilderness, nor during the years of their joy when Jerusalem was indeed a Zion unto them; never before, not even during the earlier life of our Lord, when he himself worshipped before the great altar and renewed his covenants to do the will of him whose Son he was—never was there such an outpouring of divine truth as we shall hear at this Feast of Tabernacles.

It is October 11, A.D. 29; four days ago, on the great day of atonement, "solemn expiation was made for the sins of all the people." (Farrar, p. 410.) It is now the Sabbath day, and seven and eight days hence—on October 17 and 18, on the great day of the feast and then on the next Sabbath or the Octave of the feast—the climax will be reached as the Hosanna Shout rends the air and as repeated eternal witness of the divine Sonship is borne. Then the Feast of Tabernacles will cease as a legally approved season of worship; then it will cease until its millennial restoration, when not only the Jews but all nations will go up to Jerusalem to worship the King, the Lord of Hosts, according to the new rituals and performances that are part of that eternal fulness which supersedes the lesser Mosaic system.

Under normal circumstances the Feast of Tabernacles is the most cosmopolitan of all the Jewish feasts. Linked with the day of atonement and coming at the time when the temple contributions are received and counted, it attracts more devout pilgrims from distant places than even the Passover or Pentecost. It also comes in the autumn, after the harvests are gathered, and when in a spirit of thanksgiving and rejoicing those who recognize the divine hand in all things are wont to praise and worship him for all he has given them.

How they love to assemble in the Holy Sanctuary "of marble, cedarwood, and gold, up there on high Moriah, symbol of the infinitely more glorious overshadowing Presence of Him, Who was the Holy One in the midst of Israel." How they rejoice in the multitude of sacrifices, including the seventy bullocks, symbolical of "the seventy nations of heathendom." How their souls are stirred by the chants of the Levites, the solemn responses of the Hallel, and the piercing blasts from the silver trumpets of the priests. And at night, when "the great Candelabras" are lighted in "the Court of the Women," when the glare of the torches lights up the temple buildings, and when the "strange sound of mystic hymns and dances" rings in their ears, how their souls light up anew as they contemplate the future glory of the chosen race. Truly, "the Temple-illumination" is the light which shall "shine from out the Temple into the dark night of heathendom."

How they exult within themselves when the priests draw water from the spring of Siloam and pour it out in the holy place, "symbolical of the outpouring of the Holy Spirit," and giving to "the whole festival the name of House of Outpouring." How their voices rise in great crescendos of praise as they wave their lulavs and cry Hosanna, Hosanna, to God and the Lamb. And how they covenant anew to stand forever as Jews of the Jews when the solemn proclamation is made, "We are Jehovah's—our eyes are towards Jehovah." (Edersheim 2:149-50.)

Glorious as is each festive season at Tabernacle Times, this one is destined to surpass all the rest. This time the Son of God himself will come; he will announce who he is, what power he possesses, and whom he represents; and by his own voice he will tell his people and all men what they must believe and how they must live to gain celestial rest.

But he will not come at the beginning of the feast; and whether he will dwell in a booth, as the law requires, and present himself in the temple and bow to the ritualistic rules of the Rabbis, our inspired author does not tell us. We suppose that at this point in our Lord's ministry the practices of the priests and the laws of the Levites are of little concern to him. He has already declined to travel with his blood-brothers in the great Galilean caravan of pilgrims, choosing rather to journey with his disciples somewhat in secrecy.

This late arrival has the desired effect upon the people. The Galileans who preceded him have now recited in detail the wondrous works done in all their cities and villages. All Jerusalem hears again of the blind eyes that now see, the deaf ears that now hear, the lame legs that now leap, and of the lepers whose flesh has returned again to its clean and healthy state. All Jerusalem is reminded anew that storms have ceased, devils have departed, and dead corpses have walked again—all at his word. And all Jerusalem is left to ponder anew the words he has spoken and the sermons he has preached in Galilee, as these are now recited by the reputable witnesses who heard his voice.

Never in all her long history, reaching back at least to the days of Melchizedek, has Jerusalem seen such a ferment of opinion, felt such an anxiety about a doctrine, and had such a concern about a man. All people sought him. 'Where is he; when will he come; are the reports about him true; will he continue his ministry among us; is he the promised Messiah; will he deliver us from Roman bondage; is he the Son of God?'

None, however, went into the temple to preach sermons about him and his saving power; none gathered groups together in the bazaars or on the street corners to acclaim his doctrine publicly, or to trumpet his wondrous works in the ears of all men; none raised a Messianic standard and called others to enlist in the new cause—"for fear of the Jews," meaning the leaders of the people. No apostle or seventy was present to speak "openly of him." But among the people "there was much murmuring." In private conversations some were saying, "He is a good man"; others, "Nay; but he deceiveth the people." He who came not to bring peace on earth but a sword; who came to set members of the same household against each other; who came to divide families and sift the wheat from the tares—he whose gospel proclamation always divides mankind was accomplishing his purpose.

The good news of gospel grace was believed by some, rejected by others. The sifting processes were at work; the great Harvester was sifting out the hearts of men before his judgment seat. The sheep were getting ready to enter the sheepfold of the Good Shepherd, the goats to be driven out into the wilderness of spiritual darkness. The time for the arrival of the Man was at hand.

John says: "Now about the midst of the feast"—perhaps about the fourth or fifth day—"Jesus went up into the temple, and taught." Without warning he was there; his arrival was then as the Second Coming will be: to the wicked and ungodly and to all who are not waiting with anxious expectation for the promised day, it will come suddenly. On this day, the Lord whom they sought had come suddenly to his temple. Surely John and the other disciples were with him to hear his words and record his doings. As to the initial events surrounding his appearance, John, who alone records any of the happenings at the Feast of Tabernacles, tells us only that he came among them and "taught."

What did he teach? As to his spoken word, there is no record presently available where it can be read. Based on the responses that were forthcoming, and upon the questions raised by virtue of his sayings, and upon our prior knowledge of the general course he customarily pursued, however, there is little doubt as to the substance and purport of what he then said. He who is the same yesterday, today, and forever had preached, did then preach, and everlastingly will preach the gospel—the gospel of the kingdom; the gospel of salvation; the fulness of the everlasting gospel. In Galilee, in Judea, in Perea, in Phoenicia, in the Decapolis; among the Jews and to the Gentiles—everywhere and always—Jesus preached the gospel. This gospel is that he came into the world to work out the infinite and eternal atonement; that he is God's Son, the Promised Messiah; and that if men will believe in him and live his law they will be raised not alone in immortality but unto everlasting life in the Everlasting Presence.

How he couched the message on this occasion we know not. He may have used parables or dramatic illustrations, or recited eternal verities as he had done in the Sermon on the Mount. Perhaps he drew his illustrations from the sacrificial victims whose shed blood and burnt flesh adorned the great altar; or from the golden table whereon lay the holy bread, the bread of the Presence; or from the veil that shrouded the Holy of Holies, wherein the Shekinah, in olden times, had rested on the mercy seat between the cherubim. Whatever the words used, the thoughts expressed, and the doctrine taught, his preachments were not like those of the scribes. He spoke in his own right, with authority, and not by reciting a long concatenation of Rabbinical lore and tradition.

Consequently: "The Jews marvelled" at his teachings. Their natural queries were: "How knoweth this man letters, having never learned?" "He is no authorized Rabbi; He belongs to no recognized school; neither the followers of Hillel nor those of Shammai claim Him; He is a Nazarene; He was trained in the shop of the Galilean carpenter; how knoweth this man letters, having never learned? . . . In all ages there is a tendency to mistake erudition for learning, knowledge for wisdom; in all ages there has been a slowness to comprehend that true learning of the deepest and noblest character may co-exist with complete and utter ignorance of everything which absorbs and constitutes the learning of the schools." (Farrar, p. 413.) And so, to their misplaced queries, Jesus responds:

My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself.

Never man spake as this Man. The Lord Jesus Christ, supreme above all, ministers among men; he who made heaven and earth and the sea and the fountains of waters; he who is the Teacher of teachers, the Preacher to preachers, the One whose very word is perfect—this Man has no doctrine of his own! He speaks only those things which are in the bosom of the Father. It is the Father's plan; it is the gospel of the Father; those who do the will of the Father—and it is the will of God that men should believe in his Son—shall know by the power of the Holy Ghost of the truth and divinity of the gospel word. [^2]

The Sinless One Acclaims His Divine Sonship

(John 7:18-36; JST John 7:24)

Jesus now speaks of himself. Having announced that he was sent of God, having said that he did not speak of himself, he now adds: "He that speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory." Why else do the orators of the world, be they ministers or politicians, pour forth their mouthings except to gain prominence and position and power for themselves? "But he that seeketh his glory that sent him," that servant who glorifies the lord who sent him, even I myself who glorify my Father, "the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him."

There is no unrighteousness in him! He is the Sinless One! All that he has done and said is perfect, which he here states in plainness—he is defending himself—because there are those then present who are plotting his death. The supposed sin: On his last visit to Jerusalem, some eighteen months ago, at the time of the Second Passover, he healed the blind man at the pool of Bethesda on the Sabbath day. "Did not Moses give you the law"—the law that says "Thou shalt not kill"—"and yet none of you keepeth the law" because ye go "about to kill me."

Those whose guilt has thus been revealed have no recourse but to plunge wildly on in their maddened course. "Thou hast a devil: who goeth about to kill thee?" they respond. Both their blasphemous charge against him and their own self-serving attestation of false innocence, he waves aside, as he continues his own defense: "I have done one work, and ye all marvel," he says. Even now, after a year and a half, the contention still raged among them: Was he the Messiah because he opened blind eyes, or was he possessed of a devil because he violated their self-imposed Sabbath restrictions?

"Moses therefore gave unto you circumcision," he continued, "(not because it is of Moses, but of the fathers;) and ye on the sabbath day circumcise a man." Such was a factual recitation of what they all knew to be true. "If a man on the sabbath day receive circumcision, that the law of Moses should not be broken; are ye angry at me, because I have made a man every whit whole on the sabbath day?"

This logic cannot be gainsaid. "On their own purely ritual and Levitical principle, . . . His word of healing had in no respect violated the Sabbath at all. . . . Moses had established, or rather re-established, the ordinance of circumcision on the eighth day, and if that eighth day happened to be a Sabbath, they without scruple sacrificed the one ordinance to the other, and in spite of the labour which it involved, performed the rite of circumcision on the Sabbath day. If the law of circumcision superseded that of the Sabbath, did not the law of Mercy? If it was right by a series of actions to inflict that wound, was it wrong by a single word to effect a total cure? If that, which was at the best but a sign of deliverance, could not, even on account of the Sabbath, be postponed for a single day, why was it criminal not to have postponed for the sake of the Sabbath a perfect deliverance?" (Farrar, pp. 414-15.)

Our Lord then concluded this line of reasoning with the bold counsel, nay, with the command, a command falling from divine lips: "Judge not according to your traditions, but judge righteous judgment."

Jesus spent many hours in the temple teaching; occasional sentences—those necessary to preserve the moving majesty of his life, as he went relentlessly to a martyr's doom on a Roman cross—occasional statements only have come down to us. As he spoke he was interrupted, heckled, and harassed; attempts were made to arrest him; many of his sayings were in response to the sophistries of the scribes, the ruses of the Rabbis, and the armed assaults of the temple guards. The open classroom, in which multitudes milled about and talked among themselves, was totally devoid of decorum; angry mobs mingled in the courts with believing souls; and his disciples participated in the affrays and were part of the great proselyting work then being done by earth's Chief Missionary.

Thus we now read in John's account that "some of them of Jerusalem," whose opinions had been molded by their scribes and Rabbis, asked: "Is not this he, whom they seek to kill?" It seemed incomprehensible to them that if he were Satan incarnate, as the rulers said, they would stand idly by and let him speak freely to the people. "Lo, he speaketh boldly, and they say nothing unto him. Do the rulers know indeed that this is the very Christ?"

Then, lest any think their zeal for Moses and the law had lessened, and lest any accuse them of departing from their ancient moorings, they aligned themselves against their Deliverer by saying, "Howbeit we know this man whence he is: but when Christ cometh, no man knoweth whence he is." Again their traditions led them astray; these included the teaching that the Messiah's coming would be sudden and unexpected, a view that may have arisen from Messianic utterances about the Second Coming. "Do not the Rabbis tell us," said some, "that the Messiah will be born in Bethlehem, but that He will be snatched away by spirits and tempests soon after His birth, and that when He returns the second time no one will know from whence He has come? But we know that this man comes from Nazareth. Our chief men, if they choose, may accept Him as the Messiah; we will not." (Geikie, p. 587.)

'He is a good man!' 'He is a deceiver!' The tension mounts and the division widens. Thereupon Jesus, in a loud voice that all the disputants might hear, cries out: "Ye both know me, and ye know whence I am." Our Lord—and blessed be his name—was making himself an active participant in their disputes. 'In a worldly sense you know me. You know I was born in Bethlehem; you know I am the Son who was called out of Egypt; you know I grew up in Nazareth, that I might be called a Nazarene. But in the true and eternal sense you neither know me nor from whence I came.'

And I am not come of myself, but he that sent me is true, whom ye know not. But I know him: for I am from him, and he hath sent me.

'I alone of myself do not claim to be the Messiah; I am sent by my Father. He is God, and I am his Son. His witness of me is true. Ye do not know that he is God, that he sent me, and that I came forth from him. But I know him and testify that I am the Messiah.'

At the pool of Bethesda, on the Sabbath when the impotent man, at his word, took up his bed and walked, Jesus said: "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work." On that occasion, for Sabbath violation and for blasphemy, as they supposed, the rulers sought his life. "The hostile part of the crowd rightly saw a similar claim repeated now, and with the wild fanaticism of their race in that age, proposed to lay hold of Him, and hurry Him outside the city on the instant, to stone Him, as the Law against blasphemy enjoined. But His hour had not yet come, and whether from fear of the Galileans at the feast, or from other reasons, their rage died away in words." (Geikie, p. 588.)

The long hours of teaching in the temple began to bear fruit. His words, his bearing, the spirit that attended him, the testimonies of disciples who mingled among them—perhaps also there were miracles—all softened the hearts of those who were spiritually receptive. "Many of the people believed on him," John says. "When Christ cometh," they asked, "will he do more miracles than these which this man hath done?"

With this turn of events, "the Pharisees and the chief priests sent officers to take him." He must be arrested before the spell of his presence caused the rabble to acclaim him King-Messiah as it was reported they had done near Bethsaida-Julias when he fed the five thousand. 'Unless he is silenced our craft is in danger. He defames our Sabbath; our traditions are set at naught. What will happen to our washings before we eat, our sacrifices on the great altar, the temple contributions that flow in from our people everywhere? He must be silenced!'

These temple police, warrant in hand, singled out by their distinctive dress, mingled with the multitudes, seeking opportunity to make the arrest without raising a tumult. To them in the hearing of all, Jesus said: "Yet a little while am I with you, and then I go unto him that sent me. Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where I am, thither ye cannot come." The Master simply declines to be arrested; such does not accord with his needs and plan. "Your desire to take me is premature; I am to remain with you until the appointed time. Then I shall return to my Father, and we shall part company forever." 'In the troubles of the coming day ye shall seek your Deliverer, your Messiah.' But "ye shall not find me, for no unclean thing can come into my Father's kingdom. Later he will tell his repentant and faithful disciples that where he went they can come also. (John 14:1-6.)" (Commentary 1:444-45.)

Jesus' words—testifying that God is his Father, that he shall die and return to him whose Son he is, and that the unbelieving and rebellious shall not find place in the Divine Presence—these words refresh the hearts of the faithful and pour light into their souls. To the unbelieving among his hearers, their effect is the reverse. "Whither will he go, that we shall not find him?" they ask. The things of the Spirit are understood only by the power of the Spirit; these Jews know nothing of the Eternal Kingdom and the Father who reigns there, nor of the identity of the Son who is now on earth. "Will he go unto the dispersed among the Gentiles, and teach the Gentiles?" "What! Will he leave us to go to the scattered remnant of Israel among the Greeks? Will he leave us, the assembled and chosen people, to preach to Gentiles?" (Commentary 1:445.) "What manner of saying is this that he said, Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where I am, thither ye cannot come?" Truly, there is no darkness as deep as spiritual darkness, and no mind as closed as one bound by the chains of a false religion.

Thus endeth, as far as the record goes, Jesus' ministry during the initial days of the Feast of Tabernacles. But all this is but the foundation for the proclamation he will make "in the last day, the great day of the feast," and for what he will say and do on the octave of the same festal season, as we are about to see.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Targum that paraphrases this verse reads: "Behold, as the waters are poured on arid ground and spread over the dry soil, so will I give the Spirit of My Holiness on thy sons, and My blessing on thy children's children." (Edersheim 2:161.)
[^2] Other relevant passages say: "With joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation." (Isa 12:3.) "Thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not." (Isa. 58:11.) "I will even make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert. . . . Because I give waters in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen." (Isa. 43:19-20.) Heretofore also we have heard Jesus speak of giving "living water" to the Samaritan woman, and of the fact that those who believe in him shall never thirst more. (John 4:10-14; 6:35.)
