Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 70

Living Water for All Men

I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring. (Isa. 44:3.) [^1]

"Come Ye to the Waters"

(John 7:37-39; JST John 7:39)

How men long for water in a dry and thirsty land! Moses smites the rock with his rod that Israel may drink and live. Elijah abides by the brook Cherith when the heavens are sealed for three and a half years. Without water, men die.

No metaphor is more intense than that offered by the longing for water among the dwellers in the desert. As the Lord laveth the desert soil, so he rains down righteousness upon his people. As he sendeth the early and latter rains, so pools of living water spring up in the parched soil; and where there are living prophets, there streams of living water flow, streams from which men may drink and never thirst more.

When Isaiah invites men to come unto Christ and believe his gospel, his cry is: "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters." (Isa. 55:1.) And in the echoing call recorded by the Beloved Revelator we hear: "Come. And let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely." (Rev. 22:17.) For our day, the day of restoration, the prophetic assurance promises: "And in the barren deserts there shall come forth pools of living water; and the parched ground shall no longer be a thirsty land." (D&C 133:29.) [^2]

And when the ceremonial performances of the Feast of Tabernacles were perfected, they too were designed to depict an outpouring of divine grace upon all men of all nations, using water as the symbol of life. As Edersheim observes, this feast "points forward to that great, yet unfulfilled hope of the Church: the ingathering of Earth's nations to the Christ," including the nations of heathendom, for whom sacrifices were then offered. "This eventuality can, of course, only be realized through the outpouring of the Holy Spirit upon the Gentile nations. As we have already seen, the daily and ritualistic pouring out of the water, which gave the whole festival the name House of Outpouring, was understood by the Rabbis to be symbolical of the outpouring of the Holy Spirit." (Edersheim 2:156.)

Now we must describe this performance, hear the cries of Hosanna that attend it, and show how all this prepared the way for Jesus to testify that he was the source of that living water of which all men must drink to gain salvation. We must not pass over this or any of the local settings in which Jesus chose to proclaim his eternal truths, and none of them is more dramatic than that which we shall now recount.

It has been calculated that it took "not fewer than 446 priests," and an equal number of Levites, to carry out the sacrificial worship at the Feast of Tabernacles. On each of the seven days, and possibly also on the octave day, one of these sons of Aaron, after the morning sacrifice was laid on the altar, drew three logs of water—somewhat more than two pints—from the Pool of Siloam. Attended by throngs of worshippers who carried their palm branches, to be waved in the Hosanna Shout, this priest brought the water from the pool in a golden ewer. A solemn procession carried the "living water" to the temple; joyous blasts on the sacred trumpets heralded its arrival; and while one priest poured it into a silver basin on the western side of the altar, another poured the wine for the drink-offering into another silver basin on the eastern side.

Then came the chanting by the Levites, with responses from the people, of the Hallel, which consists of Psalms 113 through 118. At designated places the people responded with the following cries:

"Hallelu Yah" (Praise ye the Lord, from which Hebraic expression comes the designation, Hallel); "O then, work now salvation, Jehovah"; "O Lord, send now prosperity"; and "O give thanks to the Lord." As these expressions were made—similarly, we suppose, as is the case in the latter-day Hosanna Shout—they waved their palm branches toward the great altar.

Then followed the special sacrificial offerings for the day and the chanting, to instrumental accompaniment, of the appointed psalm. On "the last day, that great day of the feast," this was Psalm 82:5, which—perhaps not without divine irony—read: "They know not, neither will they understand; they walk on in darkness: all the foundations of the earth are out of course." This reading was attended by three threefold blasts from the priestly trumpets while all the people bowed in worship.

"In further symbolism of this Feast, as pointing to the ingathering of the heathen nations, the public services closed with a procession round the Altar by the Priests, who chanted 'O then, work now salvation, Jehovah! O Jehovah, send now prosperity.' But on 'the last, the Great Day of the Feast,' this procession of Priests made the circuit of the altar, not only once, but seven times, as if they were again compassing, but now with prayer, the Gentile Jericho which barred their possession of the promised land. Hence the seventh or last day of the Feast was also called that of 'the Great Hosannah.' As the people left the Temple, they saluted the altar with words of thanks, and on the last day of the Feast they shook off the leaves on the willow-branches round the altar, and beat their palm-branches to pieces." (Edersheim 2:159-60.)

In the light of all this, there can be little doubt as to when Jesus stood and cried: "If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink." "It must have been with special reference to the ceremony of the outpouring of the water, which, as we have seen, was considered the central part of the service. Moreover, all would understand that His words must refer to the Holy Spirit, since the rite was universally regarded as symbolical of His outpouring." (Edersheim 2:160.) Thus we hear Jesus say:

He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. [^3]

To this John appends an explanation: "But this spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive; for the Holy Ghost was promised unto them who believe, after that Jesus was glorified."

Further, in setting the scene for the great proclamation, Edersheim continues: "The forthpouring of the water was immediately followed by the chanting of the Hallel. But after that there must have been a short pause to prepare for the festive sacrifices. It was then, immediately after the symbolic rite of water-pouring, immediately after the people had responded by repeating those lines from Psalm 118—given thanks, and prayed that Jehovah would send salvation and prosperity, and had shaken their Lulavs towards the altar, thus praising 'with heart, and mouth, and hands,' and then silence had fallen upon them—that there rose, so loud as to be heard throughout the Temple, the Voice of Jesus. He interrupted not the services, for they had for the moment ceased: He interpreted, and He fulfilled them." (Edersheim 2:160.)

"Never Man Spake like This Man"

(John 7:40-50; 8:1)

This great Man, on this great day, at this great feast—this Man, the mightiest of all the prophets of Israel—has now discharged the preacher's responsibility to this mob-multitude who mill about in the court of the temple, a court that can contain two hundred and ten thousand souls. He has preached the doctrine given him by his Father; he has reaffirmed his own divine Sonship; he has invited all men to come unto him and to drink that living water which quenches thirst forever. Now the event rests with the hearers. At the peril of their salvation they must make their choice. 'Is he the Christ, or wait we for another?' Multitudes, multitudes, in the Valley of Decision! For them the day of the Lord has come. He has thrust in his sickle to reap among a multitude whose wickedness is great. For some, the light of heaven blazes in their hearts; as to others, even the stars withdraw their shining.

Many said, "Of a truth this is the Prophet." The Prophet, the one like unto Moses, is the Messiah, their Deliverer, though as used here it may have meant to some, not the Anointed One himself, but his forerunner. Others said, "This is the Christ," a plain, straightforward declaration that partook of part of that spirit which attended the great confession of Peter.

Yet others queried: "Shall Christ come out of Galilee? Hath not our scripture said, That Christ cometh of the seed of David, and out of the town of Bethlehem, where David was?" How marvelously adept Lucifer is at quoting scripture for his own purposes! He did it to the Master himself, when after forty days of fasting Jesus was tempted in a face-to-face confrontation with Beelzebub. At that time he was totally discomfited by Him who gave the scripture. Now the evil one quotes holy writ by the mouths of his ministers, as it were, by the mouths of those who hearken to his enticements. And, as far as the record shows, there was none to refute their false assertions. Of course the Seed of David was to come from the City of David, from Bethlehem, as their scriptures said; but their scriptures also said that he was to come not only from Galilee, but from Nazareth in Galilee, that he, as the prophets foretold, would be called a Nazarene. [^4]

"So there was a division among the people because of him," just as there is division in so-called Christendom today, because of him, because some—again at the peril of their salvation—choose to worship a Christ of one sort, some of another. And again, in the temple court, some sought to arrest him for blasphemy, that he might be stoned, as Moses in the law commanded. "But no man laid hands on him," he declining again to be arrested. And we are left to wonder, to ponder in our hearts, how many in the religious climate of today would deny his doctrines and use the processes of the law to impede his work if he again ministered personally among men. Would they do other to Christ than they do to his servants?

After this, "the chief priests and Pharisees"—members, no doubt of the Great Sanhedrin itself—demanded of the temple police, "Why have ye not brought him?" Why indeed? Could any man arrest the Son of God before his time? If no man can take his life from him so that he must lay it down of himself, can any arrest him and hail him before the council unless he wills it? He at whose word ten legions of angels wield fiery flaming swords had work yet to do. Though their orders were strict, the officers dared not make the arrest. Some of his divine words had pricked their hearts; they were words that sapped their strength and paralyzed their wills. To their military superiors they could only respond: "Never man spake like this man."

"Are ye also deceived?" asked the rulers. 'Ye sons of Levi who serve in the temple itself, have you no more sense and judgment than this rabble to whom he preaches?' "Have any of the rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him?" 'If his claims were true, would not the rulers in the Great Sanhedrin—those who sit in judgment on the people and the law—be the first to know it? Surely the wise and the learned—the scribes who interpret the law and the Pharisees who live it to the very letter—these are the ones who should judge his claims.' "But this people who knoweth not the law are cursed." 'This ignorant rabble who have not been taught in the schools of Hillel and Shammai, who have never attended a divinity school to learn how to interpret the scriptures, are led by their superstitions to ruin.'

One voice on the council, one member of the Great Sanhedrin, was raised in Jesus' defense. Nicodemus, with whom Jesus conversed by night at the time of the First Passover, asked: "Doth our law judge any man, before it hear him, and know what he doeth?" What else Nicodemus said, we do not know; it is idle to suppose his defense was limited to one sentence only. But this single sentence sufficed to cut his colleagues to the core. They knew Jehovah's charge to the judges: "Hear the causes between your brethren, and judge righteously between every man and his brother, and the stranger that is with him. Ye shall not respect persons in judgment; but ye shall hear the small as well as the great; ye shall not be afraid of the face of man for the judgment is God's." (Deut. 1:16-17.)

There is no way to refute a right reply; the rulers fell back on their only recourse—taunts and derision. "Art thou also of Galilee?" they demanded of Nicodemus. "Search, and look: for out of Galilee ariseth no prophet." No? "Where then . . . was Gath-hepher, whence Jonah came? where Thisbe, whence Elijah came? where Elkosh, whence Nahum came? where the northern town whence Hosea came? . . . But there is no ignorance so deep as the ignorance that will not know; no blindness so incurable as the blindness which will not see. And the dogmatism of a narrow and stolid prejudice which believes itself to be theological learning is, of all others, the most ignorant and the most blind. Such was the spirit in which, ignoring the mild justice of Nicodemus, and the marvellous impression made by Jesus even on their own hostile apparitors, the majority of the Sanhedrin broke up, and went each to his own home." (Farrar, p. 421.)

"Jesus," however, "went unto the mount of Olives," and perhaps beyond to Bethany where dwelt his friends Mary and Martha and Lazarus, whence, on the morrow, he will return to continue his teaching in the temple.

The Woman Taken in Adultery

(John 8:2-11; JST John 8:9-11)

Early the next morning—October 18, A.D. 29, the day following "the Great Hosanna," when he had offered living water to all men—Jesus came early to the temple. Back from the quiet and peace and sweetness of the Mount of Olives, he was once again, at duty's call, amid the stench and smells and human filth of the city. When he was seated, probably in the Court of the Women, "all the people came unto him," to hear those words of eternal life which prepare men for immortal glory.

As his wondrous words flow forth, weaving themselves into the very fibers and sinews of believing souls, the scribes and Pharisees are about to confront him with one of the most devilish plots yet devised in their scheming minds. During the night a woman has been caught in the very act of adultery; they will ask him to judge her, thus forcing him to side, as they suppose, either with Moses or with Rome, where her heinous sin is involved. "The repeated instances in which, without a moment's hesitation, He foiled the crafty designs of His enemies, and in foiling them taught for ever some eternal principle of thought and action, are among the most unique and decisive proofs of His more than human wisdom; and yet not one of those gleams of sacred light which were struck from Him by collision with the malice or hate of man was brighter or more beautiful than this." [^5]

"It is probable that the hilarity and abandonment of the Feast of Tabernacles, which had grown to be a kind of vintage festival, would often degenerate into acts of licence and immorality, and these would find more numerous opportunities in general disturbance of ordinary life caused by the dwelling of the whole people in their leafy booths."

"Master, this woman was taken in adultery, in the very act," taunted the scribal rulers and Pharisaic hypocrites as they, with physical persuasion, placed her in the midst of those whom Jesus was teaching. "Now Moses in the law commanded us, that such should be stoned," they said, "but what sayest thou?" This cunningly devised interrogatory was in no sense a search for guidance, nor did it raise any point with reference to an infamous act of adultery that needed a decision. Though it was the custom to consult distinguished Rabbis in cases of doubt or difficulty, this was not such a case. They knew, and everyone knew, that Moses decreed death for adulterers, both of them, the man and the woman, and that the accuser's hand should cast the first stone. This was not such a case. The guilty man was absent; the aggrieved husband was lodging no charge; and no witnesses had been summoned, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word might be established. Their purpose, rather, as John expresses it, was to tempt him, "that they might have to accuse him."

The character of the conniving religionists is seen perfectly in their callous use of the woman. "To subject her to the superfluous horror of this odious publicity—to drag her, fresh from the agony of detection, into the sacred precincts of the Temple—to subject this unveiled, dishevelled, terror-stricken woman to the cold and sensual curiosity of a malignant mob—to make her, with total disregard to her own sufferings, the mere passive instrument of their hatred against Jesus—and to do all this, not under the pressure of moral indignation, but in order to gratify a calculating malice—showed on their parts a cold, hard cynicism, a graceless, pitiless, barbarous brutality of heart and conscience, which could not but prove, in every particular, revolting and hateful to One who alone was infinitely tender, because He alone was infinitely pure."

These wily scribes and crafty Pharisees have done their work well. 'Master, what sayest thou of this adulteress and the penalty she should receive?' "They thought that now they had caught Him in a dilemma. They knew the divine trembling pity which had loved where others hated, and praised where others scorned, and encouraged where others crushed; and they knew how that pity had won for Him the admiration of many, the passionate devotion of not a few. They knew that a publican was among His chosen, that sinners had sat with Him at the banquet, and harlots unreproved had bathed His feet, and listened to His words. Would He then acquit this woman, and so make Himself liable to an accusation of heresy, by placing Himself in open disaccord with the sacred and fiery Law? or, on the other hand, would He belie His own compassion, and be ruthless, and condemn? And, if He did, would He not at once shock the multitude, who were touched by His tenderness, and offend the civil magistrates by making Himself liable to a charge of sedition? How could He possibly get out of the difficulty? Either alternative—heresy or treason—accusation before the Sanhedrin or delation to the Procurator—opposition to the orthodox or alienation from the many—would serve equally well their unscrupulous intentions. And one of these, they thought, must follow. What a happy chance this weak, guilty woman had given them!"

Thus their trap was baited; but Jesus—not deigning to respond, scarce considering their stratagem worthy of a fleeting notice—"stooped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground, as though he heard them not." Perhaps what he wrote were the words he was about to speak; perhaps the act was symbolical—a symbol of forgiveness, "a symbol that the memory of things thus written in the dust might be obliterated and forgotten." But his detractors, inattentive to what they might learn, insensitive to anything but the scheme they had so cunningly devised, continue to attack him with their repetitious question: 'What sayest thou?'

Jesus stood up. He spoke. "He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her." Those words alone sufficed. He spoke, and they knew he spoke, not of sins in general, but of the same sin—adultery—of which the woman was guilty. 'He among you that is not an adulterer, let him cast the first stone.' What saith the law of Moses? "The hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him to put him to death, and afterward the hands of all the people." (Deut. 17:7.) Jesus had read their hearts and discerned their sins. There were none fit to accuse her according to the law. "And again he stooped down, and wrote on the ground."

"The spirit which actuated these Scribes and Pharisees was not by any means the spirit of a sincere and outraged purity. In the decadence of national life, in the daily familiarity with heathen degradations, in the gradual substitution of a Levitical scrupulosity for a heartfelt religion, the morals of the nation had grown utterly corrupt. . . . Not even the Scribes and Pharisees—for all their external religiosity—had any genuine horror of an impurity with which their own lives were often stained. They saw in the accident which had put this guilty woman into their power nothing but a chance of annoying, entrapping, possibly even endangering this Prophet of Galilee, whom they already regarded as their deadliest enemy."

As Jesus pointedly ignored the evil and sinful leaders of the people, they slunk guiltily away. "Convicted by their own conscience," they went out of the temple "one by one, beginning at the eldest, even unto the last. . . . He had but calmly spoken a few simple words, but those words like the still small voice to Elijah at Horeb, had been more terrible than wind or earthquake. They had fallen like a spark of fire upon slumbering hearts, and lay burning there till 'the blushing, shame-faced spirit' mutinied within them. The Scribes and Pharisees stood silent and fearful; they loosed their hold upon the woman; their insolent glances, so full of guile and malice, fell guiltily to the ground. They who had unjustly inflicted, now justly felt the overwhelming anguish of an intolerable shame, while over their guilty consciences there rolled, in crash on crash of thunder, such thoughts as these:—'Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judgest: for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself: for thou that judgest doest the same things. But we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth against them which commit such things. And thinkest thou this, O man, that judgest them which do such things and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the judgment of God? Or despisest thou the riches of His goodness and forbearance, and long-suffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance? but after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up to thyself wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God, who will render to every man according to his deeds.' (Rom. 2:1-6.) They were 'such' as the woman they had condemned, and they dared not stay."

Permitting the sin-smitten scribes and the impure Pharisees to depart without so much as a glance, Jesus then stood up again. "Woman, where are those thine accusers? hath no man condemned thee?" he asked.

"No man, Lord," she replied. "Neither do I condemn thee; go, and sin no more. And the woman glorified God from that hour, and believed on his name." And, we cannot doubt, she repented of her sins, was washed clean in the waters of baptism, and joined herself to the true believers who through righteousness have their garments washed clean by the blood of the Lamb.

We cannot, at this point, refrain from expressing these words of sound doctrine: Jesus did not condone an adulterous act; rather, he did and does condemn those who commit any immoral act. Those guilty of sexual sins, including adultery and homosexual perversions, may repent and be saved in the kingdom of the Father. When he says here that he does not condemn this woman, his words carry two connotations: (1) He does not condemn her within the meaning of the Mosaic law where her accuser is obligated to sit in judgment and cast the first stone, and (2) he does not condemn her because she repented and became clean before him.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Such was the proclamation of the Promised Messiah, spoken to the brother of Jared more than two millennia before his mortal birth.
[^2] Such were the words of the Risen Lord, spoken to the Nephites after he had tabernacled in the flesh.
[^3] "Remission of sins before death (and the consequent status of cleanliness and purity which assures the sin-free person of eventual salvation) comes to accountable men in one way and one way only. By conformity to the following eternal principles sins are remitted: (1) Men must believe in Christ as the very Son of God, the actual Redeemer and Savior through whose atoning sacrifice the whole plan of redemption and salvation is made operative; (2) Then being moved upon by a godly sorrow for sin they must forsake evil, turn to righteousness, and repent of their wrongdoings with all their hearts; (3) Thereafter they must be baptized in water for the remission of sins, under the hands of a legal administrator; and (4) Following this, also under the hands of a legal administrator, they must receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. "Those who take these steps and who endure in righteousness thereafter are saved; all others are damned. Thus by rejecting their King-Messiah these Jews would inevitably and surely die in their sins and be precluded from going to that eternal kingdom where the Eternal King reigns forever. And what was true for them applies in principle to men of all ages." (Commentary 1:454-55.)
[^4] An interesting sidelight on Matthew's quotation that Jesus would be called a Nazarene because he dwelt in Nazareth (Matt. 2:23) is that Nazarene (Netzer in Hebrew) has the same root word as Branch. The Nazarene was the promised Branch. (Isa. 11:1; Jer. 23:5; 33:15; Zech. 3:8.)
[^5] This quotation and the balance of those in this subsection, "The Woman Taken in Adultery," are found in Farrar, chapter 40, pages 422-31. In this chapter, as Edersheim comments, Archdeacon Farrar has written "some of his most pictorial pages." (Edersheim 2:163, footnote 1.)
