Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 71

Messiah—The Light of the World

In me shall all mankind have light, and that eternally, even they who shall believe on my name. (Ether 3:14.) [^1]

Behold I am the light; I have set an example for you. . . . Behold I am the light which ye shall hold up—that which ye have seen me do. (3 Ne. 18:16, 24.) [^2]

"I Am the Light of the World"

(John 8:12)

Few of our Lord's bold utterances had such an effect on his Jewish hearers as did his claim to Messiahship by saying he was the Light of the World. Heretofore he has named himself as the Bread of Life, which if men eat they shall never hunger more. Only yesterday he offered living water to all who thirst for spiritual drink. His present claim to be the Light—the Example, Guide, Archetype, Model—the Perfect Pattern for all men, this claim surpasses in some respects all of the other Messianic symbolisms he has applied to himself.

To envision its meaning and effect upon his Jewish hearers, we must realize two things that they knew: (1) their Messianic prophecies spoke plainly of a deliverer who would bring light to Israel and—note it well—to all nations; and (2) those fonts of Jewish wisdom, the scribes and Rabbis, taught that the Messiah would be the Light of men.

What Jesus will now do is apply the Messianic prophecies and the Rabbinic teachings to himself. It is not the doctrinal principle that is at stake—there is universal agreement on that; it is the application of what the prophets and the Rabbis have said to the person of this Man from Galilee who has now come into Judea to say to the Jews what he has been saying all along to his Galilean compatriots.

Indeed, how could the Promised Messiah come to declare glad tidings to the meek, to preach the gospel to the poor, to free men from the bondage of sin, without bringing light into the world? How could the Holy One of Israel—who is sinless and perfect, and who is the same everlastingly—come into mortality without remaining as the Sinless One and therefore being a light and an example to all men? If the Great Jehovah—the Lord Omnipotent, who was and is from all eternity—was destined to make flesh his tabernacle, how could he do other than bring with him the effulgent light and glory which dwelt in his person?

With reference to his eternal status as the Lord Jehovah, the prophetic word abounds in such statements as: "The Lord is my light and my salvation." (Ps. 27:1.) "O send out thy light and thy truth: let them lead me." (Ps. 43:3.) "God is the Lord, which hath shewed us light." (Ps. 118:27.) "Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path." (Ps. 119:105.) None can doubt that the Jewish Jehovah who led their fathers was himself the source of light and truth for all.

With reference to his future Messianic ministry, his ministry among mortals as the Son of God, it is written: "I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth." (Isa. 49:6.) Of the kingdom he shall set up the prophetic word is: "And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising." (Isa. 60:3.) And of his personal ministry among men, a ministry in the Gentile-infested lands of Zebulun and Naphtali, Isaiah says: "The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light: they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined." (Isa. 9:2.) And so the saintly Simeon, having long waited for the Consolation of Israel to come—while holding the Child in his arms in Jehovah's house, and while speaking as the Holy Ghost gave him utterance—this devout and righteous man acclaimed Mary's Son as "a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel." (Luke 2:32.)

The teachings of the Rabbis, naming their Messiah as the great light-bearer to the world, are summarized in these words: In the Midrash we are told that, "while commonly windows were made wide within and narrow without, it was the opposite in the Temple of Solomon, because the light, issuing from the Sanctuary was to lighten that which was without." Further, "That, if the light in the Sanctuary was to be always burning before Jehovah, the reason was, not that He needed such light, but that He honoured Israel with this as a symbolic command. In Messianic times God would, in fulfilment of the prophetic meaning of this rite, 'kindle for them a Great Light,' and the nations of the world would point to them, who had lit the light for Him Who lightened the whole world." Still further, "The Rabbis speak of the original light in which God had wrapped Himself as in a garment, and which could not shine by day, because it would have dimmed the light of the sun. From this light that of the sun, moon, and stars had been kindled. It was now reserved under the throne of God for the Messiah, in Whose days it would shine forth once more." And finally, the Midrash designates "the Messiah . . . as the Enlightener." Of him it says: "The light dwelleth with Him." (Edersheim 2:166.)

Thus, he, the Jewish Messiah, according to their own prophetic recitations and according to their Rabbinic teachings, was destined to be a light, not alone to the scattered remnants of Jewish Israel, but to the heathens, the Gentile nations, those always supposed by the devout among them to be outside the pale of saving grace. Their Messiah was to be the Light of the World.

Jesus is now about to proclaim himself as the Light of the World. He is choosing Tabernacles Times as the setting for such a proclamation for two very good reasons: (1) This is the feast, as we have seen, when sacrifices are offered for the nations of heathendom, the season when the chosen seed turn their thoughts to sending forth light and truth to those who sit in darkness; and (2) this is the festal season when each night the great candelabra are lighted in the temple to symbolize the sending forth of light to the inhabitants of the city and the world. Perhaps some circumstance arose to point the attention of the multitudes to these gigantic candelabra, fifty cubits in height, whereon were the lamps from which the light went forth. In any event Jesus took occasion, in this setting and at this feast, to announce:

I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life.

The Light of the World! Jew and Gentile alike—all persons—must look to him. How well Jesus has applied the symbolisms of the feast to himself. 'I, Jesus, am the Source; light and truth shine forth from me. My word is light; it is truth. Follow me; I am the Exemplar. Believe my gospel and ye shall no longer walk in darkness; do as I do, and ye shall be as I am. Ye shall have the light which giveth life, the light leading to eternal life.'

The Pharisees Reject the Light

(John 8:13-20)

We now see something that makes us weep, weep for the spiritual blindness and depravity of a whole race of religionists. It is not as though the prophecies and Messianic concepts are foreign to them. They know, and have been taught for thousands of years, that one will come and announce himself as the Light of the World. They and their fathers have looked forward to this day for four millennia, a day when they that sit in darkness shall see a great light, a day when the Deliverer shall come to Israel to pierce the darkness of the night with the light of life, with the light of eternal life.

Here in the midst of the chosen race is a man like none other they have ever seen; here sitting in the treasury in the holy temple is one who says: 'I am the Light of the World; I am your promised Messiah; I am the Son of God. Come unto me and ye shall be saved.' He is the same man who is known by all the people as the one who opens blind eyes, unstops deaf ears, and commands the spirits of men to enter embalmed corpses so that dead men live again. He is the one who is known by all of them to cleanse lepers, cast out evil spirits, and to say to raging storms, 'Cease,' and it is so. He is the one who speaks—and this none of them can deny—as never man spake. His simple eloquence surpasses that of their greatest orators and their most profound preachers.

And yet they do not believe; they choose to reject him and his message. In direct response to his personal witness that he is the Light of the World, the Pharisees say: "Thou bearest record of thyself; thy record is not true." There are none so blind as they who will not see, none so deaf as those who will not hear. Why this utter disbelief? Why do they say the sun does not shine while they see it? The answer has been given before. It was at the First Passover. It is that men love darkness rather than light because their deeds are evil, and they come not to the light lest their evil deeds should be reproved. (See chapter 30, Book 1.)

But no man, least of all these pious Pharisees, says, 'I choose to walk in darkness because I am a sinner.' What, then, is the excuse they give for rejecting the Light? It is that his words do not comply with the requisites of their divine law of witnesses because he alone is attesting to their verity. This also is a matter that he has answered before, at the Second Passover, when he acclaimed his divine Sonship in pointed and precise words and showed that the same witness had also been borne by John the Baptist, by his Father, by inspired witnesses as they were moved upon by the Holy Spirit, and by their whole body of scriptural writ. (See chapter 38, Book 2.) Now his response is:

Though I bear record of myself, yet my record is true: for I know whence I came, and whither I go; but ye cannot tell whence I come, and whither I go.

By claiming Jesus could not bear a true witness of his own divinity, the Pharisees were attempting to use a rule of judicial procedure that rejected uncorroborated personal testimony. In court procedures all things were established in the mouths of two or three witnesses. They were thus presuming to sit in judgment on him. In a moment he will name another, his Father, who is also his witness; but first he rejects their assertion that even his unsupported testimony is not true, and in doing so makes himself the judge rather than the one on trial.

He knows his origin, whence he came, and whither he will soon go; they do not. He can testify of these things. He knows; they are without knowledge and can give only negative testimony, as it were. Witnesses can testify only to what they know, not what they do not know. Jehovah tells his people, "Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, that I am God." (Isa. 43:12.) Thus, those saints who know of the existence of God by revelation from the Holy Ghost can testify "I know God lives," but someone else who does not know this cannot testify "There is no God." The fact that someone does not know something is not evidence that the thing is not true. In this case Jesus can testify as to who he is because he knows; the Pharisees cannot deny this because it is something they do not know. Their only valid testimony would be that they did not know one way or the other. And so Jesus continues:

Ye judge after the flesh; I judge no man. And yet if I judge, my judgment is true: for I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me.

'Ye seek to judge me by the law, which requires added witnesses. I do not involve myself in such contentions. When I sit in judgment on any matter, my decisions are true and righteous, for I do not judge by myself alone, but give the decision of him who sent me, who is the Father.' This assertion determined the matter from the eternal standpoint; such were the realities where the everlasting truths of salvation were concerned. He was Christ, and Christ is God, and his testimony alone sufficed on that point. But there was, in fact, more; even if they chose to sit in judgment on him according to their legal system, he nonetheless met their requirements.

It is also written in your law, that the testimony of two men is true. I am one that bear witness of myself, and the Father that sent me beareth witness of me.

This, as we have heretofore seen, is the divine law of witnesses. It operated in Jesus' case. Two "men" bore witness of him; he was one man, the Father was the other. God himself is a Holy Man.

Thereupon the Pharisees asked, not who is the Father—Jesus had made that abundantly clear on this and numerous occasions—but "Where is thy Father?" Perhaps in their spiritually benighted state they assumed the Father should come personally to bear witness of the Son, rather than doing it, as his eternal law provides, by the power of the Holy Ghost.

Ye neither know me, nor my Father: if ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also.

This is the sum and substance of the whole matter. Because they did not believe in the Son, they were unable to believe in the Father. How can anyone believe that the Son is the offspring of the Father without believing that the Father is the progenitor of the Son? To know one is to know the other; and to disbelieve in one is to disbelieve in the other. Having so spoken, having thus uttered words that had the ring of blasphemy in Pharisaic ears, the expected reaction should have been 'Let him be stoned as our law requires, for he maketh himself God.' But as John concludes, "No man laid hands on him; for his hour was not yet come."

"Believe in Me, or Die in Your Sins"

(John 8:21-30)

I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and shall die in your sins: whither I go, ye cannot come.

These words, spoken later, perhaps in one of the porches of the temple, are obviously the conclusion of some more extended teaching on Jesus' part. He is saying that the Son will go his own way back to the Father. He will not serve as the temporal Messiah whom they desire, though they will continue to seek for such a worldly ruler. But because they believe neither in him nor in his Father, they shall die in their sins. All men have sinned, and those only who believe, repent, are baptized, and receive the Holy Ghost become clean and qualify for a celestial inheritance. None others can go where he is. [^3]

This doctrine is strong; the meaning is clear to Jewish ears; even these rebellious Jerusalemites know he is speaking of his atoning sacrifice and death, and of his heavenly abiding place with his Father. They know too that they have been plotting that very death. He must not, from their standpoint, be permitted to leave any implication that they, the Jews, will be guilty of his death. Alert to their own defense, they say—it is not a question to him but an assertion to the multitude—"Will he kill himself? because he saith, Whither I go, ye cannot come." 'See, he is going to commit suicide and go down to Sheol, where none of us Jews will go.'

Jesus knows their designs and intents. They shall not escape responsibility for their evil plans by such self-serving statements. He says:

Ye are from beneath; I am from above: ye are of this world; I am not of this world.

'Ye yourselves are from the nether realms; I am from heaven. Ye are carnal, sensual, and devilish, and ye pursue a worldly course, a course that thirsts for my blood; I am righteous and live by a higher standard.'

I said therefore unto you, that ye shall die in your sins: for if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins.

'I repeat; your deeds are evil; you are sinners; ye seek that which is evil; and ye shall die in your sins. I alone can save you; remission of sins comes by faith, repentance, and baptism. If you do not believe in me, ye shall die in your sins and be damned in eternity.'

Again the meaning is clear: again Jewish ears know he is hurling anathemas upon them for rejecting him; again they know he is damning them for their contempt toward him. What is their defense? Perhaps they can trap him into saying something that is clearly blasphemous and that will further their death-devising schemes. "Who art thou?" they ask. His reply:

Even the same that I said unto you from the beginning.

'Why try and trap me now? From the beginning of my ministry—throughout Judea and Galilee and among those who are aliens, always and everywhere—I have borne the same witness. My identity is of record. All who have heard me speak know what I have said about me and my Father.' And further:

I have many things to say and to judge of you: but he that sent me is true; and I speak to the world those things which I have heard of him.

Sadly, as John records, there were among them those who "understood not that he spake to them of the Father." In spite of all that he had said and now said, a veil of disbelief covered their hearts. Wicked and carnal men cannot comprehend the things of the Spirit; only those who hearken to the promptings of that light—the light of conscience, the Light of Christ, that light with which all men are endowed—only those are led to the truth.

When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am he, and that I do nothing of myself; but as my Father hath taught me, I speak these things.

And he that sent me is with me: the Father hath not left me alone; for I do always those things that please him.

'I shall be crucified. Ye shall, by Roman hands, lift me up upon the cross; ye shall, by a Roman spear, pierce my side; and finally, in a distant day, ye shall look on me whom ye have pierced, and know that I am he who came to bring salvation. And yet, even I can do nothing of myself. I serve at my Father's behest; he taught me all I know, and I speak his words. He sent me. I am his Son, and he is ever with me, for I keep his commandments.'

"As he spake these words," John says, "Many believed on him." Or better, as we are about to see, many began to believe on him, for their faith was not yet perfect, and they had much yet to do to become his disciples indeed.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] It is unthinkable to me, as the weight of opinion assumes, that these Jews had any reference whatever to political freedom in their response to Jesus. They knew full well that their fathers had been slaves in Egypt for four hundred years; that ten of their tribes had been taken into Assyrian bondage and were lost to the knowledge of men; that their fathers had suffered a Babylonian exile, with only a remnant returning; and that even then a Roman yoke weighed heavily upon their bowed shoulders. In my mind the dialogue here involved is, in the mind of both Jesus and his opponents, one dealing with spiritual freedom, with the gospel freedom that leads to eternal life.
[^2] Some of the paraphrasing quotes involved in the dialogue here involved are also taken from this portion of my Commentary, vol. 1.
[^3] These words are not, of course, in the King James Version of the Bible. It is of considerable interest and import, therefore, to note Edersheim's comment that "even Jewish tradition" asserted that "Abraham had, in vision, been shown not only this [that is, our Lord's day], but the coming world—and not only all events in the present 'age,' but also those in Messianic times." And further: "In the Targum Jerusalem on Gen. 15 also it seems implied that Abraham saw in vision all that would befall his children in the future, and also Gehenna and its torments." (Edersheim 2:176, including footnote 1.)
