Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 72

Abraham's Seed

We be Abraham's children, the Jews said to Jove; We shall follow our Father; inherit his trove. But from Jesus our Lord came the stinging rebuke: Ye are children of him whom ye list to obey; Were ye Abraham's seed ye would walk in his path, And escape the strong chains of the father of wrath.

We have Moses the seer, and the prophets of old; All their words we shall treasure as silver and gold. But from Jesus our Lord came the sobering voice: If to Moses ye turn, then give heed to his word; Only then can ye hope for rewards of great worth, For he spake of my coming and labors on earth.

We have Peter and Paul; in their steps let us trod; So religionists say, as they worship their God. But speaks he who is Lord of the living and dead: In the hands of those prophets, those teachers and seers, Who abide in your day have I given the keys; Unto them ye must turn, the Eternal to please.

"The Truth Shall Make You Free"

(John 8:31-36)

As the festal fellowship and sociality of the Feast of Tabernacles comes to a close, the temple courts present a disconcerting scene of confusion and contention. A motley multitude assembles in groups in the various porches to hear the words of prominent Rabbis. In the courts are lowing cattle and bleating sheep destined to die in the sacrificial rites. The autumn breezes carry the smell of dung and the stench of urine. Moneychangers ply their trade: the temple bazaars do a thriving business; and the sons of Annas gather extortionate sums into their rapacious pockets.

Large crowds gather around Jesus in one of the porches as he seats himself to continue the day-long doctrinal dialogues that have now been going on for four or five days. Some of the multitude are friendly, some unfriendly; some are meek and lowly in heart, others are conniving and mendacious. Sanhedrinists are present, those sanctimonious souls who delight to bear the religious burdens of the nation. There are pious priests and supercilious scribes. The Pharisees, who make broad their phylacteries and from whose garments hang the holy tassels in token of their covenant to be a people set apart, mingle among them. We see rude Galileans, haughty Judeans, worldly-wise Gentiles. There are pilgrims from afar, from Egypt and Greece and Rome, even, perhaps, from so distant a land as Spain, for the Jews in this day are everywhere. Herodians, ever alert to the interest of Rome, are infiltrated among them, and Roman soldiers are not far off, awaiting the call, if needed, to keep the peace. Mingling also with the group are the disciples, Peter and John and the others, hearing the words of the Master and participating in numerous gospel discussions.

At one time Jesus converses with one group, at another with a different one. Certain among the multitude have just heard him testify—with power beyond compare—of his coming atonement and that God is his Father. They believe his doctrine and their hearts are pricked by the power of his testimony, but they are not yet as those who have borne with him the heat of the day and who have worked miracles in his name. To these newly gained partial believers he says:

If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.

'You have begun to believe; you are exercising a particle of faith. My words, as a good seed, are beginning to sprout in your souls; and in this you have done well. But, if you are to be my true disciples—my intimate friends; those who are ever with me; those who sit with me in the kingdom of my Father—you must feast upon my words and keep my commandments. Then shall ye be my disciples. Then shall ye know the truth. Your minds shall be quick and active; ye shall receive revelation by the power of the Spirit; and the gifts of the Spirit shall be poured out upon you. Then ye shall know the truths of salvation; ye shall understand the gospel; ye shall know the things you must do to gain peace in this life and eternal life in the world to come. The truth will make you free—free from darkness, free from all the soul-shackling traditions that keep you from salvation.'

The truth shall make you free!—"Free from the damning power of false doctrine; free from the bondage of appetite and lust; free from the shackles of sin; free from every evil and corrupt influence and from every restraining and curtailing power; free to go on to the unlimited freedom enjoyed in its fulness only by exalted beings." (Commentary 1:456-57.)

With Jesus' statement—affirming that a knowledge of the truth as he revealed it would lead them to salvation—their faith died aborning. No, they would not continue in his word to gain the truth. Rather, "We be Abraham's seed," they said, "and were never in bondage to any man: how sayest thou, Ye shall be made free?"

'We are the chosen seed. God called Abraham, our father, and gave the truths of salvation to him and to his seed forever. None but the chosen seed have the truth; none but they shall be saved. All who are alien to Israel shall be damned. We are already free, free from all damning restraints of the heathens around us. We do not need you to make us free. You need not bring us another system of religion. We already have the Abrahamic covenant of salvation.' [^1]

And all this has such a familiar spirit. These same Jews, when John the Baptist sought to introduce a new order of truth and salvation, said within themselves, "We have Abraham to our father." 'We do not need a new covenant. We are free from Gentile delusions; we shall be saved.' And such, sadly, is ever and always the cry of apostate peoples. Their wont is to rely on the promises made to prophets of old, rather than to accept the new revelation sent from heaven in their day. But to all this Jesus has a reply.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whosoever committeth sin is the servant of sin. And the servant abideth not in the house for ever: but the Son abideth ever. If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.

'True, you are Abraham's seed in the literal and temporal sense; you are descended from him; and his blood flows in your veins. As such you abide in his house here in this life and suppose you shall so abide forever.' "Temporally speaking, only members of the family abide permanently in the house; servants come and go in their menial ministrations; they cannot abide forever in the house unless freed from their station as bondsmen; they remain outside the inner circle unless adopted as members of the family, thus being made legal heirs of all its privileges."

'But you are not Abraham's seed in the spiritual and eternal sense, because you commit sin and are therefore the servants of sin. Said I not unto you, If ye believe not that I am the Messiah, ye shall die in your sins?' "Only the family members, the freemen, the sons and daughters of God, shall abide forever in his kingdom; the servants, those bound by the chains of sin, shall minister in their assigned spheres; they cannot abide in the Father's house unless freed from sin through the cleansing power of the Son. To gain an inheritance in the spiritual kingdom, they must be spiritually begotten of the Father, adopted into his family as joint-heirs with the Son."

Thus: 'You may belong to the household of Abraham now in mortality, but it may not be so always. Only those who believe in me as the Son of God shall abide in the household of faithful Abraham in the eternal worlds. If ye forsake sin, and believe in the Son, he shall make you free from spiritual bondage, and only the free shall be Abraham's seed hereafter.' (Commentary 1:457.)

Who Are the Children of Abraham?

(John 8:37-50; JST John 8:43, 47)

"Ye are the children of the prophets; and ye are of the house of Israel; and ye are of the covenant which the Father made with your fathers, saying unto Abraham: And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed." So spoke the Risen Lord to the Nephite remnant of Israel; so might the Mortal Lord have spoken to those Jews who stood in his presence on this 18th day of October, A.D. 29, on the octave of the Feast of Tabernacles in that year; and so might he speak to that remnant of his ancient people who have been gathered into the true fold and kingdom in our day.

Children of the prophets! The literal seed of Abraham, the seed of his body, his posterity who are natural heirs of the blessings of their father! And those blessings are the blessings of celestial marriage, of an enduring family unit, of posterity both in the world and out of the world, as numerous as the sands upon the seashore or as the stars in the heavens. They are the blessings of eternal increase, of eternal life in the Everlasting Presence.

"The Father having raised me up unto you first, and sent me to bless you in turning away every one of you from his iniquities; and this because ye are the children of the covenant—And after that ye were blessed then fulfilleth the Father the covenant which he made with Abraham, saying: In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed—unto the pouring out of the Holy Ghost through me upon the Gentiles." (3 Ne. 20:25-27.)

Children of the covenant! God covenanted with Abraham to save and exalt him, and his literal seed, and also all the Gentiles who would join his family by adoption—all on condition that those to be honored thus in eternity would accept the Messiah and keep his commandments. Even the Gentiles who were adopted into the family of Abraham would receive the Holy Ghost, the greatest gift that can be conferred upon men in mortality.

With reference to the dialogue digested in John 8:37-50, which we are here considering, I have written elsewhere: "For nearly 2,000 years all Israel had clung tenaciously to God's promise to Abraham: 'I will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.' Also: 'And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.' Now these unbelieving Jews, a remnant of the seed of faithful Abraham, glorying in their Abrahamic descent, contended with Jesus about their assumed preferential status as the 'seed' of that ancient patriarch.

"To understand this discussion between Jesus and his Jewish detractors, it must be remembered that men are born in various families, nations, and races as a direct result of their preexistent life. Many choice spirits from preexistence are sent in selected families. This enables them to undergo their mortal probations under circumstances where the gospel and its blessings will be more readily available to them.

"Abraham gained the promise from the Lord that his descendants, his 'literal seed, . . . the seed of the body,' would be natural heirs to all of 'the blessings of the Gospel.' His seed were to be 'lawful heirs, according to the flesh,' because of their 'lineage.' Accordingly, since Abraham's day, the Lord has sent a host of righteous spirits through that favored lineage.

"Further, Abraham also gained the divine assurance that all those who thereafter received the gospel, no matter what their literal lineage, should be 'accounted' his seed and should rise up and bless him as their father. By adoption such converts would 'become . . . the seed of Abraham.' Conversely, and in this spiritual sense, such of the literal seed of Abraham as rejected the gospel light would be cut off from the house of their fathers and be denied an eternal inheritance with Israel and Abraham. 'For they are not all Israel, which are of Israel,' as Paul explained it. 'Neither, because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children: . . . That is, They which are the children of the flesh, these are not the children of God: but the children of the promise are counted for the seed.'

"Thus there are two distinct meanings of the expression, 'seed of Abraham': (1) There are his literal descendants who have sprung from his loins and who by virtue of their favored family status are natural heirs of the same blessings which Abraham himself enjoyed; and (2) There are those (including adopted members of the family) who become the 'seed of Abraham' in the full spiritual sense by conformity to the same gospel principles which Abraham obeyed. In this spiritual sense, the disobedient literal descendants of Abraham, being 'children of the flesh,' are not 'accounted' as Abraham's seed, but are cut off from the blessings of the gospel." (Commentary 1:458-60.)

Now we are ready for the conversation itself. Jesus said: "I know that ye are Abraham's seed; but ye seek to kill me, because my word hath no place in you. I speak that which I have seen with my Father: and ye do that which ye have seen with your father." 'Ye are Abraham's seed in this life, but you are not his children spiritually, because ye reject Him in whom Abraham believed and whose gospel he lived. Nay, more, ye even seek to kill me in whom Abraham believed. Ye seek to kill me because I speak that which I have received from my Father for your good. But in seeking to kill me, you do that which your father desires.' To this, without thought or reason, they chant back: "Abraham is our father." Jesus replies:

If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham. But now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth, which I have heard of God: this did not Abraham. Ye do the deeds of your father.

The works of Abraham! The works of righteousness—for "Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness" (Rom. 4:3)—Abraham's works of righteousness were these: He had faith in the Lord Jehovah, whose gospel he believed and in whose paths he walked; he repented of his sins, was baptized, after the manner of his fathers, and received the gift of the Holy Ghost. Thereafter he endured in good works all his days—honoring the priesthood, living in the patriarchal order of matrimony, receiving visions and revelations and the gifts of the Spirit, and worshipping the Father in the name of the Son, as did Adam and all of the ancients. As to that celestial marriage practiced by Abraham and that eternal life which grows out of it, the revealed word to latter-day Israel is: "This promise is yours also, because ye are of Abraham, and the promise was made unto Abraham; and by this law is the continuation of the works of my Father, wherein he glorifieth himself. Go ye, therefore, and do the works of Abraham; enter ye into my law and ye shall be saved." (D&C 132:31-32.)

But these rebellious sons—sons physically but not spiritually—seek to slay the very Jehovah whom Abraham their father revered. And they do it because he tells them some of the same truths he revealed to Abraham, truths that he learned from his Father, Elohim. Such a course was counter to all that the ancient patriarch stood for, and these Jews, therefore, were doing the deeds not of righteous Abraham, but of an evil father. 'Ye are apostates who walk in the way of wickedness, being led by the devil whom ye have adopted as your father.'

"We be not born of fornication," they reply; "we have one Father, even God." 'The devil is not our father; we are not spiritually illegitimate. We are the children of Abraham and have the true religion, and hence God is our Father.'

If God were your Father, ye would love me: for I proceeded forth and came from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent me.

'If ye had the true religion, thus making God your Father, ye would accept me, for God sent me to lead men to him. How can you believe in the Father and reject the Son, who is in the express image of the Father and who came forth from him, and who speaks his words and does his works?'

Why do ye not understand my speech? even because ye cannot bear my word. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do.

The wicked and ungodly cannot bear the word of God; it is a burden that crushes their souls and leaves them lifeless in the dust of despair. And further, "Just as surely as the obedient 'receive the adoption of sons,' becoming 'children of God,' so the disobedient are adopted into the Church or kingdom of the devil, thus becoming children of the devil." (Commentary 1:461.) [^2] As to the satanic father of these satanic sons, Jesus now says:

He was a murderer from the beginning and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it.

Satan is real; he is personal; he is an entity, a personage, a spirit being. He is as personal and real as any of the spirit offspring of the Father—for such he is: "Lucifer, a son of the morning"; "Perdition," over whom "the heavens wept" (D&C 76:26); the devil, who rebelled and defied God and all the hosts of Michael; the old dragon, whose tail drew a third of the stars of heaven, in the day when there was war in heaven. He was a murderer from the beginning in that he sought to destroy light and truth and whispers to every evil Cain to choose and slay a righteous Abel. As the enemy of truth he is the friend of falsehood. He was a liar in preexistence and is so now. Any truths spoken by him or his servants are interlaced with lies in an effort to make his own "gospel" more palatable to the minds of men. He is the one who "stirreth up the children of men"—as in the case of these Jews—"unto secret combinations of murder and all manner of secret works of darkness." (2 Ne. 9:9.)

And because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not. Which of you convinceth me of sin? And if I say the truth, why do ye not believe me? He that is of God receiveth God's words; ye therefore receive them not, because ye are not of God.

'I am without sin; my course of life is perfect. Since none of you can find any sin in me, it should be apparent that my life and teachings are in perfect harmony with the truth, and consequently what I tell you is true. Why then do ye not believe me? If ye had the truths of salvation so as to be the children of God, ye would accept the word of God which I now deliver unto you. But the very fact you do not accept my words shows you are not of God and do not have the true religion which is of God.'

Unable to answer him, and in a pitch of hatred and fury, the Jews ask—though it is more of a proclamation than a question—"Say we not well that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil?" How often they resort to the cry, 'Thou hast a devil,' to justify in their own minds their violent opposition. The demeaning slur that he is a Samaritan, however, is not an accusation that he came from Samaria or was one of that hated race. At this very feast they have attempted to belittle him as a Galilean, not a Samaritan. Edersheim tells us that the word meaning Samaritan "is almost as often used in the sense of heretic," and that it is "sometimes used as the equivalent of . . . the Prince of the demons." (Edersheim 2:174.) These evil men, steeped in iniquity and trained in priestcraft, are thus saying that he has a devil and is a heretic, or, worse, the very prince of demons himself. Our Lord's reply is simply to say:

I have not a devil; but I honour my Father, and ye do dishonour me. And I seek not mine own glory: there is one that seeketh and judgeth.

'I am not possessed of a devil. If I were, my teachings and works would not honor and glorify my Father as they do. But ye dishonor me because I am of God and ye are not. I seek not mine own glory, as do those who are of the devil; but there is one, even God, who seeketh it for me, and he will judge those who dishonor me.'

‘Before Abraham Was I Jehovah’

(John 8:51-59)

This period of preaching is rising toward its glorious climax. Soon, in a perfectly orchestrated crescendo of divine music, the Sinless One will acclaim his divine Sonship in words we have never before heard him use: his witness will be as when a bush burned and was not consumed, or when smoke and fire and quaking spread themselves over Sinai as the Lord Jehovah wrote the law on tablets of stone with his own finger. This time, however, the Man Jesus will write the witness in the broken hearts of believing disciples, while the stony hearts of the sons of Satan will maintain their granitic hardness. As the tempo and tone of the great orchestration takes on new power, Jesus says:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man keep my saying, he shall never see death.

Again he speaks of "my word," of "my saying," as well he might, for he is God; and the word comes from him even as it comes from his Father. "My word . . . is my law." (D&C 132:12.) Prophets speak of the word of the Lord; Jesus speaks of his own word and that of his Father. Those who keep his commandments shall never see death; they shall not die spiritually. It is the same doctrine he has taught before; it is a thoroughly Jewish way of speaking. According to their own traditions, the Messiah would come bringing salvation, having life in himself, ransoming and redeeming his people both temporally and spiritually. That is to say: "They knew he would come bringing those truths by which men are born again, enjoy spiritual life and avoid spiritual death. . . . These Jews knew that those who believed and obeyed the words of the true Messiah would never see spiritual death." (Commentary 1:463.)

Their disbelief on this occasion did not stem from any misunderstanding of his spoken word. Rather, it was an affirmative denial of his Messiahship. "Now we know that thou hast a devil," they said. Such is the only explanation that can justify their course in their own eyes. "Abraham is dead, and the prophets; and thou sayest, If a man keep my saying, he shall never taste of death. Art thou greater than our father Abraham, which is dead? and the prophets are dead: whom makest thou thyself?"

It may be they were baiting him. Would he make a plain Messianic claim for which he could be stoned? Was he on the verge of such a blasphemous claim to divinity—as they would interpret it—that a mob, in a panic-borne burst of zeal for their law, would strike him with death-inflicting stones? In their hearts they sought his death by whatever means might arise. His answer ignored the repeated charade of false pretense that insinuated demoniac possession. He said instead:

If I honour myself, my honour is nothing: it is my Father that honoureth me; of whom ye say, that he is your God: Yet ye have not known him; but I know him: and if I should say, I know him not, I should be a liar like unto you: but I know him, and keep his saying.

'If I make myself the Messiah, my claim to divinity is of no validity; it is God my Father who honors me with divine Sonship. My honor comes from him who ye say is your God, but whom in truth ye have not known. Nevertheless, I know him for I am his Son, and if I should say that I know him not and am therefore not the Messiah, I would be a liar like unto you. But that I do know him and am the Messiah is shown by the fact that I keep his sayings perfectly, as only his Son could.' Then came the penultimate climax. After this there was but one blinding flash of eternal light, one thunderous roll of eternal truth, one supreme witness to bear. Its prelude came in these words:

Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad.

Abraham saw the day of Christ. Nearly two millennia before the Son of God made flesh his tabernacle, Abraham, the friend of God, the father of the faithful, saw in vision what would be in time's meridian. Abraham had the gospel. (Gal. 3:8.) Jehovah came personally to our great progenitor to tell him of the gospel, the priesthood, and eternal life. (Abr. 2:6-11.) To him the Almighty said: "The day cometh, that the Son of Man shall live." And he "looked forth and saw the days of the Son of Man, and was glad, and his soul found rest, and he believed in the Lord; and the Lord counted it unto him for righteousness." (JST Gen. 15:11-12.) [^3]

"Thou art not yet fifty years old," was the Jewish response, "and hast thou seen Abraham?" Either this question was a deliberate reversal and twisting of Jesus' statement—he had said Abraham saw his day, not that he had seen Abraham's day—or there is something left out of the account to which it is responsive. We may well suppose that the Jews did not want so much as to admit that Abraham saw the day of Jesus, lest it be concluded that this man was greater than their foremost patriarch. In any event, their assertion completed the foundation for the divine proclamation now to fall from Jesus' lips:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am.

Jesus-Jehovah has spoken, and so it is. "This is as blunt and pointed an affirmation of divinity as any person has or could make. 'Before Abraham was I Jehovah.' That is, 'I am God Almighty, the Great I AM. I am the self-existent, Eternal One. I am the God of your fathers. My name is: I AM THAT I AM.'

"To Moses the Lord Jehovah had appeared, identified himself as the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and said: 'I AM THAT I AM: . . . Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you. . . . This is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.

"Of a later manifestation, the King James Version has Deity say: I am the Lord: And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my name JEHOVAH was I not known to them.' From latter-day revelation we know that one of our Lord's great pronouncements to Abraham was: 'I am the Lord thy God; . . . My name is Jehovah,' and accordingly we find the Inspired Version account reading: 'I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob. I am the Lord God Almighty; the Lord JEHOVAH. And was not my name known unto them?' " (Commentary 1:464.)

"Then took they up stones to cast at him," John says—for nothing could have been more blasphemous in their eyes than what they had just heard—"but Jesus hid himself, and went out of the temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed by."

He had preached his doctrine and borne his witness, and his crowning words were:

BEFORE ABRAHAM WAS I, JEHOVAH.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Records are kept in heaven as well as on earth, and the faithful saints who have gained the promise of eternal life have their names recorded in the Lamb's Book of Life." (Commentary 1:465.)
[^2] This whole glorious concept of how Christ is both the Father and the Son is dealt with at length in The Promised Messiah. See particularly chapter 20.
[^3] In this connection, the Midrash says of Isaiah: "He had been privileged to prophesy of so many blessings, 'because he had taken upon himself the yoke of the Kingdom of Heaven with joy.' " (Edersheim 2:143.)
