Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 73

Jesus Speaks of Spiritual Things

I will hear what God the Lord will speak: for he will speak peace unto his people, and to his saints: . . . Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him. (Ps. 85:8-9.)

The Seventies Report on Their Apostleship

(Luke 10:17-20; JST Luke 10:19-20)

Shortly after the Feast of Tabernacles—at which all Israel worshipped for themselves; at which they offered sacrifices on behalf of the nations of heathendom; at which their rites symbolized the outpouring of the Holy Spirit upon the Gentiles—shortly after this great festal season, the seventies returned from their missions to report to that Lord whose witnesses they were. He had sent them—not as he soon would into all the world to declare his word to every creature, but to the cities and towns of Israel—to prepare the way for him, that receptive congregations might be assembled to hear the gospel, that attentive ears might be attuned to the Messianic voice.

All save one of the Twelve were Galileans. We suppose a like ratio was found among the Seventy. The Galilean chose his Galilean friends and kinsmen to echo his words of blessing and hope to Jew and Gentile alike. The Seventy were, like their brethren of the Twelve, rugged, forthright, and faithful souls who were scholastically untainted. The damning curse of scribal theology and the unbearable yoke of Rabbinic ritual weighed less heavily upon them than upon their Judean kinsmen. They had less of the doctrine of Hillel and fewer of the sayings of Shammai to forsake when they accepted the gospel than did the theologically contentious Judeans. Their present mission had commenced in the summer or autumn and now, three or four months later, they came together in a spirit of thanksgiving and rejoicing to report their labors. They had been successful. "Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through thy name," they said.

To cast out the spirit followers of Lucifer from their ill-gotten abodes, thus freeing suffering souls from physical maladies and spiritual suffering, could be accomplished only by the power of God. The Goliath of evil can only be slain by the David of righteousness. But Jesus had given them power—power to preach and heal and save. The gospel is power—the power of God by which salvation comes. The holy priesthood is power—the power and authority of God to act in all things for the salvation of men. The Holy Ghost comes with power—power to cleanse and perfect a human soul. Ministers without the power of the gospel, the power of the priesthood, the power of eternal truth, can never lead a soul to salvation. Satan is as naught only when he faces true ministers, and these seventies had subjected the evil one to their will through their Master's will. Rejoicing with them, Jesus said:

As lightning falleth from heaven, I beheld Satan also falling.

'When there was war in heaven, the rebel spirits were cast out. The same power that sent them as lightning from the realms of light to their benighted state on earth still controls them.' These seventies have ministered well, and they are now prepared for a greater ministry and a higher spiritual endowment.

Behold, I will give unto you power over serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy; and nothing shall by any means hurt you.

How glorious is the Cause that makes every warrior a general, every soldier in the ranks a hero, every servant of the Lord the master of all things! What are the combined powers of earth and hell when arrayed against the servants of the Lord? "Nothing shall by any means hurt you." In the eternal sense there is nothing but glory and triumph for faithful ministers.

Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you, but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven. [^1]

Christ Is the Father and the Son

(Matthew 11:25-30; JST Matthew 11:27-29; Luke 10:21-24; JST Luke 10:22-23)

Would that we knew all that the seventies said and could feel anew the fierce fervor and be warmed by the flaming faith that attended the testimonies they then bore. This must have been an occasion of spiritual refreshment comparable to that other day in Caesarea Philippi when the apostles themselves were bearing their testimonies. On this later occasion, as Matthew says, "there came a voice out of heaven," and as Luke says, in this hour "Jesus rejoiced in spirit." We cannot doubt that the words then spoken by the Father of us all placed a seal of divine approval upon the work and words of the seventies, which, naturally, would cause his Son, Jesus, to rejoice. Our Lord then said:

I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from them who think they are wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes; even so, Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight.

What things are hidden from the worldly wise but are revealed unto babes and sucklings, as it were? The truths just spoken by the Father; the testimonies just borne by the seventies; the revealed witness in the hearts of the faithful of the truth and divinity of the Lord's work; everything that pertains to God and godliness, to faith and faithfulness, to the Spirit and spirituality—all these things being of heavenly origin can only be understood by heavenly power. Among them are the great truths upon which Jesus now discourses. From Matthew's account we read:

All things are delivered unto me of my Father; and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and they to whom the Son will reveal himself; they shall see the Father also.

As with almost all of Jesus' recorded words, our Gospel authors are selecting for preservation the portions that they feel most completely summarize the great truths then presented. In this case, Luke's account preserves these blessed words:

All things are delivered to me of my Father; and no man knoweth that the Son is the Father, and the Father is the Son, but him to whom the Son will reveal it.

It is evident that much more was said, but from these brief quotations from the transcripts of eternity, we receive a sunburst of truth seldom expressed in words so few. 'My Father, who is God, has placed all things in my hands because I am his Son and Heir, and I do ever those things which please him. And no man can know that I am the Son except by revelation from the Father; and no man can know my Father unless he comes unto me, for I am sent to bear record of the Father. And those who know by the power of the Holy Ghost that I am the Son of God, if they abide in me and keep my commandments, they shall see the Father also.

'And further, I, the Son, will reveal to the faithful that the Son is the Father, and the Father is the Son. We are one; the Father is in me and I am in the Father. I am the manifestation of God in the flesh. God is in me revealing himself to the world, so much so that if you have seen me, you have seen the Father. The Father is as I am, for I am in his image and live and am as he is. I, the Son, am to you as the Father; and the Father, in whose image I am, is as the Son.' [^2]

At this point, as Luke expresses it, "he turned him unto his disciples"—the seventies and others—"and said privately, Blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye see: For I tell you, that many prophets and kings have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them." And with this we concur completely, for we are among the number in question.

Thus, to his disciples he has spoken of the mysteries of the kingdom, telling them of his own divinity and how he is the incarnation of God so that it is as though he were the Father. In these disciples, already converted to the truth, he rejoices in spirit. But the message must not stop with them; what he has said to the seventies must go to all who will qualify to receive it. New disciples must be won; the kingdom is for all men. Downtrodden, burdened, suffering mankind; men staggering under the weight of their sins; children of a common Father, all with the potential of advancing and progressing and becoming like him—these may find rest in Christ. To them the cry goes forth:

Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

Those who then heard these words wore the yoke of Rabbinism. Around their necks and weighted upon their shoulders hung the yoke of the law, the yoke of the kingdom. This yoke—and it was so named by the Rabbis—was "one of laborious performances and of impossible self-righteousness. . . . Indeed, this voluntary making of the yoke as heavy as possible, the taking on themselves as many obligations as possible, was the ideal of Rabbinic piety." (Edersheim 2:143-44.) [^3] It is in this Rabbinic setting that we hear Jesus say:

Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.

'Rid yourselves of the yoke of Rabbinism; cease from all your self-righteous washings and ordinances and performances; forsake the insane Sabbath restrictions which say ye cannot even heal the sick or care for the suffering on that day. Remove the yoke placed upon you by the scribes and Pharisees; they are the degenerate defenders of the dead days of old. Come unto me; learn of me; believe that I am the Messiah by whom salvation comes. I am meek and lowly in heart, not proud and pompous and austere as are those whom you now serve. Wear my yoke—the yoke of the gospel; compared to your religious restrictions my yoke is easy and my burden is light. In me ye shall find rest. No longer will ye be wafted about by every word of Rabbinic doctrine; no longer will you have to judge between Hillel and Shammai, or this Rabbinic school or that. I will give you rest.'

Parable of the Good Samaritan

(Luke 10:25-37; JST Luke 10:32-33, 36)

Jesus now encounters one of those intellectual religionists who thrive on contention and delight in dissension. Found in every sect and cult, particularly in Jewish Israel, their self-appointed mission is to ask questions for question's sake. Their interests are primarily academic and theoretical, and they deal with hypothetical rather than real situations. They are the lawyers whose interest are in the dicta rather than the decision; the medical students who ask how to treat nonexistent diseases; the religionists who solve problems that may never arise in the lives of people. If they can ask questions that—to the embarrassment of their opponents—cannot be answered, so much the better.

Jesus must have been teaching something about eternal life, that glorious state of exaltation reserved for the faithful for whom the family unit continues in the realms ahead. As he did so, "a certain lawyer stood up, and tempted him," or, better, stood up to test him, to see how he as a Rabbi would answer one of the points of debate in the Rabbinical schools. The question: "Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?"

Jesus parried the question. He declined to stoop to the level of the debating Rabbis; let them revel in polemics—he would not do so. "What is written in the law? how readest thou?" he asked. 'It is your problem, not mine. You have the law before you; answer your own question.'

And the answer that was forthcoming from the learned lawyer was perfect; it was the very answer Jesus himself gave on at least two other occasions. Combining the statement in Deuteronomy 6:5, which is part of the Shema itself, with that in Leviticus 19:18—these two passages being the heart and core of the Mosaic law—the lawyer answered: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbour as thyself." Moses, who spoke for Jehovah, had phrased perfectly the two commandments by conformity to which eternal life is won, and the lawyer had quoted correctly that which he had read in the law.

But the question had been asked not to gain information, but rather, in the hope that Jesus might not give the proper answer—an answer already known to his interrogator and preserved for all to read in the law—and therefore that he would be embarrassed at his own lack of Rabbinical understanding. Do we not, then, detect a touch of irony in our Lord's response: "Thou hast answered right: this do, and thou shalt live." 'You knew the answer all along; if you would do the things you already know, you shall gain eternal life.'

Hoping to salvage such reputation as he could in a confrontation that had gone against him; desiring to justify his own hatred rather than love for many of his fellowmen; and knowing, by instinct or from some previous statement of Jesus, that our Lord and the other Rabbis differed widely as to who fell in the category of a neighbor, the lawyer asked: "And who is my neighbour?"

Had Jesus, this time, asked, "What says the law on this point?" he would have called forth all the old expressions of approved hatred toward all those of other nations. He himself had summarized the Mosaic standard by saying, "Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy," but 'I give unto you a higher standard.' To the Jews their neighbors were the members of the congregation of Israel; the Gentiles and all who opposed the Jewish people not only failed to qualify as neighbors, but were, in fact, enemies. "Whatever modern Judaism may say to the contrary, there is a foundation of truth to the ancient heathen charge against the Jews of odium generis humani (hatred of mankind)." (Edersheim 2:237.) And so Jesus himself gave the answer, his answer, the gospel answer, to the query "Who is my neighbour," and the divine definition shines forth in that wondrous parable of the good Samaritan.

A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, which stripped him of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him half dead.

A Jew, one of the elect, a member of the chosen people, traveling alone through the rocky gorges and rough terrain along the twenty-two-mile road from Jerusalem to Jericho, falls among Bedouin thieves. It is an evil area where men like Gadianton lurk. The thoroughfare itself was known as the Red Path or Bloody Way. On it our present victim is robbed, wounded, and left naked and half dead. The merciless thieves, perhaps frightened away by other itinerants, leave him to die while they hide nearby to await other victims.

And by chance, there came down a certain priest that way; and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side of the way.

By chance, or, rather, in the providences of the Almighty—for the seeming chances of life provide the testing experiences for men in this mortal probation—by chance a priest, a son of Aaron, one ordained to a holy calling, one whose divine appointment was to minister for the temporal well-being of his fellowmen, came, saw, recognized a Jewish brother, and chose to pass by. A priest, without compassion, left his brother, whom he could have saved, to die of wounds and thirst in a Bedouin desert.

And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and looked upon him, and passed by on the other side of the way; for they desired in their hearts that it might not be known that they had seen him.

As with the priest, so with the Levite: both dishonored their priesthood; both brought disgrace upon their nation; both failed one of the great tests of mortality, choosing, rather, to say within themselves, "Am I my brother's keeper?" And they thought: "No man knows that I have seen this wounded and dying man, and who can condemn me?" And yet, there was a man who did know, and he is Judge of all.

But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: and when he saw him, he had compassion on him, And went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him.

A Samaritan, a hated Samaritan, a half-heathen and apostate worshipper of Jehovah, one through whose land the pilgrims from Galilee en route to Jerusalem would not even travel! A Samaritan, who could not be saved, and who some Rabbis said would not even be resurrected! A Samaritan, who was an enemy and not a neighbor, chose to make this half-dead Jew his brother. Wine cleanses the wounds; oil salves the pain and removes the smart; bandages—perhaps torn from the benefactor's own clothing—protect the torn flesh; the ass of the one from the despised race carries the wounded Jew; and the owner of the beast walks. They go to the khan or hostelry by the road, where lodging is free but victuals for men and beasts can be had for a price. The Samaritan took care of the Jew, watched over him, and saved his life.

And on the morrow when he departed, he took out two pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him, Take care of him; and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee.

Two pence, or, better, two dinars, the sum a laborer earned in two days—this, and an assurance of more if need be, was left with the host. "Which now of these three, thinkest thou, was neighbour unto him that fell among the thieves?" Jesus asked. The lawyer, even now not daring to commend a hated Samaritan by national designation, responded, "He that shewed mercy on him." Jesus said, "Go, and do thou likewise."

A Familial Scene

(Luke 10:38-42)

He who had not where to lay his head—not so much as the foxes who have holes and the birds of the air who have nests—yet during the whole of his mortality among us partook of the culture and sociality of many Jewish abiding places. A sliver of knowledge here, a ray of light there, an incidental comment somewhere else, all let us catch fleeting glimpses of the life he lived and the sociality that was his among those with whom he shared the intimacies incident to the days of his flesh.

We attuned our voices to those of the seraphic hosts in the heavenly choir when he made flesh his tabernacle in a roadside caravanserai in Bethlehem of Judea. We saw him draw his first mortal breath amid the tethered beasts of burden because there was no room in the inns for a woman big with child and whose travail was upon her. We watched as loving hands cared for his needs in the homes of Jewish friends and relatives in Bethlehem and Egypt and Nazareth. It was pleasant to see him learn to crawl and walk and speak in the Jewish home of Jewish Joseph there in the hill country of Galilee. There it was that he learned to pray, where he memorized the Shema and reverenced the Mezuzah attached to the doorpost as a symbol of Jehovah's protecting care over the homes of Israel.

We have seen his wants cared for in many homes by many people; have feasted with him at many banquets; have slept with him under the stars and in the little booths into which all Israel moved at Tabernacle Times. In the home of Peter in Capernaum of Galilee we saw him hold a child in his arms as he taught who was greatest in the kingdom of heaven. And in the guest chamber of the home of John, in Jerusalem, at the time of the First Passover, we listened attentively as he conversed with Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews, one who sat on the Great Sanhedrin.

But at no other time and in no other place have we seen such a sweet and tender scene as now opens before us in the home of Martha in Bethany. Blessed Bethany, hidden from Jerusalem by a spur of the Mount of Olives, yet only two miles away, was the retreat to which Jesus so often went to rid himself of the influence and contentions of those who knew not God and who, because of priestcrafts, chose to reject his Son.

It seems clear that the two sisters, Martha and Mary, and their brother Lazarus, all dwelt in the house owned by Martha, who therefore must have been the oldest of the three. It seems apparent that they were well-to-do and had the means and facilities to care for their blessed guest. Because of the reverent curtain of silence drawn by the inspired authors over the family relationship and social intercourse of Jesus and his friends, we know only that the three who dwelt in Bethany were loved by Jesus. It is of interest to note that the name Martha was truly Jewish and meant "lady" or "mistress," that Mary was the Greek equivalent of the ancient Hebrew "Miriam," and that Lazarus was the Greek form of "Eleazer." The inference is that the three children had been so named by parents who rejoiced in the present and looked forward to the future, including the coming of the Messiah, and the new kingdom, rather than looking back to the old glory of the old kingdom.

That Jesus came to Bethany for the express purpose of being with the sisters we cannot doubt; his disciples apparently had found lodging in other homes. Nor can we doubt there was an open, congenial, and friendly respect and association between them and our Lord. There must have been considerable prior association so that the parties knew each other well and were not restrained in their association by feelings of awe.

On this occasion Mary, whom Jesus loved, sat at his feet to hear his words. No doubt she asked questions and was fed spiritually as few of her sex have ever been. We feel to rank her, in spiritual stature, along with the other Marys—the Blessed Virgin who gave birth to God's Son, and the Mary called Magdalene, whom we have seen as one of the traveling missionary companions of Jesus, and whom we shall yet see as the first mortal to behold the Resurrected Person. Shall we not also rank her with Eve and Sarah and the widow of Zarephath, and the faithful ones of old who ministered to the prophets in their days?

Would that we knew what conversations passed between them, what questions Mary asked, what answers Jesus gave. Did they discuss the atonement through which all men are raised in immortality, while those who believe and obey ascend unto eternal life? Was eternal life defined as that state of glory and peace reserved for those who live everlastingly in the family unit? Were the glories of the celestial realm unfolded to the view of this true believer who had prepared herself by baptism and otherwise to receive the mysteries of the kingdom? Perhaps it is not amiss to say—and we so express ourselves reverently—that in that day when all things are revealed we shall learn of even these sacred and now secret hours in the life of the Divine Person and those whom he chose as his intimates.

Also on this occasion Martha, whom also Jesus loved, "was cumbered about much serving"; as the official hostess, so to speak, it was incumbent upon her to attend to the physical needs of her guest. Perhaps she was envious of the attention given her younger sister and wished herself to be seated at the feet of the Master and to hear those things which then fell from his lips. We cannot suppose she was one whit less spiritual than Mary; indeed, it will be Martha, a short while hence, on the occasion of the raising of their brother Lazarus from death, who will bear a witness of the divine Sonship that would do credit to a Peter, or a Moses, or an Abraham. Nor can we rank her a hair's breadth behind Mary in personal righteousness and in the desire to hear the words of eternal life here and now and be an inheritor of immortal glory hereafter. It just happens that on this occasion the burdens of hospitality had fallen primarily upon the older sister. It is not unnatural to think that Martha may have asked Mary for help that up to that moment had not been forthcoming.

In any event Martha says: "Lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? bid her therefore that she help me." Such a statement spoken to Jesus under these circumstances carries a wealth of meaning. It is as though Jesus had some obligation to see that Martha had help. It is not the plea of a person who is so awed by the presence of the Lord Jesus that she fears to speak up on a relatively trivial matter. It is not a statement in which a hostess is careful to avoid any seeming annoyance in the presence of a guest because of a family problem. Geikie even says her "complaint to Jesus" was "not free from irreverence," and that it was as though she had said, "'Lord, do you not care that my sister has left me to do all the work alone? If you speak to her, she will help me.'" (Geikie, p. 601.)

Thereupon Jesus, as was his invarying wont, turned the circumstances at hand into a teaching situation. "Martha, Martha," he said in words of endearing tenderness, "thou art careful and troubled about many things: But one thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her."

"From Martha's housewifely complaint and Jesus' mild reproof, we learn the principle that, though temporal food is essential to life, once a reasonable amount has been acquired, then spiritual matters should take precedence. Bread is essential to life, but man is not to live by bread alone. Food, clothing, and shelter are essential to mortal existence, but once these have been gained in reasonable degree, there is only 'one thing' needful—and that is to partake of the spiritual food spread on the gospel table." (Commentary 1:473.)

That there is no mention on this occasion of Lazarus, whom also Jesus loved, neither adds to nor detracts from the domestic scene. He may well have been present, as an observer rather than a participant. We shall shortly meet Martha, and then Mary, and then Lazarus, under the most unusual circumstances ever to confront humankind in all the four millennia since mortality began.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Christ had not only no legal authority for interfering, but the Jewish law of inheritance was so clearly defined, and, we may add, so just, that if this person had any just or good cause, there could have been no need for appealing to Jesus. Hence it must have been 'covetousness,' in the strictest sense, which prompted it-perhaps, a wish to have, besides his own share as a younger brother, half of that additional portion which, by law, came to the eldest son of the family." (Edersheim 2:243.)
[^2] "God called Israel as a nation, and planted it in the most favored spot: as a fig-tree in the vineyard of His own Kingdom. 'And he came seeking,' as He had every right to do, 'fruit thereon, and found none.' It was the third year that He had vainly looked for fruit, when He turned to His Vinedresser-the Messiah, to Whom the vineyard is committed as its King-with this direction: 'Cut it down-why doth it also deteriorate the soil?' It is barren, though in the best position; as a fig-tree it ought to bear figs, and here the best; it fills the place which a good tree might occupy; and besides, it deteriorates the soil. And its three years' barrenness has established its utterly hopeless character. Then it is that the Divine Vinedresser, in His infinite compassion, pleads, and with far deeper reality than either Abraham or Moses could have entreated, for the fig-tree which Himself had planted and tended, that it should be spared 'this year also,' 'until then that I shall dig about it, and dung it'-till He labour otherwise than before, even by His Own Presence and Words, nay, by laying to its roots His most precious Blood. 'And if then it bear fruit'-here the text abruptly breaks off, as implying that in such case it would, of course, be allowed to remain; 'but if not, then against the future (coming) year shalt thou cut it down.'" (Edersheim 2:247-48.)
[^3] In this connection, the Midrash says of Isaiah: "He had been privileged to prophesy of so many blessings, 'because he had taken upon himself the yoke of the Kingdom of Heaven with joy.' " (Edersheim 2:143.)
