Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 75

The Man Born Blind

The Lord openeth the eyes of the blind. (Ps. 146:8.)

The Miracle—One Born Blind Is Healed

(John 9:1-12; JST John 9:4)

It is the joyous Sabbath—a day of rest, a day of peace, a day of worship. It is also the burdensome Sabbath—a day on which Rabbinism goes wild in enforcing petty, Satan-inspired restrictions that defy all sense and reason, restrictions that serve no purpose except to stand as a witness of the dire apostasy then prevailing among a once-chosen and a once-enlightened people.

Jesus and his disciples pass by one of the gates of the temple, as we suppose. It is a place where beggars ask alms, perhaps the same sacred site where a man lame from his mother's womb will one day entreat Peter and John for a few pence and receive instead full strength in his feet and ankles. But on this autumn day, a beggar is present who has been blind from birth. He cannot ask alms, for it is the Sabbath, though it would be legal for kindly disposed persons to make voluntary contributions to his welfare. The man and his state are well known to the disciples and, as we shall see, to great hosts of Jerusalemites. No doubt he is sitting in the place where he commonly plied his unhappy trade.

"Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind?" the disciples ask. This question, propounded by spiritually enlightened disciples—men who, like Peter, James, and John, had seen within the veil and heard the voice of God—presupposes two verities: (1) that the sins of the fathers may be visited upon the children in the form of physical impairment, and (2) that mortal souls are capable of committing sin before they ever breathe the breath of life. Both of these concepts are true.

As we have seen—with reference to the slaughter of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifices, and with reference to the eighteen upon whom the tower of Siloam fell—the Jews believed that calamities and accidents came as punishment for sin. Jesus denounced this heresy; those so slain, though sinners, were not unlike all of their fellows; their misfortunes were not the result of any evil in their lives that was greater than that of their neighbors.

On the other hand, God sent calamities and plagues upon Israel, as a people and as a nation, because they forsook him and kept not his commandments. And there may be specific parental sins that impose penalties upon children; immoral parents may contract a venereal disease that causes blindness in unborn children. And personal sins may bring physical punishment to individuals, as when illness is caused by disobedience to the Lord's law of health.

The question asked is not one that can be answered by glib generalities. Birth deformities may or may not result from parental disobedience, but we have no reason to believe that children are so afflicted because of acts done in the premortal life. All children are born free from the taint of sin because of the great plan of redemption ordained for them by a gracious God. And yet, again on the other hand, children, though starting life in innocence, are born in one race or another, at one time or another, with one talent or another—all as a direct result of the life lived before mortal birth. The question asked by the disciples is, in fact, a good one that presupposes a knowledge of the plan of salvation. They are asking about this case, to gain a better understanding of how the eternal laws operate in all cases.

Jesus answers: "Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the works of God should be made manifest in him." 'This is a special case, set apart from all others. This man has never seen; no ray of light has ever entered his eyes; he has seen no sunrise or sunset, no birds of the air, no lilies of the field. He is born thus for a purpose—so that I may heal him and he may stand forever as a witness that I am the Son of God. Through him the works of God shall be manifest forever to all those to whom my gospel comes.'

I must work the works of him that sent me, while I am with you; the time cometh when I shall have finished my work, then I go unto the Father. As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.

'Let there be no misunderstanding with reference to what I shall now do. My Father sent me to do this work, and do it I shall as long as I am with you. When I have finished my work—all my work, this act of healing, my preaching, and finally my atoning sacrifice—then I shall return to the Father. And know this: I am the light of the world. Whenever, from this time forth, you remember that I opened these blind eyes, physically, remember also that I came to bring light to eyes, spiritually.'

Now comes the miracle. Jesus himself has set the stage; he has told the people what he is going to do and why. It but remains for them to see how it is done, and in this instance the how is of surpassing import. Their Messiah stoops down; he spits on the ground, he makes clay with the spittle; and he anoints the eyes of the blind man with the saliva-filled lump of the dust of the earth. Sick persons are healed by faith through the laying on of hands, not by rubbing them with daubs of spittle-made mud. Why, then, does Jesus so act? There can be little doubt that he is deliberately violating the law of the Sabbath in two major respects: (1) he made clay, and (2) he applied a healing remedy to an impaired person, which of itself was forbidden, and in addition there was a specific prohibition against the application of saliva to the eyes on the Sabbath. This strange restriction came into being because of a common belief that saliva was a remedy for diseases of the eye.

Thus Jesus is putting the people in the position of choosing between him as one sent of God to do the work of the Father, as one who can open blind eyes, and the traditions of the elders about Sabbath observance. They must make their choice at the peril of their salvation. Once again it will be a day in Israel when the trumpet sounds: "Choose ye this day whom ye will serve."

So far, be it noted, Jesus has said nothing to the man. He has made no effort to plant even the seeds of faith in the man's heart; the blind one does not even know who Jesus is, or that he is believed by some to be the Messiah. This miracle is being done at Jesus' initiative, by his own power for his own purposes. He now says, "Go, wash in the pool of Siloam"—just that and nothing more. John here inserts the comment that Siloam means sent, thus signifying, as we suppose, that as the Father sent the Son, so the Son sent the man—all to the end that what was done might be for the glory of God. In any event, the man went, washed as directed, gained sight, and returned seeing. The miracle has been wrought.

The blind eyes that now see create a sensation everywhere; word of the event is on every tongue; neighbors, friends, kinsmen, those who merely knew him by sight—all marvel at what has happened. "Is not this he that sat and begged?" they ask. Some say, "This is he"; others, "He is like him." But he says, "I am he." "How then were thine eyes opened?" they demand. Having now learned Jesus' name, he responds: "A man that is called Jesus made clay, and anointed mine eyes, and said unto me, Go to the pool of Siloam, and wash: and I went and washed, and I received sight." Such a beautiful and straightforward account, glorious in its simplicity! "Where is he?" they ask, and he says, "I know not."

The Testing of the Miracle—Pharisaic Contention

(John 9:13-29; JST John 9:13, 27)

It is the Sabbath. There are both believers and skeptics among those who know of the miracle. Some who are rigid formalists—zealous for the strict observance of the day—take him that was blind to the Pharisees in council and report: 'Jesus made clay and opened this man's eyes on the Sabbath.'

"The Rabbis had forbidden any man to smear even one of his eyes with spittle on the Sabbath, except in cases of mortal danger. Jesus had not only smeared both the man's eyes, but had actually mingled the saliva with clay! This, an act of mercy, was in the deepest and most inward accordance with the very causes for which the Sabbath had been ordained, and the very lessons of which it was meant to be a perpetual witness. But the spirit of narrow literalism and slavish minuteness and quantitative obedience—the spirit that hoped to be saved by the algebraical sum of good and bad actions—had long degraded the Sabbath from the true idea of its institution into a pernicious superstition. The Sabbath of Rabbinism, with all its petty servility, was in no respect the Sabbath of God's loving and holy law. It had degenerated into that which St. Paul calls it, a 'beggarly element.' And these Jews were so imbued with this utter littleness, that a unique miracle of mercy awoke in them less of astonishment and gratitude than the horror kindled by a neglect of their Sabbatical superstition." (Farrar, p. 439. Gal. 4:9.)

Those in the Pharisaic council inquired how the man had received sight. He told his story again. "He put clay upon mine eyes, and I washed, and do see." Clearly, this miracle was either of God or of Satan. Some among the Pharisees said of Jesus: "This man is not of God, because he keepeth not the sabbath day." Others replied: "How can a man that is a sinner do such miracles?" Faced with this division in their own ranks, the inquisitors asked further of the healed man: "What sayest thou of him, that he hath opened thine eyes? The answer came in majestic simplicity: "He is a prophet." [^1]

There was yet one ray of Pharisaic hope that might explain all this away. Perhaps the man had not been blind at all. 'How could blind eyes be opened?' they argued. With this in mind they called the parents and questioned them. "Is this your son, who ye say was born blind? how then doth he now see?" they asked.

To us the obvious answer should have been: 'He is our son. He was born blind. The man Jesus anointed his eyes with clay made of his own spittle; our son, at his direction, washed in the pool of Siloam, and now his eyes are open.' All this the parents knew to be true; and next to the healed one himself, who should have rejoiced more in the miracle than his parents? But in the Jewish setting, and because they were faced with the social and religious pressures of Rabbinism, their answer was lacking in full integrity of expression and failed to manifest the same moral courage found in the words of their son. "We know that this is our son, and that he was born blind," they said, for this none could deny; "But by what means he now seeth, we know not: or who hath opened his eyes, we know not: he is of age; ask him: he shall speak for himself."

A great miracle has been wrought; a man who was blind from birth now sees; it should be a time to rejoice and thank God for his goodness and grace. But the issue is not that a blind man sees; he is but a pawn, an infinitesimal nothing, in a great warfare that is raging in the souls of rebellious Israel. The issue is that the miracle was wrought by Jesus, by a sinner who breaks the Sabbath, by one who casts out devils by Beelzebub, by one who opens blind eyes by Satan's power; yes, by one who is Satan Incarnate. Thus John, in explaining the parental response, says: "These words spake his parents, because they feared the Jews: for the Jews had agreed already, that if any man did confess that he was Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue. Therefore said his parents, He is of age; ask him."

Lucifer, our common enemy, using as his agents those on earth who heed the whisperings of his voice, is here exerting on these parents, and upon all who do or may believe that Jesus is the Christ, such pressure as we can scarcely envision. They are to be "put out of the synagogue." Had the Judaic-Mosaic worshippers, who chose to reject their Messiah, simply excommunicated all who did believe in him, we would have little fault to find with their decision. Certainly a religious society is entitled to drop from membership those who depart from its beliefs and standards.

Excommunication among them, however, came successively and by degrees, until it built up to a terrible climax of hate and vengeance. Certain temporary restrictions might be imposed to begin with; these might be increased in extent and intensity; finally, the penalties included curses and anathemas, unbearable social and economic pressures, and all of the fears and torments of an eternal hell. One of the incomplete excommunications, when thrust upon a prominent person, included these restrictions: "Henceforth he would sit on the ground, and bear himself like one in deep mourning. He would allow his beard and hair to grow wild and shaggy; he would not bathe, nor anoint himself; he would not be admitted into an assembly of ten men, neither to public prayer, nor to the Academy; though he might either teach, or be taught, by single individuals. Nay, as if he were a leper, people would keep at a distance of four cubits from him. If he died, stones were cast on his coffin, nor was he allowed the honor of the ordinary funeral, nor were they to mourn for him."

This was only the beginning of what might be. "Still more terrible was the final excommunication, or Cherem [by which is meant being put out of the synagogue], when a ban of indefinite duration was laid on a man. Henceforth he was like one dead. He was not allowed to study with others, no intercourse was to be held with him, he was not even to be shown the road. He might, indeed, buy the necessaries of life, but it was forbidden to eat or drink with such an one."

There were twenty-four grounds for imposing this final type of excommunication, including resisting "the authority of the Scribes, or any of their decrees," and leading others "either away from 'the commandments,' or to what was regarded as profanation of the Divine Name." (Edersheim 2:184.) Those who confessed that Jesus was the Messiah would, of course, be guilty of these violations.

To be put out of the synagogue was more than excommunication; it was persecution, which led Jesus to say to the disciples: "They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service." (John 16:2.) The dreadful burden of such a penalty was more than these parents—already so poor that their son begged for a living—dared to assume.

An evil spirit of bitterness and contention now blazes forth anew. Having failed utterly in their assault upon the parents; being unable to deny or explain the miracle; feeling a sense of sheer and utter perplexity—the Pharisaic council again calls in the man that once was blind. They will try another approach. "Give God the praise: we know that this man is a sinner," they say. In effect they are asking the man to recant. 'We now admit you have been healed; your parents make that clear; but give God the credit. Confess that Jesus had nothing to do with it; he is a sinner—one who has desecrated the Sabbath by molding a ball of clay and by rubbing saliva on your eyes—and, therefore, he could not perform a miracle.' They were asking the man to side completely with them, to deny Christ and to glorify—even deify—traditionalism. They sought the condemnation of Christ and the apotheosis of Rabbinism.

But our once blind friend is fearless. He may not know all the intricacies and nuances of Rabbinic reasoning; he may not know whether it is a sin to rub a glob of mud together on your fingers on the Sabbath or not; but one thing he does know: whereas once he was blind, now he sees. His response is his testimony: "Whether he be a sinner or no, I know not: one thing I know, that, whereas I was blind, now I see."

Shamed and discomfited, the Pharisees make one more attack. Perhaps a renewed recitation of the details will reveal some undotted "I" or an uncrossed "T" that they can twist into proof the miracle was wrought by demoniac power. If their questions cease now, it is an admission of defeat at the hands of an unlearned beggar. "What did he to thee? how opened he thine eyes?" they demand. Their star witness is wearied with the repeated wanderings over the same course. He has told his story; it stands; there is nothing to add. "I have told you already, and ye did not believe," he says. Then in a master stroke, filled with inspired irony, the man asks: "Wherefore would ye hear it again? will ye also be his disciples?" 'Why are you asking me again? Is it because I have converted you? Do you now believe? Are you ready to become his disciples?'

Reviling and bitterness pour forth in the Pharisaic response: "Thou art his disciple," they say, "but we are Moses' disciples. We know that God spake unto Moses: as for this fellow, we know not from whence he is." And with these words they rejected their King, cast their lot with Lucifer, and sealed their own doom.

The Purpose of the Miracle: Jesus Acclaims His Divinity

(John 9:30-41; JST John 9:32)

The Pharisaic witness has been given: 'This fellow, this Nazarene of Galilee, this friend of publicans and sinners, we do not know whether he is of God or not.'

Now comes the true witness, contained in words of irrefutable logic, spoken—we cannot doubt—by the power of the Spirit. The man says: "Why herein is a marvellous thing, that ye know not from whence he is, and yet he hath opened mine eyes. Now we know that God heareth not sinners: but if any man be a worshipper of God, and doeth his will, him he heareth. Since the world began was it not heard that any man opened the eyes of one that was born blind, except he be of God. If this man were not of God, he could do nothing."

To this there is no answer; it cannot be gainsaid; the words carry within themselves the evidence of their own verity. There is nothing left for the Pharisees to do but to revile and to persecute. "Thou wast altogether born in sins" is their screeching cry—as though that had any bearing on the issue one way or the other—"and dost thou teach us?" Truly out of the mouths of babes and sucklings fall gems of eternal truth; the weak and the simple confound the wise and the learned, and the purposes of the Lord prevail. He had taught them, and they knew it, and he knew it. As a consequence, "they cast him out," and he was subjected to the dire penalties of excommunication and persecution. And so ever is it with those who forsake the world and cleave unto Christ. The world loves its own and hates those who are Christ's.

But the Lord loveth and careth for those who are his own, and when he who came to minister to his fellowmen learned of the excommunication, he sought out the man to teach him the truths of his everlasting gospel. No doubt he told him many things about a loving Father, the fall of man, and the atonement yet to be wrought by God's own Son. We know he asked this question:

Dost thou believe on the Son of God?

There is nothing figurative, nothing hidden, nothing left for interpretation, about the query. It is as plain as language can be; it strikes, as an arrow, into the very heart and core of revealed religion. "Who is he, Lord, that I might believe on him?" Jesus answers:

Thou hast both seen him, and it is he that talketh with thee.

And the man said, "Lord, I believe." And he worshipped Jesus. That is, he who was born blind, whose eyes Jesus opened, received now a greater gift than sight itself. His lifelong spiritual blindness ceased also; his spirit eyes were opened; he knew Jesus was the Son of God through whom salvation comes, and he was prepared to follow him, worship him, and keep his commandments. Because of his belief in the Son, he was ready to enter in at the gate of repentance and baptism and to plant his feet firmly on the path leading to eternal life.

Here is a man who was born blind so that he might one day be a sign and a witness of the One who should open his eyes. And such came to pass according to that divine providence which cares for all things so that even a sparrow's fall merits divine notice. Here also is a man who was spiritually blind, upon whose soul the rays of gospel light had never shone, until one came who opened his spiritual eyes so that he saw in Jesus the Son of God. Can there be any doubt as to which is the greater miracle—to see with the eyes of mortality the things of this benighted sphere which shall pass away, or to see with the eyes of the spirit the things of a better world that shall endure forever? And does not the fact that Jesus opened the eyes that were blind physically testify that he also has power to open men's spiritual eyes so they can see the things of the Spirit and walk in the strait and narrow path leading to eternal life? And so Jesus said:

For judgment I am come into this world, that they which see not might see; and that they which see might be made blind.

'I am come into the world to sit in judgment upon all men, to divide them into two camps by their acceptance or rejection of my word. Those who are spiritually blind have their eyes opened through obedience to my gospel and shall see the things of the Spirit. Those who think they can see in the spiritual realm, but who do not accept me and my gospel shall remain in darkness and be made blind to the true spiritual realities.' (Commentary 1:482.)

Knowing full well the meaning and import of Jesus' words, some of the Pharisees asked, "Are we blind also?" The reply: "If ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say, We see; therefore your sin remaineth." 'If you did not have the law of Moses and the words of the prophets; if you did not profess to worship the God of Israel in your synagogues and to sacrifice to him in your temple; if you were not the chosen people to whom the word of truth once came, you would not be condemned as severely as you are. But because you have the greater light, and rebel against it, you commit sin.' [^2]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] At this point we face, as we have on several previous occasions, a problem of chronology that cannot be resolved on the basis of the Gospel accounts as we now have them. Almost every scholar who pays for himself the full price of analytical and in-depth research comes up with a different conclusion. Our friend Farrar, for instance, at this point in his writings says: "Almost every inquirer seems to differ to a greater or less degree as to the exact sequence and chronology of the events which follow. Without entering into minute and tedious disquisitions where absolute certainty is impossible, I will narrate this period of our Lord's life in the order which, after repeated study of the gospels, appears to me to be the most probable, and in the separate details of which I have found myself again and again confirmed by the conclusions of other independent inquirers." (Farrar, p. 444.) Other equally competent analysts find themselves at odds with Farrar and are able to call upon yet others to sustain their views. Contention in the field is needless; and in view of the present state of things, we are not inclined to feel harshly toward any sincere student, regardless of the conclusions he reaches. The issues are such that reasonable men can differ without in any way demeaning or questioning the grand design of the Grand Life. Our own President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and our own Elder James E. Talmage, for instance, are in complete disagreement as to when various things happened on this and other occasions. It is only important for us to know there are problems in the field of chronology and to confess that we, as well as others of greater insight and capacity, can err on the points involved. And yet this is of no great import, for the over-all witness will be the same, and someday the true eventualities will be unraveled and set forth for all to know. Regardless of the chronology conclusions reached, it is logical, for our purposes, to consider Jesus' statements about the Good Shepherd who gives his life for the sheep as though they were part of the same sermon given at the Feast of Dedication. Such may, in fact, have been the case; there are so many similar threads that it seems as though Jesus is weaving one grand tapestry by all that is recorded in John 10.
[^2] "Though 'there is none other God but one' for men on this earth to worship, yet 'there be gods many, and lords many' throughout the infinite expanse of eternity. (1 Cor. 8:4-7.) That is, there are many exalted, perfected, glorified personages who reign as gods over their own dominions. John saw 144,000 of them standing with Christ upon Mount Zion, all 'having his Father's name written in their foreheads' (Rev. 14:1), which is to say that they were gods and were so identified by wearing crowns so stating. Indeed, to each person who overcomes and gains exaltation, Christ has promised: 'I will write upon him the name of my God,' and he shall 'sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne.' (Rev. 3:12, 21.) "Joseph Smith said: 'Every man who reigns in celestial glory is a god to his dominions.' (Teachings, p. 374.) All exalted persons 'are gods, even the sons of God.' (D&C 76:58.) Through obedience to the whole gospel law, including celestial marriage, they attain the 'fulness of the glory of the Father' (D&C 93:6-28) and 'a continuation of the seeds forever and ever. Then shall they be gods, because they have no end: therefore shall they be from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue; then shall they be above all, because all things are subject unto them. Then shall they be gods, because they have all power, and the angels are subject unto them.' (D&C 132:19-20.) "But to us there is but one God, who is Elohim, and one Lord, who is the Lord Jehovah; the Holy Ghost acts as their minister; and these three are one Godhead, or as it is more graphically expressed, one God. Thus we find the Psalmist, whom Jesus quoted, saying: 'God standeth in the congregation of the mighty; he judgeth among the gods. . . . I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most High.' (Ps. 82:1, 6.)" (Commentary 1:491.)
