Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 76

The Good Shepherd

The Lord is my Shepherd. (Ps. 23: 1.)

The Lord God will come. . . . He shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young. (Isa. 40:10-11.)

Jesus Is the Good Shepherd

(John 10:1-15; JST John 10:7-8, 12-14)

No figures of speech, no similitudes, no parables or allegories brought greater joy to Israelite hearts than those which led to the glorious pronouncement: Jehovah is our Shepherd.

Israel's very lives depended upon the safety and procreant powers of their sheep. Physically and spiritually their interests centered in their flocks and herds. From them came food for their tables, clothes for their bodies, sacrifices for their altars. In the lonely deserts, on the mountain slopes, in the valleys of the shadow of death, a strong bond of love and mutual reliance grew up between the sheep and their pastor. Those who cared for the flocks were not sheepherders but shepherds; sheep were not driven, but led; they hearkened to him whose voice they came to know. At night the flocks were commingled in one safe sheepfold where a single shepherd stood guard against the wolves and terrors of the night. In the morning each shepherd called his own sheep out and they followed him to green pastures and still waters.

Thus in their hymns of praise Israel sang: "Know ye that the Lord he is God: it is he that hath made us, and not we ourselves; we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture." (Ps. 100:3.) When Jehovah rebuked his recreant priests and teachers, his cry was: "Woe be to the shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves! should not the shepherds feed the flocks? . . . And ye my flock, the flock of my pasture, are men, and I am your God, saith the Lord God." (Ezek. 34:2, 31.) And when the people were called to repentance, the cry was: "O ye workers of iniquity; ye that are puffed up in the vain things of the world, ye that have professed to have known the ways of righteousness nevertheless have gone astray, as sheep having no shepherd, notwithstanding a shepherd hath called after you and is still calling after you, but ye will not hearken unto his voice! Behold, I say unto you, that the good shepherd doth call you; yea, and in his own name he doth call you, which is the name of Christ; and if ye will not hearken unto the voice of the good shepherd, to the name by which ye are called, behold, ye are not the sheep of the good shepherd. And now if ye are not the sheep of the good shepherd, of what fold are ye? Behold, I say unto you, that the devil is your shepherd, and ye are of his fold; and now, who can deny this?" (Alma 5:37-39.) And many of their Messianic prophecies spoke of the Shepherd of Israel, and of the day when the Son of David, sitting on the throne of David, should be King over them, when "they all shall have one shepherd." (Ezek. 37:24.)

It is in this setting, then, among a people who understand the similitudes and figures from days of old, that Jesus now bears testimony of himself as the Shepherd of Israel. In what has come down to us as an allegory—John calls it a parable, and such it may have been in the fuller versions extant in his day—the Lord Jesus now says:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber.

He is addressing himself to the priests and scribes, to the Pharisees and Rabbis in particular—to those who have made themselves guides and lights and teachers to the people. These ministers, these pastors, these shepherds, like their fathers, were those of whom Ezekiel said: "Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the wool, ye kill them that are fed: but ye feed not the flock. The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost; but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them." (Ezek. 34:3-4.)

These false ministers ruled over such of Israel as was then known, over congregations assembled in Palestine and other lands, upon whom, as thieves and robbers, they imposed the burdens of a dead law and forbade the sheep to find pasture in Christ and to drink of the waters of life that he brought. Of them Elder James E. Talmage says that they "sought by avoiding the portal and climbing over the fence to reach the folded flock; but these were robbers, trying to get at the sheep as prey; their selfish and malignant purpose was to kill and carry off. . . . Never has been written or spoken a stronger arraignment of false pastors, unauthorized teachers, self-seeking hirelings who teach for pelf and divine for dollars, deceivers who pose as shepherds yet avoid the door and climb over 'some other way,' prophets in the devil's employ, who to achieve their master's purpose, hesitate not to robe themselves in the garments of assumed sanctity, and appear in sheep's clothing, while inwardly they are ravening wolves." (Talmage, pp. 417-18.)

But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out.

Jesus himself—a true Minister, the Shepherd of the Sheep—comes openly, boldly, visibly to the door. To him the one—his Father—who has preserved Israel in one place for this very day opens the sheepfold. The Son preaches his gospel; those who are his sheep, who came from preexistence with the special talent to recognize the truth, heed his voice, and he leads them out of the Rabbinical past into the revelation of the present.

And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him; for they know his voice. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the voice of strangers.

Christ goeth before his sheep; he is the pattern. They follow him and seek to do what he has done, because they know his voice—the voice of testimony, the voice of true doctrine, the voice of righteousness, the voice of the Lord. True disciples will not follow the false shepherds of the world. Should they do so, they will be eaten by the wolves of wickedness and lose their souls.

It is not strange that the spiritually untuned ears of the Rabbinists failed to receive into their souls the deep and awesome portent of Jesus' divine words. Accordingly, by way of doctrine and of testimony, he continues:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the door of the sheepfold. All that ever came before me who testified not of me are thieves and robbers; but the sheep did not hear them.

'I am the door by which men must enter to be saved. All the ministers of the past, of the present, and of the future, who do not testify of me and teach my gospel—including you priests, scribes, Pharisees, and Rabbis—are thieves and robbers; you are teachers in the employ of Satan and are seeking to steal the souls of men. But the true sheep will not follow you.'

I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture.

'Salvation comes by me; it is not in the law of Moses, neither in the dead churches of Christendom, neither in the non-Christian religions. Come unto me; I am the Savior. Those in my sheepfold shall go forth to the pastures of salvation and drink the waters of eternal life.'

The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly.

We are hearing Ezekiel all over again. False ministers feed and clothe themselves. Let the sheep be slain; let them lose their souls; it matters not what happens to the flock so long as the purposes of priestcraft are served. "Woe be to the shepherds of Israel." But Jesus came to bring life. His atoning sacrifice will cause all to live again in immortality, and those who believe and obey shall have an abundant life. They shall be added upon. All that the Father hath shall be theirs, for they shall inherit eternal life which is the kind of life that God lives.

I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep.

What more can he say? How better can it be said? 'I am Jehovah, your Shepherd; because of me ye shall not want. I shall cause you to lie down in green pastures and shall lead you beside the still waters. I shall restore your souls and lead you in the paths of righteousness for my name's sake. Though you walk through the valley of the shadow of death, ye need fear no evil: for I will be with you; my rod and my staff shall comfort you. I shall prepare a table for you in the presence of your enemies; I shall anoint your head with oil; your cup runneth over. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow you all the days of your life; and you shall dwell in the house of the Lord forever in the eternities that are ahead—all because I am the Good Shepherd; I am the Lord Jehovah, and I shall give my life for the sheep in the infinite and eternal atonement which is ahead.'

And the shepherd is not as an hireling, whose own the sheep are not, who seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth the sheep and scattereth them. For I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine. But he who is an hireling fleeth, because he is an hireling, and careth not for the sheep. As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father.

'Now I shall tell you the difference between me and false ministers and teachers, between me and the scribes and Pharisees. I am the Shepherd, not a hireling. Those who practice priestcrafts—who preach for hire and divine for money, who seek the praise of the world—whose own the sheep are not, they forsake the sheep when trouble comes. But I am the Good Shepherd, the Lord Jehovah. The sheep are mine; I will care for them, even though it costs me my life. This is ordained by my Father, who is God, and who knoweth me, even as I know him.'

The Good Shepherd Has Power over Death

(John 10:15-21)

Jesus, as the Good Shepherd, came into the world to lay down his life for the sheep. He will save the sheep though he be slain: or, better, he will save the sheep because he is slain.

And I lay down my life for the sheep.

Then, before enlarging upon this theme—almost in a parenthetical pronouncement—he extends the Good Shepherd concept out beyond the borders of Palestine, beyond Egypt and Greece and Rome, beyond the Old World, to the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills, as Father Jacob described the place of the inheritance of the seed of his son Joseph. Jesus speaks thus of his Nephite sheep:

And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.

All Israel, all the promised seed, all the chosen race—all shall enter one sheepfold. All Israel all of the seed of Abraham, all of the children of the prophets—all shall have one Shepherd. The flock of the Lord's pasture are men, the men of Israel. They shall hear his voice and see his face; theirs is the privilege, first and ahead of all others, to hear his voice. The time of the Gentiles is yet future. And so when the Risen Lord ministers among Nephite-Israel, he will say: Ye are they of whom I said: Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd. And they understood me not, for they supposed it had been the Gentiles; for they understood not that the Gentiles should be converted through their preaching. And they understood me not that I said they shall hear my voice; and they understood me not that the Gentiles should not at any time hear my voice—that I should not manifest myself unto them save it were by the Holy Ghost. But behold, ye have both heard my voice, and seen me; and ye are my sheep, and ye are numbered among those whom the Father hath given me." (3 Ne. 15:21-24.)

Then the Lord told his Nephite sheep that he had yet "other sheep," the lost tribes of Israel, whom he would visit. (3 Ne. 16:1-5.) And finally, all who believe his gospel, Jew and Gentile alike, shall be gathered into his fold, "for there is one God and one Shepherd over all the earth." (1 Ne. 13:41.) But having digressed from his central theme, or, at least, having illustrated the magnitude and extent of his sheepfold, Jesus returns to the matter of his laying down his life for the sheep.

Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father.

Thus Jesus proclaims the doctrine of the divine Sonship. From God who is his Father he inherited the power of immortality, the power to live forever. An immortal Being cannot die. No man can take his life from him. From Mary, who is his mother, he inherited the power of mortality, the power to separate body and spirit, the power to die. All mortal beings die; all lay down their lives in death. Jesus only of all mankind—Jesus, the Son of the living God; Jesus, the Son of the mortal Virgin—this One Man of all men had power to live or to die; and having chosen to die, he had power to live again in glorious immortality, never again to see death. All this is according to the commandment of the Father.

What possible response can his hearers—then or now—make to this divine doctrine? The response—then as now—can be but one of two things: belief or disbelief. There is no middle ground, no gray area, no room for compromise. Either he is the Atoning One or he is not. If he is not, the natural Jewish excuse for rejecting him, as it then came from those then present, is: "He hath a devil, and is mad; why hear ye him?" Of course he is mad, insane, totally devoid of reason or sense, unless these claims to divinity are true. Yet others who chose to believe did so on the basis of his words and his works. His words flowed forth with such a divine fluency and conviction that no Spirit-enlightened person could reject them. His works were those which none but one approved of God could perform. "These are not the words of him that hath a devil. Can a devil open the eyes of the blind?" And so, if one approved of God—as his works testify—says, in words, 'God is my Father,' how can his testimony be other than true?

Jesus Says: "I Am the Son of God"

(John 10:22-42)

"How long dost thou make us to doubt? If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly." So said the Jews to Jesus as he walked in the temple in Solomon's Porch at the Feast of Dedication. [^1] It is December 20-27, A.D. 29; in just over three months, he will be lifted up upon the cross because he is the Christ. Can it be that he has not as yet told the people plainly that he is their Messiah?

The fact is, for three years, of which we know, this man from Nazareth in Galilee has testified that he is the Christ, thousands upon thousands of times, always so couching his words as to avoid claiming the kind of political Messiahship of which so many of the Jews dreamed. He has said: 'I am the Christ; I am the Messiah; I am the Lord Jehovah; I am the Good Shepherd; God is my Father; in me and in me alone are the Messianic prophecies fulfilled.' During this same period he has accepted, freely and graciously, a like testimony from his disciples: 'Thou art he of whom Moses and the prophets spoke; thou art the Messiah; thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God. We worship thee.' And yet he has not let himself be hailed or crowned as the King-Messiah who would raise an army, throw off the Roman yoke, and lead a disconsolate people to national triumph and worldly renown.

The words of inquiry now spoken to him must have partaken of some of the nationalistic feeling that he should acclaim himself as an earthly king. His answer—that of one whose kingdom is not of this world—brings the matter of Messiahship back into the place and perspective where he intends it to be.

I told you, and ye believed not: the works that I do in my Father's name, they bear witness of me.

I have told you over and over again, and you have not believed me. I have wrought wondrous miracles in my Father's name, which I could not do without his approval—an approval that includes the words I speak. My words and my works bear witness that I am the Christ.'

But ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, as I said unto you. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.

'I am the Good Shepherd, the Lord Jehovah, who is the Shepherd of those who truly are of Israel. Ye are not my sheep; ye are not truly Abraham's seed. Ye are of your father, the devil, as I said unto you. My sheep hear my voice; they developed the talent for spirituality, the talent to recognize the truth, while yet in preexistence. It is easy for them to believe in me; and I know them; and they follow me, believe my gospel, join my church, and keep my commandments.'

And I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand.

My Father, which gave them me, is greater than all; and no man is able to pluck them out of my Father's hand.

I AND MY FATHER ARE ONE.

They asked to be told plainly that he was the Christ. He is answering their petition again, not in the language calling for a temporal Deliverer who will wield a worldly sword, but in language quoted from the registers of eternity. He, the Christ, will give his disciples eternal life; salvation is in him; and none can steal his sheep. The flocks of this world perish from hunger and cold and thirst. The Lord's sheep will never perish. The Father who gave the sheep to the Son and Shepherd has all power, and he, the Son, acts in the power of the Father. They are one.

Again there are two alternatives and two only. Either what he says is true or it is blasphemy. Either he is the Son of God, one with his Father, or he deserves to die for the most awesomely irreverent of all crimes. These Jews, who had been told many times that Jesus was the Christ but perhaps never so plainly and forcibly as on this occasion, and who always and ever rejected the divine witness, now took up stones again to stone him.

"Many good works have I shewed you from my Father," he says, "for which of those works do ye stone me?" 'Am I to die at your hands because I opened the eyes of a man born blind, or cleansed a leper, or fed thousands of hungry souls with a few barley loaves and a savory made of fish, or is it because I raised a widow's son from death?' The question is unanswerable. It is as though men would slay God because he created the earth, gave them life and being, and sends seedtime and harvest. Their answer: "For a good work we stone thee not: but for blasphemy; and because that thou, being a man, makest thyself God." Clearly they understood the meaning of the words Jesus had spoken. Now he says:

Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are gods? If he called them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the scripture cannot be broken; Say ye of him, whom the Father hath sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest; because I said, I am the Son of God?

'Do you not understand the plan of salvation that was revealed to your fathers? Do you not know that all of the children of the Father have power to advance and progress and become like him? Have you never read that those who received your law in olden times had the promise that they could attain godhood and be gods themselves? Why accuse me of blasphemy for testifying that I was sanctified and sent into the world by the Father? Does it offend you to hear me say that I am the Son of God? Do you not know that every righteous person to whom the word of God comes, and who then obeys the fullness of that law, shall become like the Father and be a god himself?' [^2]

If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not. But if I do, though ye believe not me, believe the works: that ye may know, and believe, that the Father is in me, and I in him.

'Ye say ye do not believe in me; very well, then believe in the works which I do, for ye cannot deny they have come by divine power; and if ye accept the works, then ye shall believe in me also, for I could not do the works alone; they came by the power of the Father. Then ye shall know and believe that the Father is in me and I in him; we are one; we have the same powers, perfections, and attributes.'

Then again they sought to take him, "but he escaped out of their hand." We suppose he overawed them with his presence, and that while they devised in their hearts some way to put him to death, he passed through the throng, out of the temple, and out of Judea, into Perea, to the place beyond Jordan "where John at first baptized." There he abode for a season, and "many resorted unto him" to be taught. "John did no miracle," they said, "but all things that John spake of this man were true."

"And many believed on him there."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] At this point we face, as we have on several previous occasions, a problem of chronology that cannot be resolved on the basis of the Gospel accounts as we now have them. Almost every scholar who pays for himself the full price of analytical and in-depth research comes up with a different conclusion. Our friend Farrar, for instance, at this point in his writings says: "Almost every inquirer seems to differ to a greater or less degree as to the exact sequence and chronology of the events which follow. Without entering into minute and tedious disquisitions where absolute certainty is impossible, I will narrate this period of our Lord's life in the order which, after repeated study of the gospels, appears to me to be the most probable, and in the separate details of which I have found myself again and again confirmed by the conclusions of other independent inquirers." (Farrar, p. 444.) Other equally competent analysts find themselves at odds with Farrar and are able to call upon yet others to sustain their views. Contention in the field is needless; and in view of the present state of things, we are not inclined to feel harshly toward any sincere student, regardless of the conclusions he reaches. The issues are such that reasonable men can differ without in any way demeaning or questioning the grand design of the Grand Life. Our own President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and our own Elder James E. Talmage, for instance, are in complete disagreement as to when various things happened on this and other occasions. It is only important for us to know there are problems in the field of chronology and to confess that we, as well as others of greater insight and capacity, can err on the points involved. And yet this is of no great import, for the over-all witness will be the same, and someday the true eventualities will be unraveled and set forth for all to know. Regardless of the chronology conclusions reached, it is logical, for our purposes, to consider Jesus' statements about the Good Shepherd who gives his life for the sheep as though they were part of the same sermon given at the Feast of Dedication. Such may, in fact, have been the case; there are so many similar threads that it seems as though Jesus is weaving one grand tapestry by all that is recorded in John 10.
[^2] "Though 'there is none other God but one' for men on this earth to worship, yet 'there be gods many, and lords many' throughout the infinite expanse of eternity. (1 Cor. 8:4-7.) That is, there are many exalted, perfected, glorified personages who reign as gods over their own dominions. John saw 144,000 of them standing with Christ upon Mount Zion, all 'having his Father's name written in their foreheads' (Rev. 14:1), which is to say that they were gods and were so identified by wearing crowns so stating. Indeed, to each person who overcomes and gains exaltation, Christ has promised: 'I will write upon him the name of my God,' and he shall 'sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne.' (Rev. 3:12, 21.) "Joseph Smith said: 'Every man who reigns in celestial glory is a god to his dominions.' (Teachings, p. 374.) All exalted persons 'are gods, even the sons of God.' (D&C 76:58.) Through obedience to the whole gospel law, including celestial marriage, they attain the 'fulness of the glory of the Father' (D&C 93:6-28) and 'a continuation of the seeds forever and ever. Then shall they be gods, because they have no end: therefore shall they be from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue; then shall they be above all, because all things are subject unto them. Then shall they be gods, because they have all power, and the angels are subject unto them.' (D&C 132:19-20.) "But to us there is but one God, who is Elohim, and one Lord, who is the Lord Jehovah; the Holy Ghost acts as their minister; and these three are one Godhead, or as it is more graphically expressed, one God. Thus we find the Psalmist, whom Jesus quoted, saying: 'God standeth in the congregation of the mighty; he judgeth among the gods. . . . I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most High.' (Ps. 82:1, 6.)" (Commentary 1:491.)
