Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Section 9

The Perean Ministry

But as it is written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. But God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God. (1 Cor. 2:9-10.)

Jesus speaks; his words are wondrous; salvation is his theme.

Jesus ministers; his deeds are divine; blind men see and dead men live.

Jesus journeys; Jerusalem is his bourn; a cross awaits him there.

"Lord, are there few only that be saved?" he is asked. We hear his answer.

We learn that little children have eternal life; that men must be willing to lay their all on the altar—their possessions and families, even their very lives—to gain salvation.

We are told plainly: To gain eternal life, we must keep the commandments.

We stand before a sealed tomb and see the greatest miracle of his mortal ministry: Lazarus after four days of decomposing death steps forth in vibrant life.

And we hear from his own lips the soul-filling testimony: "I AM THE RESURRECTION, AND THE LIFE: HE THAT BELIEVETH IN ME, THOUGH HE WERE DEAD, YET SHALL HE LIVE."

We see ten lepers healed; rejoice with blind Bartimeus as he sees again; and are grateful that the man with dropsy and the woman with an eighteen-year infirmity are now well and whole.

We hear sermons—his discourse on the kingdom of God; his discourse on marriage and divorce; his pronouncement that the law and the prophets testify of him.

What is this we hear? Peter asks what reward shall the Twelve receive. Jesus places them on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. James and John seek a place on his right hand and on his left in the eternal worlds, and are rebuked for their presumption.

And there are parables, not a few: the prodigal son, that sweet story of infinite mercy and tenderness; Lazarus and Dives, which sets forth the divisions in the spirit world; the laborers in the vineyard, all of whom are paid alike; the parable of the pounds, of the lost sheep, of the great supper, and many others.

As we hear and see and feel of the miracle that he is, there comes also the satanic voice, heard in the Sanhedrin, as that spiritually dead quorum plots his death.

Truly, the one perfect ministry of the one perfect man is proceeding on its foreordained course—to a cross and to a crown!
