Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 77

Sacrifice And Salvation

How can ye be saved, except ye inherit the kingdom of heaven? . . . Ye cannot be saved in your sins. . . . Those who believe on his name . . . these are they that shall have eternal life, and salvation cometh to none else. (Alma 11:37-40.)

More Sabbath Healings

(Luke 13:10-17; 14:1-6; JST Luke 13:11, 14, 17)

As the day approaches for the final great conflict that will bring death to God's Son and doom to a once-chosen people, it seems as though Jesus is deliberately widening the gulf between him and them. Their sad perversion of true Sabbath worship creates an arena in which the conflict can be waged. On that holy day he openly chooses to defy their traditions and to place them in a position where they must choose between him as a Divine Healer sent of God and the burdensome traditions of Rabbinism.

Luke tells us of two such healings that took place on different Sabbaths in different cities in Perea. In one of these, while Jesus taught on the Sabbath in a synagogue, he healed a woman who had suffered for eighteen long years with a sickly, serious malady; in the other, while eating in the home of a leading Pharisee, he chose to heal a man afflicted with dropsy. Both healings comforted the afflicted, enraged the rebellious, and bore irrefutable witness of the divine power of the one who made his acts of healing of more import than all the inane Sabbatarianism that seemed so important to the Jews.

Jesus is teaching in a synagogue in Perea on the Sabbath. And we say again—though the repetition may seem monotonous—he is teaching the gospel. He is teaching the plan of salvation, the tender mercies of a loving Father, the Messianic mission of Israel's Deliverer, the salvation that God's Son is offering to the chosen people. Such is his message; he has none other.

There is present a devout and deserving woman—one of the regular worshippers in this synagogue—who for eighteen years has been bound by Satan with a malady having deep spiritual roots. Hers is both a moody and melancholic state and one in which her sickly and crooked frame is bound and crippled. She is unable to straighten up and use her muscles. Jesus sees her, calls her to him, and says: "Woman, thou art loosed from thine infirmity." As is his not uncommon practice, he lays his hands upon her, and, as is always the case when he speaks, she is healed. Jesus thus acts on his own initiative, without supplication, because he desires to bless mankind. And she glorifies God. After eighteen years of sorrow and suffering, bowed in grief and crippled in body, she arises whole, clean, mentally and spiritually renewed and refreshed. Jesus speaks and so it is.

Jesus is now interrupted. The ruler of the synagogue—a pitiful, petty scrub of a man—arises in his Satan-spawned wrath and pours out his venom, not directly upon Jesus, not directly upon the woman, but upon the people who were silent witnesses of the power of God. "There are six days in which men ought to work," he says; "in them therefore come and be healed, and not on the sabbath day."

What a scene we have just beheld! One of God's daughters has been healed, and one of Satan's ministers has risen in wrath to condemn the Healer and warn his congregation against the sin of permitting such a thing to happen to them on the Sabbath. The healed woman broke forth into utterances of gratitude to God. "But her strain of thanksgiving was interrupted by the narrow and ignorant indignation of the ruler of the synagogue. Here, under his very eyes, and without any reference to the 'little brief authority' which gave him a sense of dignity on each recurring Sabbath, a woman—a member of his congregation—had actually had the presumption to be healed! Armed with his favorite 'texts,' and in all the fussiness of official hypocrisy, he gets up and rebukes the perfectly innocent multitude, telling them it was a gross instance of Sabbath-breaking for them to be healed on that sacred day, when they might just as well be healed on any of the other six days of the week. . . .

"Now, as the poor woman does not seem to have spoken one word of entreaty to Jesus, or even to have called His attention to her case, the utterly senseless address of this man could only by any possibility mean either, 'You sick people must not come to the synagogue at all on the Sabbath under present circumstances, for fear you should be led into Sabbath-breaking by having a miraculous cure performed upon you;' or 'If any one wants to heal you on a Sabbath, you must decline.' And these remarks he has neither the courage to address to Jesus Himself, nor the candour to address to the poor healed woman, but preaches at them both by rebuking the multitude, who had no concern in the action at all, beyond the fact that they had been passive spectators of it! The whole range of the Gospels does not supply any other instance of an interference so illogical, or a stupidity so hopeless." (Farrar, pp. 466-67.)

Jesus' response contains a stinging rebuke and an irrefutable argument. "Thou hypocrite," he acclaims, "doth not each one of you on the sabbath loose his ox or his ass from the stall, and lead him away to watering?" Such was their practice. No penalty attached to the labor of leading an animal, which had been without water for a few hours, to the place of watering. Animals must be cared for; their well-being was important. "And ought not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham"—surely, as such, she was as important as an ox or an ass—"whom Satan hath bound, lo, these eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the sabbath day?"

It is no wonder that "when he had said these things, all his adversaries were ashamed; and all his disciples rejoiced for all the glorious things which were done by him." In this setting Jesus continued to teach and gave over again the parables of the mustard seed and of the leaven.

On yet another Sabbath, in yet another Perean city, we find Jesus in the house of "one of the chief Pharisees," perhaps one who is a member of the Great Sanhedrin itself. A great company is present, including many who are prominent and influential; it is a festal-Sabbath meal. There are also unbidden guests present, as custom allows; these are welcome to enter and observe, as did the woman who washed Jesus' feet with her tears and anointed them with ointment in the home of another Pharisee, but these observers are not among the banqueters themselves. One of these unofficial guests has dropsy. He and his condition are visible to all; the chief Pharisee, planning to taunt or test Jesus, may even have arranged for the prominent display of the afflicted man. In any event, all present watch Jesus to see what he will do, and he does not hesitate to use the occasion for his own purposes.

To the lawyers and Pharisees, he asks, "Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day?" For an answer there is silence only, no spoken word. "They would not say, 'Yes;' but, on the other hand, they dared not say, 'No!' Had it been unlawful, it was their positive function and duty to say so then and there, and without any subterfuge to deprive the poor sufferer, so far as in them lay, of the miraculous mercy which was prepared for him. If they dared not say so—either for fear of the people, or for fear of instant refutation, or because the spell of Christ's awful ascendency was upon them, or out of a mere splenetic pride, or—to imagine better motives—because in their inmost hearts, if any spot remained in them uncrusted by idle and irreligious prejudices, they felt that it was lawful, and more than lawful, RIGHT—then, by their own judgment, they left Jesus free to heal without the possibility of censure. Their silence, therefore, was, even on their own showing, and on their own principles, His entire justification. His mere simple question, and their inability to answer it, was an absolute decision of the controversy in His favour. He therefore took the man, healed him, and let him go." (Farrar, pp. 470-71.)

"Which of you shall have an ass or an ox fallen into a pit," Jesus then asks, "and will not straightway pull him out on the sabbath day?" He has cited their own custom and practice; to care for their beasts was lawful and right on the Sabbath. This being established—and even they knowing that a man is more important than a beast—there is nothing more to be said. And so they said nothing.

Before leaving the arena where this Sabbath-warfare is being waged—an arena in which we see Jesus contend for the real meaning and purpose of the Lord's holy day, while the Pharisees seek rather to follow the base traditions of their fathers—before leaving this field of contest, we should note these instructive words of Farrar, which show why a whole people will submit to such a system of inanity, of scribal scrupulosity, and of Pharisaic perversion. "Again and again was our Lord thus obliged to redeem this great primeval institution of God's love from these narrow, formal, pernicious restrictions of an otiose and unintelligent tradition," he says. "But it is evident that He attached as much importance to the noble and loving freedom of the day of rest as they did to the stupefying inaction to which they had reduced the normal character of its observance. Their absorbing attachment to it, the frenzy which filled them when He set at naught their Sabbatarian uncharities, rose from many circumstances."

It is these circumstances and this religious climate that illustrate why people will follow false and strict systems of religion to their doom. "They were wedded to the religious system which had long prevailed among them," our analyst says, "because it is easy to be a slave to the letter, and difficult to enter into the spirit; easy to obey a number of outward rules, difficult to enter intelligently and self-sacrificingly into the will of God; easy to entangle the soul in a network of petty observances, difficult to yield the obedience of an enlightened heart; easy to be haughtily exclusive, difficult to be humbly spiritual; easy to be an ascetic or a formalist, difficult to be pure, and loving, and wise, and free; easy to be a Pharisee, difficult to be a disciple; very easy to embrace a self-satisfying and sanctimonious system of rabbinical observances, very difficult to love God with all the heart, and all the might, and all the soul, and all the strength. In laying His axe at the root of their proud and ignorant Sabbatarianism, He was laying His axe at the root of all that 'miserable micrology' which they had been accustomed to take for their religious life." (Farrar, p. 469.)

Parable of the Wedding Guests

(Luke 14:7-11; JST Luke 14:7, 9-10)

After the Sabbath-healing of the dropsical man, and while yet at the festal table of the chief Pharisee, Jesus gave two parables—the parable of the wedding guests and the parable of the great supper. Many persons of great eminence were then present—noted scribes, renowned scholars, respected Rabbis, prominent Pharisees, rich merchants. All had assembled to partake of the rich delicacies heaped high on the banquet board. As the setting for the parable of the wedding guests, there must have been some struggles for seating precedence among the ego-inflated guests. Their protocol placed prominent people in preferred positions. This raised the question of comparative prominence and of ruling on the problems raised by their own self-esteem and self-exaltation. And so, Luke says, Jesus "put forth a parable unto them concerning those who were bidden to a wedding; for he knew how they chose out the chief rooms, and exalted themselves one above another."

When thou art bidden of any man to a wedding, sit not down in the highest room; lest a more honourable man than thou be bidden of him; And he who bade thee, with him who is more honorable, come, and say to thee; Give this man place; and thou begin with shame to take the lowest room.

To their shame, some of their chief concerns centered around rank and precedence, which, if it did nothing more, attested to the essential hollowness of their Rabbinical religion.

But when thou art bidden, go and sit down in the lowest room; that when he who bade thee, cometh, he may say unto thee, Friend, go up higher; then shalt thou have honor of God, in the presence of them who sit at meat with thee.

Those who bridle their Pharisaic self-esteem and control their inflated self-satisfaction prepare themselves to receive honor from God. What matter the petty preferences of this probation as compared to the eternal honors that are his to confer?

For whosoever exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.

Parable of the Great Supper

(Luke 14:12-24; JST Luke 14:12)

As a setting for this parable we have an assemblage of renowned persons. They are the friends of "one of the chief Pharisees." Also, Jesus has just given the parable of the wedding guests. Now, "concerning him who bade to the wedding," and speaking to a host whose assembled guests are the noble and great among men, he says: "When thou makest a dinner, or a supper, call not thy friends [an Oriental idiom meaning call not only thy friends], nor thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor rich neighbors; lest they also bid thee again, and a recompense be made thee. But when thou makest a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, and the blind"—the man healed of dropsy might well have been asked to stay and partake of the banquet delicacies—"And thou shalt be blessed; for they cannot recompense thee: for thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of the just."

Clearly these words were a reproof and a rebuke to a self-exalted host who esteemed highly those of his own ilk, but who looked with disdain and ill-will toward those in a lower caste. Perhaps to break the tension thus created, one of the self-esteeming, self-ennobling, self-exalting persons among the banqueters—one of those who in his own self-righteous frame of mind could, religiously, do no wrong—said: "Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God." In this reply there was more than meets the eye. Having in mind the Jewish tradition that the resurrection of the just and the setting up of the kingdom of God would be ushered in by a great festival of which all the members of the kingdom would partake, it was as though the speaker had acclaimed: 'Yea, Lord, we know that men will be rewarded for their good deeds in the resurrection of the just; and since we as members of the chosen people will be there at that time to partake of the feast of God, surely we shall be fully rewarded.'

In this setting, then, the Master Parabolist gave the parable of the great supper. "A certain man made a great supper, and bade many," he said. 'The Lord of all prepared for his people a great feast of fat kine, of wine on the lees well refined, of corn and cakes and honey. He offered to feed them with food celestial; theirs would be the privilege of eating at his table and never hungering more, of drinking at his board and never again wanting for water. He made ready a great gospel banquet that they might feast on the rich delicacies of eternity.'

He then "sent his servant at supper time to say to them that were bidden, Come; for all things are now ready." 'He sent his Servant, the Suffering Servant of whom Isaiah spoke; he sent his Son, sent him to the chosen people. Come, the Servant would say; Come, feast upon the words of Christ. The banquet table is set; there is meat and drink here for the soul. After fifteen hundred years of Mosaic preparation all things are now ready. The fulness of the everlasting gospel is now yours for the taking.'

"And they all with one consent began to make excuse." The whole nation sought to excuse themselves from attendance. The banquet was not to their liking; the food was seasoned with a new salt, the salt of humility and lowliness of heart. The fatted calf, now roasted before them, smelled not of the smoke of Mosaic fires, but was prepared more delicately for those of more refined sensitivities. This was no feast for them; they preferred rather to fatten themselves on the traditions of the elders and the teachings of the Rabbis.

"The first said unto him, I have bought a piece of ground, and I must needs go and see it: I pray thee have me excused." 'I am lawfully and properly engaged in tilling the soil of the past. My heart rejoices in the worldly possessions I have acquired. Why should I forsake all and believe in this new religion?' "And another said, I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to prove them: I pray thee have me excused." 'I am engaged in business enterprises of my own. If I spend the time required in this new religion, my business will suffer.' "And another said, I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come." 'Mine are the pleasures of this present world; let me rejoice in my wife. Am I expected to give up the pleasant things of this world simply because a new religion promises me greater joys in the life to come?'

"So that servant came, and shewed his lord these things. Then the master of the house being angry said to his servant, Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind." 'Turn from the scribes and Pharisees, from the rich and the noble in Israel; turn from those who are self-ennobling and self-exalting. Go to the publicans and sinners in your streets; go to the poor, to those who are considered to be spiritually maimed and halt and blind. Go to the common people, to the man born blind who in Pharisaic eyes knew not anything.' And it was done.

And then—because the gospel is for all men, because all are alike unto God, whether Jew or Gentile, bond or free, black or white—"Go out into the highways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled." 'Go outside the Holy City; go beyond the chosen people; go out upon the highways of the world; go to the heathen and the pagan. They have never heard of the gospel; they must be taught and commanded and compelled. Bring them in that my house may be filled.' "For I say unto you, That none of those men which were bidden shall taste of my supper."

"The application to all present was obvious. The worldly heart—whether absorbed in the management of property, or the acquisition of riches, or the mere sensualisms of domestic comfort—was incompatible with any desire for the true banquet of the kingdom of heaven. The Gentile and the Pariah, the harlot and the publican, the labourer of the roadside and the beggar of the streets, these might be [nay, would be] there in greater multitudes than the Scribe with his boasted learning, and the Pharisee with his broad phylactery." (Farrar, p. 474.) But the application to the whole nation and the manifestation of the eternal purposes of him who prepared the table and who issued the invitations are even more important. The gospel supper was spread, first, before the Jews as a nation and as a people. When the delicacies remained untouched—nay, when they were spurned and ignored and left to be carried as garbage to Gehenna—then the Gentiles and the ends of the earth were invited to come, to drink of the waters of life, to eat of the manna from heaven, to gain all of the blessings of the gospel.

Will Many or Few Be Saved?

(Luke 13:22-33; JST Luke 13:23-25, 27-34)

Jesus, somewhere in Perea, is journeying toward Jerusalem. It is a missionary journey "through the cities and villages." Everywhere, as his custom is, he is telling people what they must do to be saved; his gospel, which he everlastingly preaches, is a gospel of salvation. He is asked: "Lord, are there few only that be saved?"

Few or many in comparison to what? Few as compared to the general masses of worldly men, or many when the billions of millennial men—almost all of whom will be saved—are thrown into the scales? The total number of saved souls is of academic interest only; it is of no especial concern in the real world of applied truth. A far better question is: What must we do to be saved? And so Jesus answers not the question that was asked, but the question that should have been asked.

Strive to enter in at the strait gate; for I say unto you, Many shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able; for the Lord shall not always strive with man.

Men must seek salvation. They must labor and strive and struggle. The gate is both strait and straight. Even among those who seek to enter, many shall fail. The Lord wants people to be saved and he will strive with them—personally while he dwells among them, and by his Spirit, the Light of Christ, at all times. But his Spirit will not always strive with men. When they harden their hearts and sear their consciences, his Spirit ceases to plead, to enlighten, to guide. Men are then left unto themselves, to pursue the inevitable and unfailing course which dooms them to outer darkness. Now we hear Jesus say:

Therefore, when once the Lord of the kingdom is risen up, and hath shut the door of the kingdom, then ye shall stand without, and knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us. But the Lord shall answer and say unto you, I will not receive you, for ye know not from whence ye are.

There comes a time when the judgment is set, when the books are opened, when the eternal decrees are issued. There is a day when the door to the kingdom closes with eternal finality. Thereafter no new citizens are admitted to the Celestial Presence.

Then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our streets. But he shall say, I tell you, ye know not from whence ye are; depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity.

The Lord Jesus who then walked among them is the Eternal King. He it is from whom the workers of iniquity shall hear their dread doom: Depart from me. He invites men to repent here and now; if they do not do so, theirs is an everlasting sorrow hereafter.

There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth among you, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God and you are thrust out.

This is literal. Those who reject the testimony of the legal administrators who are sent to preach to them; those who fail to heed the witness of the elders of Israel who come preaching the gospel of peace; those who reject the living oracles of God in their day—those shall see, as it were, these very rejected ones with crowns on their heads, reigning in immortal glory, in the presence of the Great King. And O what weeping and howling there will be among those in whose streets these very witnesses once walked!

And verily I say unto you, They shall come from the east, and the west; and from the north, and the south, and shall sit down in the kingdom of God.

All the ends of the earth shall hear the message of salvation—Jew and Gentile alike—and the righteous among them shall come out of Babylon into Zion, there to prepare themselves for celestial rest.

And, behold, there are last which shall be first, and there are first which shall be last, and shall be saved therein.

"'There are those Gentiles in all nations to whom the gospel is offered last who shall be saved ahead of you Jews to whom the word of God came first, and there are those among you who first had Opportunity to hear the truth, who shall be last as to honor, preference, and salvation hereafter.' (1 Ne. 13:42.)" (Commentary 1:497.)

As Jesus thus spoke—of the Jews who would be cast out for rejecting Him who had taught in their streets, and of the Gentiles who would come from the ends of the earth to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God—at this point, "certain of the Pharisees" came and said: "Get thee out, and depart hence: for Herod will kill thee."

That Jesus believed this Pharisaic report, and also that it was a matter of complete indifference to him whether Antipas sought his life or not, is evident from his reply: "Go ye and tell Herod," he said, "Behold, I cast out devils, and do cures to-day and to-morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected." For the present and for the immediate future he would continue his ministry; the day of his death, resurrection, and eternal perfection was a few months away. He would, in due course, be slain, not in Perea but in Jerusalem. "I must walk to-day and to-morrow, and the third day; for it cannot be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem," he said. And Luke added, "This he spake, signifying of his death."

Sacrifice Prepares Disciples for Salvation

(Luke 14:25-35; JST Luke 14:25-26, 28-31, 35-38)

After giving the parable of the wedding guests and the parable of the great supper—both in the house of one of the chief Pharisees—Jesus "departed thence, and there went great multitudes with him." To these he taught the law of sacrifice required of all disciples. Better for these throngs if they turned back now unless they were ready to pay the full price of discipleship. Better for them to remain with such light as they had in the dead law of the dead past, unless they were prepared to lay their all, including their very lives, upon the altar of sacrifice.

If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, or husband, yea and his own life also; or in other words, is afraid to lay down his life for my sake, cannot be my disciple.

"A true disciple, if called upon to do so, forsakes all—riches, home, friends, family even his own life—in the Master's Cause." (Commentary 1:503.) "And whoso is not willing to lay down his life for my sake is not my disciple." (D&C 103:28.) Are they even to hate their family members? "Not hate in the sense of intense aversion or abhorrence; such is contrary to the whole spirit and tenor of the gospel. Men are to love their enemies, to say nothing of their own flesh and blood. Rather, the sense and meaning of Jesus' present instruction is that true disciples have a duty toward God which takes precedence over any family or personal obligation." (Commentary 1:503.)

And whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot be my disciple. Wherefore, settle this in your hearts, that ye will do the things which I shall teach, and command you.

Only those who make up their minds to do so—come what may come—have power to keep the commandments in times of trial and tribulation. To dramatize his teaching "that converts should count the cost before joining the Church; that they should come into the kingdom only if they are prepared to make the sacrifices required; that they should go the whole way in the gospel cause, or stay out entirely; that they 'not . . . follow him, unless' they are 'able to continue' in his word, to 'do the things' which he teaches and commands" (Commentary 1:504)—Jesus now gives two parables, the parable of the rash builder and the parable of the rash king.

For which of you intending to build a tower, sitteth not down first, and counteth the cost, whether he have money to finish his work? Lest, unhappily, after he has laid the foundation and is not able to finish his work, all who behold, begin to mock him, Saying, This man began to build, and was not able to finish.

"And this he said," Luke tells us, "signifying there should not any man follow him, unless he was able to continue."

Or what king, going to make war against another king, sitteth not down first, and consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him that cometh against him with twenty thousand? Or else, while the other is yet a great way off, he sendeth an ambassage, and desireth conditions of peace.

Then, by way of conclusion to the whole matter, Jesus said:

So likewise, whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple.

All that he hath! Possessions, family, life itself—all things—must be forsaken, if to retain them means losing the gospel and eternal life. [^1]

These teachings that men must forsake all and follow Christ raise again the issue of Moses and his law. They crystallize in the Jewish mind the essential contrariety of their whole system of worship and the new doctrine proclaimed by this man who is neither a priest, nor a Levite, nor a scribe, nor a Pharisee, nor even, as they suppose, a follower of Moses, the man of God. It is time, as his antagonists reason, to ask again the question that will remind the people, as they also suppose, that there is no need for this Nazarene because they already have Moses and the plan of salvation set forth in the law that he gave. Accordingly, "certain of them came to him, saying, Good Master, we have Moses and the prophets, and whosoever shall live by them, shall he not have life?"

Salvation is available through Moses and his law! What need is there for you and your teachings? We have the sayings of all the seers, the prophecies of all the prophets, the ordinances and sacrifices ordained by Jehovah; what more do we need? Our fathers were saved because of Moses and the prophets; surely we also shall gain eternal life in the same way. Such was their reasoning. To it Jesus could make but one reply.

Ye know not Moses, neither the prophets; for if ye had known them, ye would have believed on me; for to this intent they were written. For I am sent that ye might have life.

It is the age-old answer to the age-old heresy. Apostate peoples always look back to their fathers; always suppose they are treading where the saints have trod; always reject new prophets who seem to them to teach a new doctrine that differs from their traditions. And the answer always is: The old prophets foretold the coming of the new ones, and if men believed the ancient scriptures they would accept the new revelations that come in their day. And, in the case of Jesus, not only did Moses and all the prophets foretell his ministry and mission, but also, in his case he, and he alone, had come to make eternal life available for all men because he was the Son of God.

"Therefore I will liken it unto salt which is good," he continues; "But if the salt has lost its savor, wherewith shall it be seasoned? It is neither fit for the land, nor yet for the dung hill; men cast it out. He who hath ears to hear, let him hear." Luke adds: "These things he said, signifying that which was written, verily must all be fulfilled."

Thus we have Jesus saying in effect:

"1. 'Ye do err, for ye neither know nor understand the teachings of Moses or the prophets. If ye understood their teachings, ye would believe in me, for all their teachings were given to prepare men for my coming and the salvation which I would bring.'

"2. 'Further, even assuming that ye believe Moses and the prophets, yet ye must turn to me, for "salvation doth not come by the law alone," for it is only in and through my atoning sacrifice that life and salvation come.'

"3. 'And now that I have come, the law of Moses has lost such saving power as it had; it has become as salt that has lost its savor and it cannot be seasoned again; yea, the law is dead in me, and from henceforth it is not fit for anything except to be cast out. He who hath ears to hear, let him hear.'" (Commentary 1:506.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "The Midrash relates how, when Moses fed the sheep of Jethro in the wilderness, and a kid had gone astray, he went after it, and found it drinking at a spring. As he thought it might be weary, he laid it on his shoulder and brought it back, when God said that, because he had shown pity on the sheep of a man, He would give Him his own sheep, Israel, to feed." (Edersheim 2:257-58.)
