Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 78

The Lost Sheep, Coin, and Son

Ye feed not the flock. The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost. (Ezek. 34:3-4.)

Parable of the Lost Sheep

(Matthew 18:11-14; JST Matthew 18:11; Luke 15:1-7; JST Luke 15:1, 4)

We have no doubt that Jesus gave all of the parables many times. It strains the bands of sense and reason to suppose that each of his wise sayings was spoken only once. He came to preach the gospel and to save sinners, and the same message saves all men in all situations. If there were Galileans near Capernaum who were entitled to hear the Sermon on the Mount, surely there were Judeans near Jerusalem to whom the same words should be spoken. The Gospel authors repeatedly mention that Jesus was teaching and healing, but only occasionally do they record what he said or describe the cures he performed.

As to the parable of the lost sheep, we know he gave it twice, once in Galilee in response to claims of preeminence by those who wanted to be first in the kingdom of God, and later in Perea in response to murmurings that he ate with publicans and sinners. On that occasion in Capernaum he placed a little child in the midst of the disciples and taught them that they must become as little children in order to enter into the kingdom of heaven. "For the Son of Man is come to save that which was lost, and to call sinners to repentance; but these little ones have no need of repentance, and I will save them," he said. Then, with reference to those who are accountable for their sins, he asked:

How think ye? if a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be gone astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine, and goeth into the mountains, and seeketh that which is gone astray?

He is speaking as the Good Shepherd; he is making himself the pattern. He has come to save the "little ones" who otherwise would be lost. "The emphasis is on keeping the sheep from getting lost, on showing how precious the sheep are, and on how reluctant the Shepherd is to lose even one." (Commentary 1:508.) And as he, the Chief Shepherd, does, so also should we do who are his servant-shepherds.

And if so be that he find it, verily I say unto you he rejoiceth more of that sheep, than of the ninety and nine which went not astray.

Even so it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that one of these little ones should perish.

In Perea the setting and tone are different. Jesus is consorting with publicans and sinners—eating at their tables, teaching in their homes, offering to such despised and lowly ones the same truths he made available to the noble and the great. Such is contrary to Rabbinical standards; these social outcasts are to be shunned, not received as equals. "And the Pharisees and scribes murmured, saying, This man receiveth sinners, and eateth with them."

To these complaining, self-esteeming ones, Jesus asked which of them would not search for his one lost sheep and, finding it, place it on his shoulders with rejoicing. [^1]

And when he cometh home, he calleth together his friends and neighbours, saying unto them, Rejoice with me; for I have found my sheep which was lost.

I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons, which need no repentance.

"This time the Master Teacher places the emphasis on finding that which is lost; he shows the length the Shepherd will go to find the sheep and the rejoicing that takes place when the lost is found. This time, in applying the parable, the complaining religious leaders, who considered themselves as just men needing no repentance, become the shepherds who should have been doing what the Chief Shepherd was doing—seeking to find and save that which was lost." (Commentary 1:508.)

Jesus is speaking to Jews—to scribes and Pharisees in particular—and they and their friends and neighbors all rejoice when a lost sheep is found. Such was the practice. But what about the saving of a lost soul? Are there any like feelings when such occurs? We cannot, of course, answer as to the feelings of rejoicing that may have been in the hearts of individual Jews when Gentiles were converted, but we can quote the Rabbinic word that has come down to us. It is: "There is joy before God when those who provoke Him perish from the world." (Edersheim 2:256.) What a contrast this is to the gospel view of joy in heaven when a sinner repents!

It is not unlikely that Jesus, in the Perean rendition of this parable, was contrasting their rejoicing over their sheep with their almost total indifference toward human souls, even as he had recently contrasted their concern for thirsty cattle with the physical well-being of diseased and crippled humans.

Parable of the Lost Coin

(Luke 15:8-10)

As a second illustration of the joy in the heavenly kingdom that results from the reclaiming of a lost member of the earthly kingdom, Jesus gave the parable of the lost coin:

Either what woman having ten pieces of silver, if she lose one piece, doth not light a candle, and sweep the house, and seek diligently till she find it? And when she hath found it, she calleth her friends and her neighbours together, saying Rejoice with me; for I have found the piece which I had lost. [^2]

Likewise, I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth.

The lost sheep strayed from the fold by choice, seeking green pastures and still waters out in the deserts of the world. But the lost coin, a silver drachma, was lost through the inattention of the officers of the kingdom. The Lord's servants neglected their responsibility to care for the needs of the saints, and one of the saintly coins slipped to the floor and rolled into the dust in a dark corner where, except for diligent search, it would remain lost until swept out with the refuse.

The woman who by lack of care lost the precious piece may be taken to represent the theocracy of the time, and the Church as an institution in any dispensational period; then the pieces of silver, every one a genuine coin of the realm, bearing the image of the great King, are the souls committed to the care of the Church; and the lost piece symbolizes the souls that are neglected and, for a time at least, lost sight of, by the authorized ministers of the gospel of Christ." (Talmage, p. 456.)

The angels rejoice! And why not? Are they not our brethren, children of the same Eternal Father? Who should have greater interest in the spiritual well-being of mortals than their immortal kin beyond the veil who are themselves also seeking that eternal life which consists in the perfecting of the eternal family unit?

Parable of the Prodigal Son

(Luke 15:11-32)

As a gem in a crown of gold, so is the parable of the prodigal son among the parables. Even Jesus' words are not all of equal splendor, and the Son of God in this parable climbs the mountain height. In wonder and reverence we view his terse eloquence.

A certain man had two sons: And the younger of them said to his father, Father, give me the portion of goods that falleth to me. And he divided unto them his living.

And not many days after the younger son gathered all together, and took his journey into a far country, and there wasted his substance with riotous living.

Each son received his portion; each was entitled, according to the Jewish law of inheritance, to a specified share of his father's possessions, though neither could claim it while the father lived. The eldest son received a double portion; the younger gained one-third of the movable property, which apparently is all that was bequeathed at this time. "The demand of the younger son for a portion of the patrimony, even during his father's lifetime, is an instance of deliberate and unfilial desertion; the duties of family cooperation had grown distasteful to him, and the wholesome discipline of the home had become irksome. He was determined to break away from all home ties, forgetful of what home had done for him and the debt of gratitude and duty by which he was morally bound. He went into a far country, and, as he thought, beyond the reach of his father's directing influence. He had his season of riotous living, of unrestrained indulgence and evil pleasure, through it all wasting his strength of body and mind, and squandering his father's substance; for what he had received had been given as a concession and not as the granting of any legal or just demand." (Talmage, p. 458.)

And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in that land; and he began to be in want. And he went and joined himself to a citizen of that country; and he sent him into his fields to feed swine. And he would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did eat: and no man gave unto him.

Divine Providence uses the forces of nature to humble the children of men and to lead them to repentance. Deity speaks to earth's inhabitants by "the voice of thunderings, and the voice of lightnings, and the voice of tempests, and the voice of the waves of the sea heaving themselves beyond their bounds." (D&C 88:90.) Here his voice is heard in "a mighty famine," which forces the hunger-driven younger son into the most degrading of all occupations—herding swine. Jews who kept swine were cursed, and the husks that these particular swine ate were totally unfit for human consumption. "The Jews detested swine so much, that they would only speak of a pig euphemistically as dabhar acheer, 'another thing.' The husks are the long bean-like pods of the carob-tree, or Egyptian fig. . . . They are stringy, sweetish, coarse, and utterly unfit for human sustenance. . . . The tree was called the 'locust-tree,' from the mistaken notion that its pods are the 'locusts' on which St. John fed." (Farrar, p. 328, footnote 1.)

And when he came to himself, he said, How many hired servants of my father's have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger! I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, And am no more worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy hired servants.

"Where, in the entire range of human literature, sacred or profane, can anything be found so terse, so luminous, so full of infinite tenderness—so faithful in the picture which it furnishes of the consequences of sin, yet so merciful in the hope which it affords to amendment and penitence—as this little story? How does it summarize the consolations of religion and the sufferings of life! All sin and punishment, all penitence and forgiveness, find their best delineation in these few brief words. The radical differences of temperament and impulse which separate different classes of men—the spurious independence of a restless free-will—the preference of the enjoyments of the present to all hopes of the future—the wandering far away from that pure and peaceful region which is indeed our home, in order to let loose every lower passion in the riotous indulgence which dissipates the rarest gifts of life—the brief continuance of those fierce spasms of forbidden pleasure—the consuming hunger, the scorching thirst, the helpless slavery, the unutterable and uncompassionated degradation that must inevitably ensue—where have these myriad-times-repeated experiences of sin and sorrow been ever painted—though here painted in a few touches only—by a hand more tender and more true than in the picture of that foolish boy demanding prematurely the share which he claims of his father's goods; journeying into a far country, wasting his substance with riotous living; suffering from want in the mighty famine; forced to submit to the foul infamy of feeding swine, and fain to fill his belly with the swine-husks which no man gave? And then the coming to himself, the memory of his father's meanest servants who had enough and to spare, the return homewards, the agonized confession, the humble, contrite, heart-broken entreaty, and that never-to-be-equalled climax which, like the sweet voice from heaven, has touched so many million hearts to penitence and tears." (Farrar, pp. 327-28.)

And he arose, and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way off; his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him. And the son said unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son. [^3]

The father, who yet loved his wayward son, was waiting, hoping, praying for his return. He has a fatted calf in the stall for a planned feast; now he sees the erring one a great way off, hastens to him, and greets him with tender compassion. The son confesses his sins—without which forgiveness cannot come—and because he has been so graciously received as a son, he does not make the contemplated offer to serve in a menial capacity as a hired servant. The two of them return to the home.

But the father said to his servants, Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet: And bring hither the fatted calf, and kill it; and let us eat, and be merry: For this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found. And they began to be merry.

Back came the prodigal, into the household, as a member of the family; back he came to a position of honor and dignity, where his wants and needs would be cared for by the servants; back came the repentant son—not to inherit all that his father had, for such was reserved for the faithful son who had served during the heat of the day, but back he came from reveling with harlots, eating husks, and wallowing in a pigsty to his place with the family in the ancestral home. From his back the servants took the ragged, tattered, and coarse garb of the swineherd and replaced it with a choice stola, the upper garment of the higher classes. On his finger went the ring of a ruler, and his bare and mire-encrusted feet were cleansed and shod with sandals. Thus crowned with the three symbols of wealth and position—the robe, the ring, and the shoes—he joined in eating the fatted calf and making merry with the family. A lost sheep had returned to the sheepcote.

Now his elder son was in the field: and as he came and drew nigh to the house, he heard musick and dancing. And he called one of the servants, and asked what these things meant. And he said unto him, Thy brother is come; and thy father hath killed the fatted calf, because he hath received him safe and sound.

And he was angry, and would not go in: therefore came his father out, and intreated him. And he answering said to his father, Lo, these many years do I serve thee, neither transgressed I at any time thy commandment: and yet thou never gavest me a kid, that I might make merry with my friends: But as soon as this thy son was come, which hath devoured thy living with harlots, thou hast killed for him the fatted calf.

Never certainly in human language was so much—such a world of love and wisdom and tenderness—compressed into such few immortal words. Every line, every touch of the picture is full of beautiful eternal significance. The poor boy's presumptuous claim for all that life could give him—the leaving of the old home—the journey to a far country—the brief spasm of 'enjoyment' there—the mighty famine in that land—the premature exhaustion of all that could make life noble and endurable—the abysmal degradation and unutterable misery that followed—the coming to himself, and recollection of all that he had left behind—the return in heart-broken penitence and deep humility—the Father's far-off sight of him, and the gush of compassion and tenderness over this poor returning prodigal—the ringing joy of the whole household over him who had been loved and lost, and had now come home—the unjust jealousy and mean complaint of the elder brother—and then that close of the parable in a strain of music—"

And he said unto him, Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine. It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found.

"All this is indeed a divine epitome of the wandering of man and the love of God such as no literature has ever equalled, such as no ear of man has ever heard elsewhere. Put in the one scale all that Confucius, or Sakaya Mouni, or Zoroaster, or Socrates ever wrote or said—and they wrote and said many beautiful and holy words—and put in the other the Parable of the Prodigal Son alone, with all that this single parable connotes and means, and can any candid spirit doubt which scale would outweigh the other in eternal preciousness—in divine adaptation to the wants of man?" (Farrar, p. 483.)

"All that I have is thine!" The elder and younger sons no longer stand on a plane of equality. Though received back to honor and dignity, the erstwhile wayward one does not receive all that his father hath; though he wears the stola, has a ring on his finger, and is shod with sandals, he does not reign on the throne, nor exercise control, rulership, and dominion in the place and stead of the father. Such an inheritance is reserved for the one whose service and devotion merit that inestimably great inheritance. [^4]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] In an instructive footnote dealing with Pharisaic covetousness, Farrar says: "The vice of avarice seems inherent in the Jewish race. To this day, says Dr. Thomson, speaking of the Jews in Palestine, 'Everybody trades, speculates, cheats. The shepherd-boy on the mountain talks of piastres from morning till night; so does the muleteer on the road, the farmer in the field, the artisan in the shop, the merchant in his magazine, the pacha in his palace, the kadi in the hall of judgment, the mullah in the mosque, the monk, the priest, the bishop-money, money, money! the desire of every heart, the theme of every tongue, the end of every aim. Everything is bought and sold-each prayer has its price, each sin its tariff.' Quarrels about the money, complaints of the greed and embezzlement of the Rabbis, wrong distribution of the chaluka, or alms, and the kadima, or honorary pay, form the main history of the Jews in modern Jerusalem. It is a profoundly melancholy tale, and no one who knows the facts will deny it-least of all pious and worthy Jews." (Farrar, p. 475, footnote 1.)
[^2] "Now, concerning the state of the soul between death and the resurrection-Behold, it has been made known unto me by an angel, that the spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body, yea, the spirits of all men, whether they be good or evil, are taken home to that God who gave them life. And then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness, which is called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow. And then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of the wicked, yea, who are evil-for behold, they have no part nor portion of the Spirit of the Lord; for behold, they chose evil works rather than good; therefore the spirit of the devil did enter into them, and take possession of their house-and these shall be cast out into outer darkness; there shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, and this because of their own iniquity, being led captive by the will of the devil. Now this is the state of the souls of the wicked, yea, in darkness, and a state of awful, fearful looking for the fiery indignation of the wrath of God upon them; thus they remain in this state, as well as the righteous in paradise, until the time of their resurrection." (Alma 40:11-14.)
[^3] In this connection, these words of Chrysostom are worthy of preservation: "For as on the stage some enter, assuming the masks of kings and captains, physicians and orators, philosophers and soldiers, being in truth nothing of the kind; so also in the present life wealth and poverty are only masks. As then, when thou sittest in the theatre, and beholdest one playing below who sustains the part of a king, thou dost not count him happy, nor esteemest him a king, nor desirest to be such as he; but knowing him to be one of the common people, a ropemaker or a blacksmith, or some such a one as this, thou dost not esteem him happy for his mask, and his robe's sake, nor judgest of his condition from these, but holdest him cheap for the meanness of his true condition: so also, here sitting in the world as in a theatre, and beholding men playing as on a stage, when thou seest many rich, count them not to be truly rich, but to be wearing the masks of rich. For as he, who in the stage plays the king or captain, is often a slave, or one who sells figs or grapes in the market, so also this rich man is often in reality poorest of all. For if thou strip him of his mask, and unfold his conscience, and scrutinize his inward parts, thou wilt there find a great penury of virtue; thou wilt find him to be indeed the most abject of men. And as in the theatre, when evening is come and the spectators are departed, and the players are gone forth thence, having laid aside their masks and their dresses, then they who before showed as kings and captains to all, appear now as they truly are; so now, when death approaches and the audience is dismissed, all, laying aside the masks of wealth and poverty, depart from hence, and, being judged only by their works, appear some indeed truly rich, but some poor; and some glorious, but others without honor."
[^4] Speaking of those who magnify their callings in the Holy Priesthood and who are thereby true and faithful in all things, fulfilling all the terms and conditions of their priesthood covenant, the Lord promises: "All that my Father hath shall be given unto" them. (D&C 84:33-40.) All that the Father hath is eternal life or exaltation; it is to inherit, receive, and possess that which the Father now has and to be like him. Such was the promise to the elder son in this parable of parables.
