Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 79

The Two Peculiar Parables

Give ear, O my people, to my law: incline your ears to the words of my mouth. I will open my mouth in a parable: I will utter dark sayings. (Ps. 78:1-2.)

Parable of the Unjust Steward

(Luke 16:1-13)

This parable and that of Lazarus and the rich man are difficult to understand, sow seeds of confusion and uncertainty among sectarian scripturalists, and in fact can only be understood by the saints as they are enlightened by the power of the Holy Spirit. In them Jesus opens his mouth to "utter dark sayings," as far as the scriptural exegetes of the world are concerned. But both of them, when received and understood for what they are, shed wondrous light on glorious gospel verities.

The parable of the unjust steward was spoken to the disciples, to members of the Church—to the publicans and sinners who now followed Jesus, to the extreme annoyance and displeasure of the Pharisees—and was intended not to countenance their prior evil deeds, but to show what they could learn from their previous life of sin.

There was a certain rich man, which had a steward; and the same was accused unto him that he had wasted his goods. And he called him, and said unto him,

How is it that I hear this of thee? give an account of thy stewardship; for thou mayest be no longer steward.

As Eliezer of Damascus ruled over all that Abraham possessed, so was this steward the overseer of all his master's property. But unlike Eliezer, to whom Abraham entrusted the high duty of getting Rebekah as a wife for Isaac, our unnamed steward was untrue to his trust. He squandered his master's money and wasted his goods, perhaps in riotous living. Summoned before his employer, he made no defense, was discharged, and was given time to get his accounts in order for his successor.

Then the steward said within himself, What shall I do? for my lord taketh away from me the stewardship: I cannot dig; to beg I am ashamed. I am resolved what to do, that, when I am put out of the stewardship, they may receive me into their houses.

So he called every one of his lord's debtors unto him, and said unto the first, How much owest thou unto my lord? And he said, An hundred measures of oil. And he said unto him, Take thy bill, and sit down quickly, and write fifty. Then said he to another, And how much owest thou? And he said, An hundred measures of wheat. And he said unto him, Take thy bill, and write fourscore.

And the lord commended the unjust steward, because he had done wisely: for the children of this world are in their generation wiser than the children of light.

Here we see an unjust servant, an unrighteous steward—an evil Eliezer—violating every standard of honesty and integrity. His acts are within the letter of the law, for his power of attorney is still in force, and he can still buy and sell and contract at will. But he defrauds his employer and enriches the debtors, who he is confident will feel an obligation to favor him in future business arrangements. For such conduct we would anticipate, at the least, a severe rebuke, and, more likely, an attempt at legal prosecution. Instead we hear praise for his wise and prudent acts, with which conclusion Jesus concurs as he gives this moral: "For the children of this world are in their generation wiser than the children of light."

Having spiritual insight, the disciples to whom the dissertation has come could not have failed to see in this parable an endorsement, not of dishonesty and perfidy, but of worldly sagacity and wisdom in caring for one's own interests. To claim it, as some have done, as a parable that commends and sanctions cheating simply shows how far afield uninspired commentators can go. But now we hear how Jesus himself interpreted and applied the account.

And I say unto you, Make to yourself friends of the mammon of unrighteousness; that, when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations.

"Our Lord's purpose was to show the contrast between the care, thoughtfulness, and devotion of men engaged in the money-making affairs of earth, and the half-hearted ways of many who are professedly striving after spiritual riches. Worldly-minded men do not neglect provision for their future years, and often are sinfully eager to amass plenty; while the 'children of light,' or those who believe spiritual wealth to be above all earthly possessions, are less energetic, prudent, or wise. By 'mammon of unrighteousness' we may understand material wealth or worldly things. . . .

"If the wicked steward, when cast out from his master's house because of unworthiness, might hope to be received into the homes of those whom he had favored, how much more confidently may they who are genuinely devoted to the right hope to be received into the everlasting mansions of God!"

He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also in much, and he that is unjust in the least is unjust also in much. If therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit to your trust the true riches? And if ye have not been faithful in that which is another man's, who shall give you that which is your own?

No servant can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.

"Make such use of your wealth as shall insure you friends hereafter. Be diligent; for the day in which you can use earthly riches will soon pass. Take a lesson from even the dishonest and the evil; if they are so prudent as to provide for the only future they think of how much more should you, who believe in an eternal future, provide therefor! If you have not learned wisdom and prudence in the use of 'unrighteous mammon,' how can you be trusted with the more enduring riches? If you have not learned how to use properly the wealth of another, which has been committed to you as a steward, how can you expect to be successful in the handling of great wealth should such be given you as your own? Emulate the unjust steward and the lovers of mammon, not in their dishonesty, cupidity, and miserly hoarding of the wealth that is at best but transitory, but in their zeal, forethought, and provision for the future. Moreover, let not wealth become your master; keep it to its place as a servant." (Talmage, pp. 463-64.)

The Law and the Prophets Testify of Christ

(Luke 16:14-18; JST Luke 16:16-18, 20-23)

Never in all history was there a people unto whom God sent his word, by the mouths of his servants the prophets, who were left so completely without excuse for their disbelief as were these Jews. They had the law and the prophets; the scriptures lay open before them; the mind and will of the Lord was recorded for all to read. And the man of whom the ancient records taught stood among them, spake as never man spake, performed miracles as none other had ever done, and lived and was as only God's Son could live and be. And yet their sins led them to reject him.

He has just taught his disciples, among whom are repentant publicans—and sinners—a group detested by the Pharisees—that to gain a heavenly reward they must use their earthly wealth in accordance with gospel standards. If men cannot be faithful in handling the unrighteous mammon—the things of this world—why should they think their heavenly Father will place in their hands the true riches of eternity?

Mingling with the disciples, and also hearing the parable of the unjust steward, were pious Pharisees who loved money and had their hearts set on the mammon of unrighteousness. They were covetous, grasping, avaricious. To cheat in business was a way of life with them. [^1] And their reaction to Jesus' instruction on the proper use of wealth was to scoff and sneer and deride. In response Jesus said: "Ye are they which justify yourselves before men; for that which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of God."

These words, coming with a voice of authority, from one having authority, stand as a divine rejection of them and their way of life. Either they must be refuted or these Pharisees stand condemned before their race; and the sole means of overthrowing a divinely inspired prophetic utterance is to attack the prophet. If the word came from God, it is true; if the prophet can be rejected, his words fall with him. And so, "they said unto him, We have the law, and the prophets; but as for this man we will not receive him to be our ruler; for he maketh himself to be a judge over us."

How often they have taken this approach: 'What need have we for Jesus and his new doctrine? His gospel is a needless appendage to our system of religion; we already have the plan of salvation as given by Moses and all the prophets. As for this man Jesus, he and his doctrine are nothing to us.' To such rebellious feelings, testimony mingled with doctrine is the only perfect answer. Thus Jesus says:

The law and the prophets testify of me; yea, and all the prophets who have written, even until John, have foretold of these days. Since that time, the kingdom of God is preached, and every man who seeketh truth presseth into it.

By definition and in its very nature, a prophet is one to whom the Holy Ghost reveals that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. Every prophet from Adam to John foretold the coming of him who then preached in their streets and ate at their tables. Had they not done so, they would not have been prophets. But now the new kingdom is being proclaimed, and every man who seeketh truth, who desires righteousness, who yearns for salvation—all such come and join the Church.

And why teach ye the law, and deny that which is written; and condemn him whom the Father hath sent to fulfill the law, that you might all be redeemed?

O fools! for you have said in your hearts, There is no God. And you pervert the right way; and the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence of you; and you persecute the meek; and in your violence you seek to destroy the kingdom; and ye take the children of the kingdom by force. Woe unto you, ye adulterers!

To all this—their condemning of the One who came to fulfill the law; the announcement that he had come to redeem them; the assertion that in their hearts they did not even believe in God; the charges of perverting the truth, of persecuting the Church, of using violence against the kingdom, of physically assaulting his disciples—to all this they gave no heed. Passing over their whole Satan-guided rejection of him, his laws, and his new kingdom—let these things be as they were—they came to the one thing that gave them supreme offense. He said they were adulterers. All else for which they were arraigned was openly known and could not be denied. Their immoral acts, however, were done in secret; and because Jesus lifted this veil and charged them openly with sex immorality, they reviled him. His response was to single out certain acts of adultery that were public knowledge, and that we shall consider later in connection with his teachings on marriage and divorce. He said:

Whosoever putteth away his wife, and marrieth another, committeth adultery; and whosoever marrieth her who is put away from her husband, committeth adultery.

Such, then, were the words and feelings that called forth the parable of Lazarus and the rich man.

Parable of Lazarus and the Rich Man

(Luke 16:19-31; JST Luke 16:23-24)

Jesus is facing his Pharisaic foes. Because of their love of money, their obdurate refusal to accept him, and their vicious persecution of his disciples, he is speaking sharp and stinging words. He calls them fools and adulterers. Then to climax his acrid and harsh sayings against these imperious self-exaltants who worship the mammon of unrighteousness, he says:

Verily I say unto you, I will liken you unto the rich man. For there was a certain rich man, who was clothed in purple, and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day.

And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate, full of sores, And desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the rich man's table: moreover the dogs came and licked his sores.

Two more extreme opposites could scarcely have been chosen. A rich Pharisee, not so much as dignified by name, revels in wealth and luxury. His linen apparel and his upper garment, dyed a royal and costly violet-purple, are his constant dress. He banquets daily on all the delicacies money can buy. He is rich, powerful, and selfish, using his wealth to gratify his love of luxury. There is here none of that wise use of the mammon of unrighteousness which will prepare his soul for an everlasting inheritance.

On the other hand we see a poor, diseased beggar—one Lazarus by name, a name that means "God help him," and from which we derive the word lazar, meaning leper. He is laid at the gate of the opulent Pharisee, to beg, to plead, to cry out—along with the whining dogs—for crumbs that fall from the banquet board. Dressed in rags, burdened with disease, famished for want of food, he is seen by the lordly Pharisee, who worships before the great altar and makes broad his phylactery, but who has no dried crust of barley bread for his suffering fellow mortal. He is too immersed in the weighty things of wealth and in the intricacies of Mosaic performances to concern himself with a diseased and starving son of Abraham. And the dogs lick Lazarus's sores, which neither alleviates the pain nor softens the suffering; the uninvited canines merely aggravate the ache.

Such, then, is the temporal and physical state of Lazarus, who, however, from what follows, we know to have been a morally upright and righteous person. And such also is the earthly state of the rich man, whom we have come to call Dives, such being the Latin designation for his state of riches. But one's earthly state, be he Lazarus or Dives, is transitory; and so Jesus continues:

And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom: the rich man also died, and was buried; And in hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom. [^2]

Then death came—as come it must to all—first to Lazarus, hastened by hunger and assured by disease; then to Dives, who lived out his days of wealth and worship and high self-esteem. But how different were their deaths. For Dives there was earthly pomp and ceremony, an embalmed corpse, a costly funeral with paid mourners, a carved tomb in a choice cave where marble statuary was placed. Lazarus, his body uncared for, unwrapped, without ointment or spices or embalming service, was hauled on a wooden cart to a pauper's grave in a potter's field.

So much for their mortal remains. As to their immortal spirits things were quite different. One went to paradise, the other to hell. Lazarus was carried by the angels to Abraham's bosom, there to mingle with prophets and patriarchs; there to find rest and peace from all care and sorrow; there to enjoy the companionship of the righteous of all past ages until the day of resurrection. Dives descended to hell, to Hades, to Sheol, to the spirit prison, to outer darkness, to a place of weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth, a place where sinners sorrow and howl because of the torments that have come upon them. Nor can we refrain from reciting that revelation in which the Lord says: "If any man shall take of the abundance which I have made, and impart not his portion, according to the law of my gospel, unto the poor and the needy, he shall, with the wicked, lift up his eyes in hell, being in torment." (D&C 104:18.) Then Dives speaks:

And he cried and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame.

But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.

And beside all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed: so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot; neither can they pass to us, that would come from thence.

How things have changed. The beggar on earth—whose body was pained with sores, whose belly cried out for food—now, well and whole, clothed in robes of righteousness, feasts on eternal bread in paradisiacal palaces. The rich man on earth—who rejoiced in the multitude of things that his soul possessed—now begs for a drop of water to cool the flame of tormented conscience that burns unchecked in his miserably small soul. Lazarus's mask of pain and poverty has been stripped away to reveal a healthy soul prepared to receive and manage the riches of eternity, while Dives's removed mask reveals the shriveled soul of a moral weakling who, now stripped of wealth and influence, suffers eternal pain in an eternal hell. [^3]

And as they knew each other in mortality, so they remember their former acquaintanceship. But no longer are they accessible to each other so that one might minister to the needs of the other. Christ has not yet bridged the gulf between the prison and the palace, and there is as yet no communion between the righteous in paradise and the wicked in hell.

Then he said, I pray thee therefore, father, that thou wouldest send him to my father's house: For I have five brethren; that he may testify unto them, lest they also come into this place of torment.

Abraham saith unto him, They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them. And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead, they will repent.

And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.

To pass from this life to the next, to die, as we are wont to say, simply means that the eternal spirit—wherein the mind of man is found, and which is the believing, knowing, sentient, intelligent part of the human personality—steps out of the mortal body and continues to live in another sphere. Beliefs do not change; prejudices remain; faith or its absence is still the order of the day. Those who believe the truth in this life believe it in the next; those who reject God's eternal laws here reflect that same rebellion hereafter. There may and will be repentance and changes in process of time, but there is no immediate change. Dives's five brethren—were they the five sons of Annas, the high priest, as some have speculated?—knew Jesus had raised the dead, and they did not believe in him. Why would they be converted if a ghostly apparition—which could be rationalized away as a misty nothingness—should appear to them? Faith does not come in that way. Only those who accept Moses and the prophets would have the spiritual insight to recognize what was involved should one rise from the dead. There is indeed a certain eternal finality connected with death. It is this day of life that is given to men to prepare for eternity, and the day of death is one of rejoicing for all the Lazaruses of life and a day of sorrow for all the Diveses of death.

Parable of the Unprofitable Servant

(Luke 17:1-10; JST Luke 17:5-6, 9-10)

Jesus now has somewhat to say to his disciples about those who bring offenses, saying that it were better for them if a millstone were hanged about their necks and they drowned in the sea than that they should offend one of his little ones. This is a repetition of similar expressions made earlier in Capernaum that we have considered in chapter 66. He also repeats some counsel about rebuking and forgiving our erring brethren—"And if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I repent; thou shalt forgive him"—all of which we also considered in the Capernaum setting in chapter 67. Now the apostles say unto him: "Increase our faith." Only a brief sentence of what must have been an extended exposition is preserved for us by Luke, and then Jesus gives the parable of the unprofitable servant. As to faith he says:

If you had faith as a grain of mustard seed, you might say unto this sycamore tree, Be thou plucked up by the roots, and be thou planted in the sea; and it should obey you.

We cannot doubt that Jesus on this and many occasions discoursed to the apostles, to all of his disciples, and to Jew and Gentile alike, that faith was the first principle of the gospel and that it came by obedience to those laws upon which its receipt is predicated.

Faith, the moving cause of all action in intelligent beings; faith, the hope in that which is not seen which is true; faith, the assurance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen; faith, the mighty, moving power by which the worlds were made and by which all things are upheld and sustained in their ordained spheres; faith, the power by which miracles are wrought, by which God's work goes forth, by which the gospel is preached and souls are saved; faith, the very power of the Lord Almighty himself—faith is power.

Faith is borne of knowledge and matures through righteousness. To gain faith unto life and salvation, men must first adopt the concept that God actually exists; they must have a correct idea of his character, perfections, and attributes; and they must obtain an actual knowledge that the course of life they are pursuing is according to his omnipotent will. These and many like things we know about faith; would that we knew all that Jesus said to the apostles on this occasion, for who can know too much about faith and righteousness? But now for the parable:

But which of you, having a servant plowing or feeding cattle, will say unto him by and by, when he is come from the field, Go and sit down to meat? And will not rather say unto him, Make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird thyself, and serve me, till I have eaten and drunken; and afterwards thou shalt eat and drink?

Doth he thank that servant because he doeth the things which were commanded him? I say unto you, Nay. So likewise ye, when ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants. We have done that which was no more than our duty to do.

Jesus thus teaches that his saints grow in faith by obedience and service in the kingdom; also, "that Deity has a claim upon the services of his saints, and that even though they serve him with all their hearts, mights, mind, and strength, yet they are unprofitable servants." (Commentary 1:527.) As to faith growing in the hearts of men, first the seed sprouts; then, as it is cared for, the plant grows and the fruit ripens; and finally the faithful saints pluck and eat the fruit of eternal life. As to faithful service that yet leaves the servant as unprofitable, how can it be expressed better than King Benjamin did it: "If ye should serve him who has created you from the beginning, and is preserving you from day to day, by lending you breath, that ye may live and move and do according to your own will, and even supporting you from one moment to another—I say, if ye should serve him with all your whole souls yet ye would be unprofitable servants. And behold, all that he requires of you is to keep his commandments; and he has promised you that if ye would keep his commandments ye should prosper in the land; and he never doth vary from that which he hath said; therefore, if ye do keep his commandments he doth bless you and prosper you. And now, in the first place, he hath created you, and granted unto you your lives, for which ye are indebted unto him. And secondly, he doth require that ye should do as he hath commanded you; for which if ye do, he doth immediately bless you; and therefore he hath paid you. And ye are still indebted unto him, and are, and will be, forever and ever; therefore, of what have ye to boast?" (Mosiah 2:21-24.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] In an instructive footnote dealing with Pharisaic covetousness, Farrar says: "The vice of avarice seems inherent in the Jewish race. To this day, says Dr. Thomson, speaking of the Jews in Palestine, 'Everybody trades, speculates, cheats. The shepherd-boy on the mountain talks of piastres from morning till night; so does the muleteer on the road, the farmer in the field, the artisan in the shop, the merchant in his magazine, the pacha in his palace, the kadi in the hall of judgment, the mullah in the mosque, the monk, the priest, the bishop-money, money, money! the desire of every heart, the theme of every tongue, the end of every aim. Everything is bought and sold-each prayer has its price, each sin its tariff.' Quarrels about the money, complaints of the greed and embezzlement of the Rabbis, wrong distribution of the chaluka, or alms, and the kadima, or honorary pay, form the main history of the Jews in modern Jerusalem. It is a profoundly melancholy tale, and no one who knows the facts will deny it-least of all pious and worthy Jews." (Farrar, p. 475, footnote 1.)
[^2] "Now, concerning the state of the soul between death and the resurrection-Behold, it has been made known unto me by an angel, that the spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body, yea, the spirits of all men, whether they be good or evil, are taken home to that God who gave them life. And then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness, which is called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow. And then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of the wicked, yea, who are evil-for behold, they have no part nor portion of the Spirit of the Lord; for behold, they chose evil works rather than good; therefore the spirit of the devil did enter into them, and take possession of their house-and these shall be cast out into outer darkness; there shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, and this because of their own iniquity, being led captive by the will of the devil. Now this is the state of the souls of the wicked, yea, in darkness, and a state of awful, fearful looking for the fiery indignation of the wrath of God upon them; thus they remain in this state, as well as the righteous in paradise, until the time of their resurrection." (Alma 40:11-14.)
[^3] In this connection, these words of Chrysostom are worthy of preservation: "For as on the stage some enter, assuming the masks of kings and captains, physicians and orators, philosophers and soldiers, being in truth nothing of the kind; so also in the present life wealth and poverty are only masks. As then, when thou sittest in the theatre, and beholdest one playing below who sustains the part of a king, thou dost not count him happy, nor esteemest him a king, nor desirest to be such as he; but knowing him to be one of the common people, a ropemaker or a blacksmith, or some such a one as this, thou dost not esteem him happy for his mask, and his robe's sake, nor judgest of his condition from these, but holdest him cheap for the meanness of his true condition: so also, here sitting in the world as in a theatre, and beholding men playing as on a stage, when thou seest many rich, count them not to be truly rich, but to be wearing the masks of rich. For as he, who in the stage plays the king or captain, is often a slave, or one who sells figs or grapes in the market, so also this rich man is often in reality poorest of all. For if thou strip him of his mask, and unfold his conscience, and scrutinize his inward parts, thou wilt there find a great penury of virtue; thou wilt find him to be indeed the most abject of men. And as in the theatre, when evening is come and the spectators are departed, and the players are gone forth thence, having laid aside their masks and their dresses, then they who before showed as kings and captains to all, appear now as they truly are; so now, when death approaches and the audience is dismissed, all, laying aside the masks of wealth and poverty, depart from hence, and, being judged only by their works, appear some indeed truly rich, but some poor; and some glorious, but others without honor."
