Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 80

The Raising of Lazarus

For behold, this is my work and my glory— to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. (Moses 1:39.)

The Message That Lazarus Is Sick

(John 11:1-6; JST John 11:1-2, 6, 16)

Who shall say what was the greatest miracle performed by the Man of Miracles during the years of his ministry? Clearly the most wondrous event of the ages was to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. This he alone could do because God was his Father; and this he did do—commencing in Gethsemane when he sweat great drops of blood from every pore; continuing on the cross when he voluntarily gave up his life; and crowned in the Arimathean's tomb when his spirit entered again that body which never would see corruption.

What greater miracle did he perform than to come forth from the tomb; than to rise in glorious immortality; than to unite his body and spirit inseparably in the resurrected state? What miracle compares with that of passing on to all men the effects of his resurrection, so that all shall rise from death to life; so that all shall put off this corruption and put on incorruption; so that all shall rise from mortality to immortality? And what greater joy and attainment is there—miraculous joy and attainment—than to be raised in immortality and unto eternal life in the everlasting kingdom of the Everlasting Father?

But as to the miracles that mortals can perform—and how he labored and lived and loved in the full bloom and beauty of that mortality which is the happy lot of all the worthy offspring of the Father—as to these miracles, which was the greatest? Was it to open blind eyes, cast out devils, or cleanse lepers? Was it to calm storms, walk on water, or feed thousands with a few barley loaves and a little savory of fish? Or was it to raise from death the daughter of Jairus in Capernaum or the widow's son near Nain, thus giving life to cold corpses and calling back spirits from the realms of the departed?

Perhaps the greatest miracle is none of these; perhaps it is the healing of sin-sick souls so that those who are spiritually blind and deaf and diseased become again pure and clean and heirs of salvation. Perhaps the greatest miracle of all is that which happens in the life of each person who is born again; who receives the sanctifying power of the Holy Spirit of God in his life; who has sin and evil burned out of his soul as though by fire; who lives again spiritually, and, perchance, if need be, is also healed physically.

With these words of introduction we now turn to the raising of Lazarus from death. We shall hear and see and feel what the Lord of Life—and blessed be his name—chose to do near Bethany of Judea a short while before he also chose to lay down his own life and take it up again at Jerusalem. We shall seek to tune our spirits to his as he performs what has become known as the miracle of miracles—this raising of Lazarus—the miracle that he singled out as the chief one to bear witness that he is the resurrection and the life; that by him immortality and eternal life come; and that he would in due course perform the infinitely and miraculously great atoning sacrifice. And as we weep with the mourners, including Jesus himself, and rejoice with the faithful when a decomposing body again becomes the tenement of an eternal spirit, perhaps we shall envision why this miracle stands preeminent over them all.

Now Lazarus lived in the town of Bethany some two miles east of Jerusalem, but hidden from the Holy City by a spur of the mount of Olives. There also dwelt in this Judean village of blessed memory the beloved sisters Mary and Martha, in whose family circle the Lord Jesus so often found surcease from toil and rest from his labors. They and their brother Lazarus were three of the most intimate friends Jesus had on earth. Of this intimacy we shall speak more particularly when we see Mary, just before the Fourth Passover, anoint Jesus' feet with very costly spikenard. At this time Mary "lived with her sister Martha, in whose house her brother Lazarus was sick." Whether Lazarus at this time was married and had a family of his own, we know not, only that in connection with this illness the industrious and compassionate Martha was caring for him in her home. If he was about the age of Jesus, the custom of the day would have required him long since to assume the normal familial responsibilities.

Jesus is in Perea at least a score of miles away, perhaps more, but his whereabouts are known to the two sisters in Bethany. We cannot escape the conclusion that they kept in touch with each other as friends and intimates normally do. From the two sisters came this message: "Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest is sick." Perhaps the messenger also said, 'It is urgent that you come immediately, for Lazarus lieth at the door of death. He cannot last much longer; only you can heal him.' The fact is, by that time Lazarus was dead and his body lay in a tomb, which thing Jesus must have known by the power of inspiration. It would take one day for the messenger to travel from Bethany to Perea and find Jesus. Our Lord then remained two days, teaching and ministering among the people, without apparent concern for his beloved friend; it took him another day to reach the Judean town, and when he finally arrived Lazarus had lain four days in the grave.

"This sickness is not unto death," Jesus said, "but for the glory of God, that the Son of God might be glorified thereby." No doubt the messenger returned bearing this somewhat enigmatic reply, which meant, as the subsequent events witness, 'Lazarus shall die—nay, has already passed from life to death—but he shall not remain long in the tomb. His passing was for the glory of God. At my command he shall return to mortality to stand as a witness to all generations that I am the Son of God and have power over life and death. He shall live again as a sign that he and all men shall rise in the resurrection because of me, for I am the resurrection and the life.'

Lazarus's sickness was "for the glory of God"! Shall we not set it forth plainly? Lazarus was foreordained to die; it was part of the eternal plan. His spirit must separate from its mortal tenement; it must remain in paradise until the tabernacle of clay began to decay, until corruption and decomposition were well under way. Then his destiny was to live again; to take up a physically renewed mortal body; to dwell again in mortality, from which temporal state he could escape only by dying again.

One wonders why this beloved friend of Jesus was not chosen as one of the Twelve. One answer is that he may have been at a later time, filling a vacancy caused by the martyrdom of one of the original special witnesses. Or Lazarus may have been one of the Seventy; or his may have been a special work that would heap upon him respect and renown in all ages, as is the case with many of the Lord's valiant servants today who serve neither in the Twelve nor among the Seventy.

When Jesus' work in Perea was finished; when sufficient time had elapsed for the purposes of the Father to be fulfilled in Lazarus's death; when he had "tarried two days, after he heard that Lazarus was sick"—then our Lord said: "Let us go into Judea again." Such a course was fraught with peril. His disciples remonstrated with him: "Master, the Jews of late sought to stone thee; and goest thou thither again?" Jesus, using figurative language, attempted to calm their fears:

Are there not twelve hours in the day? If any man walk in the day, he stumbleth not, because he seeth the light of the world. But if a man walk in the night, he stumbleth, because there is no light in him.

"During the twelve hours of His day of work He could walk in safety, for the light of His duty, which was the will of His Heavenly Father, would keep Him from danger." (Farrar, p. 506.) 'Though it be the eleventh hour of my life, yet there are twelve hours in the day, and during that designated period, I shall do the work appointed me without stumbling or faltering. This is the time given me to do my work. During the appointed day I shall walk in safety; my Father will preserve me. I cannot wait for the night when perchance the opposition will die down. He that shirks his responsibilities and puts off his labors until the night shall stumble in darkness and his work shall fail.'

Then, that they might more fully understand, he said: "Our friend Lazarus sleepeth; but I go, that I may awake him out of sleep." Though it was as common a figure among the Jews as it is among us to speak of those who have passed away as being asleep; though this was the obvious meaning of Jesus' statement, otherwise anyone could have awakened him and Jesus' presence would not have been needed; and though they knew he had raised the sleeping dead on at least two previous occasions—yet the disciples failed to grasp his meaning. "Lord, if he sleep, he shall do well," they said.

"Then said Jesus unto them plainly, Lazarus is dead. And I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, to the intent ye may believe; nevertheless let us go unto him." What Jesus will soon do will be a witness of his own divine Sonship that none, either in that day or this, can reject without losing his soul. It will be done in such a way that none can fail to envision the event or avoid discerning its meaning. None but a God can do what he is about to do.

Seeing, then, that he is determined to go, Thomas, who was willing to lay down his life in the gospel cause, but who had failed to understand Jesus' statement that he would be preserved during the appointed twelve hours of his mortal ministry, said to the group: "Let us also go, that we may die with him." As soon would be evident, however, Jesus' death must await the time of the coming Passover, and the martyrdom of Thomas and the others must not take place until after the apostolic witness of a resurrection has been borne to the nations of the world.

And so the holy party went to the Judean town of Bethany, there to become witnesses of the miracle of miracles, the raising of Lazarus after four days of death.

"Lazarus, Come Forth"

(John 11:17-46; JST John 11:17, 29)

"And when Jesus came to Bethany, to Martha's house, Lazarus had already been in the grave four days." Such was part of the divine program. After four days, according to Jewish tradition, the spirit no longer remained near his erstwhile tenement, and the uninhabited corpse was considered as the dust of the earth. Decay and decomposition were in full swing; the finality of death was a reality; mourning and weeping would continue for thirty days, as the lives of the living adjusted to an existence without the presence of the dead one.

From all that is written about them, it is clear that the two sisters and their brother were part of a prominent family that was amply endowed with this world's goods. Lazarus, therefore, his body having been anointed with myrtle, aloes, and many spices, was laid in a cave or rock-hewn tomb, probably in a garden, as befitted his station in life. Even those of moderate means had their own private burial places, which were passed on to their heirs as was the case with all realty.

Many friends of the family had come out from Jerusalem to comfort the bereaved sisters. Though all the family members were disciples, whose belief in Christ was openly avowed, they had not as yet been put out of the synagogue and made subject to the penalties and persecutions of excommunication. Had Lazarus been esteemed as an apostate of Judaism, his death would have called for demonstrations, not of mourning but of rejoicing, from his Jewish neighbors and associates. But here we find hosts of people participating in the overly ostentatious weepings and howlings that substituted for genuine mourning in that day. We may assume, since the refining fires of the gospel had long burned in the hearts of Martha and Mary, that the pretentious and pompous wailings so common among them were somewhat modified.

Word of Jesus' coming was brought first to Martha, who immediately went forth to meet him, while Mary, apparently unaware of the Master's return, remained in the house mourning with her friends. And from Martha's lips, when she met Jesus, fell some of the sweetest words ever uttered, words of faith and surety that were Petrine in caliber:

Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died. But I know, that even now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will give it thee.

Martha, who served in the household; Martha, who was cumbered about with many things; Martha, whose younger sister had chosen the better part, as she sat at Jesus' feet, and who would yet again do so when she anointed them with oil; Martha of blessed memory, this day both spoke herself and heard from him such divine words as seldom have saluted the ears of mortal. Her words so far spoken can have but one meaning: 'I know thou wouldst have healed him hadst thou been here. But even now—as it was with the daughter of Jairus: as it was with the widow's son—I know thou canst call him forth from the death of the tomb to the life of mortals. God will hear thee.' The full import of these words, spoken by the power of the Holy Ghost, may not, as we shall soon see, have dawned fully upon this faithful and sweet sister, but she was in tune with the Spirit, and her faith enabled her to speak them, and glorious is her name for so doing.

Jesus said to her, "Thy brother shall rise"—meaning, 'I shall call him back to mortal life.' To this Martha, relying on that faith and knowledge which long had been hers, replied: "I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day." Then Jesus, in all the awesome majesty of his eternal godhood, spoke to his beloved Martha, in the presence of his Father, of the holy angels, and of his mortal apostolic witnesses; then Jesus, speaking as the Great Jehovah, speaking as God's Almighty Son, gave this divine testimony of his own divine Sonship:

I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die. Believest thou this?

Thus saith the Lord. He has spoken and so it is. He is the resurrection; it comes by him; without him there would be no immortality; he is the personification of that power which molds the dust of the grave into an immortal man. He it was who asked: "Can these bones live?" And he it was who answered: "Thus saith the Lord God unto these bones; Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live; And I will lay sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall live; and ye shall know that I am the Lord." (Ezek. 37:3, 5-6.)

He also is the life; eternal life comes by him. Without him there would be no salvation in the highest heaven, no exaltation no continuation of the family unit in eternity, no fulness of joy in the realms ahead. He is the personification of that power which gives eternal life to all those who are born again, who are alive in Christ. Those who believe and obey, though they die the natural death, yet shall they gain eternal life in the resurrection. Yea, those who believe in Christ shall never die spiritually; they shall be alive to the things of the Spirit in this life, and they shall have eternal life in the world to come. Death, as men view it, is nothing to sorrow about where the faithful saints are concerned; what if they, as do all men, lose their lives here—they shall yet gain the far more glorious reward of eternal life hereafter.

To Jesus' question. "Believest thou this?" Martha—still guided by the power of the Spirit, still speaking with certainty from the depths of her soul, still uttering words that are petrine in caliber, but now building on the foundation Jesus has just laid, that immortality and eternal life come by him—the blessed Martha, in this setting, replies:

Yea, Lord: I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world.

In spiritual things there is no difference between men and women. Adam and Eve both teach their children by the power of the Spirit. Peter and Martha both bear witness that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the Living God. Mary Magdalene, even ahead of the apostles, bows before the Risen Lord and hails him yet with the affectionate Rabboni. Martha has now borne her testimony, and that she might do so is one of the reasons all things relative to Lazarus's death and raising were arranged as they are now unfolding. Martha is on record; her testimony is recorded by the angels; and as Jesus said aforetime, with reference to such cases, her sins are forgiven. Now he must give Mary the same opportunity.

Martha came to Jesus while he was yet outside the town. Now she returned and spoke to Mary in secret. "The Master is come, and calleth for thee," she said. Mary arose quickly and, without even excusing herself from those who were comforting her in the house, hastened to Jesus, all of which indicates there were dangers in Jesus' coming and that his friends felt the need to take precautions. Those who were with Mary followed. "She goeth unto the grave to weep there," they said.

Coming to Jesus, Mary fell at his feet and said the same words Martha had first spoken: "Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died," indicating that this was something the beloved sisters probably had discussed between themselves. Perhaps also she added the same sure witness of Christ's eternal power that had fallen from the lips of her older sister; and the Lord Jesus may have said to her what he had already said to Martha about being the resurrection and the life, even receiving back from the younger sister the same inspired testimony of his own divinity. We have no reason to believe that Jesus would do other than treat his two friends with equal tenderness and solicitude, and that he would try the faith of each of them to the full in the same way.

When Jesus saw Mary weeping, "and the Jews also weeping which came with her, he groaned in the spirit, and was troubled, And said, Where have ye laid him? They said unto him, Lord, come and see." Perhaps there were other events, not recorded, that brought forth this display of divine emotion. It may be that John is telling us that Jesus was troubled in spirit because of the artificial wailings of the paid mourners, or the rebellion that he saw in the hearts of many who were present, or that his reaction was one of pure love and tenderness toward the two sisters and their now seemingly lost Lazarus.

Or perhaps it may be, as Farrar speculates, with reference to the sorrow of Mary and her friends, something along this line: "The sight of all that love and misery, the pitiable spectacle of human bereavement, the utter futility at such a moment of human consolation, the shrill commingling of a hired and simulated lamentation with all this genuine anguish, the unspoken reproach, 'Oh, why didst Thou not come at once and snatch the victim from the enemy, and spare Thy friend from the sting of death, and us from the more bitter sting of such a parting?'—all these influences touched the tender compassion of Jesus with deep emotion. A strong effort of self-repression was needed—an effort which shook His whole frame with a powerful shudder—before He could find words to speak, and then He could only ask, 'Where have ye laid him?'" (Farrar, pp. 507-8.)

We now see Jesus himself weeping, his eyes streaming with silent tears. Among the observing Jews are both friends and enemies. Those who are kindly disposed say: "Behold how he loved him!" Others whose hearts are hardened and who seek to discount his powers say: "Could not this man, which opened the eyes of the blind, have caused that even this man should not have died?" It was as though they said: 'True, this man opened the eyes of a blind man, whom he did not know, but he could not save his own friend from death. Perhaps after all his powers are of a limited, uncertain, and capricious nature.' And so again, confronted with such a malignant outpouring of unbelief, Jesus groaned in himself. Or perhaps, as Farrar says, "Jesus knew and heard their comments, and once more the whole scene—its genuine sorrows, its hired mourners, its uncalmed hatreds, all concentrated around the ghastly work of death—came so powerfully over His spirit, that, though He knew that He was going to wake the dead, once more His whole being was swept by a storm of emotion." (Farrar, p. 508.)

Jesus is now at the grave; it is a cave; a stone lies upon it, sealing the entrance. "Take ye away the stone," he says. He who can raise the dead can surely find a grave site, and yet he asked to be shown where Lazarus lay. He who can call forth a dead corpse can surely cause a stone to roll aside, and yet he called for human hands to move the obstacle that barred the way. Each step was taken with deliberation, to test and purify the faith of those who believed. And so Martha, who had before spoken of Jesus' power to raise the dead, now, fearful for the moment, struggling to believe that which almost no mortal could believe, said, "Lord, by this time he stinketh: for he hath been dead four days." And Jesus, strengthening, encouraging, desiring to see her faith increase, asks: "Said I not unto thee, that, if thou wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God?" Then Martha, strengthened and reassured, reminded of the assurances that had already come to her by the power of the Spirit, nodded the legal approval needed to unseal the tomb, and strong arms pushed aside the great stone that covered the place where Lazarus lay.

Before the great miracle, one thing yet remained. "And Jesus lifted up his eyes, and said, Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me. And I knew that thou hearest me always: but because of the people which stand by I said it, that they may believe that thou hast sent me." This miracle is going to prove that Jesus is the Christ, the Messiah, the Promised One. None but the Son of God could do what he is about to do. He had prayed and struggled and prepared for this moment, and the Father whose power he held, had granted his pleas.

Thus, at this moment—with the hearts of Martha and Mary perfectly united with that of their beloved Lord; with the body of Lazarus lying in the dust, eaten by worms, every vital organ in process of rotting away; with the spirit of this man of divine destiny, in paradise, awaiting the Promised Voice—at this moment the Lord of Life spoke: "LAZARUS, COME FORTH."

"Those words thrilled once more through that region of impenetrable darkness which separates us from the world to come; and scarcely were they spoken when, like a spectre, from the rocky tomb issued a figure, swathed indeed in its white and ghastly cerements—with the napkin round the head which had upheld the jaw that four days previously had dropped in death, bound hand and foot and face, but not livid, not horrible—the figure of a youth with the healthy blood of a restored life flowing through his veins; of a life restored—so tradition tells us—for thirty more long years to life, and light, and love." (Farrar, p. 510.)

"Loose him, and let him go," Jesus said. And there the inspired account ends. A reverent curtain of silence drops over the sayings and doings of Lazarus—from his youth to the day he fell asleep in the arms of death; during the four days his spirit visited with friends in paradise, as he awaited the call to come back to the turmoils of life; and from the time he again breathed the breath of life until he laid down again his mortal tabernacle, this time to await that glorious day of resurrection of which Martha spoke. Lazarus lived and Lazarus died and Lazarus rose again—that he might continue his mortal probation; that he might die again; that he might be, for his day and for all days, a living witness of the power of him who ministered in Bethany as the Son of God. We cannot doubt that he bore many fervent testimonies to many Jewish brethren relative to the life and death and life that was his.

We have now heard Jesus claim divine Sonship and accept the concurring witness of his beloved Martha. Then we have seen him prove the truth of his own testimony by creating a living Lazarus where only a dead one lay. What effect did this miracle have on the Jews? John says: "Then many of the Jews which came to Mary, and had seen the things which Jesus did, believed on him." And well they might, for which glory be to God. "But some of them went their ways to the Pharisees, and told them what things Jesus had done," and they as a result plotted his death.

Truly we are hearing an echo here in Bethany and in Jerusalem of a Perean Voice acclaiming: "If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead." Or is it an echo? Perhaps what we hear are rolling claps of thunder, roaring and crashing from one end of heaven to the other, as part of the dooming storm that shall destroy all those who willfully close their eyes and ears to eternal truth.

The Sanhedrin Plots Jesus' Death

(John 11:47-54; JST John 11:47)

There is no language to describe the religious idiocy and the Pharisaic fanaticism that swept through Jerusalem and Judea because Jesus raised Lazarus from death. Lazarus lives and therefore Jesus must die; indeed, it would be well if Lazarus's own testifying lips could be sealed in death also. Let us slay them both and be done with this menace that subverts our Mosaic religion and runs counter to the traditions of the elders.

Within an hour of the time Lazarus walked from his tomb in or near Bethany, Jewish zealots were in the temple in Jerusalem reporting to the Pharisees and rulers on all that they had seen and heard in that Judean town. The prayers of thanksgiving and the hymns of praise that were then ascending in the home of Martha found their counterpart in the curses and revilings being poured forth in the now desecrated house of Jewish worship. The great Sanhedrin convened immediately to hear the witnesses.

Their detailed investigation of the opening of the eyes of the man born blind and their complete discomfiture in the presence of an unlearned beggar who testified that Jesus was a mighty prophet were fresh in their minds. And now this—a man whose decaying body had rotted and spewed out stench for four days—was alive and well and vibrant. What kind of a man was it who opened blind eyes and reanimated cold corpses? This thing must be stopped even if it requires the death of a god. "If we let him thus alone," they reasoned, "all men will believe on him"—and what a sad thing that would be—"and the Romans shall come and take away both our place and nation." Their dilemma was both religious and political. 'If this man's gospel is true, the day of Moses and the law is past, and we shall lose our prominence and power as rulers in Israel. The people will rally round him as their Messiah and Deliverer, and Rome will then destroy us with the sword.'

As hatred and perplexity dominated the Sanhedrinists, the high priest, Joseph Caiaphas, a civil appointee of Rome who had gained his position by bribery, rose to address them. Apparently his intention was to advocate Jesus' death on the theory that it was better for this one man to die than that the whole nation should perish at the hands of Rome. His was to be a political speech of expediency. The problem before them was not a matter of right or wrong; they must forget whether Jesus was the Messiah or not. Regardless of anything, he must be destroyed lest their nation be brought to ruin.

But whatever Caiaphas's intention was, Deity ordained otherwise. And however evil and wicked he was, yet he held the office of high priest, and as such he had a commission to speak for God to the people, which he then, unwittingly, did. The words that came out were these: Ye know nothing at all, Nor consider that it is expedient for us, that one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not." John says: "This spake he not of himself: but being high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for that nation; And not for that nation only, but that also he should gather together in one the children of God that were scattered abroad."

Caiaphas's intent had been evil but his words had been prophetic; however, the Sanhedrin was no more inclined to believe prophetic words than they were to accept the divinity of one who raised the dead. Their decision was that Jesus must die for political reasons. "Then from that day forth they took counsel together for to put him to death."

Thereupon Jesus and his disciples slipped quietly away to a small village called Ephraim, whose locale is no longer known, and there they remained some weeks in seclusion, awaiting the appointed time for his return to Jerusalem and for the crowning events of the life of earth's only Divine Being. The time in Ephraim was spent preparing the disciples for the ministerial teachings and trials that lay ahead.
