Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 81

More Healings, Parables, and Sermons

To day if ye will hear his voice, Harden not your heart, as in the provocation, and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness: When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my work. (Ps. 95:7-9.)

Jesus Cleanses Ten Lepers

(Luke 17:11-19)

As Jesus, after a few weeks of seclusion in Ephraim, begins his last journey to Jerusalem, no doubt by a leisurely and circuitous route, he continues to warn and teach and heal. He continues to work wonders in Israel as he did among their fathers in generations past, and Jacob's seed, as always, seeks to tempt and prove and provoke him. His words and his works are as they have ever been; he preaches the gospel and takes upon himself the infirmities of his suffering kinsmen.

Just two years ago in Galilee we saw him heal a leper; we then marveled as he freed a faithful soul from leprosy—that dread and evil plague which makes of life a living death. (See chapter 36, Book 2.) No doubt since then there have been scores or hundreds of lepers cleansed, for what affliction would create in the heart of the Healing One such compassion as this stench-spreading sickness, which rotted away the organs of the body piecemeal? Our inspired authors, however, as we are aware, sift out selected samples of his healing power to teach such general principles and illustrate such special virtues as the needs of their respective narratives warrant.

Now, as Jesus passes through the midst of Samaria and Galilee, he enters an unnamed village where he meets, standing afar off, ten men who are lepers. Either this is a place where lepers are segregated to keep their putrefying plague from spreading, or, which accords with the sense and feeling of the whole episode, these ten, alerted to the coming of the Lord, had assembled that perchance his shadow, as it were, might touch them as he passed by. As is the requisite for those who seek healing blessings, they believed in him and had faith in his name and power. Their call to him, no doubt uttered with repetitious urgency, is a plea for healing from their deathlike doom: "Jesus, Master, have mercy on us."

"There was something in that living death of leprosy—recalling as it did the most frightful images of suffering and degradation—corrupting as it did the very fountains of the life-blood of man, distorting his countenance, rendering loathsome his touch, slowly encrusting and infecting him with a plague-spot of disease far more horrible than death itself—which always seems to have thrilled the Lord's heart with a keen and instantaneous compassion." (Farrar, p. 462.) Jesus calls out: "Go shew yourselves unto the priests." His meaning is clear: they must show themselves to the priests and be pronounced clean, free from leprosy, before they can again mingle with their fellowmen. True, it is a test of their faith to start their journey before they are healed, but so be it. He has spoken, and they are assured of that blessed physical relief that none but the leprous can desire so devoutly. There is none of the spirit of Naaman the Syrian in their souls. And so, as they journey, they are healed, we suppose, degree by degree, as health and vigor and strength return.

Ten lepers are now clean and whole; ten men whose fate was worse than death now glory in a new life of health and vigor; ten of the discards of society are now returned to the mainstream of life. It is with them as when Lazarus came forth from his tomb; where once there was death, now there is life. When a leper lives again, what does he do? Nine of the group—apparently all Jews—rushed home to embrace their loved ones; to weep with joy on the necks of their friends; to show themselves to the priests, lest any scrupulosity of the law be forgotten. One of the ten—and he a Samaritan—hastened back to Jesus, fell at his feet, gave thanks, "and with a loud voice glorified God." His loved ones and the priests could wait; first, let God be praised and his Healing Son be thanked.

"Were there not ten cleansed?" Jesus asked, "but where are the nine?" Surely there is sorrow in his voice as he continues: "There are not found that returned to give glory to God, save this stranger." And then, to the Samaritan he said: "Arise, go thy way: thy faith hath made thee whole"—which can only be interpreted to mean that this one Samaritan, singled out of the group, received added spiritual blessings that were withheld from the nine.

The sin of ingratitude, how common it is! As Jesus cleansed ten lepers physically, so he cleanses all his saints spiritually from the leprosy of sin. Are we more grateful for our blessings than were the healed lepers who hastened on their ways, heedless of the beneficent goodness of the One whose words had made them new creatures?

Well might we remember that he, who in his life healed men physically, is the one who, in his death, made it possible for all men to be healed spiritually. Well might we rejoice because he who cleansed the lepers, when he dwelt on earth, is the one who, through his atoning sacrifice, enables all men to cast off their leprous bodies of corruption, exchanging them for those glorious bodies which are refreshed and renewed in immortality.

And well ought we—lest the sin of ingratitude overtake us—praise his holy name forever.

The Discourse on the Kingdom of God

(Luke 17:20-37; JST Luke 17:21)

This is a day of Pharisaic confrontation, one in which Jesus is repeatedly harassed, harried, and heckled by these pious preservers of the Mosaic status quo. After the healing of the ten lepers and while the holy party is still in Galilee, traveling with Jerusalem as their destination, these learned Rabbinists decide to put our Lord's Messianic claims to the test. He has testified everywhere that he is the Promised One, the Deliverer sent of God to Israel; he speaks everlastingly of the gospel of the kingdom of God. And yet he utterly refuses to wear a Messianic crown, rally the people round him, and lead the assault on their Romish-Gentile overlords that will free the chosen people from an alien yoke. Has not the time come to wring from him a declaration as to when the kingdom will be restored to Israel? If his answers are found wanting, perhaps his followers can be weaned away. Haughtily, imperiously, the Pharisees "demanded" to know "when the kingdom of God should come." 'Once and for all answer this question,' they say.

But they are not equal to him whose kingdom is not of this world, and who came not to lead a revolt against Rome, nor to place swords and shields in the hands of his followers, but to wage a revolution in the hearts of men. Their imperious demands are deftly swept aside as he restates the simple gospel verity that equates his earthly church with the kingdom of God on earth:

The kingdom of God cometh not with observation: Neither shall they say, Lo, here! or, Lo, there! For, behold, the kingdom of God has already come unto you.

'My kingdom is already here; there will be no martial displays of military might; no bands will play, no legions march. My soldiers will not capture the fortress of Antonia, nor overrun Machaerus, where John was slain. Heralds will not go forth crying, Assemble here, or, Go there, for my kingdom, which is not of this world, has already come. It is the Church which I have set up, which Church administers the gospel, which gospel is the power of God unto salvation. And these Twelve hold the keys; they shall direct the destiny of my kingdom.' Nothing more is recorded of this confrontation, leaving us to suppose the Pharisees had no more to say on the subject.

But the issue of the future glorious millennial reign having thus been raised, Jesus turned from the Pharisees to his disciples and delivered a great discourse relative to that kingdom which shall sweep away the decadent kingdoms of men and hold sway over all the earth. In substance and thought content he will repeat these same truths in the Olivet discourse, during the last week of his mortal life, and we will there consider them.

Parable of the Unjust Judge

(Luke 18:1-8; JST Luke 18:8; D&C 101:81-92)

Having spoken to the Pharisees about the kingdom of God then set up among men, meaning the Church, and having spoken to the disciples about that great millennial kingdom which will be established when he comes again, Jesus now teaches, in a parable, how the preserving prayers of the saints will finally prevail in the day of his coming. He is not here speaking of the simplistic principle that earnest and repetitious importunings will eventually be heard and answered, though this may be true in some cases. It is not a matter of an importunate widow gaining redress from an unjust judge because of her insistent pleadings, and that therefore those who pray to Him who is just will have their petitions granted if they earnestly and everlastingly importune at the throne of grace. Prayers are answered when there is faith; faith is founded on truth and can only be exercised in harmony with the plan of heaven. Only those petitions which are just and right are granted. Rather, this parable, as we shall see, teaches that if the saints will continue to importune in faith for that which is right, and because their cause is just, though the answers to their prayers may be long delayed, yet, finally in the day of vengeance when he judges whose judgment is just, when he comes again to rule and reign, the faithful shall be rewarded.

"Men ought always to pray, and not to faint," Luke says in introducing the parable, meaning that the disciples, the saints of God, the children of Zion, the members of that kingdom which is the Church, ought to importune everlastingly for the success and triumph of their cause because their cause is just and right.

There was in a city a judge, which feared not God, neither regarded man.

These introductory words have a ring of reality to his hearers, for such all too frequently was the case with those non-Jewish judges in Palestine. Appointed by Herod or the Romans, many of these magistrates were amenable to bribery; cared nothing for public opinion; were openly contemptuous of principles of equity and justice; flouted the divine law in their decisions; and issued decrees that were grossly unjust.

And there was a widow in that city; and she came unto him, saying, Avenge me of mine adversary. And he would not for a while: but afterward he said within himself, Though I fear not God, nor regard man; Yet because this widow troubleth me, I will avenge her, lest by her continual coming she weary me.

The widow's plea is for the magistrate to make legal inquiry; to call in him who has wronged her; to set things right and let justice be done. The judge's sole concern is expediency: what is the political thing to do; how can he benefit most from the case; why not grant the petition and be free of the annoyance of repetitious importunings.

And the Lord said, Hear what the unjust judge saith. And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them?

This parable is one of contrasts. If an evil magistrate, caring nothing for a poor widow, will finally adjudge her case, how much more shall the Judge of all the earth, who loves his saints, finally, in the day of vengeance at his coming, avenge his elect upon all their enemies.

I tell you that he will come, and when he does come, he will avenge his saints speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of Man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?

In his own providences, and for their own development—that they may be tested to the full—it will seem to the Lord's praying saints as if the Just Judge delayeth his coming so that he will scarcely find any left who have faith. [^1]

We must not overlook the fact that the Church itself, in Christ's absence, is a widow. And in the latter-day version of this parable, we find the Lord directing "the children of Zion" to importune for redress of grievances at the feet of the judge, the governor, and the president, each in turn; and if none of these heed their pleas,

Then will the Lord arise and come forth out of his hiding place, and in his fury vex the nation; And in his hot displeasure, and in his fierce anger, in his time, will cut off those wicked, unfaithful, and unjust stewards, and appoint them their portion among hypocrites, and unbelievers; Even in outer darkness, where there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

Pray ye, therefore, that their ears may be opened unto your cries, that I may be merciful unto them, that these things may not come upon them.

Parable of the Pharisee and the Publican

(Luke 18:9-14)

In every major sect, party, and denomination there are both Pharisees and publicans. Among the Jews the Pharisees were the pious, proud, pompous self-appreciators who boasted of their charities and extolled their own good works. They esteemed themselves as far superior to the common, garden-variety of mankind, and they rejoiced in their separate, superior status. The publicans, on the other hand, were the tax collectors who made their living by extorting from the people more than they turned in to the Roman treasury. Almost without exception they were sinners whose hearts were so hardened that they could appropriate—with greed and avarice—the last sheep of the shepherd and the last mite of the widow. The nature of their employment, by an alien power, dulled their sensitivities and left them to ponder and plan how to exact by force a poor man's last farthing. In this parable Jesus speaks of the haughty pride of all Pharisees and of a welcome display of humility of a certain publican whose soul was wracked because of the sorrows of his avaricious life. It is addressed to "certain which trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and despised others."

Two men went up into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee, and the other a publican. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess.

And the publican, standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner.

I tell you, this man went down to his house justified rather than the other: for every one that exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.

"By the parable of the haughty, respectable, fasting, alms-giving, self-satisfied Pharisee—who, going to make his boast to God in the Temple, went home less justified than the poor Publican, who could only reiterate one single cry for God's mercy as he stood there beating his breast, and with downcast eyes—He taught them that God loves better a penitent humility than a merely external service, and that a broken heart and a contrite spirit were sacrifices which He would not despise." (Farrar, p. 482.)

It is clear that the prayer of the Pharisee portrayed the life he lived—a separatist life full of holier-than-thou conduct that was offensive to God and man. As for the publican, he had come to himself, as did the prodigal son, and we may safely assume he then was or soon would become a disciple of the One through whose blood mercy is dispensed to the penitent.

The Discourse on Marriage and Divorce

(Matthew 19:1-12; JST Matthew 19:2, 11; Mark 10:1-12; JST Mark 10:1-2; Luke 16:18; JST Luke 16:23)

Still en route to Jerusalem, traveling from Galilee into Perea, Jesus and the holy party come to that Perean area where a few weeks ago he encountered violent Pharisaic opposition. On that occasion he called these Pharisees adulterers and lashed out at their loose marriage and divorce practices with the bold assertion: "Whosoever putteth away his wife, and marrieth another, committeth adultery: and whosoever marrieth her that is put away from her husband committeth adultery." (Luke 16:18.) We then reserved consideration of this pronouncement until the discourse on marriage and divorce he is now about to deliver.

Great multitudes now follow him; he teaches the gospel; many believe on him, and he heals them. Into this setting where there is peace and righteousness, and where the grace of God is being poured out in abundant measure upon penitent souls, there now comes an evil, divisive, hateful influence. Those Pharisees whom he had condemned as adulterers come to mingle with the multitudes. With the help of Satan, their master, these malignant and evil devils, clothed in human form, have built a trap from which, as they suppose, Jesus can find no escape. It may be that even their hellish cunning has never devised a question fraught with so many difficulties and so much emotion as that which they now use to tempt him. No matter what answer he gives, he will surely alienate, they reason, a large portion of the people; and if he takes the same view thundered forth by his forerunner, the Blessed Baptist, then they hope Herod Antipas will send forth his soldiers and carry off Jesus, as he did John, to the dungeons of Machaerus, there to await a convenient time for the headsman's ax to fall. Their question, which calls for a religious decision in a sensitive field, and which may pull down political wrath upon Him to whom it is asked, is couched thus: "Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?"

Marriage and divorce, the one a blessing, the other a curse; how long a family unit endures; how to salvage all that may be saved in the case of divorce—these matters are of more concern in the society of men than are any others. It is the divine design that men create for themselves eternal family units patterned after the family of God the Eternal Father. In such a process there can be no divorce; if all men and all women lived in complete harmony with the law of the gospel, there would be no divorces. It is the purpose of the Almighty to create eternal family units; under his system, when it operates perfectly, families are never divided by divorce.

But just as God exalts and glorifies the family, so Satan seeks to weaken and destroy this most basic of all units of society. If Lucifer had his way, no men would ever marry; they would live like animals and breed like cattle; or, being married, they would live without sexual restraint and as if there were no moral law; or divorces would be so easy to obtain, and the dissolution of the family unit so common, that men would interchange wives freely; or divorces would be so hard to obtain that marriage partners would leave each other and live in open sin with others because no realistic system of divorce prevailed; or whatever circumstances or situations might be devised to increase immorality and demean the family as such.

Manifestly, the marriage discipline and the divorce requirements among various cultures and peoples depend upon that portion of the Lord's law which they are able to live. The Lord may allow divorces in one day among a certain people and deny them in another day among a more enlightened populace. Marriage and divorce may be regulated one way among the heathen, another in the Gentile nations, and yet another according to Mosaic discipline. Even in the church and kingdom of God on earth—where men have the gospel itself—the divinely approved laws of marriage and divorce may vary from time to time. Plural marriage is practiced under certain circumstances and at designated times; divorce is allowed—with consequent remarriage of divorced persons—when such laws are in the best interest of the people; and in the highest type gospel situation, there is no divorce and all families become eternal.

In the Jewish culture of Jesus' day there were many discordant and divisive voices crying out in defense of divergent divorce standards and advocating differing marriage disciplines. Plural marriage, handed down from their fathers, was still practiced, though it does not seem to have been the dominant order of matrimony. Their main difficulties, however, seem to have grown out of the meaning of this Mosaic statement: "When a man hath taken a wife, and married her, and it come to pass that she find no favour in his eyes, because he hath found some uncleanness in her: then let him write her a bill of divorcement, and give it in her hand, and send her out of his house. And when she is departed out of his house, she may go and be another man's wife." (Deut. 24:1-2.)

The Pharisaic question assumes the propriety of divorce; the issue, as they express it, is, may it be granted "for every cause"; and, in theory at least, this depends upon the meaning of the Mosaic phrase "some uncleanness," which may also be translated "some unseemly thing," or "some matter of shame," or, literally, "some matter of nakedness." On this point the School of Shammai interpreted the Mosaic standard so as to allow divorce only for unchastity, while the School of Hillel allowed almost any trivial act to sever a marriage. Among these the Mishnah recites such things as: seeing another woman who pleased him more; feeling any disgust toward the wife; spoiling her husband's dinner; breaking the law of tithing, or other Mosaic requirement; going in public with an uncovered head; spinning in the public streets; brawling or being troublesome, or quarrelsome, or of ill repute; being childless for ten years; and on and on and on. These differences between the two major schools led, it is said, to the Jewish proverb: "Hillel loosed what Shammai bound." In practice there were many divorces for minor reasons. But Jesus, in his reply, as his wont was, rose above the battleground of the Rabbinists and went back to first principles.

Have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning made them male and female, And said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh?

Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder.

This is the very heart and core of the whole matter. God made man, male and female created he them, so they could marry; so they could provide bodies for his spirit children; so they could create for themselves eternal family units. God brought the woman unto the man and gave her to him to be his wife. He did it in Eden, before the fall; all things were then immortal; death had not entered the world. The first marriage—performed by the Lord God himself—was a celestial marriage, an eternal marriage, a union of Adam and Eve that was destined to last forever. There was no death; there was to be no divorce; the man and his wife were to be one flesh forever. Such was the pattern. All men thereafter should be as their first parents. Men and women should marry as did Adam and Eve—in celestial marriage—and should cleave unto each other as the divine pattern required. What God does is forever. And what he hath joined in eternal union, let not man put asunder. Divorce is no part of the eternal plan. That these caviling, querulous, quarrelsome Pharisees understood these words and knew exactly what Jesus was saying, there can be no doubt. When we consider the conversation with the Sadducees about marriage in heaven, we shall see that the concept of eternal marriage was part of Jewish theology. And so the Pharisees now ask, "Why did Moses then command to give a writing of divorcement, and to put her away?"

Needless to say, Moses never gave any such command. What he did was to permit the recalcitrant and rebellious rebels who went by the name of Israel, but who were unable to live the full law as the Lord gave it to them—for they had the Melchizedek Priesthood, the sealing power, and celestial marriage—to divorce each other in proper cases. Hence Jesus replies:

Moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you to put away your wives: but from the beginning it was not so.

And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery: and whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit adultery.

Moses permitted divorce because Israel was unable to live the perfect law. His teachings were a schoolmaster to prepare men for the fulness of the gospel. That gospel is now among them, and under this perfect law, marriage once again is eternal. Once again it is performed by the Lord or by his word; and once again it has no end. Such marriages can only be put asunder as a result of unchastity. If the man and his wife sever their union for lesser reasons and marry others, all concerned commit adultery, for in the eyes of the Lord his eternal marriage compact has never been broken. All of its terms and conditions are in force and have full efficacy and divine standing.

Thus Jesus recited the full and perfect law to the Pharisees. Its provisions were only binding upon those who received his gospel, but he had declared unto them that very gospel, and they must accept it—including its law of marriage and divorce—at the peril of their salvation. Later, in a house away from the multitudes, the disciples, themselves troubled at the severity and strictness of the doctrine, "asked him again of the same matter." Later they said: "If the case of the man be so with his wife, it is not good to marry."

Jesus repeated to the disciples the basic law of marriage and divorce, applying its principles to both men and women—for women can gain divorces as well as men—and then added:

All cannot receive this saying; it is not for them save to whom it is given. For there are some eunuchs, which were so born from their mother's womb: and there are some eunuchs, which were made eunuchs of men: and there be eunuchs, which have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake.

He that is able to receive it, let him receive it.

From these words it is clear that the high standards of marriage and divorce of which Jesus speaks were for those only to whom they were given by revelation. Needless to say they have not been given to us in our day in their eternal fulness, and marriages to divorced persons do not of themselves constitute adultery. That this high state of marriage discipline will prevail again during the millennium also goes without saying. It is difficult for us, however, to envision fully the illustration here used about eunuchs. The record must be incomplete, for these words cannot, as is sometimes assumed, have reference to a celibate ministry. Perhaps they simply mean that even as special provision must be made for those who for physical reasons cannot marry, so the Lord makes special provision in his marriage discipline, so that all things required will meet the needs and circumstances of people in whatever society and culture they live.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Keep my commandments, and seek to bring forth and establish the cause of Zion; Seek not for riches but for wisdom, and behold, the mysteries of God shall be unfolded unto you, and then shall you be made rich. Behold, he that hath eternal life is rich." (D&C 6:6-7.)
