Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 82

Gaining Eternal Life

If thou wilt do good, yea, and hold out faithful to the end, thou shalt be saved in the kingdom of God, which is the greatest of all the gifts of God; for there is no gift greater than the gift of salvation. (D&C 6:13.)

Salvation consists in the glory, authority, majesty, power and dominion which Jehovah possesses and in nothing else; and no being can possess it but himself or one like him. (Lectures on Faith, p. 64.)

And, if you keep my commandments and endure to the end you shall have eternal life, which gift is the greatest of all the gifts of God. (D&C 14:7.)

Little Children Shall Be Saved

(Matthew 19:13-15; JST Matthew 19:13-14; Mark 10:13-16; JST Mark 10:12; Luke 18:15-17)

A scene of surpassing sweetness now unfolds before our eyes. Little children, still retaining the sinless purity of the sacred seraphs who surround the throne of God, are brought to Jesus to be blessed. He enfolds them in his arms, lays his hands upon them, and speaks wondrous words about them. Then he commands all men to be as they are.

We are still with our Blessed Lord and his select group of disciples in a Perean house. He has just proclaimed the sacred and holy nature of the marital union. It is ordained of God for the benefit of man; the Lord God made man, male and female, that they might marry and provide bodies for his spirit children. "And they twain shall be one flesh, and all this that the earth might answer the end of its creation; And that it might be filled with the measure of man, according to his creation before the world was made," and "Whoso forbiddeth to marry is not ordained of God." (D&C 49:15-17.) As the Pauline word has it: "Marriage is honourable in all, and the bed undefiled." (Heb. 13:4.) Such is our Lord's doctrine. And so it is that we see Jesus take "part in a scene that has charmed the imagination of poet and painter in every age. For as though to destroy all false and unnatural notions of the exceptional glory of religious virginity, He, among whose earliest acts it had been to bless a marriage festival, made it one of His latest acts to fondle infants in His arms." We see "fathers and mothers and friends" bring "to Him the fruits of holy wedlock—young children and even babes—that He might touch them and pray over them." (Farrar, pp. 500-501.)

They are rebuked by the disciples, who say, "There is no need, for Jesus hath said, Such shall be saved." It is evident that the adult male followers of Jesus feel they should not be disturbed in the deep doctrinal discussions then in progress. To them women and children, in keeping with Jewish practice and tradition, should remain in the background. "But when Jesus saw and heard them, he was much displeased," and he rebuked his disciples. Then he uttered those words of wonder and beauty and glory that shall stand forever among the great doctrinal verities of pure Christianity:

Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not; for of such is the kingdom of heaven.

For of such is the kingdom of heaven! Little children, blessed spirits, pure and holy children of the Father, scarce removed from the Celestial Presence—such, in their innocence and perfection, are heirs of full salvation. "And little children also have eternal life," Abinadi said (Mosiah 15:25); and Joseph Smith, in recording a vision of the celestial kingdom, tells us: "And I also beheld that all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven" (D&C 137:10). Such being the law that Jesus had theretofore taught his meridian disciples, we can almost anticipate his next words:

Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child shall in no wise enter therein.

Riches and Eternal Life

(Matthew 19:16-26; JST Matthew 19:18, 26; Mark 10:17-27; JST Mark 10:16, 22, 26; Luke 18:18-27; JST Luke 18:27)

Jewish Rabbis in Jesus' day were often asked by their disciples what course they should pursue to gain an inheritance with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of God. Rabbinists discussed, freely and at length, what the chosen people must do to gain eternal life. It was a dominant theme of discussion in all the Rabbinical schools. And always the course leading to salvation was lighted by their varying views and interpretations of the Mosaic and prophetic writings. It is said, for instance, that "when the Angel of Death came to fetch the R. Chanina, he said, 'Go and fetch me the Book of the Law, and see whether there is anything in it which I have not kept.'" (Farrar, p. 502, footnote 2.) Jesus himself, but recently, encountered a lawyer who sought to test his Rabbinical knowledge, hoping to find a flaw or a fault, by asking: "Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?" And it was out of the resultant colloquy that the parable of the good Samaritan came.

We are now about to witness a scene that so impressed the Synoptists that all three preserved its essential details. With the same question weighing heavily upon him, a rich young ruler, probably the ruler of the local synagogue, came running to Jesus. He knelt, affirmatively doing obeisance. Evidently he was sincere, but his words were so phrased as to specify that Jesus was only a great and good Rabbi and not the Divine One, not the Messiah, not the one whose answer would be the ipse dixit that would settle the matter forever. His words, coupled with Jesus' reply, have always been somewhat troublesome and difficult to understand; but by placing them—and particularly Jesus' answer—in their Jewish setting, we get a radically different meaning than otherwise would be the case. The devout young man said: "Good Master, what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life?"

Now, in all Jewish literature there is no such thing as addressing a Rabbi as good. It is said that the whole Talmud contains no single instance of such an accolade. It simply was not done in that day. He might be called Rab, Rabbi, or Rabboni, as when Mary Magdalene knelt before the Risen Lord in the garden, but not Good Rabbi, or Good Master. We have seen his disciples and those made whole by his healing power kneel before him, worship his person, and call him the Messiah, the God of Israel, and the Son of God. This our rich young ruler does not do—he has some reservations about the claims of this Rabbi; and yet it is clear to him that here is one who is more than other Rabbis; and so he seeks a middle ground, one that will honor Jesus more than the mere title Rabbi, and yet one that will avoid ascribing to him divine Messianic status. He says, "Good Master." It is as though he said, 'I salute you as a great Rabbi, one whose wisdom is greater than these others, but I refrain from calling you the Messiah, as do your disciples.'

In reply, Jesus said: "Why callest thou me good? there is none good but one, that is, God." 'Do not address me by the title good unless you acknowledge me as God, for none but God is good, none but he is sinless, none but he is perfect. I am indeed the Sinless One, and therefore I am good. As I have heretofore taught, no one convicts me of sin; and so unless you are ready to accede this, do not call me good.' By this answer, which carries a touch of irony, Jesus affirms by inference his divinity and makes it plain to the young ruler that his halfhearted attempt to laud the one who needs no honor from men does not suffice. "He would as little accept the title 'Good,' as He would accept the title, 'Messiah,' when given in a false sense. He would not be regarded as that mere 'good Rabbi,' to which, in these days, more than ever, men would reduce Him. So far, Jesus would show the youth that when he came to Him as to one who was more than man, his address, as well as his question, was a mistake. No mere man can lay any other foundation than that which is laid, and if the ruler committed the error of simply admiring Jesus as a Rabbi of preeminent sanctity, yet no Rabbi, however saintly, was accustomed to receive the title of 'good,' or prescribe any amulet for the preservation of a virtuous life." (Farrar, p. 502.) In this setting, then, Jesus turns to the issue at hand, and makes a pronouncement of wondrous import:

If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments.

This is the sum and substance of the whole matter. Salvation, eternal life, rewards in all their degrees and varieties—all come by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. Salvation must be won; it is not a free gift. "Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man." (Eccl. 12:13.) But what of grace? Grace is the love, mercy, and condescension of God in making salvation available to men. "It is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do." (2 Ne. 25:23.) Eternal life is freely available; salvation is free in that all may drink of the waters of life; all may come and partake; but none gains so high a reward as eternal life until he is tried and tested and found worthy, as were the ancients.

This is the answer the rich young man should have expected to hear. Any reputable Rabbi would have said the same thing. The differences arose as to what the commandments were and what one must do to keep them. The law of marriage and divorce, but recently expounded by Jesus, is an illustration of the divergent views of recognized Rabbinical schools on some of the most important of all human conduct. And so in answer to Jesus' pronouncement calling upon men to keep the commandments, the young ruler of the local synagogue asks: "Which?" 'Do I follow the School of Shammai or the School of Hillel? Must I observe the Sabbath and fast twice a week as do the Pharisees? Must I eat the paschal lamb with my loins girded and my feet shod, as did our fathers? Everyone says, Keep the commandments; I need to know the particulars.' Jesus, as always, goes back to basics:

Thou shalt not kill. Thou shalt not commit adultery. Thou shalt not steal. Thou shalt not bear false witness. Honour thy father and thy mother: and, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.

To this recitation, the answer came: "All these things have I kept from my youth up: what lack I yet?" Clearly our young friend was a man of devotion, decency, and integrity. From his youth he had walked in the available light, as millions in modern Christendom do before they ever hear of the restoration of the fulness of the gospel. That he knew little of the real meaning of some of those commandments we are about to see when he declines to do more than give lip service to loving his neighbors. But at this point, "Jesus beholding him loved him," and said to him:

One thing thou lackest: go thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, take up the cross and follow me.

Eternal life can come to those only who put first in their lives the things of God's kingdom; who love the riches of eternity more than a handful of mortal pelf; who are willing to forsake all and follow Christ. Where a man's treasure is, there will his heart be also. For this man, the needful thing was to overcome the love of money and the power of riches; for others of us, the testing process calls upon us to forsake some other prized possession or ardent desire; every man has his own Gethsemane. [^1] Having heard Jesus' counsel, the young man was sad and went away grieving, for he was richly endowed with this world's goods. Jesus then said to the disciples:

How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God!

Heretofore Jesus has said many things about laying up treasures in heaven. He has taught that a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things that his soul possesses; he has spoken of those who lay up treasures for themselves and are not rich toward God; he has repeatedly called upon men to forsake all and follow him, and many such like things; but now he makes it almost seem as though rich men cannot be saved. His disciples are astonished. This is a straiter gate and a narrower path than they had supposed was the case. Jesus, in words of tenderness, responds to their feelings by amplifying his words:

Children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God! It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.

Their astonishment increases. It is a common Jewish proverb that even in a man's dreams he will not see an elephant pass through the eye of a needle. It is a proverb that points to that which cannot be. As with an elephant, so with a camel; a bloated beast of gargantuan size cannot pass through an opening made only large enough for a silken thread. As Mark expresses it, "they were astonished out of measure," and asked among themselves, "Who then can be saved?" Jesus gives answer:

With men that trust in riches, it is impossible; but not impossible with men who trust in God and leave all for my sake, for with such all these things are possible.

How better could it be said? Truly, never man spake as this man. And as to the rich young ruler whose questions and conduct brought forth these gems of eternal truth, no further mention is made. Our last view of him is one of a man who prefers the comforts and ease of great wealth to the riches of eternity; it is of a sincere and devout man who is nonetheless deceived by the deceitfulness of riches; it is of one who dares not pay out a temporal-all in the cause of truth and righteousness here, so as to purchase an eternal-all in the realms ahead. We cannot but hope that he—being one upon whom Jesus looked with affection—came to himself, returned and accepted our Lord as the Messiah, and made his means available to feed the hungry, clothe the naked, shelter the homeless, and further the eternal gospel cause.

Riches and Rewards in the Day of Regeneration

(Matthew 19:27-30; JST Matthew 19:28; Mark 10:28-31; JST Mark 10:30-31; Luke 18:28-30)

As the rich young ruler, clinging to his wealth as a miser grasps his pennies, departs in sorrow, choosing to revel in ease and comfort rather than to use his possessions to bless mankind; as Jesus ends his terse and piercing words about forsaking all to gain eternal life; and as the full significance of his sayings begins to dawn upon the disciples, showing them that those who trust in riches and will not forsake all to follow Christ and further his gospel cause cannot be saved—In this setting, in a boastful way, claiming an apostolic preference and preeminence, Peter says: "Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee; what shall we have therefore?" In answer Jesus speaks first to the Twelve:

Verily I say unto you, that ye who have followed me, shall, in the resurrection [in the regeneration, as the King James Version has it], when the Son of Man shall come sitting on the throne of his glory, ye shall also sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

Not only shall the Twelve have eternal life, but these noble souls also shall continue to serve in their high and holy administrative roles in the eternal worlds. Neither Peter nor any of his fellow apostles could ever have dreamt of so high and exalted a station as is here named. Jacob begat Israel and sired them as a nation; Moses led the chosen people out of Egyptian bondage and gave them their law; Elijah and Isaiah and the prophets guided them in the hours of their despair; Jesus, the Son of God, had come to redeem them—but now it is revealed that the Twelve shall, at Christ's behest, sit in judgment on Abraham's seed. Thus saith the Lord: "It hath gone forth in a firm decree, by the will of the Father, that mine apostles, the Twelve which were with me in my ministry at Jerusalem, shall stand at my right hand at the day of my coming in a pillar of fire, being clothed with robes of righteousness, with crowns upon their heads, in glory even as I am, to judge the whole house of Israel, even as many as have loved me and kept my commandments, and none else." (D&C 29: 12.) [^2]

All this was to be in the day of regeneration, the day when the earth would be refreshed and renewed and receive again its paradisiacal glory. This is the day that Peter, James, and John had seen in vision in the holy mount when Christ and they were transfigured, and when the Father bore witness that Jesus was his Son. But the blessings of the gospel are not for the Twelve only. Jesus continues:

Verily I say unto you, There is no man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake, and the gospel's, But he shall receive an hundredfold now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions; and in the world to come eternal life.

Of what does sacrifice consist? In the eternal perspective it is giving up a handful of clay—held and owned but tremulously and for a moment on this lowly earth—in exchange for a universe in the eternal ages that are to be. And yet, from our mortal view, it may mean giving up that which is of great worth unto us for the moment. Do we forsake family and friends and possessions and receive persecutions instead? If so, the gospel cause provides us with kinfolk who become closer than blood relatives; we are welcome to use the lands of others; and the possessions of all the saints become ours as we need them—all of which is only the beginning. There are rewards—with persecutions—in this life; and, finally, there is eternal life in the world ahead, which eternal life is all that the Father hath. [^3]

Having set forth these wondrous truths, Jesus turned to Peter, who, with some pride of self-accomplishment, had posed the question. "But there are many who make themselves first," Jesus said, "that shall be last, and the last first." To this Mark adds: "This he said, rebuking Peter." And this, we might also add, formed an introduction to the parable of the laborers in the vineyard, which was immediately forthcoming.

Parable of the Laborers in the Vineyard

(Matthew 20:1-16)

Peter's statement, "we have forsaken all, and followed thee," said after the rich young ruler made his great refusal, declining as he did to follow Christ, was followed by the question: "What shall we have therefore?" Jesus' answer—glorious beyond belief—we have heard, together with his rebuke of Peter relative to some who made themselves first and who would, in fact, be last. Such is the setting for the present parable. "To impress upon them still more fully and deeply that the kingdom of heaven is not a matter of mercenary calculation or exact equivalent—that there could be no bargaining with the Heavenly Householder—that before the eye of God's clearer and more penetrating judgment Gentiles might be admitted before Jews, and Publicans before Pharisees, and young converts before aged Apostles—He told them the memorable Parable of the Labourers in the Vineyard. That parable, amid its other lessons, involved the truth that, while all who serve God should not be defrauded of their just and full and rich reward, there could be in heaven no murmuring, no envyings, no jealous comparison of respective merits, no base strugglings for precedency, no miserable disputings as to who had performed the maximum of service, or who had received the minimum of grace." (Farrar, p. 504.)

For the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, which went out early in the morning to hire labourers into his vineyard. And when he had agreed with the labourers for a penny a day, he sent them into his vineyard.

The kingdom of heaven on earth is the Church of Jesus Christ, which prepares men for an inheritance in the kingdom of heaven hereafter, which is the celestial kingdom. The householder is God; the hired laborers are his servants; the vineyard is his kingdom; it is also the house of Israel and all the inhabitants of the earth to whom his servants are sent. It was the practice of the day to employ daily laborers in the marketplace. The agreed compensation, a penny or denarius, was the normal wage for a single day's service. The great importance of the work is shown by the fact that the householder himself employed the laborers, not trusting it to a steward.

And he went out about the third hour, and saw others standing idle in the marketplace. And said unto them; Go ye also into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right I will give you. And they went their way. Again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour, and did likewise.

The work day lasted from sunup to sunset. The others were employed for a just but unspecified wage; the Lord's servants do not always know what rewards he has in store for them, nor, in reality, could they conceive of them if they were named and identified.

And about the eleventh hour he went out, and found others standing idle, and saith unto them, Why stand ye here all the day idle? They say unto him, Because no man hath hired us. He saith unto them, Go ye also into the vineyard; and whatsoever is right, that shall ye receive.

Laborers called throughout the day are assumed to have been available at any time, but were called only as indicated. Deity calls his own servants according to his own will and on his own schedule. A new and grander vision of those called into the Master's service at the eleventh hour is seen in the revelation, received June 8, 1978, offering the full blessings of the gospel, including the priesthood and the blessings of the temple, to those of every race and color. All such, called at the eleventh hour, have the same obligation of priesthood service that the divine Householder has given to any of his servants, and they shall be rewarded on an equal basis.

So when even was come, the lord of the vineyard saith unto his steward, Call the labourers, and give them their hire, beginning from the last unto the first. And when they came that were hired about the eleventh hour, they received every man a penny. But when the first came, they supposed that they should have received more; and they likewise received every man a penny.

And when they had received it, they murmured against the goodman of the house, Saying, These last have wrought but one hour, and thou hast made them equal unto us, which have borne the burden and heat of the day.

But he answered one of them, and said, Friend, I do thee no wrong: didst not thou agree with me for a penny? Take that thine is, and go thy way: I will give unto this last, even as unto thee. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Is thine eye evil, because I am good?

In its initial application, the parable applied to Peter and the apostles; they bore the burdens of the kingdom during the heat of the day and came off marvelously well. But there were others—Gentiles, heathen, the seed of Cain—all of whom in due course would be called to service in the vineyard of the world. What if some of them, laboring but for an hour, should receive equal or even greater rewards than the first laborers—all of which brings us back to the introductory statement, made to Peter, which Jesus now restates by way of summary.

So the last shall be first, and the first last: for many be called, but few chosen.

These concluding words—"many be called, but few chosen"—stand forth as the warning-climax of the parable, not alone to Peter and the other first laborers, but to all who are called to service in the vineyard of the Lord. Many are called into the earthly kingdom, but few shall gain full salvation in the heavenly kingdom; many are called to serve missions, but few shall reap the reward that might have been theirs; many are called to the holy priesthood—covenanting thereby to love and serve God and their fellowmen with all their hearts, might, mind, and strength—but few shall be chosen for eternal life in the kingdom of Him whose we are. As he who gave the parable anciently has said to us in our day: "There are many who have been ordained among you, whom I have called but few of them are chosen. They who are not chosen have sinned a very grievous sin, in that they are walking in darkness at noon-day. . . . If you keep not my commandments, the love of the Father shall not continue with you, therefore you shall walk in darkness." (D&C 95:5-6, 12; 121:34-40.)

Many are called but few are chosen. It is an awesome warning.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] As I have written elsewhere with reference to the statement that a position on his right hand or on his left was not his to give: "Certainly it is Christ's to give, for he has all power (Matt. 28:18) and all judgment is committed to the Son. (John 5:22.) Rather: 'It is not mine to give as a matter of favoritism; it can be given only in accordance with justice. To sit on my right hand or on my left is not mine to give, except to them for whom it is prepared according to the Father's will, and the Father and I are one.'" (Commentary 1:566.)
[^2] For a brief summary of how men are judged by a great hierarchy of judges-with Judge Jesus at the head-see Commentary 1:558-59.
[^3] Because the Prophet Joseph Smith laid his all on the altar, the Lord by revelation said of him: "I will bless him and multiply him and give unto him an hundred-fold in this world, of fathers and mothers, brothers and sisters, houses and lands, wives and children, and crowns of eternal lives in the eternal worlds." (D&C 132:55.)
