Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 83

Journeying Toward the Cross

Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness. (Matt. 3:15.)

The Coming Baptism of Blood

(Matthew 20:17-28; JST Matthew 20:23; Mark 10:32-45; JST Mark 10:40, 42; Luke 18:31-34; JST Luke 18:34)

Two scenes now come into view that dramatize the agony and the glory that lie ahead for Him who came to ransom fallen man from the bottomless abyss. They are (1) the announcing anew of his coming death and resurrection, and (2) the strivings of two of the Twelve for precedence and dominion in the kingdom of heaven.

We are traveling with Jesus, en route to "the great city which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt," where also he will be "crucified." (Rev. 11:8.) He must needs go to Jerusalem; he left Ephraim with that fixed design. He has ministered and taught, somewhat leisurely along the way, but now the time of the Fourth Passover draws nigh. It must needs be that he arrive on schedule, enter the Holy City amid shouts of Hosanna, perform his final ministry there, and then submit to the Roman scourge and the crucifier's nails.

Jesus' feet have trod the dusty lanes of Palestine for some thirty-three years; he has been in and out of the gates of Jerusalem hundreds of times; but there has never been such a journey as this one. In the past his steps have taken him to scenes of joy and healing and friendly intercourse with beloved associates; now they are traversing a steady descent into the valley of the shadow of death. And there is a solemnity, an awe—yes, a reverence—about the journey itself. Mark tells us Jesus went before the Twelve, and that they were amazed and afraid as they followed him. As he went forth on "the journey which was to end at Jerusalem," Farrar—whose way with words is wondrous—tells us, "A prophetic solemnity and elevation of soul struggling with the natural anguish of the flesh, which shrank from that great sacrifice, pervaded His whole being, and gave a new and strange grandeur to every gesture and every look. It was the Transfiguration of Self-sacrifice; and, like that previous Transfiguration of Glory, it filled those who beheld it with an amazement and terror which they could not explain. There are few pictures in the gospels more pathetic than this of Jesus going forth to His death, and walking alone along the path into the deep valley, while behind Him, in awful reverence, and mingled anticipations of dread and hope—their eyes fixed on Him, as with bowed head He preceded them in all the majesty of sorrow—the disciples followed, and dared not disturb His meditations." (Farrar, pp. 516-17.) But as they journeyed, Jesus said:

Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and all things that are written by the prophets concerning the Son of man shall he accomplished.

He was following a foreordained course; he came to preach and heal and die; his death lay just ahead. Of him all the prophets had testified, and every jot and tittle spoken by them must be fulfilled.

Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of man shall be betrayed unto the chief priests and unto the scribes, and they shall condemn him to death, And shall deliver him to the Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify him: and the third day he shall rise again.

This is now the third time, of which we know, when this same Jesus has spoken in plainness of his betrayal, trial, scourging death, and resurrection. It was said just before he and the Three went up the Mount of Transfiguration and, thereafter, when the apostolic party—including the women who were with them—returned to Galilee. But this is the first time the word crucify is recorded. Of what he has now said, Luke editorializes: "And they understood none of these things; and this saying was hid from them; neither remembered they the things which were spoken." As the apostles were to be observers, witnesses, and to some extent participants in the atoning events that lay ahead, and as those events were to be tests for them as well as for the Lord Jesus, their full meaning was kept from them and they were not permitted to remember them again until after the testing period was past.

Now the scene changes, though the holy party is still traveling their fateful course toward Jerusalem. Life with Jesus was like a refiner's fire. Day after day and conversation after conversation, his incisive words burned dross and imperfections out of the souls of his apostles and out of all others who could bear the heat of the fiery furnace. Now Salome—the wife of Zebedee, the sister of the Blessed Virgin, the mother of James and John, the aunt of the Lord Jesus—with her two sons, the sons of thunder, who one day sought to call down fire from heaven upon certain persons in Samaria who rejected Jesus—these three, a mother and her two sons, came to Jesus in secret. They fell before him in reverential worship; theirs was the sure knowledge, born of the Spirit, that the Man of Nazareth was the Holy Messiah who should reign on the throne of David forever.

Knowing they desired something of him, Jesus asked: "What wilt thou?" Salome answered: "Grant that these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand, the other on the left, in thy kingdom." James and John uttered the same petition. "Master, we would that thou shouldest do for us whatsoever we shall desire," they said. And when he responded, "What would ye that I should do for you" they repeated the plea of their mother: "Grant unto us that we may sit, one on thy right hand, and the other on thy left hand, in thy glory."

The echo of Jesus' voice, rebuking Peter when the Chief Apostle sought to make himself first in the kingdom of God, has scarcely stopped ringing in their ears. The message of the parable of the laborers in the vineyard—that all servants worthy of exaltation would be rewarded alike—is still part of their ponderings. And yet, filled with holy zeal and boundless ambition—as true saints should be, within proper limits—these intimates of the Lord asked for that which exceeded the bounds of propriety. "Jesus bore gently with their selfishness and error. They had asked in their blindness for that position which, but a few days afterwards, they were to see occupied in shame and anguish by the two crucified robbers. Their imaginations were haunted by twelve thrones; His thoughts were of three crosses. They dreamt of earthly crowns; He told them of a cup of bitterness and a baptism of blood." (Farrar, pp. 517-18.) "Ye know not what ye ask," he said. "Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?" Their answer, "We are able."

Then said Jesus: "Ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with: but to sit on my right hand, and on my left, is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared of my Father." [^1] As Jesus was baptized by John in Jordan to fulfill all righteousness, so for the same reason would all of the Twelve be baptized in blood, as it were, when the severity of the scourge, and the cruelties of the cross, and the sharpness of the spear fell upon them. James would be slain at Herod's order and John would be banished to Patmos. The baptism of blood was indeed at their door.

When the rest of the Twelve heard what Zebedee's family sought they were "much displeased with James and John," and Jesus, calling them all together, used the occasion to teach them how true greatness in God's kingdom is gained:

Ye know that they who are appointed to rule over the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and their great ones exercise authority upon them. But so shall it not be among you: but whosoever will be great among you, shall be your minister: And whosoever of you, will be the chiefest, shall be servant of all.

For even the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.

If Jesus came to be the servant of all; if he came to minister to the eternal well-being of all men; if he came to pay the ransom, by the shedding of his own blood, for the captive souls of men—then how ought his greater stewards and lesser servants labor in his vineyard?

The Healing of Zaccheus and of Bartimeus

(Luke 18:35-43; 19:1-10; JST Luke 18:43; 19:7-8; Mark 10:46-52; Matthew 20:29-34)

In Jericho of ancient fame there dwelt two men, Zaccheus and Bartimeus, whose lives are about to be changed forever by the touch of the Master's hand. Zaccheus, the Jew, is a hated and despised publican; nay, more, he is "the chief among the publicans," of whom there is a large colony in this prosperous city. He is a rich man and a sinner who lives a life of extortion and fraud. How evil it is for a tax collector to take more than the law allows and to keep it for himself! Zaccheus has a sin-sick soul. Bartimeus, the Jew, is poor and blind and makes his living by begging on the streets. He is a social nonentity for whom none care, and whose life is tolerated only because blindness and begging go together in this culture, a culture that leaves its invalids to suffer alone and to gain such crumbs and crusts as chance to fall their way.

Jericho, a verdant tropical city filled with flowers and palm trees, located on a watered plain, is called the paradise of God. It is truly the Eden of Palestine, the most fruitful area of the whole land, and to it masses of people flock as desert denizens to a flowery oasis. Through its streets pass many of the Perean and Galilean pilgrims en route to keep the Passover in Jerusalem. Among them this time are Jesus, the Twelve, and others of the disciples, including women, one of whom, Salome, has but recently interceded with him for her sons.

Jesus' fame is such that the whole city turns out to see him. This is he who sent one born blind to wash in the pool of Siloam and he came seeing. This is he who said to Lazarus of Bethany, whose decomposing body had lain in the tomb for four days, "Come forth," and it was so. This is he whom the scribes hate and the Sanhedrin seek that they may put him to death. Is he the Messiah, as we have heard, or does he do all these miracles by the power of Satan? Will he do any of his marvelous works in our streets? Is he the Messiah or the antichrist? Perhaps we will be able to tell as we see what happens to Zaccheus and to Bartimeus.

Jesus, now in Jericho, is surrounded by throngs of people; there are multitudes on every side. Zaccheus, who is small of stature, cannot so much as glimpse the Messianic face; he runs ahead and climbs a sycamore tree. Jesus stops under the tree, looks up, and says, "Zaccheus, make haste, and come down; for to day I must abide at thy house."

"And he made haste, and came down, and received him joyfully." He who ever stands at the door and knocks; he who is ever ready to come in and sup with all who will open unto him; he who seeks to be an unseen guest in every home at every meal—he this day chose a rich and hated publican to be his host. Why? No reasons are given, nor need they be. We cannot doubt that Zaccheus by study and prayer and pondering had made himself ready to receive the Guest of guests, and that Jesus came—as a Laborer worthy of his hire—to impart to a repenting publican that spiritual health which he alone can give. "And when the disciples saw it, they all murmured, saying, That he was gone to be a guest with a man who is a sinner."

Once there was no room for him in the inns; now he chooses to spend the night with a sinner who is hated by all, and that not without cause. Often he has slept with his disciples under the Palestinian stars to be rid of the conniving and evil influences of the day; now he elects to associate with a sinner of ill repute. In this self-selected abode there is time to relax and eat, to rest and to teach. Much is said by Jesus about the gospel and repentance and salvation and the glories of the eternal world. At a point of climax, Zaccheus's heart is pricked. He stands and says: "Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor; and if I have taken any thing from any man by unjust means, I restore him fourfold."

Jesus has gained a convert. This man will be baptized and become a disciple. Jesus says: "This day is salvation come to this house, forsomuch as he also is a son of Abraham." And to all of this, then comes the grand climax:

For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost.

Such is the story of Zaccheus, as far as it has been preserved for us. His soul is healed and he is a new man. Jesus has wrought one of his greatest miracles. As to Bartimeus, the beggar, the blessing prepared for him is reserved until the next morning as Jesus and his party leave Jericho, and it becomes in effect a divine seal on the preaching and spiritual healing of which we have already spoken.

Luke tells us that as Jesus and his party approached Jericho, they met "a certain blind man" who sat begging by the way. Hearing the multitude, he asked what it meant, and was told, "Jesus of Nazareth passeth by." Immediately the sightless one cried out, "Jesus, thou son of David, have mercy on me." He was rebuked by those who accompanied Jesus and was told to hold his peace, which he did not do, but continued to cry out, "Thou son of David, have mercy on me." Jesus stopped, commanded the blind one to be brought, and asked, "What wilt thou that I shall do unto thee?" He said, "Lord, that I may receive my sight." Jesus said, "Receive thy sight: thy faith hath saved thee." Immediately his sight came, and he followed Jesus and glorified God. "And all the disciples when they saw this, gave praise unto God." Then, as Luke has it, "Jesus entered and passed through Jericho."

Mark tells us that this healing took place when Jesus "went out of Jericho with his disciples," and adds to Luke's account that the beggar was named Bartimeus, the son of Timeus; that when the beggar was called to come to Jesus, he was told, "Be of good comfort, rise; he calleth thee"; and that the beggar cast away his garment as he came. Matthew agrees with Mark as to when the blind eyes were opened, but says there were two beggars, not one, and that Jesus "touched their eyes." There is no question, of course, that if we had the full recitations, as originally written, there would be no contradictions. We are left, therefore, to draw our own conclusions as to the details here involved. We know Jesus normally taught the gospel first and then stretched forth his hands to work miracles so that the healing acts would place a seal of divinity upon his teachings. We suppose that is what he did in this instance also. In any event, as pertaining to Bartimeus, his repeated designation of Jesus as the Son of David, who had power to open blind eyes, shows that he had prior faith and qualified as one entitled to receive the divine blessing that came to him.

Parable of the Pounds

(Luke 19:11-28; JST Luke 19:11, 14, 17, 23-25)

Jesus has set his face like flint to go to Jerusalem, where the cruel cross of crucifixion awaits his outstretched arms and nailed hands. He has many things yet to say in the few remaining days of his flesh, but, with it all, Jehovah must die so that together with his dead body many that sleep in the dust shall come forth. He as a nobleman sent of God must now travel to a far country, there, in the presence of his Father, to be crowned with glory and power everlasting. Before he departs he will leave his earthly affairs in the hands of his servants to whom, in due course, he will return and call for an accounting of their stewardships.

This, however, is not what all Israel suppose. They are yet seeking a temporal deliverer upon whose head a kingly crown may be placed; they have yet to learn that the way to the crown is by the cross. Even some of the disciples—not, we suppose, those of the Twelve or of the Seventy—yet feel that this man should be crowned, not crucified, when he arrives in the Holy City.

And so now we find Jesus and his party, and a great host of Passover pilgrims, plodding onward from Jericho to Jerusalem. Mingled among them are many who could be drawn into the scribal stream of hostility and evil where the enemies of God will raise a sword against his Son. As a warning to them, and so that his disciples may understand more perfectly his purposes, and because they are "nigh to Jerusalem," "and because the Jews taught that the kingdom of God should immediately appear"—the scene being thus set—Jesus delivers the parable of the pounds.

A certain nobleman went into a far country to receive for himself a kingdom, and to return. And he called his ten servants, and delivered them ten pounds, and said unto them, Occupy till I come. But his citizens hated him, and sent a messenger after him, saying, We will not have this man to reign over us.

This is a story that friends and foes alike will ponder in their hearts. Hearing it, they will recall the numerous "noblemen" who left Palestine and went to far-off Rome to receive suzerainty from Caesar, that they might return and reign with blood and horror over the citizens of their assigned kingdoms. They will remember in particular that some thirty years before, Archelaus went to Augustus in Rome to gain confirmation of the provisions of the will of his father, Herod the Great, so that the Idumean's offspring could reign in his appointed kingdom. They will recall how the Jews sent to Augustus a deputation of fifty to recount the cruelties and oppose the claims of Herod's son; how "Philippus defended the property of Archelaus during his absence from the encroachments of the Proconsul Sabinus"; and how Archelaus, upon his return, avenged this Jewish act of rebellion with the blood of his enemies. (Farrar, p. 524, footnote 1; Edersheim 2:466.) They will also realize that Jesus is speaking of himself as the nobleman who goes to a far country; that his servants have a period of labor before his return; and that the Messianic kingdom for which they yearn will not be established until a future day.

And it came to pass, that when he was returned, having received the kingdom, then he commanded these servants to be called unto him, to whom he had given the money, that he might know how much every man had gained by trading.

Then came the first, saying, Lord, thy pound hath gained ten pounds. And he said unto him, Well done, thou good servant; because thou hast been faithful in a very little, have thou authority over ten cities. And the second came, saying, Lord thy pound hath gained five pounds. And he said likewise to him, Be thou also over five cities.

And another came, saying, Lord, behold, here is thy pound, which I have kept laid up in a napkin: For I feared thee, because thou art an austere man: thou takest up that thou layedst not down, and reapest that thou didst not sow.

And he saith unto him, Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee, thou wicked servant. Thou knewest that I was an austere man, taking up that I laid not down, and reaping that I did not sow: Wherefore then gavest not thou my money into the bank, that at my coming I might have received mine own with usury?

And he said unto them who stood by, Take from him the pound, and give it to him who hath ten pounds.

Each servant has a like endowment and a like responsibility. It is with the elders and seventies as it is with the apostles. Each receives the Holy Priesthood; each is called to minister for the salvation of men; each takes upon himself the covenant and rejoices in the oath of the priesthood; and each has power to work out his own salvation and gain eternal reward if true and faithful in all things. As it turns out, the respective labors of each determine his kingdom and dominion in the day of his Lord's return. The power to work in the kingdom here becomes the power to rule in the kingdom hereafter. As to the slothful servant, who did no labor here, he enjoys no dominion hereafter. His pound is given to the one who can make the best use of it—it shall go "to him that hath ten pounds." Such is the surprise of his hearers at this decision that they interrupt Jesus to say, "Lord, he hath ten pounds." Our Lord's response is:

For I say unto you, That unto every one who occupieth, shall be given; and from him who occupieth not, even that he hath received shall be taken away from him.

Service is essential to salvation! Labor in the vineyard or be damned. Those who receive the Holy Priesthood must magnify their callings; they must use the priesthood to teach the gospel, to perform ordinances, and to work miracles, as Jesus did; otherwise they have no reward.

But those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me.

Jesus' enemies—worldly people; those who do not heed the voice of his servants; those who reject him and his gospel; those who will not have him to rule over them—they shall be slain at his coming. "And the day cometh that they who will not hear the voice of the Lord, neither the voice of his servants, neither give heed to the words of the prophets and apostles, shall be cut off from among the people." (D&C 1:14.) It shall be "when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, In flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power." (2 Thes. 1:7-9.)

Such is the eternal intent; such is the long-term meaning of the parable. But for that generation of Jews there was to be an immediate application of the curse pronounced upon those who would not have him to rule over them; who proclaimed, "We have no king but Caesar"; who said, "Write not, The King of the Jews; but that he said, I am King of the Jews"; who after he ascended into heaven continued to exhibit violent hostility against the infant Church—upon that generation of Jews the curse was to fall with unslaked fury. True, "The parable was one of many-sided application; it indicated His near departure from the world; the hatred which should reject Him; the duty of faithfulness in the use of all that He entrusted to them; the uncertainty of His return; the certainty that, when He did return, there would be a solemn account; the condemnation of the slothful; the splendid reward of all who should serve Him well; the utter destruction of those who endeavoured to reject His power." (Farrar, p. 525.)

"But as regards His 'enemies,' that would not have Him reign over them—manifestly, Jerusalem and the people of Israel—who, even after he had gone to receive the Kingdom, continued the personal hostility of their 'We will not that this One shall reign over us'—the ashes of the Temple, the ruins of the City, the blood of the fathers, and the homeless wanderings of their children, with the Cain-curse branded on their brow and visible to all men, attest, that the King has many ministers to execute that judgment which obstinate rebellion must surely bring, if His authority is to be vindicated, and His Rule to secure submission." (Edersheim 2:467.)

"And when he"—the Nobleman who will reign as King in a future day—"had thus spoken," Luke tells us, "he went before, ascending up to Jerusalem," allowing his hearers to ponder and marvel at the gracious words they had heard.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] As I have written elsewhere with reference to the statement that a position on his right hand or on his left was not his to give: "Certainly it is Christ's to give, for he has all power (Matt. 28:18) and all judgment is committed to the Son. (John 5:22.) Rather: 'It is not mine to give as a matter of favoritism; it can be given only in accordance with justice. To sit on my right hand or on my left is not mine to give, except to them for whom it is prepared according to the Father's will, and the Father and I are one.'" (Commentary 1:566.)
