Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Section 10

From the Anointing to the Royal Reign

THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS. (Matt. 27:37.)

Blessed be the King that cometh in the name of the Lord: peace in heaven, and glory in the highest. (Luke 19:38.)

As Samuel poured oil on the head of Saul and anointed him to be captain over the Lord's inheritance, and all Israel then marched at their king's word;

As he also poured oil on David and anointed him in the midst of his brethren, so that the Spirit of the Lord came upon him from that day forward;

And as Zadok took an horn of oil and anointed Solomon, and all the people said, "God save king Solomon"—

So Mary of Bethany, in the home of Simon the leper, as guided by the Spirit, poured costly spikenard from her alabaster box upon the head of Jesus, and also anointed his feet, so that, the next day, the ten thousands of Israel might acclaim him King and shout Hosanna to his name.

We see Jesus thus anointed and acclaimed, heading a triumphal procession into the Holy City. So commences the first day of the week of the atoning sacrifice.

On the second day he curses the barren fig tree and cleanses the temple a second time.

On the third day he discourses on faith; confounds the Jews on the question of authority, and delivers the three parables to the Jews—the parable of the two sons, the parable of the wicked husbandmen, and the parable of the marriage of the king's son.

That same day the Jews provoke, tempt, and reject him; they seek to ensnare him on the question of tribute and are confounded; he proclaims the law of eternal marriage; and then he gives his great pronouncement about the first and great commandment.

Then he propounds the question: "What think ye of Christ?"

After all this comes the great denunciation. Such woes—eight in number—as seldom come from divine lips are heaped, with a vengeance, upon the rebellious scribes and Pharisees.

Thereupon he laments over doomed Jerusalem, speaks of the widow's mite, offers salvation to the Gentiles, and testifies boldly that he is the Son of Man. Thus endeth his public ministry.

During the closing hours of that day, he gives the incomparable Olivet Discourse.

In it his voice is raised, first, against Jerusalem and the Holy House soon to be left desolate.

He speaks of the persecutions and martyrdom that await his disciples.

He tells of the universal apostasy that will precede the Second Coming; then of the glorious era of Restoration; of the desolations of the latter days; and of the coming in of the Gentile fulness.

His disciples learn that the abomination of desolation shall again sweep Jerusalem; that signs and wonders shall fill the heavens and the earth; and that he shall come as a thief in the night.

Those who shall abide the day are identified, and all men are commanded to watch, pray, take heed, and be ready.

He then speaks the parable of the ten virgins and the parable of the talents, and, finally, gives the great decree that he and the Twelve shall sit on thrones in judgment upon the world.

And in that day all his saints who have served their fellow men shall learn that their good deeds were in fact done unto him, and they shall have eternal life.
