Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 84

"Hosanna to the Son of David"

Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold, thy King cometh unto thee: he is just, and having salvation; lowly, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the foal of an ass. . . . He shall speak peace unto the heathen: and his dominion shall be from sea even to sea, and from the river even to the ends of the earth. (Zech. 9:9-10.)

Mary Anoints Jesus at Simon's Supper

(John 11:55-57; 12:1-11; JST John 11:56; 12:7; Matthew 26:6-13; JST Matthew 26:5-10; Mark 14:3-9; JST Mark 14:4-8)

As the time of the Fourth Passover draws near, fanatical tides of religious anarchy sweep through Jerusalem—through the Holy City, the City of David, through the religious capital of the world. Never in the whole history of the world have religious feelings and fanaticism built themselves up to such a crisis as now impends—not when the Lord confounded the tongues at Babel; not when he slew the firstborn in every Egyptian home; not when an evil and militant spirit swept the Crusades across Europe; not at any time.

There is a veritable maelstrom of divergent opinion about Him who is everywhere proclaiming his own divine Sonship and then working miracles to attest the divinity of his word. For three and a half years Jesus has taught and preached and worked miracles in every city and village throughout the land. Apostles and seventies, and disciples without number, both male and female, have echoed his words and testified of his goodness and grace to them. His gospel message has been proclaimed from the mountaintops; nothing has been done in a corner. Just as all Israel knew that Moses led them through the Red Sea and that six days of each week Jehovah rained manna from heaven upon them, so these Jews all know that there is one among them who claims to be the Son of God. It is as though each day the press, radio, and television carry new banner headlines and relay extensive broadcasts telling his doings of that day. There are press releases quoting his words; accounts of eyewitnesses who saw his miracles; the testimonies of those who were healed; the views of his enemies that he works by the power of Beelzebub and is even Satan incarnate; and the analytical columns setting forth the marvels of his ministry, or the evils of forsaking Moses to follow him, as each author expounds the views he espouses. Every Sabbath in the synagogues his doings and sayings are discussed by friends and foes. Every marketplace is ablaze with gossip and rumor about him. On every street corner men congregate to exchange opinions and gain new views. The raising of Lazarus is discussed in every home; the name of Jesus is on every tongue.

Passover pilgrims from the country areas are arriving in Jerusalem ahead of the feast itself so they can "purify themselves" in the temple. Their conversations are about the one thing uppermost in all minds. "What think ye of Jesus?" they ask one another. His disciples, whose views are fixed, move among them and bear testimony of the knowledge of salvation that has come into their hearts. Many rustic Galileans speak of him in reverent tones. "Will he not come to the feast?" they ask, and none seem to know. Influenced by their Rabbis and swayed by their scribes, most of the sophisticated Judeans have gained an undying hatred of this man of Galilee—out of which country, as they pretend to believe, cometh no prophet. And the chief priests and the Pharisees have given a commandment that if anyone knows where Jesus is, "he should shew it, that they might take him." [^1]

Before placing his person in the midst of this war of words and tumult of opinions; before showing himself to the people, that all things shall be fulfilled which have been spoken of him in the law and in the prophets; before carrying his cross for the week of his passion, Jesus chose to spend a quiet Sabbath, his last on earth, in his beloved Bethany. There in the home of Simon the leper, enjoying sociality with Mary and Martha and Lazarus and those of his intimate circle, he will receive the holy anointing preparatory to his kingly burial; there he will take into his lungs the last peaceful breaths of Judean air before the tumultuous hours and days of his passion. It is Friday, Nisan 8, A.U.C. 780—March 31, A.D. 30, according to our calendar—and Jesus and his select friends are just arriving from Jericho. As we learned in the passing and raising of Lazarus there was communication between our Lord and his associates in Bethany, and it would not surprise us if the beloved sisters and others came out to meet and greet him and his party as they neared the place where they designed to spend the approaching Sabbath.

But before recounting the circumstances surrounding the sacred ordinance, which will transpire in this Judean village of blessed memory, on the Sabbath which will dawn, as it were, with the setting sun, we must note the intimate and felicitous friendships that prevailed between Jesus and the beloved sisters and their brother Lazarus. We have reason to believe this relationship was like none other enjoyed by him who came to do all things well and gain all the experiences of mortality. All scripturalists and authors of insight and renown are aware of the unique and unusual familial scenes portrayed by the Gospel authors with reference to the various happenings in this secluded and peaceful village. Let us note, for instance, how Farrar speaks of Jesus' friends in Bethany.

"We seem to trace in the Synoptists a special reticence about the family at Bethany," he says. "The house in which they take a prominent position is called 'the house of Simon the leper'; Mary is called simply 'a woman' by St. Matthew and St. Mark; and St. Luke contents himself with calling Bethany 'a certain village,' although he was perfectly aware of the name. There are, therefore, good grounds for the conjecture that when the earliest form of the Gospel of St. Matthew appeared, and when the memorials were collected which were used by the other two Synoptists, there may have been special reasons for not recording a miracle [the raising of Lazarus] which would have brought into dangerous prominence a man who was still living, but of whom the Jews had distinctly sought to get rid as a witness of Christ's wonder-working power. Even if this danger had ceased, it would have been painful to the quiet family of Bethany to have been made the focus of an intense and irreverent curiosity, and to be questioned about those hidden things none have ever revealed. Something, then, seems to have 'sealed the lips' of those Evangelists—an obstacle which had been long removed when St. John's Gospel first saw the light." (Farrar, p. 511.) [^2]

As to our Lord's last Sabbath on earth, we assume he preached in the local synagogue or counseled in quiet seclusion with the Twelve and other intimates. When the hour came for the festive Sabbath meal, they held it in his honor. John says, "they made him a supper," as though it were a community expression of goodwill toward their Guest of renown. Matthew and Mark placed the banquet "in the house of Simon the leper." Martha served—indeed, she seems to have been in charge of the serving and arrangements; Lazarus sat at the table with Jesus; the Twelve and others of the disciples partook of the feast; and—as the custom was—others milled about as observers.

Bethany that evening was the focal point of Jewish interest. Many people, learning that Jesus was there, came from Jerusalem to see him and to see Lazarus, "whom he had raised from the dead." Among them were those whose souls were penitent and who sought that righteousness which this Galilean brought; and among them also were those whose hearts were hardened and who were devising ways to slay both Lazarus and Jesus. Lazarus alive was a living witness of the power of Him whose new doctrine meant the death of the Mosaic system, and of all the religious formalities so dear to the hearts of those whose means of livelihood it was. And so, "the chief priests"—the very rulers of the nation—"consulted that they might put Lazarus also to death," John tells us, "Because that by reason of him many of the Jews went away, and believed on Jesus." Scarcely is there a lower depth than this to which malice and hatred and depravity can sink.

Emotions ran high this memorable evening in Bethany, not only among those who came to view and wonder, or to plot and connive, as their desires might be, but also among those in whose house the feast was held. And in the souls of none did the fires of love, and devotion, and worship, burn more brightly than in the soul of the beloved Mary. She who loved to sit at Jesus' feet and hear his words; she whose soul drank in truth as the parched desert absorbs the heavensent rain; she who had seen her brother Lazarus come forth from the tomb after four days of decomposing death—this beloved one now sought some means of expressing her love and worship of the Master before he went to his death. She took from her treasures an alabaster box containing "a pound of ointment of spikenard, very costly," and poured it on his head, and anointed his feet, and wiped them with her hair, "and the house was filled with the odour of the ointment." Truly the sweet smell of incense, symbolical of the prayers of the heart, ascended up on high this night.

"To understand this solemn scene one must both know and feel the religious significance of Mary's act. Here sat the Lord of Heaven, in the house of his friends, as the hour of his greatest trials approached, with those who loved him knowing he was soon to face betrayal and crucifixion. What act of love, of devotion, of adoration, of worship, could a mere mortal perform for him who is eternal? Could a loved one do more than David had said the Good Shepherd himself would do in conferring honor and blessing upon another, that is: 'Thou anointest my head with oil'?" (Commentary 1:700.) [^3]

"But there was one present to whom on every ground the act was odious and repulsive. There is no vice at once so absorbing, so unreasonable, and so degrading as the vice of avarice, and avarice was the besetting sin in the dark soul of the traitor Judas. The failure to struggle with his own temptations; the disappointment of every expectation which had first drawn him to Jesus; the intolerable rebuke conveyed to his whole being by the daily communion with a sinless purity; the darker shadow which he could not but feel that his guilt flung athwart his footsteps because of the burning sunlight in which for many months he now had walked; the sense too that the eye of his Master, possibly even the eyes of some of his fellow-apostles, had read or were beginning to read the hidden secrets of his heart;—all these things had gradually deepened from an incipient alienation into an insatiable repugnancy and hate. And the sight of Mary's lavish sacrifice, the consciousness that it was now too late to save that large sum for the bag—the mere possession of which, apart from the sums which he could pilfer out of it, gratified his greed for gold—filled him with disgust and madness. He had a devil. He felt as if he had been personally cheated; as if the money were by right his, and he had been, in a senseless manner, defrauded of it. 'To what purpose is this waste?' he indignantly said; and, alas! how often have his words been echoed, for wherever there is an act of splendid self-forgetfulness there is always a Judas to sneer and murmur at it. 'This ointment might have been sold for three hundred pence and given to the poor!' Three hundred pence—ten pounds or more! There was perfect frenzy in the thought of such utter perdition of good money; why, for barely a third of such a sum, this son of perdition was ready to sell his Lord. Mary thought it not good enough to anele Christ's sacred feet: Judas thought a third part of it sufficient reward for selling His very life." (Farrar, 527-28.)

Mary loved much and was rewarded infinitely. Her act of adoring worship—born, we cannot doubt, from the promptings of the Spirit—gained for her a name and a fame that shall endure everlastingly. How sweet the words we now hear Jesus speak:

Why trouble ye the woman? For she hath wrought a good work upon me.

Ye have the poor with you always, and whensoever ye will, ye may do them good; but me ye have not always.

Let her alone; for she hath preserved this ointment until now, that she might anoint me in token of my burial.

She has done what she could, and this which she has done unto me, shall be had in remembrance in generations to come, wheresoever my gospel shall be preached; for verily she has come beforehand to anoint my body to the burying.

And in this thing that she hath done, she shall be blessed; for verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached in the whole world, this thing that this woman hath done, shall also be told for a memorial of her.

He that hath ears to hear, let him hear!

Jesus Enters Jerusalem as King Messiah

(Matthew 21:1-11; JST Matthew 21:2, 4-5, 9; Mark 11:1-11; JST Mark 11:10-13; Luke 19:29-44; John 12:12-19; JST John 12:14)

"Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem"; let all who dwell in David's City cry Hosanna. Come, all ye Judeans and Galileans and Pereans and Samaritans; come, ye Gentiles whose lives are touched by Israel and her divine destiny; come, ye three million souls who are celebrating the Passover in your capital city—for this day ye shall see the seeric words of Zechariah fulfilled.

"Behold," O Jerusalem, the Holy City, for "thy King cometh unto thee." He cometh from Bethany on the east, where but yesterday he sat at meat with Lazarus, whom he raised from death; where in the house of Simon the leper, his beloved Mary anointed his royal head and poured costly spikenard on his kingly feet—all in token of his burial, which is to be later this week.

Hail him as your king; heed his words, for "he is just, and having salvation." Accept him as the Just One, your Deliverer—from death, hell, the devil, and endless torment. Know that all who believe in him shall be saved; he is your Savior; salvation comes by him; he is the resurrection and the life, as he said.

How shall he come? As the prophetic word foretells, ye shall see him "lowly, and riding upon an ass," the symbol of Jewish royalty. He shall be "upon a colt the foal of an ass." Messianic shouts shall rend the air; his disciples shall wave palm branches of peace; and the Roman soldiers in Antonia will smile and say, "What manner of King is this," not knowing that his kingdom is not of this world.

Come, join in the celebration, for this is he of whom it is written: "He shall speak peace unto the heathen: and his dominion shall be from sea even to sea, and from the river even to the ends of the earth." And those who accept him now will reign with him then in that great millennial day.

It is Sunday, April 2, A.D. 30, and Jesus with his disciples—that all things shall be fulfilled which are written of him—departs from Bethany, going toward Jerusalem. Multitudes from the Judean village follow along. When he arrives at the mount of Olives, near Bethphage, a suburb of Jerusalem, he says, as we suppose, to Peter and John: "Go your way into the village over against you: and as soon as ye be entered into it, ye shall find a colt tied, whereon never man sat; loose him, and bring him. And if any man say unto you, Why do ye this? say ye that the Lord hath need of him; and straightway he will send him hither."

They went. All things happened as Jesus' seeric foresight had specified, and they "brought the colt, and put on it their clothes; and Jesus took the colt and sat thereon; and they followed him." Then many, "a very great multitude"—those who came out from Jerusalem to meet the Messianic party, and those who followed from Bethany—spread their garments, and the branches they cut from the trees, to make a path before him. His disciples—both Judeans and Galileans coming out from the City of the Great King, and those from Bethany who were with him "when he called Lazarus out of his grave, and raised him from the dead"—they all "took branches of palm trees" and waved them as they gave the Hosanna Shout. It was a spontaneous, Spirit-guided acclamation of holy praise and divine testimony, patterned after the acclamations of adulation and glory given to Jehovah at the Feast of Tabernacles. Their King—meek and lowly in heart, riding in their midst on a lowly ass—heard thousands of voices cry out in perfect praise:

Hosanna: Blessed is the king of Israel that cometh in the name of the Lord.

Blessed be the King that cometh in the name of the Lord: peace in heaven, and glory in the highest.

Hosanna to the son of David: Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest.

Hosanna! Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord; That bringeth the kingdom of our father David; Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest.

Such blasphemy as this could not go unchallenged. This mob of unlearned followers of this discredited Galilean were ascribing to him the very cries of praise reserved for Jehovah alone. Here were men crying Hosanna—meaning save now, or save we pray, or save we beseech thee—to him, as though he were God and could save them. Here the very words of the Hallel—"Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee, send now prosperity. Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the Lord"—were being sung in praise to One whose works were from beneath. To the Pharisees among them this was as gall and wormwood; it was blasphemy. "Master, rebuke thy disciples," they said. But Jesus, knowing the full significance of what was then in process, replied: "I tell you that, if these should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out." These cries were destined to be made. He was the King of Israel and was to be acclaimed as such by believing people before Pilate wrote over his cross: "THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS."

Drawing near to Jerusalem, and beholding the city, Jesus wept. "He had dropped silent tears at the grave of Lazarus; here He wept aloud. All the shame of His mockery, all the anguish of His torture, was powerless, five days afterwards, to extort from Him a single groan, or to wet His eyelids with one trickling tear; but here, all the pity that was within Him overmastered His human spirit, and He not only wept, but broke into a passion of lamentation, in which the choked voice seemed to struggle for its utterance. A strange Messianic triumph! a strange interruption of the festal cries! The Deliverer weeps over the city which it is now too late to save; the King prophesies the total ruin of the nation which He came to rule!" (Farrar, pp. 534-35.) His lamenting words:

If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes.

'O that thou hadst known me and believed my gospel and gained that peace which I came to bring. O that thou hadst exchanged thy heart of flint for a heart of flesh and had hearkened unto the Son of Man who has taught in thy streets. But now all these things are hidden from thine eyes.'

For the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, And shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee; and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another; because thou knewest not the time of thy visitation.

"Sternly, literally, terribly, within fifty years was that prophecy fulfilled. Four years before the war began, while as yet the city was in the greatest peace and prosperity, a melancholy maniac traversed its streets with the repeated cry, 'A voice from the east, a voice from the west, a voice from the four winds, a voice against Jerusalem and the holy house, a voice against the bridegrooms and the brides, and a voice against this whole people.' No scourgings or tortures could wring from him any other words except, 'Woe! Woe! to Jerusalem; woe to the city; woe to the people; woe to the holy house!' until seven years afterwards, during the siege, he was killed by a stone from a catapult. His voice was but the renewed echo of the voice of prophecy.

"Titus had not originally wished to encompass the city, but he was forced, by the despair and obstinacy of the Jews, to surround it, first with a palisaded mound, and then, when this vallum and agger were destroyed, with a wall of masonry. He did not wish to sacrifice the Temple—nay, he made every possible effort to save it—but he was forced to leave it in ashes. He did not intend to be cruel to the inhabitants, but the deadly fanaticism of their opposition so extinguished all desire to spare them, that he undertook the task of well-nigh exterminating the race—of crucifying them by hundreds, of exposing them in the amphitheatre by thousands, of selling them into slavery by myriads. Josephus tells us that, even immediately after the siege of Titus, no one, in the desert waste around him, would have recognized the beauty of Judea; and that if any Jew had come upon the city of a sudden, however well he had known it before, he would have asked 'what place it was?' And he who, in modern Jerusalem, would look for relics of the ten-times-captured city of the days of Christ, must look for them twenty feet beneath the soil, and will scarcely find them. In one spot alone remain a few massive substructions, as though to show how vast is the ruin they represent; and here, on every Friday, assemble a few poverty-stricken Jews, to stand each in the shroud in which he will be buried and wail over the shattered glories of their fallen and desecrated home." (Farrar, pp. 535-37.)

Then Jesus, continuing with the triumphal procession, entered Jerusalem, and, Matthew tells us, "all the city was moved, saying, Who is this?" It was never intended that the events of this day be hidden from view; for nearly six hundred years all Israel had awaited the fulfillment of Zechariah's prophecy, and now the divine Hosannas rent the air. The answer to their question came from the multitude who hailed him as the Son of David. "This is Jesus of Nazareth, the prophet of Galilee," they said.

Continuing into the courts of the temple, where two hundred and ten thousand can assemble at one time, Jesus "looked round about upon all things, and blessed the disciples." What a sweet and tender touch this is! The Son of David, whose Father is God, and who has this day been hailed by believing souls as the Blessed One who was to come, has in his heart a feeling of gratitude. However deserving he knows himself to be—of all the glory and honor and worship that this day has been heaped upon him—yet he now blesses his disciples for the spirit of adoration they have manifest. He blesses them for fulfilling the Messianic word, for crying out: "Blessed is he who cometh in the name of the Lord."

Meanwhile the Pharisees—oppressed, hateful, vengeful—unable to stay the surging tide of divine acclaim that is this day hailing Jesus as Israel's King, say among themselves: "Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing? behold, the world is gone after him." And Jesus, when "the eventide was come," the work of this day being accomplished, "went out unto Bethany with the twelve."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] All formal teaching must be both authoritative and authorized.
[^2] Authorization for Rabbinical teaching came by ordination.
[^3] "To anoint the head of a guest with ordinary oil was to do him honor; to anoint his feet also was to show unusual and signal regard; but the anointing of head and feet with spikenard, and in such abundance, was an act of reverential homage rarely rendered even to kings. Mary's act was an expression of adoration; it was the fragrant outwelling of a heart overflowing with worship and affection." (Talmage, p. 512.)
