Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 85

Jesus—One Having Authority

And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high priest; but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee. As he saith also in another place, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. Called of God an high priest after the order of Melchisedec. . . . (Heb. 5:4-6, 10.)

He Curseth a Barren Fig Tree

(Mark 11:12-14, 20-26; JST Mark 11:14-16, 24-26; Matthew 21:18-22; JST Matthew 21:17, 20)

Here is a man who says he is the Son of God; who preaches a gospel that he says is the plan of salvation; who works miracles as a witness that his words are true and that God is his Father. Whence comes his authority and in what power does he act?

Our Gospel authors do not preserve for us his sermons on priesthood and priestly offices: they do not speak of his ordinations, or even have a great deal to say of the divine commissions conferred upon him by his Father. He is simply described as going forward doing what could not be done without authority. Our inspired writers do not tell how he received the same priesthood and power that was before held by Melchizedek, or how he was called by his Father to rule and reign in that priestly power forever. And yet, implicit in every word that he spoke and every deed that he did is the issue of divine authority. Never man spake as this man; he spake as one having authority and not as the scribes. Never man wrought as this man did; his works required power—the power of God. And priesthood is the power and authority of God delegated to man on earth to act in all things for the salvation of men. It is also the power and authority by which worlds come rolling into existence, by which mountains are moved and seas divided, and by which fig trees are cursed. And if ever there was a people who knew their prophets must have authority from on high, it was Jewish Israel. We are about to see Jesus curse a fig tree and cleanse again his Father's house, and then the chief priests will confront him on the very issue of authority itself. But first the matter of the fig tree.

Bethany of blessed memory—the beautiful and beloved village—has once again been the bivouac of the Bridegroom and of the twelve special friends who ever attend him. It is now early Monday. How the holy party spent the night we do not know—perhaps in communion with each other; perhaps in sacred and solitary prayer; perhaps resting in the home of Simon the leper. Now they are en route to the city and the temple. Jesus is hungry. Afar off he sees a solitary fig tree having leaves. Such trees are planted by the way, and their fruit is common property of all. It is not the season for newly ripened figs, but it is common to find autumn figs still clinging to the trees; and since the new crop develops before the leaves, there should have been a sweet and edible though unripened crop of spring figs.

"But when He came up to it, He was disappointed. The sap was circulating; the leaves made a fair show; but of fruit there was none. Fit emblem of a hypocrite, whose external semblance is a delusion and sham—fit emblem of the nation in whom the ostentatious profession of religion brought forth no 'fruit of good living'—the tree was barren. And it was hopelessly barren: for had it been fruitful the previous year, there would still have been some of the kermouses hidden under those broad leaves: and had it been fruitful this year, the bakkooroth would have set into green and delicious fragrance before the leaves appeared: but on this fruitless tree there was neither any promise for the future, nor any gleanings from the past.

"And therefore, since it was but deceptive and useless, a barren cumberer of the ground, He made it the eternal warning against a life of hypocrisy continued until it is too late, and, in the hearing of His disciples, uttered upon it the solemn fiat, 'Never fruit grow upon thee more!' Even at the word, such infructuous life as it possessed was arrested, and it began to wither away." (Farrar, pp. 546-47.)

Matthew tells us that Jesus having so spoken, "Presently the fig tree withered away. And when the disciples saw it, they marvelled, saying, How soon is the fig tree withered away!" Mark says that the next morning as the little group passed by on the same route, "they saw the fig tree dried up from the roots." That this miracle is unique is apparent to all; it seems at first glance, from the standpoint of the fig tree, to be a miracle that curses instead of blesses. But miracles are for the benefit and blessing of men, not for trees and shrubs. All things are and were created for man, to whom dominion over them has been given. Man is the prince of creation. If created things do not serve him and his purposes, should they not be replaced with others that will? That it is also a manifestation of the power of faith resident in him who creates and destroys as seemeth good to him is also apparent. And who are we to question divine wisdom when destructions come?

To cavilers whose aim is to find fault, this miracle becomes an excuse to upbraid and question the justice of the One who does all things well. To all such it is perhaps sufficient answer to say: "When the hail beats down the tendrils of the vineyard—when the lightning scathes the olive, or 'splits the unwedgeable and gnarled oak'—do any but the utterly ignorant and brutal begin at once to blaspheme against God? Is it a crime under any circumstances to destroy a useless tree? If not, is it more a crime to do so by miracle? Why, then, is the Savior of the world—to whom Lebanon would be too little for a burnt-offering—to be blamed by petulant critics because He hastened the withering of one barren tree, and founded, on the destruction of its uselessness, three eternal lessons—a symbol of the destruction of impenitence, a warning of the peril of hypocrisy, an illustration of the power of faith?" (Farrar, p. 548.)

Did Jesus ever miss an opportunity to teach the principles of the gospel? It almost seems that everything he or his associates either saw or heard or did became a text for preaching a new and an everlasting doctrine. When Peter said to him on Tuesday, "Master, behold, the fig tree which thou cursedst is withered away," Jesus answered:

Have faith in God. For verily I say unto you, That whosoever shall say unto this Mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that those things which he saith shall come to pass; he shall have whatsoever he saith fulfilled.

Therefore I say unto you, Whatsoever things ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive, and ye shall have whatsoever ye ask.

This is familiar doctrine, but by tying it now to a miracle of such a dramatic nature, who among his hearers will ever forget it? And if trees wither, will not mountains move? Clearly, faith is a power over both animate and inanimate objects. And all are governed for the benefit and blessing of Adam's seed. "But, since in this one instance the power had been put forth to destroy, He added a very important warning. They were not to suppose that this emblematic act gave them any licence to wield the sacred forces which faith and prayer would bestow on them, for purposes of anger or vengeance; nay, no power was possible to the heart that knew not how to forgive, and the unforgiving heart could never be forgiven. The sword, and the famine, and the pestilence were to be no instruments for them to wield, nor were they even to dream of evoking against their enemies the fire of heaven or the 'icy wind of death.' The secret of successful prayer was faith; the road to faith in God lay through pardon of transgression; pardon was possible to them alone who were ready to pardon others." (Farrar, p. 555.)

And when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have ought against any: that your Father also which is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses. But if ye do not forgive, neither will your Father which is in heaven forgive your trespasses.

Jesus Cleanseth the Temple the Second Time

(Matthew 21:12-17; JST Matthew 21:13-14; Mark 11:15-19; Luke 19:45-48; 21:37)

When we went with Jesus into the temple three years ago, at the time of the First Passover, and saw him drive out, with force and violence, the moneychangers and the wicked men who made merchandise of his Father's house, we took occasion to describe the desecrating filth and the evilness of spirit that there prevailed. (See chapter 29, Book 1.) We need not describe anew the physical filth, nor the spiritual degeneracy that then overspread those sacred courts. Suffice it to say that the cleansing of the past was but for a moment. Once again the changers of coins ply their dishonest course; the keepers of doves and the sellers of sheep still haggle over prices and shortchange the Passover pilgrims; the lowing of cattle and the bleating of sheep still add to the confusion and bespeak the spirit of religious anarchy that rages through the city; and the piles of dung and the stench of urine still foul the air. The House of the Lord at Passover time is still as filthy as a pig sty, and many who commune with each other in its courts are still breathing the spirit of hate and vengeance and murder.

Once again, in a spirit of righteous indignation, Jesus drives them out, we suppose with a scourge of cords, as in the first instance; once again he overturns the money tables, frees the doves, and refuses entrance to those who seek to carry vessels through the holy courts, as though they were streets of commerce. But this time he does not say 'Make not my Father's house an house of merchandise," but, rather, "My house shall be called the house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves." Three years have passed. Everywhere he has now testified that he and his Father are one; that he speaks the word of his Father; that whatsoever is the Father's is his also; and so now, it is Jesus' house. Let him be charged with blasphemy, if they will. It is his house. It is the house of the Lord Jehovah. He is Jehovah. And it must meet such standards of cleanliness as he can impose for these final hours and days of his teachings therein.

As peace and serenity fell over the sacred courts, Jesus resumed his teachings. The Gospel Voice was heard again; disciples crowded around him to drink deeply from the Everlasting Fountain; faith welled up in the hearts of men; "And the blind and the lame came to him in the temple; and he healed them." The same spirit of worship and adoration that fell mightily upon the multitudes the day before, in the triumphal entry into the city, came again. Shouts of hosanna rent the air; from the children of the kingdom came the cries, "Hosanna to the son of David," and believing souls knew in their hearts that this prophet of Galilee was the Promised Messiah.

But "when the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful things that he did" and heard the shouts of hosanna and the pleas for salvation that came from the disciples, "they were sore displeased." "Hearest thou what these say?" they demanded. And Jesus said: "Yea; have ye never read the scriptures which saith, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings, O Lord, thou hast perfected praise?" Then they sought how they might destroy him, and he returned to Bethany for the night.

Jesus Confoundeth the Jews on the Question of Authority

(Matthew 21:23-27; Mark 11:27-33; JST Mark 11:34; Luke 20:1-8)

On Saturday, April 1, the holy Sabbath, the Lord Jesus—having but recently accomplished his glorious Perean ministry, with all its miracles and wonders—was honored by the people of Bethany with a banquet in the house of Simon the leper. There, while Lazarus whom he raised from the dead looked on, Mary anointed Jesus' head and feet; anointed him—shall we not say it?—as King in Israel; anointed him for his burial, for their King was to die and rise again, that glory and triumph might come to them all, if they would receive it. Though these deeds were done in comparative privacy, in an obscure village, this was a crowning day in the life of Him who would, first, be lifted up upon an earthly cross, and then, have placed on his head an eternal crown.

On Sunday, April 2, Jesus rode on an ass, in triumph, into Jerusalem, amid cries of Hosanna and bold acclamations that he was the Blessed One who came to establish the kingdom of his Father. That evening he returned to Bethany.

On Monday, April 3, he returned; cursed the barren fig tree en route; cleansed the temple a second time; and taught and healed, with great power, in the newly cleansed courts. Again he returned to Bethany for the night.

These were days of glory and honor and triumph. He was being received by believing souls, and they were pledging a Spirit-borne allegiance to him who came to fulfill the old and establish the new. Those in Bethany rejoiced in his presence; many from Jerusalem and multitudes of Passover pilgrims who were there for the feast hailed him as King and Lord; and the common people found pleasure in the cleansing of the temple and the overturning of the money-gouging bazaars of the sons of Annas.

But days of glory and honor and triumph are also days of enmity and opposition and hatred. Mingling with the friendly folk in Bethany were those—taking their cues from the chief priests—who sought the death of Lazarus, that he might no longer stand as a witness of the power of Him who is the resurrection and the life. Infiltrating the hosannic chorus were Pharisaic voices that demanded, "Master, rebuke thy disciples," and that lamented among themselves, "Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing? behold, the world is gone after him."

And so, on Monday night, some of these voices—made up of the chief priests and the scribes and the elders—consulted together as to how they might halt the tide of popular acclaim now attending the ministry of this Galilean rebel, this disturber of the Mosaic order, this Rabbi from Nazareth who would destroy their craft. What arraignment can they bring against him? They have heretofore charged him with casting out devils by Beelzebub; they have demanded Messianic signs from heaven; they have raised questions of marriage and divorce and of doctrines without number; they have sought in every way for more than three years to silence his voice and void his message—all to no avail. Nay, more, all his replies and every rejoinder he has made have left them silent, embarrassed, beaten. What issue can they now raise? With that cunning which has guided them in the past, they devise a new trap. Perhaps they can show he is not an approved Rabbi and has no right even to speak, let alone work miracles. If only the people can be brought to see that he has no Rabbinical authority to utter a word of doctrine or lift a finger to perform a ministerial act, perhaps they will no longer give him glory and honor and cry out: "Lord, save us, we pray; O bring us salvation, we beseech thee; for, blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord; hosanna to the Son of David."

Thus, on Tuesday, April 4, Jesus comes again from Bethany; he discourses en route on faith, as the disciples view the smitten fig tree; he enters the temple, where—as always!—he "preached the gospel." The word of everlasting salvation is again going forth; he must be stopped; soon he will be causing the blind to see and the lame to leap, as he has done before. Now is the time for the chief priests and the scribes and the elders to make their confrontation. It is to be a formal and planned challenge. Thus, as Jesus taught the gospel to a receptive congregation, his enemies made their assault. "A formidable deputation approached them, imposing alike in its numbers and its stateliness. The chief priests—heads of the twenty-four courses—the learned scribes, the leading rabbis, representatives of all the constituent classes of the Sanhedrin were there, to overawe Him—whom they despised as the poor contemptible Prophet of Nazareth—with all that was venerable in age, eminent in wisdom, or imposing in authority in the great Council of the nation. The people whom He was engaged in teaching made reverent way for them, lest they should pollute those floating robes and ample fringes with a touch; and when they had arranged themselves around Jesus, they sternly asked Him, 'By what kind of authority doest thou these things, and who gave thee this authority?' They demanded of Him His warrant for thus publicly assuming the functions of Rabbi and Prophet, for riding into Jerusalem amid the hosannas of attendant crowds, for purging the Temple of the traffickers, at whose presence they connived." (Farrar, pp. 548-49.)

To envision the cunning import of these scribal demands—"By what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee this authority?"—we must know the Jewish setting in which they were made. In Jesus' day, approved Rabbinical ministries must meet two standards:

"There was no principle more firmly established by universal consent than that authoritative teaching required previous authorization," Edersheim tells us. "Indeed, this logically followed from the principle of Rabbinism. All teaching must be authoritative, since it was traditional—approved by authority, and handed down from teacher to disciple. The highest honour of a scholar was, that he was like a well-plastered cistern, from which not a drop had leaked of what had been poured into it. The ultimate appeal in cases of discussion was always to some great authority, whether an individual Teacher or a Decree by the Sanhedrin. In this manner had the great Hillel first vindicated his claim to be the Teacher of his time and to decide the disputes then pending. And, to decide differently from authority, was either the mark of ignorant assumption or the outcome of daring rebellion, in either case to be visited with 'the ban' [excommunication]."

"No one would have thought of interfering with a mere Haggadist—a popular expositor, preacher, or teller of legends. But authoritatively to teach, required warrant. In fact there was regular ordination (Semikhah) to the office of Rabbi, Elder, and Judge, for the three functions were combined in one. . . . Although we have not any description of the earliest mode of ordination, the very name—Semikhah—implies the imposition of hands. Again, in the oldest record, reaching up, no doubt, to the time of Christ, the presence of at least three ordained persons was required for the ordination. . . . In the course of time certain formalities were added. The person to be ordained had to deliver a Discourse; hymns and poems were recited; the title 'Rabbi' was formally bestowed on the candidate, and authority given him to teach and to act as Judge [to bind and loose, to declare guilty or free]."

Thus, "at the time of our Lord, no one would have ventured authoritatively to teach without proper Rabbinic authorization. The question, therefore, with which the Jewish authorities met Christ, while teaching, was one which had a very real meaning, and appealed to the habits and feelings of the people who listened to Jesus. Otherwise, also, it was cunningly framed. For, it did not merely challenge Him for teaching, but also asked for His authority in what He did; referring not only to His work generally, but, perhaps especially to what had happened on the previous day. They were not there to oppose Him; but, when a man did as He had done in the Temple, it was their duty to verify his credentials. Finally, the alternative question reported by St. Mark: 'or'—if thou hast not proper Rabbinic commission—'who gave Thee this authority to do these things?' seems clearly to point to their contention, that the power which Jesus wielded was delegated to Him by none other than Beelzebub." (Edersheim 2:381-83.)

Then Jesus answered their question. He did not, as some have supposed, avoid the necessity of answering by asking a question of his own; rather, his question was so framed as to constitute a complete, though partially unspoken, answer. "I also will ask you one thing, which if ye tell me," Jesus said, "I in like wise will tell you by what authority I do these things." This, then, was his question: "The baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven, or of men?"

'The baptism of John—meaning, his whole work and ministry, the doctrines he taught, the testimonies he bore, the ordinances he performed—were they of God?' As to John—than whom there was not a greater prophet—we are reminded that "all the people that heard him, and the publicans, justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John. But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of him." (Luke 7:29-30.) His baptism—the sign of his ministry; the witness that all that he taught was true—if they believed in John they must believe in Christ, for John's whole ministry was one of preparation for the One who came after. Here then was their answer. Jesus is saying 'John has already answered your questions. My authority comes from higher than Rabbinic sources; it comes from my Father, as John testified when he said: "Behold the Lamb of God!" If ye believed John, ye would believe in me, for he testified of me.'

But they had not believed in John. How then could they respond? "If we shall say, From heaven," they reasoned, "he will say, Why then believed ye him not?" Their rebellion of the past bore witness of their sins of the present. "But and if we say, Of men," they continued, "all the people will stone us: for they be persuaded that John was a prophet." How then could they answer? "We cannot tell," they said.

"There is an admirable Hebrew proverb which says, 'Teach thy tongue to say "I do not know."' But to say, 'We do not know,' in this instance, was a thing utterly alien to their habits, disgraceful to their discernment, a deathblow to their pretensions. It was ignorance in a sphere wherein ignorance was for them inexcusable. They, the appointed explainers of the Law—they, the accepted teachers of the people—they, the acknowledged monopolizers of Scriptural learning and oral tradition—and yet to be compelled, against their real convictions, to say, and that before the multitude, that they could not tell whether a man of immense and sacred influence—a man who acknowledged the Scriptures which they explained, and carried into practice the customs which they reverenced—was a divinely inspired messenger or a deluding imposter! Were the lines of demarcation, then, between the inspired Prophet and the wicked seducer so dubious and indistinct? It was indeed a fearful humiliation, and one which they never either forgot or forgave. And yet how just was the retribution which they had thus brought on their own heads! The curses which they had intended for another had recoiled upon themselves; the pompous question which was to be an engine wherewith another should be crushed, had sprung with sudden rebound, to their own confusion and shame." (Farrar, p. 550.)

"Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things," Jesus said. 'Why try to involve me in your petty Rabbinical squabbles? What is this dead Rabbinical school or that? Of what concern is it whether some blind guide had ordained me to speak authoritatively or not? You have your answer; John gave it to you at Bethabara, and my Father confirmed it by his own voice out of heaven when he said at my baptism: "This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Hear ye him."'
