Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 86

Three Parables to the Jews

Utter a parable unto the rebellious house. (Ezek. 24:3.)

Parable of the Two Sons

(Matthew 21:23, 25, 28-32; JST Matthew 21:31-34)

All Israel, as it were—through their legally designated agents, the chief priests and the scribes and the elders, as these arrayed themselves for combat in the courts of Jehovah's House—all Israel confronted Israel's Incarnate God with the demand, made relative to all that he did and all that he said, "By what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee this authority?"

The Incarnate One, by the way of reply, asked of them: "The baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven, or of men?" To this, as they knew in their hearts, there was only one reply: 'John was sent of God; he bore testimony that you are the Lamb of God, the Son of the Eternal Father; his baptism was to prepare men to receive you; and therefore you have divine authority that came to you from God who is your Father. We heard John say of you, "The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand. He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him." (John 3:35-36.) We have answered our own question. Yours is the authority of God, and he gave it to you.' To their shame they could not and did not respond in this way because they were among those who "rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of him." (Luke 7:30.)

Their silence being an answer that all present understood, Jesus, nonetheless, means now to tell them vocally the answer to his question as to whether John's baptism was of God, and hence, also to tell them the source of his own authority and to do it by a parable.

But what think ye? A certain man had two sons, and he came to the first, and said, Son, go work to day in my vineyard. He answered and said, I will not: but afterward he repented, and went. And he came to the second, and said likewise. And he answered and said, I go, sir: and he went not. Whether of them twain did the will of his father?

It is a plain and simple story. So far there can be no misunderstanding, and there is only one answer to his question. They are compelled to say, "The first." And thereupon Jesus applies his teaching:

Verily I say unto you, That the publicans and harlots shall go into the kingdom of God before you. For John came unto you in the way of righteousness, and bore record of me, and ye believed him not; but the publicans and the harlots believed him; and ye, afterward, when ye had seen me, repented not, that ye might believe him.

For he that believed not John concerning me, cannot believe me, except he first repent. And except ye repent, the preaching of John shall condemn you in the day of judgment.

The Father of us all, the Great God, whose arm is not shortened that he cannot save, and who desires to save all his children, calls both of his sons to labor in his vineyard. The first son is wicked, rebellious, ungodly, unclean, having no interest in spiritual things. He refuses the call. Religion is not for him. He is, symbolically, as the harlots and the publicans. And what is more evil than the immoral degeneracy of a prostitute or the avaricious greed of an extortionate and dishonest tax collector? The second son—wearing a veneer of spirituality; fasting two days in each week; making broad his phylacteries and lengthening the fringes on his garments; praying on the street corners to be seen of men; keeping the traditions of the fathers with a scrupulosity beyond sense and reason; separating himself from the lesser breed of men—the second son, symbolically, is the chief priests and the scribes and the elders. He is the Pharisees and the Rabbinists, the leaders of Jewry. They are the ones who, professing to be about their Father's business, have let his vineyard degenerate into a fruitless wilderness. Tares grow where wheat was sown; vines shed their fruit untimely; fig trees are barren; olives rot on the ground; and swine forage in the fields.

John comes; he bears witness of Christ; his message is one of righteousness and salvation; the publicans and harlots repent; they join the people who are preparing themselves to receive the Coming One. The lawyers and the leaders believe not, no, not even after Christ himself ministers among them. Nor, having rejected John, can they believe in Christ, unless they repent. Jesus and John are one; they testify of each other; to believe in John is to believe in Jesus; each bears witness of the authority of the other, and the words of each shall condemn the rebellious and unbelieving in the day of judgment. Such is the message of the parable of the two sons.

Parable of the Wicked Husbandmen

(Matthew 21:33-46; JST Matthew 21:34-35, 42-43, 48-56; Mark 12:1-12; JST Mark 12:12; Luke 20:9-19; JST Luke 20:10)

We are in the midst of a mighty confrontation. A religious war is in progress, reminiscent of—or better, a continuation of—the war in heaven when Michael led the armies of the just in their verbal conflict with Lucifer and his evil ones. We are in the temple, which but yesterday was cleansed again. Jesus is here to teach. His disciples rejoice in each spoken word; arrayed against them are the chief priests, scribes, Pharisees, and elders. It is a formal setting; the lawyers and leaders of the people have set themselves forth in their official capacity to defend and uphold the established order and to overthrow and destroy this new order being set up by this upstart Galilean who violates the traditions of their fathers. Our Lord's antagonists have just been defeated and humiliated on the issue of authority, and their souls have been cut to the quick by the parable of the two sons. Many hearers are assembled, some friendly and receptive, others vengeful and rebellious. Jesus says: "Unto you that believe not, I speak in parables; that your unrighteousness may be rewarded unto you." The spirit of rebellion that fills their souls denies them the right to hear the word of truth in plainness; it is their fate, as a rebellious house, to be told of their rebellion in story form. Both now and hereafter they will ponder these parables, see their application to themselves, and always wonder whether they have learned their full significance.

Hear another parable: There was a certain householder, which planted a vineyard, and hedged it round about, and digged a wine press in it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country:

And when the time of the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the husbandmen, that they might receive the fruits of it. And the husbandmen took his servants, and beat one, and killed another, and stoned another. Again, he sent other servants more than the first: and they did unto them likewise.

All this was familiar business procedure. Householders commonly leased their lands or placed them in the custody of husbandmen who had full control over their management. Owners then traveled or attended to other business, and the fruits in due season were divided between them and the lessees or husbandmen.

Here the Eternal Householder—one Jehovah by name—had planted his people on earth, beginning with Adam, the first husbandman, and had then returned to a distant heaven, leaving the first man of all men to till and farm the garden. Or, more specifically, the Great Jehovah had planted his people Israel in their promised land; had entered into a covenant with them amid the smoke and fire and thunder of Sinai; had given direction in the Mosaic law for the care and keeping of his vineyard; had traveled back to his eternal abode; and had sent his servants the prophets from time to time to serve in the vineyard and receive an accounting with reference to the fruits thereof.

That Israel's prophets were tortured, mocked, scourged, imprisoned, stoned, sawn asunder, and slain was axiomatic. All who heard Jesus speak of the ill treatment received by the Householder's servants would remember how their own scriptures said of their fathers: "All the chief of the priests, and the people, transgressed very much . . . And the Lord God of their fathers sent to them by his messengers, rising up betimes, and sending; because he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place: But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy." (2 Chr. 36:14-16.) All who heard Jesus' words would know that even in their day "another servant," as both Mark and Luke call him—one John by name—had come and been rejected by the chief priests, arrested by Antipas, imprisoned in Machaerus, and slain to appease Salome.

And further: Jesus' words would seem but a distant echo of Isaiah's parabolic utterance: "Now will I sing to my well beloved a song of my beloved touching his vineyard. My well beloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill: And he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with the choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, and also made a winepress therein: and he looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes. And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard. What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it? wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes?" (Isa. 5:1-4.) In this setting, with a full understanding on the part of all concerned, Jesus continues the parable:

But last of all he sent unto them his son, saying, They will reverence my son. But when the husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance. And they caught him, and cast him out of the vineyard, and slew him.

When the lord therefore of the vineyard cometh, what will he do unto those husbandmen?

"I will send my beloved son" are the words of the householder as Luke records them, 'This Is My Beloved Son' is the eternal testimony of the Father himself. "I am the Son of God" is the witness Jesus has everywhere been bearing of himself. And now be it noted, according to the words of the parable, the husbandmen—the chief priests, scribes, Pharisees, elders, Rabbinists, lawyers, and rulers of the people—the husbandmen appointed in that day to labor in the vineyard and raise fruit for the Lord knew who the Heir was and chose willfully to cast him out and slay him lest he disturb them in their petty Mosaic ministrations. And so now, for the third time in a row—the other two were in connection with the matter of authority and in the parable of the two sons—they are forced by their own lips to judge themselves. In answer to Jesus' question, they say: "He will destroy those miserable, wicked men, and will let out the vineyard unto other husbandmen, who shall render him the fruits in their season.

Such is the parable proper, together with the self-condemnation it heaped upon the wicked husbandmen against whom the forces of righteousness were then arrayed. And we cannot doubt that those so responding to Jesus knew they were echoing Isaiah's words: "And now go to," he says with reference to the song of the well-beloved and the vineyard, "I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard," because it brought forth wild grapes. "I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down: and I will lay it waste: it shall not be pruned, nor digged; but there shall come up briers and thorns: I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it. For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant plant: and he looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry." (Isa. 5:5-7.) But lest there be any question, Jesus then drew his own conclusions and said unto them:

Did ye never read in the scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner: this is the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes?

Therefore say I unto you, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.

And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.

In thus applying to himself the Messianic words of the Psalmist (Ps. 118:22-26), [^1] Jesus is saying he is the one whom the wicked husbandmen will cast out and slay. When the chief priests, scribes, Pharisees, and others heard this parable, "they perceived that he spake of them, And they said among themselves, Shall this man think that he alone can spoil this great kingdom? And they were angry with him. But when they sought to lay hands on him, they feared the multitude, because they learned that the multitude took him for a prophet." Later, we suppose in answer to their questions, Jesus said to his disciples:

Marvel ye at the words of the parable which I spake unto them? Verily, I say unto you, I am the stone, and those wicked ones reject me.

I am the head of the corner. These Jews shall fall upon me, and shall be broken. And the kingdom of God shall be taken from them, and shall be given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof; (meaning the Gentiles.)

Wherefore, on whomsoever this stone shall fall, it shall grind him to powder. And when the Lord therefore of the vineyard cometh, he will destroy those miserable, wicked men, and will let again his vineyard unto other husbandmen, even in the last days, who shall render him the fruits in their season.

Following this, as Matthew so aptly concludes: "And then understood they the parable which he spake unto them, that the Gentiles should be destroyed also, when the Lord should descend out of heaven to reign in his vineyard, which is the earth and the inhabitants thereof."

Parable of the Marriage of the King's Son

(Matthew 22:1-14; JST Matthew 22:3-4, 7, 14)

Jewish theology, Jewish tradition, and Jewish hope all united to fix in the minds of the Jews one great Messianic expectancy: the kingdom of their Messianic Deliverer would be ushered in by a great feast, a marriage feast, a feast to celebrate the marriage, symbolically, of the Promised Messiah and his covenant people. That this Messianic hope—though misunderstood, misinterpreted, and misapplied by the Rabbinic expounders of their law and tradition—is a true one, we shall see in the ensuing parable, as Jesus continues and, for the moment, climaxes his confrontation with the enemies of all righteousness who are arrayed before him in the temple court.

True it is, as we shall see, that there shall be a "supper of the Lord" to usher in his millennial reign, a great feast to which "all nations shall be invited"—a banquet held in honor of the Bridegroom, the Son of the Great King, whose bride is the Church. It will not be a closed and restricted feast attended only by the Jews, as the Rabbinists suppose, and it will not take place in full until the King's Son comes a second time to rule and reign on earth a thousand years. All this will now appear as the Master Parabolist gives the parable of the marriage of the king's son.

The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which made a marriage for his son, And when the marriage was ready, he sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding; and they would not come.

Again he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them that are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my oxen, and my fatlings have been killed, and my dinner is ready, and all things are prepared; therefore come unto the marriage.

The Church of Jesus Christ—which is the kingdom of God on earth; which organization administers the gospel of the kingdom; which gospel is the bread of life, upon which men may feast and never hunger more—this church, with all its saving power, is like unto a king who makes a marriage for his son. So begins the parable. Deity is the King; Jesus (Jehovah) is the Son; and those first invited to "the marriage of the Lamb"—those invited to come unto Christ and feast upon the good word of God—are the chosen and favored hosts of ancient Israel, to whom the saving truths were offered in days of old. The servants who heaped the banquet tables high with heavenly manna were Moses and Isaiah and all the prophets; they were all the messengers of old who testified of the Son of God and pled with Abraham's seed to feast upon the word of Christ and partake of that eternal bread which he alone can give. "Thy Maker is thine husband," Isaiah proclaimed to Israel, "the Lord of hosts is his name." (Isa. 54:5.)

Oriental custom called for two invitations to marriage feasts—the first, an invitation of preparation, the second, to announce that the seven- or fourteen-day feasting period, as the case may be, had arrived. With the advent of the Son, the second invitation went forth; the Old Testament proclamations prepared the way for the renewed proclamation of the same message in New Testament times. And so, "other servants" again bid the covenant people to come and eat. Again the dinner is ready. Again the Bridegroom will be the Husband of all who believe. Again the invitation goes forth to Israel: "The Lord hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth." (Isa. 54:6.) "Come unto the marriage" is the call.

But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, another to his merchandise: And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew them.

But when the king heard that his servants were dead, he was wroth; and he sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city.

Jewish Israel is composed of murderous rebels. They have a form of godliness that cloaks their avaricious interest in farms and merchandise and the things of this world. They slay the apostles and prophets who invite them to the gospel table, and they defy and rebel against Him who sent them. He in turn, using Roman steel and the vengeance of fire, in A.D. 70 destroys the murderers and burns Jerusalem. The words of the parable are the voice of prophecy.

Then saith he to his servants, The wedding is ready, but they which were bidden were not worthy. Go ye therefore into the highways, and as many as ye shall find, bid to the marriage.

So those servants went out into the highways, and gathered together all as many as they found, both bad and good: and the wedding was furnished with guests.

Thus Israel's day of preferential treatment ends; having rejected their King and his Son, they are no longer worthy to receive the blessings of Abraham. Now the gospel goes to all men, Jew and Gentile alike. From Jerusalem to the highways of the world; from the seed of Abraham to all the seed of Adam; from the favored few to the whole body of mankind—thus is the new order prefigured in the parable.

And so it is today, as "those servants" appointed in this age perform their labors. Their voices cry out: "Prepare ye the way of the Lord, prepare ye the supper of the Lamb, make ready for the Bridegroom." (D&C 65:3.) They go forth "that a feast of fat things might be prepared for the poor; yea, a feast of fat things, of wine on the lees well refined, that the earth may know that the mouths of the prophets shall not fail; Yea, a supper of the house of the Lord, well prepared, unto which all nations shall be invited. First, the rich and the learned, the wise and the noble; And after that cometh the day of my power," saith the Lord. "Then shall the poor, the lame, and the blind, and the deaf, come in unto the marriage of the Lamb, and partake of the supper of the Lord, prepared for the great day to come." (D&C 58:8-11.)

And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man which had not on a wedding garment: And he saith unto him, Friend, how camest thou in hither not having a wedding garment? And he was speechless.

Then said the king to the servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast him into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

For many are called, but few chosen; wherefore all do not have on the wedding garment.

Those gathered in are both bad and good; the gospel net catches fish of all kinds. Only those who make themselves worthy are saved. All who come into the Church must forsake the world, repent of their sins, and keep the commandments; otherwise they will be cast out with the wicked and rebellious and suffer the sorrows of the damned.

Salvation is a personal matter; it comes to individuals, not congregations. Church membership alone does not save; obedience after baptism is required. Each person called to the marriage feast will be examined separately, and of the many called to partake of the bounties of the gospel, few only will wear the robes of righteousness which must clothe every citizen in the celestial heaven. True it is that the Lord "hath bid his guests," as Zephaniah said, but "all such as are clothed with strange apparel" shall be cast out. (Zeph. 1:7-8.)

"Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honour to him: for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made herself ready. And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white: for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints. And he saith unto me, Write, Blessed are they which are called unto the marriage supper of the Lamb." (Rev. 19:7-9.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Levirate marriage is so named from the Latin word levir, "a brother-in-law." Some of its original provisions are set forth in Deuteronomy 25:5-10.
