Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 87

The Jews Provoke, Tempt, and Reject Jesus

He shall be . . . for a gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. And many among them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken. (Isa. 8:14-15.)

Him whom man despiseth, . . . him whom the nation abhorreth, . . . a servant of rulers. (Isa. 49:7.)

He is despised and rejected of men. (Isa. 53:3).

For they that dwell at Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet the voices of the prophets which are read every sabbath day, they have fulfilled them in condemning him. (Acts 13:27.)

Render unto God and Caesar Their Own

(Matthew 22:15-22; Mark 12:13-17; Luke 20:20-26; JST Luke 20:21)

If ever a plot was conceived in hell, born in hate, and acted out with satanic cunning, it was the jointly concocted stratagem of the Pharisees and Herodians on the matter of paying tribute to Caesar. When these two parties—the Pharisees whose extreme and intemperate devotion to Jehovah rejected the mere thought of Roman rule, and the Herodians whose fawning sycophancy toward Roman rule made them the open enemies of the Pharisees—when these political foes came forward to ask Jesus to rule in favor of one or the other of them (supposing that a pro-Pharisaic answer would cause his arrest by Roman authority, and a pro-Herodian answer his rejection by the people); when the hierarchical scrupulosity of the Pharisees and the political expediency of the Herodians united their voices, surely their questions must have been framed in the council rooms of Satan himself.

The Pharisees, Rabbinists, priests, elders, and leaders of the people, "foiled in their endeavor to involve Him with the ecclesiastical"—that is, having devised the questions, "By what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee this authority?" in their attempt to show he had no Rabbinical right either to teach or perform miracles; having been humiliated by his answer and by their inability to account for John's testimony of his divine Sonship; and having been condemned, rebuked, and left bruised and bleeding, as it were, by the cutting words of the three parables that he directed against them—thus, "foiled in their endeavor to involve Him with the ecclesiastical, they next attempted the much more dangerous device of bringing Him in collision with the civil authorities," as Edersheim expresses it.

"Remembering the ever watchful jealousy of Rome, the reckless tyranny of Pilate, and the low artifices of Herod, who was at that time in Jerusalem, we instinctively feel, how even the slightest compromise on the part of Jesus in regard to the authority of Caesar would have been absolutely fatal. If it could have been proved, on undeniable testimony, that Jesus had declared Himself on the side of, or even encouraged, the so-called 'Nationalist' party, He would have quickly perished, like Judas of Galilee. The Jewish leaders would thus have readily accomplished their object, and its unpopularity have recoiled only on the hated Roman power. How great the danger was which threatened Jesus, may be gathered from this, that, despite His clear answer, the charge that He perverted the nation, forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, was actually among those brought against Him before Pilate." (Edersheim 2:383-84; Luke 23:2.)

Our dealings with the Pharisees, in many places and at numerous times, have left us wary of these religious extremists—these fanatics who fast twice in a week; who make broad their phylacteries and lengthen the sacred fringes on their garments: who pray on the streets to be seen of men; and who turn simple living into a morbid hell by their Sabbath restrictions, ceremonial washings, and baseless traditions. But who are the Herodians, and how do they fit into the social milieu of Jewry? They "occur but seldom in the Gospel narrative. Their very designation—a Latinized adjective applied to the Greek-speaking courtiers of an Edomite prince who, by Roman intervention, had become a Judean king—showed at once their hybrid origin. Their existence had mainly a political significance, and they stood outside the current of religious life, except so far as their Hellenizing tendencies and worldly interests led them to show an ostentatious disregard for the Mosaic law.

"They were, in fact, nothing better than provincial courtiers: men who basked in the sunshine of a petty tyranny which, for their own personal ends, they were anxious to uphold. To strengthen the family of Herod by keeping it on good terms with Roman imperialism, and to effect this good understanding by repressing every national aspiration—this was their highest aim. And in order to do this they Grecised their Semitic names, adopted ethnic habits, frequented amphitheatres, familiarly accepted the symbols of heathen supremacy, even went so far as to obliterate, by such artificial means as they could, the distinctive and covenant symbol of Hebrew nationality.

"That the Pharisees should tolerate even the most temporary partnership with such men as these, whose very existence was a violent outrage on their most cherished prejudices, enables us to gauge more accurately the extreme virulence of hatred with which Jesus had inspired them. And that hatred was destined to become deadlier still. It was already at red-heat; the words and deeds of this day were to raise it to its whitest intensity of wrath." (Farrar, pp. 555-56.)

And so we find the Pharisees and Herodians counseling together, in secret, as to "how they might entangle him in his talk." Their plot: Certain disciples of the Pharisees—some of their young scholars who had not as yet openly confronted Jesus and who would be unknown to him—would join with the Herodians in asking him to decide the great political issue which divided them. These men—Luke calls them "spies"—"should feign themselves just men." They would raise the issue of paying tribute to Rome. If he sided with the Herodians and endorsed the Roman taxing power, he would antagonize the people, perhaps be rejected by them. If, by so much as an intimation, he questioned Romish rule and Romish taxes, their intent was to "deliver him unto the power and authority of the governor."

"If one, whom they take to be the Messiah, should openly adhere to a heathen tyranny, and sanction its most galling burdens, such a decision will at once explode and evaporate any regard which the people may feel for Him. If, on the other hand, as is all but certain, 'He should adopt the views of His countryman Judas the Gaulonite, and answer. 'No, it is not lawful,' then, in that case too, we are equally rid of Him; for then He is in open rebellion against the Roman power, and these new Herodian friends of ours can at once hand Him over to the jurisdiction of the Procurator. Pontius Pilate will deal very roughly with His pretentions, and will, if need be, without the slightest hesitation, mingle His blood, as he has done the blood of other Galileans, with the blood of the sacrifices." (Farrar, p. 558.)

Their approach was respectful, deferential, courteous. Who but one so wise as he could guide their course in this matter upon which they were so widely divided? But their respect was feigned, their deference a sham, and their courtesy a thin veneer hiding an implacable hatred. "Master, we know that thou art true, and teachest the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for any man," came the sycophantic praise designed to catch him off guard, "for thou regardest not the person of men." 'Thou alone art true: thou alone speakest what God wants said: thou only canst rise above the petty politics of the day; at long last thy divine wisdom will chart our course.' The problem: "Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or not? Shall we give, or shall we not give?"

Matthew says that Jesus "perceived their wickedness"; Luke comments that "he perceived their craftiness"; and Mark says he knew "their hypocrisy." The time has long since passed when even these evil conspirators should presume to deceive him who has repeatedly said: 'I am the Son of God; all things are given me of my Father.' His reply was curt and pointed: "Why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites? Shew me the tribute money." They produced a penny, a Roman denarius, bearing the image of Tiberius Caesar, emperor of Rome. "Whose is this image and superscription?" Jesus asked. The answer: "Caesar's." His reply—nay, his decision, his decree—answered for then and for now the question of Church versus state:

Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's; and unto God the things that are God's.

For their day and for ours, King-Messiah's kingdom is not of this world; it is a spiritual kingdom, an ecclesiastical kingdom, a church and congregation into which true believers may come to find peace in this world and gain a hope of eternal life in the world that is to be. For their day and for ours, men render unto Caesar that which is his own and in the process subject themselves to the powers that be. Having been so instructed, the conspirators marveled at his doctrine. "and left him, and went their way."

If there is a further lesson to be learned from this confrontation, perhaps it is aptly summarized in these words of Elder James E. Talmage: "Every human soul is stamped with the image and superscription of God, however blurred and indistinct the line may have become through the corrosion or attrition of sin; and as unto Caesar should be rendered the coins upon which his effigy appeared, so unto God should be given the souls that bear His image. Render unto the world the stamped pieces that are made legally current by the insignia of worldly powers, and give unto God and His service, yourselves—the divine mintage of His eternal realm." (Talmage pp. 546-47.)

Jesus Teaches the Law of Eternal Marriage

(Matthew 22:23-33; Mark 12:18-27; JST Mark 12:23, 28, 32; Luke 20:27-40; JST Luke 20:35)

This very day—Tuesday, April 4, A.D. 30, the third day of the week of the atoning sacrifice—in the temple courts, Jesus has overcome the evil assaults and triumphed over the satanic plots of the Sanhedrinists, the chief priests, the scribes, the elders, the rulers and leaders of the people, the Rabbinists and teachers, the Pharisees and their disciples, and the hated Herodians. Now the Sadducees join the chorus of reviling rebels whose goal it is to goad, provoke, and belittle the Son of God, all with the hope that he will be rejected by the common people and condemned to death by the Roman Procurator.

Their devilish devisings take the form of a scoffing, sneering, deriding attack on the doctrine of the resurrection. Theirs is to be the weapon of ridicule. They already know the answer to the question they will ask; it is one commonly debated in the Rabbinical schools and for which the Pharisees and people generally have an accepted and prevailing view. They come with "an old stale piece of casuistry, conceived in the same spirit of self-complacent ignorance as are many of the objections urged by modern Sadducees against the resurrection of the body, but still sufficiently puzzling to furnish them with an argument in favour of their disbeliefs, and with a 'difficulty' to throw in the way of their opponents." (Farrar, p. 561.) In this case their opponents are both Jesus, by whom the resurrection comes, and the Pharisees, who, with all their faults, do believe that the bodies of dead men will rise from their graves and live in glorious immortality.

Thus, from their malignant hearts of disbelief—for the Sadducees say "there is no resurrection"—and from spiteful Sadducean lips, in tones of scorn and derision, these agnostic worshippers, if such they may be called, began their colloquy with Jesus by saying: "Master, Moses said, If a man die, having no children, his brother shall marry his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother."

Such, as far as it went, was a true summary of the levirate law. [^1] Moses had indeed given such a commandment to Israel when they were subject to all of the terms and conditions of the new and everlasting covenant of marriage—including plurality of wives. Moses had indeed included such a requirement in the revealed marriage discipline of his day, so that worthy men who died without seed might yet have them in eternity where they would live forever in the family unit. Moses had made such a provision for faithful holders of the Melchizedek Priesthood whose chief aim and goal in life was to create for themselves eternal family units patterned after the family of God their Heavenly Father. The Sadducean use of the Mosaic principle as a basis for their caviling query indicates that some remnant of levirate marriage—we assume a twisted and perverted one—still prevailed in Jewry.

Having given lip service to Moses' levirate declaration, the Sadducees now mention a certain woman who, seeking seed, married seven brothers in turn, each of whom pre-deceased her. "In the resurrection whose wife shall she be of the seven?" they ask, "for they all had her." It is difficult to understand why they would ask such a foolish question, even in ridicule, for every informed person already knew the answer. The matter had been fully analyzed and debated in the Rabbinical schools. "The Pharisees," for instance, as Farrar points out, "had already settled the question in a very obvious way, and quite to their own satisfaction, by saying that she should in the resurrection be the wife of the first husband." (Farrar, p. 561.) From our vantage point, we say she would be the wife of the one to whom she was married for time and for all eternity. Any other marriage, being only until death parted the covenanting parties, would end when the mortal life of one or the other of them ceased.

But underlying this seemingly innocent query is the unspoken ridicule of the doctrine of the resurrection. 'How foolish to believe in a literal resurrection in which the family unity continues—as the Pharisees believed and the Rabbis teach!—when everyone knows a sevenfold widow cannot have seven husbands at one time.' Such an approach, in its historical setting, seems to us to present a petty and a poor argument. But we suppose it was the best one the Sadducees—who, whatever else they may have been, were neither scripturalists nor theologians—could devise at the moment.

Jesus answered, as a tolerant teacher might, without the biting sarcasm and stinging invective that at this late date so often attended answers given to the scribes and Pharisees. "Ye do err," he said, "not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God."

Not knowing the scriptures! How little they knew of the intent and meaning of that which was written. Had they "not read, that he which made them at the beginning"—the beginning, note it well; it is the time before death entered the world—"made them male and female"? Did they not know that the Eternal Creator who married Adam and Eve in an eternal union, there then being no death in the world, had said, "For this cause"—that they might live together forever—"shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh?" Had it escaped them that such married partners "are no more twain, but one flesh," and "what therefore God hath joined together"—again mark it well, what God, not man—"let not man put asunder"? (Matt. 19:4-6.) Was the scripture entirely new to them that "whatsoever God doeth, it shall be for ever"? (Eccl. 3:14.) Were they unaware of the scriptural teachings that only those who believe the gospel; only those who hold the Holy Priesthood; only those who believe in Christ and keep his commandments—that these alone are the ones to whom Moses' levirate law applies? There neither is nor can be a continuation of the family unit in eternity for any others. Celestial marriage and the resultant eternal relation as husband and wife have no application whatever to ungodly people who live after the manner of the world.

Not knowing . . . the power of God! As with all carnal men, they were incapable of knowing how he who created man from primal element could also call his dead body back from dust to life. The power of God—the power that creates, the power that snuffs out mortal breath, the power that gives life again to the dead elements of a hopeless corpse! If God creates, can he not also resurrect? And if he causes men to live again in glorious immortality, can he not solve such a petty little problem as whose wife she shall he of the seven? How narrow, inglorious, and grudging are the views of those who know neither the scriptures nor the power of God!

Three accounts follow as to what Jesus then said. Matthew gives his teaching thus:

For in the resurrection THEY neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven.

Mark gives the same teaching in substantially equivalent words:

For when THEY shall rise from the dead, THEY neither marry, nor are given in marriage; but are as the angels which are in heaven.

In view of the common sectarian heresy, based on substantially the same scriptural ignorance as that which enveloped the Sadducees, that there is no marrying nor giving in marriage in the world of resurrected glory, we cannot stress too strongly the imperative need to identify who are they to whom Jesus here refers. It is, accordingly, to Luke that we turn for the most extended, complete, and enlightening account of the inspired words of him who, as Jehovah—before death had entered the world—sealed the first man, Adam, and the first woman, Eve, in an eternal marriage union:

THE CHILDREN OF THIS WORLD marry, and are given in marriage: But they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage. Neither can they die any more: for THEY are equal unto the angels; and are the children of God, being the children of the resurrection.

Now, these words were spoken to Jesus' detractors who did not believe in a resurrection; they were spoken about a question on marriage that had been asked as a ploy only, and not because information was being sought about how marriage and the family unit operated in the realms ahead; and they were spoken to people who knew perfectly well that the Pharisees and the Rabbis and the people believed not only in a resurrection, but in the kind of a resurrection in which the same sociality—including marriage and the family unit—that exists among mortals would continue among immortals. It is true that some believed, as a certain "Rabbi Raf is reported to have often said, 'In the world to come they shall neither eat, nor drink, nor beget children, nor trade. There is neither envy nor strife, but the just shall sit with crowns on their heads, and shall enjoy the splendor of the Divine Majesty.'" This, however, was a minority view—shall we not say, as far as they were concerned, a heretical view. "The majority inclined to a materialistic view of the resurrection. The pre-Christian book of Enoch [from which Jude quotes in the New Testament] says that the righteous after the resurrection shall live so long that they shall beget thousands. The received doctrine is laid down by Rabbi Saadia, who says, 'As the son of the widow of Sarepton, and the son of the Shunamite, ate and drank, and doubtless married wives, so shall it be in the resurrection'; and by Maimonides, who says, 'Men after the resurrection will use meat and drink, and will beget children, because since the Wise Architect makes nothing in vain, it follows of necessity that the members of the body are not useless, but fulfil their functions.' The point raised by the Sadducees was often debated by the Jewish doctors, who decided that 'a woman who married two husbands in this world is restored to the first in the next.'" [^2]

Who then are they to whom Jesus refers when he says they neither marry nor are given in marriage in the resurrection? They are the children of this world; they are worldly and carnal and rebellious people; they are those who live after the manner of the world. They are the wicked and ungodly who "know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power; When he shall come to be glorified in his saints." (2 Thes. 1:8-10.) They are the Sadducees and their ilk who do not even believe in a resurrection, to say nothing of the eternal joy of eternal familyhood.

Of such persons the Lord says: "If a man marry him a wife in the world, and he marry her not by me nor by my word, and he covenant with her so long as he is in the world and she with him, their covenant and marriage are not of force when they are dead, and when they are out of the world; therefore, they are not bound by any law when they are out of the world. Therefore, when they are out of the world they neither marry nor are given in marriage; but are appointed angels in heaven, which angels are ministering servants, to minister for those who are worthy of a far more, and an exceeding, and an eternal weight of glory. For these angels did not abide my law; therefore, they cannot be enlarged, but remain separately and singly, without exaltation, in their saved condition, to all eternity; and from henceforth are not gods, but are angels of God forever and ever." (D&C 132:15-17.)

And as touching the dead, that they rise: have ye not read in the book of Moses, how in the bush God spake unto him, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? He is not therefore the God of the dead, but the God of the living; for he raiseth them up out of their graves. Ye therefore do greatly err.

Addressing Sadducees—who believed neither the prophets, nor in preexistence, nor in angels, nor in spirits, nor in life after death, nor in a resurrection, nor in kingdoms of eternal glory where family felicities are perfected—addressing these Jewish agnostics, Jesus did not call up the words recorded by Isaiah that say to Israel: "Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise. . . . and the earth shall cast out the dead." (Isa. 26:19.) He did not hark back to the words of Daniel, which say that "many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt." (Dan. 12:2.) Nor did he remind them of Ezekiel's vision of the valley of dry bones—the bones of all Israel—which came forth with sinews and flesh and skin to live again; nor of the promise of the God of Israel to his people: "I will open your graves, . . . and bring you into the land of Israel." (Ezek. 37:1-14.) Nor did he call attention to anything that the prophets of old had spoken relative to that life and immortality which is brought to pass through the atonement of God's Son.

Rather, our Lord, turning to the Pentateuch, brought forth an irrefutable proof of the resurrection that is nobler and grander even than prophetic words or seeric visions. He equated the resurrection with the very existence of God and man. The Eternal One is not the God of the dead but of the living! How unworthy, how impotent, how lowly and base is God if all things are created for naught; if his mortal children vanish away and their bodies become "grey handfuls of crumbling dust." Unless Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob live; unless their spirits dwell with the just, as they await their resurrection; unless they shall rise again to become like Him whose children they are; unless there is victory over the grave—the purposes of creation vanish away, God is dethroned, and his plans and purposes fail.

But he is not the God of the dead. Indeed, there are no dead. All live unto him. To what, if there is no resurrection, had the trust of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob come? "To death, and nothingness, and an everlasting silence, and 'a land of darkness, as darkness itself,' after a life so full of trials that the last of these patriarchs had described it as a pilgrimage of few and evil years! But God meant more than this. He meant—and so the Son of God interpreted it—that He who helps them who trust in Him here, will be their help and stay for ever and for ever, nor shall the future world become for them 'a land where all things are forgotten.'" (Farrar, pp. 562-63.)

It is no wonder that "when the multitude heard this [all that he had said both about marriage and about the resurrection], they were astonished at his doctrine," and that "certain of the scribes answering said, Master, thou hast well said."

"The First and Great Commandment"

(Matthew 22:34-40; Mark 12:28-34)

Those who believed in a literal resurrection and in the continuation of the family unit in eternity found themselves with ambivalent feelings when Jesus routed the Sadducees. They gloried in his answer, but remained repulsed by his person. They took satisfaction in seeing the false Sadducean doctrines exposed, and yet this Galilean must be shown up as a false prophet and a fraud in some other way. Some of the scribes had the good grace to say, "Master, thou hast well said," as they saw the total discomfiture of the high and mighty Sadducees. But one of their number—one who was also designated as a lawyer, one who was an expert on their law, and who was held out as an expounder of the law and a teacher of the people—one held in high esteem among them, resorted to an observing group of Pharisees to consult as to what assault could be made on Him who always came off triumphant in the forays against him. Though these agnostic Sadducees, these nonscholars, these nontheologians, who made little pretense of scriptural knowledge, were no match for the Master, yet the learned scribes and Pharisees—they would yet devise a problem to which any answer he gave would cause division and opposition against him.

After consulting with the Pharisees, one of the scribes presented this problem: "Master, which is the greatest commandment in the law?" To us this may seem to be a perfectly normal and reasonable inquiry; in its Jewish setting, however, we soon see why Matthew says it was asked as a means of "tempting him." It was, in fact, a matter around which considerable contention centered. "The Rabbinical schools, in their meddling, carnal, superficial spirit of word-weaving and letter-worship, had spun large accumulations of worthless subtlety all over the Mosaic code. Among other things they had wasted their idleness in fantastic attempts to count, and classify, and weigh, and measure all the separate commandments of the ceremonial and moral law. They had come to the sapient conclusion that there were 248 affirmative precepts, being as many as the members in the human body, and 365 negative precepts, being as many as the arteries and veins, or the days of the year: the total being 613, which was also the number of letters in the Decalogue.

"They arrived at the same result from the fact that the Jews were commanded to wear fringes (tsitsith) on the corners of their tallith, bound with thread of blue; and as each fringe had eight threads and five knots, and the letters of the word tsitsith make 600, the total number of commandments was, as before, 613. Now surely, out of such a large number of precepts and prohibitions, all could not be of quite the same value; and some were 'light' (kal), and some were 'heavy' (kobhed). But which? and what was the greatest commandment of all? According to some Rabbis, the most important of all is that about the tephillin and the tsitsith, the fringes and phylacteries; and 'he who diligently observes it is regarded in the same light as if he had kept the whole Law.

"Some thought the omission of ablutions as bad as homicide: some that the precepts of the Mishna were all 'heavy'; those of the Law were some heavy and some light. Others considered the third to be the greatest commandment. None of them had realized the great principle, that the wilful violation of one commandment is the transgression of all (James 2:10) because the object of the entire Law is the spirit of obedience to God. On the question proposed by the lawyer the Shammaites and Hillelites were in disaccord and, as usual, both schools were wrong: the Shammaites, in thinking that mere trivial external observances were valuable, apart from the spirit in which they were performed, and the principle which they exemplified; the Hillelites, in thinking that any positive command could in itself be unimportant, and in not seeing that great principles are essential to the due performance of even the slightest duties." (Farrar, pp. 565-66.)

Faced with these variant, petty, and uninspired views, these interpretations of the law that came from blind guides whose spiritual perceptions were almost nil, Jesus followed his usual course. He simply swept aside the minutia and haggling of the schools and turned their attention back to the foundation upon which the whole law rested. He may even have pointed to the tephillin (phylactery) worn by the inquiring scribe as he answered, for in it was the Shema, which all the faithful recited twice daily and which was itself a recitation of the first and great commandment.

The first of all the commandments is, Hear, O Israel; The Lord our God is one Lord: And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind and with all thy strength: this is the first commandment.

And the second is like, namely this, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. There is none other commandment greater than these.

This answer, thus given, was not new. It contained none of the "contentions, and strivings about the law" that Paul acclaimed as "unprofitable and vain." (Titus 3:9.) And there were among the Rabbis those with the sense and discernment to single it out for themselves. We have, in fact, heretofore heard a lawyer tempt Jesus with the question, "Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?" and he himself be asked in turn, "What is written in the law? how readest thou?" This learned Jew gave the same answer here repeated by Jesus, and then, "willing to justify himself," asked, "Who is my neighbour?" which brought forth from our Lord the wondrous parable of the good Samaritan. Jesus, however, to the two commandments, recorded as they are in the law, [^3] expanded their meaning by saying:

On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.

To his everlasting credit, the scribal lawyer responded: "Well, Master, thou hast said the truth: for there is one God; and there is none other but he: And to love him with all the heart, and with all the understanding, and with all the soul, and with all the strength, and to love his neighbour as himself, is more than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices."

Jesus then said, "Thou art not far from the kingdom of God." We can only hope that the light of truth grew brighter in the lawyer's heart until its full blaze and glory guided him into the earthly kingdom where alone is found the course leading to eternal life.

With this colloquy, the day of Rabbinic-Pharisaic-scribal questioning ceased. "And no man after that durst ask him any question." He had answered all things well, and aside from some things that he would yet say and do on his own motion, he had delivered his Father's message in full.

"What Think Ye of Christ?"

(Matthew 22:41-46; Mark 12:35-37; JST Mark 12:40, 44; Luke 20:41-44)

Salvation is in Christ! He is the Son of the living God. No man cometh unto the Father but by him. He is the Savior of the world and the Redeemer of men. He came into the world to do the will of the Father. His Father sent him to ransom all men from the grave and to raise those who believe and obey unto eternal life in the eternal kingdom. To gain salvation, men must come unto him, believe his gospel, and live his laws. This is the doctrine he has taught and the witness he has borne from that day in the temple when he, but twelve years of age, asked Mary if she knew not that he must be about his Father's business, to this, his last day in the temple, when all but the climactic events of his ministry are passed. But as one of these crowning events he must once again let all who will hear know that he is God's Son.

He has defeated his enemies—God's enemies!—at every turn and on every hand. That is evident to all; but none must be left to assume, nor must there be the slightest intimation, that his triumphs have come simply because he is a great prophet, or a wise philosopher, or a learned Rabbi. He must be identified for what he is—the Son of the Highest. Thus, to the Pharisees assembled there in great numbers and dressed in regal splendor, while yet in the court of his Father's house, he says:

What think ye of Christ? whose son is he?

Their answer—he could have expected none other—crystallized the whole Jewish concept of a Temporal Deliverer who would once again wield the sword of David, wear the crown of that great king, and sit on a throne from which laws would go forth to the Gentile aliens whose yoke they now wore. Their answer presupposed that the downtrodden of Israel would, under their Messiah, tread on the necks of their enemies as they rejoiced in their new Messianic kingdom. They said: "The son of David." They said: 'A mighty king, a great deliverer, a supreme ruler.' In reply Jesus said:

How then doth David in spirit call him Lord, saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool? If David then call him Lord, how is he his son?

Psalm 110, given to David by the power of the Holy Ghost—that glorious Messianic psalm in which the Eternal Father swore with an oath that his Son would be a priest forever after the order of Melchizedek—such is the scriptural source to which Jesus refers as a means of raising the issue of his own divinity. As interpreted by the Son of God—and here we may discard all the vagaries of men on the passage involved; we may ignore the higher critics who say David never wrote the psalm; we may throw aside the "learned" assumptions that someone other than Elohim was testifying of his Son—David's Messianic utterance speaks of one Lord saying to another—of one God saying to another, of Elohim saying to Jehovah, of the Eternal Father saying to his Beloved Son—sit thou on my right hand. Lo, that God who then spoke unto men by his Son; that Son whom he "hath appointed heir of all things"; that Son who is "the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his [Father's] person"; the very Son who now, having ascended into heaven, sits "on the right hand of the Majesty on high"—this Son and this Father, they are the Gods mentioned in the Messianic prophecy. (Heb. 1:1-3.) These are the ones of whom the inspired utterance speaks.

Jesus' logic was unassailable. "How say the scribes that Christ is the Son of David?" he asked. If "David . . . himself calleth him Lord," he continued, "whence is he then his son?" How could he be David's Son—as he was—if David also called him Lord? "How then could the Messiah be David's son? Could Abraham have called Isaac or Jacob or Joseph, or any of his own descendants near or remote, his lord? If not, how came David to do so? There could be but one answer—because that Son would be divine, not human—David's son by human birth, but David's Lord by divine subsistence. But they could not find this simple explanation, nor, indeed, any other; they could not find it, because Jesus was their Messiah, and they had rejected Him. They chose to ignore the fact that He was, in the flesh, the son of David; and when, as their Messiah, He had called Himself the Son of God, they had raised their hands in pious horror, and had taken up stones to stone Him." (Farrar, p. 567.)

Jesus' testimony of himself, implicit in the divine logic that he used, left the Pharisees without hope or answer, but brought rejoicing to those whose minds had not been poisoned by the theological seminaries of the day. Thus it is written: "And no man after that durst ask him, saying, Who art thou?" And also: "The common people heard him gladly; but the high priest and the elders were offended at him." So be it.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Woe for Rejecting Christ and Salvation: "The Talmud itself, with unwonted keenness and severity of sarcasm, has pictured to us the seven classes of Pharisees, out of which six are characterized by a mixture of haughtiness and imposture. There is the 'Shechemite' Pharisee, who obeys the law from self-interest (Gen. 34:19); the Tumbling Pharisee, who is so humble that he is always stumbling because he will not lift his feet from the ground; the Bleeding Pharisee, who is always hurting himself against walls, because he is so modest as to be unable to walk about with his eyes open lest he should see a woman; the Mortar Pharisee, who covers his eyes as with a mortar, for the same reason; the Tell-me-another-duty-and-I-will-do-it Pharisee-several of whom occur in our Lord's ministry; and the Timid Pharisee, who is actuated by motives of fear alone. The seventh class only is the class of Pharisees from love, who obey God because they love Him from the heart." (Farrar, pp. 571-72.)
[^2] The Woe against Avarice and Hypocrisy: This statement, as well as each of the first-sentence quotations set forth in the discussion of the eight woes, is taken from Farrar, p. 570.
[^3] The Woe for Converting Souls to a False Church:
