Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 88

The Great Denunciation

Prophesy against the shepherds of Israel, prophesy, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God unto the shepherds; Woe be to the shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves! should not the shepherds feed the flocks? . . . Behold, I am against the shepherds; and I will require my flock at their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the flock. (Ezek. 34:2, 10.)

O the wise, and the learned, and the rich, that are puffed up in the pride of their hearts, and all those who preach false doctrines, and all those who commit whoredoms, and pervert the right way of the Lord, wo, wo, wo be unto them, saith the Lord God Almighty, for they shall be thrust down to hell! (2 Ne. 28:15.)

Jesus Speaks with the Voice of Vengeance

(Matthew 23:1-12; JST Matthew 23:2, 4-7, 9; Luke 11:43)

"Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord" (Rom. 12:19), the Lord who is both Jehovah and Jesus. "Is God unrighteous who taketh vengeance?" Paul asks. He answers: "God forbid: for then [that is, if otherwise] how shall God judge the world?" (Rom. 3:5-6.) And be it remembered that the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son. And so, as we now hear the meek and lowly One—who came to teach, and bless, and heal—raise his voice in cutting invective, we must be mindful that he is also a God of vengeance, and that the power to bless is also the power to curse. He who came, according to the Messianic word, "to preach good tidings unto the meek" and "to bind up the broken-hearted" came also "to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God." (Isa. 61:1-2.) He it is whose destiny was to "bring forth judgment unto truth." He is the one concerning whom Isaiah promised: "He shall not fail nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth: and the isles shall wait for his law." (Isa. 42:1-7.)

When the Holy Messiah comes again—suddenly, as the promise is—to his temple, which is the earth, those whom he finds in its courts will fall into two categories. For some he calls it "the day of vengeance which was in my heart," and he says he will trample them in his fury and tread upon them in his anger. For others he names it "the year of my redeemed," those who "shall mention the loving kindness of their Lord, and all that he has bestowed upon them according to his goodness, and according to his loving kindness, forever and ever." (D&C 133:50-52.)

Even so now, here in his earthly temple, where tens of thousands of Passover pilgrims mill about, surrounded by faithful disciples who rejoice in his goodness and loving kindness, and in the midst of scribes and Pharisees, who hate his person and whose every faculty is bent on shedding his blood—here in a scene prefiguring the day of his later coming, he sits in judgment on his fellowmen. It is a present day in which he is revealing what shall be in the future day of judgment and burning. For his disciples it is a day of added doctrinal enlightenment and the consequent courage to hold fast to that iron rod which is the word of God. For the scribes and Pharisees it is a day of vengeance in which they shall hear about the fires of hell that await them.

In what has already taken place the priests and Rabbis and Pharisees and leaders of the people have been identified as blind leaders of the blind. "And they"—how sad it is to say—"loved their blindness," because, as we are so well aware, their deeds were evil. Further: "They would not acknowledge their ignorance," so fully demonstrated in all that has just transpired. And "they did not repent them of their faults; the bitter venom of their hatred to Him was not driven forth by His forbearance; the dense midnight of their perversity was not dispelled by His wisdom. Their purpose to destroy Him was fixed, obstinate, irreversible. If one plot failed, they were but driven with more stubborn sullenness into another. And, therefore, since Love had played her part in vain, 'vengeance leaped upon the stage;' since the Light of the World shone for them with no illumination, the lightning flash should at last warn them of their danger. There could now be no hope of their becoming reconciled to Him; they were but being stereotyped in unrepentant malice against Him. Turning, therefore, to His disciples, but in the audience of all the people, He rolled over their guilty heads, with crash on crash of moral anger, the thunder of His utter condemnation." (Farrar, p. 569.)

The scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses' seat: All, therefore, whatsoever they bid you observe, they will make you observe and do; for they are ministers of the law, and they make themselves your judges. But do not ye after their works; for they say, and do not. For they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders; but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers.

Moses' seat, the seat of judgment and power! For the few brief remaining hours until, at this very Passover, the Paschal Lamb is slain, the scribes and Pharisees continue as legal administrators of the Mosaic order. They are still the ministers of the law; none others on earth can offer up sacrifices on the great altar so as to make atonement for the sins of repentant souls. Theirs is still the obligation to teach, not their traditions, but the true principles set forth by Moses and the prophets. But O how men must be warned against their false teachings, their evil examples, their works of wickedness!

No man, before the judgment bar, will be excused for believing false doctrines or doing evil acts on the excuse that he followed a minister, who he supposed taught true principles and gave good counsel, but who in fact declared false doctrine and wrought evil works. No matter that, in showy piety, we bear grievous burdens in the name of religion (as all the Jews did), or win great theological conflicts (as the Rabbis and scribes were wont to do), or display a superabundance of supposed good works (as some modern religionists suppose they do); no matter what else we may do in a false hope of gaining salvation—all that will matter in the day of judgment will be whether we have kept, truly and faithfully, the commandments of God. Let false ministers be damned, if such is the judgment they deserve; the members of their congregations must nonetheless work out their salvation by conforming to true principles of religion.

And all their works they do to be seen of men. They make broad their phylacteries and enlarge the borders of their garments, and love the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the synagogues, and greetings in the markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi (which is master.)

True ministers labor with an eye single to the glory of God. Their interests and concerns are in the welfare of the sheep and the salvation of the souls of men. False ministers supplant priesthood service with the self-exaltation of priestcraft. Their interests and concerns are in their own self-ennoblement, not in the welfare of the sheep. They have not strengthened the diseased, nor healed the sick, nor bound up the broken, nor brought again that which was driven away, nor sought that which was lost, as true shepherds must, "but with force and with cruelty" have they "ruled them." (Ezek. 34:4.)

Indeed, "priestcrafts are that men preach and set themselves up for a light unto the world, that they may get gain and praise of the world; but they seek not the welfare of Zion." (2 Ne. 26:29.) Scarlet robes and jeweled gowns, golden crowns and costly scepters, girdles of fine-twined linen, gold and silver and silks, and all manner of precious clothing—these become the desires of those who seek to serve God through personal exaltation. Did all the Jews wear their phylacteries—those leather straps placed on the foreheads and left arms, near the heart, and containing parchments reciting the Shema and other scriptures—when praying? Those of the scribes and Pharisees must be broader and bear witness of a showy display of supposed piety. Is it the practice of all to wear garments whereon dangle sacred blue tassels in remembrance of covenants made with Jehovah? Those plying their trade of priestcraft must have gaudy and distinguishable adornments, lest any fail to see the sign of their religious devotion. Are people seated by rank and greeted in public with laudatory titles? How the ministers of men must vie for preferential status in all situations! What a difference there is between true and false religion—even in outward symbols! Without true doctrines to ponder and teach, false ministers turn to the trappings of ritualistic formalism to satisfy man's innate leanings toward things in the spiritual realm. Of all this the disciples must beware.

But be not ye called Rabbi; for one is your master, which is Christ; and all ye are brethren.

And call no one your creator upon the earth, or your heavenly Father; for one is your creator and heavenly Father, even he who is in heaven.

Neither be ye called masters; for one is your master, even he whom your heavenly Father sent, which is Christ; for he hath sent him among you that ye might have life.

But he that is greatest among you shall be your servant. And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased of him; and he that shall humble himself shall be exalted of him.

This counsel to the disciples seems of obvious and self-evident value to us. In its Jewish setting, however, it took on an even deeper import and meaning, a meaning that grew out of the unbelievable—sometimes even blasphemous—honor sought by and bestowed upon Rabbis. For instance: The heathen Governor of Caesarea was said to have seen Rabbis in vision with the faces of angels. The Governor of Antioch was supposed to have "seen their faces and by them conquered," which is not far different from the Catholic legend about Constantine the Great. Rabbis ranked higher than kings, their curses (though unjustified) always, as they supposed, came to pass, and one of them chose to "be buried in white garments, to show that he was worthy of appearing before his Maker." (Edersheim 2:409.) But perhaps the greatest illustration of pretentious self-assertion is seen in this Talmudic account: "They represent heaven itself as a Rabbinic school, of which God is the Head Rabbi. On one occasion God differs from all the angels on a question as to a leper being clean or unclean. They refer the decision to R. Ben Nachman, who is accordingly slain by Azrael, and brought to the heavenly Academy. He decides with God, who is much pleased." (Farrar, footnote 4, p. 569.) In the light of such monstrous and blasphemous absurdities, it is no wonder that Jesus commanded the disciples to designate no one on earth as their heavenly Father, which in effect is what this Rabbinic account does. No doubt there were numerous other local legends on this and related points that have not been preserved to our day.

The Eight Woes against the Scribes and Pharisees

(Matthew 23:13-33; JST Matthew 23:11-13, 17, 21, 28-29; Mark 12:38-40; Luke 11:37-42, 44-48; 20:45-47; JST Luke 11:42-43)

Jesus now bursts forth with eight denunciations of woe upon the scribes and Pharisees. [^1] He arraigns them "with a veritable torrent of righteous indignation, through which flashed the lightning of scorching invective, accompanied by thunder peals of divine anathema." (Talmage, p. 554.) For three and a half years he has offered them blessings—the Sermon on the Mount itself contains eight beatitudes, eight eternal blessings for all who will believe and obey—all of which blessings they have repeatedly rejected. The sun has now set on the day for blessings, and the darkness of night with its woeful cursings is upon them. Both blessings and curses grow out of a way of life; the righteous are blessed, the wicked are cursed. Upon them comes a deep and inconsolable grief and misery. So it is now with the scribes and Pharisees; divine wrath, holy wrath, the wrath of a Divine Being is now poured out upon them, almost without measure. We shall consider each woe in turn.

But woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men: for ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in.

"Woe unto them, for the ignorant erudition which closed the gates of heaven, and the injurious jealousy which would suffer no others to enter in!" [^2]

What false minister is ever content to damn himself alone, to lose his own soul only, to go without companions on his head-strong course to hell? It is inherent in the ministerial role to get others to believe and live as the preacher proclaims. Christ—whom the scribes and Pharisees rejected—is the door to salvation. Not only did they thus lose their own souls, but with all their power they sought to deny the gospel blessings to others.

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees! for ye are hypocrites! Ye devour widows' houses, and for a pretence make long prayers; therefore ye shall receive the greater punishment.

"Woe unto them for their oppressive hypocrisy and greedy cant!"

Thou shalt not covet; the love of money is the root of all evil; how hardly can a rich man enter into the kingdom of heaven; where a man's treasure is, there will his heart be also—these and a host of scriptural truisms, taught by Jesus, accepted instinctively by the spiritually inclined, and known to the scribes and Pharisees—all these bore testimony against them. Avarice, greed, covetousness, the amassing of great wealth by questionable means—all such was a way of life among the leaders in Israel. Under cover of religious duty, they extorted enormous sums from the ever-present widows and orphans, salving their consciences with pretentious prayers. To gain salvation, they must not only repent of their rapacious and grasping ways, but they must also affirmatively make their riches available to the poor and the needy—sell all that they have and go and follow Christ, as he himself said to the rich young ruler. How truly and well it is written: "Wo unto you rich men, that will not give your substance to the poor, for your riches will canker your souls; and this shall be your lamentation in the day of visitation, and of judgment, and of indignation: The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and my soul is not saved!" (D&C 56:16.) Add to this the deliberate and designed vice of hypocrisy, and we have a scribal-Pharisaic person whose heart is fixed on the things of this world and who will inherit accordingly in the world to come.

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte; and when he is made, ye make him two-fold more the child of hell than he was before, like unto yourselves.

"Woe for the proselytizing fanaticism which did but produce a more perilous corruption!"

O the wickedness of converting a soul, a human soul, a child of God to a false system of religion, be it Judaism or Pharisaism or one of the sects of Christendom! If a mortal child of the Eternal God is seeking truth and willing to forsake an undesirable past, how dire and calamitous it is to lead him into greater darkness! There may be times when truth seekers improve their lot by going from a sect that is more abominable to one that is less evil, but when the True Light is present, there can be only one acceptable course—turn to Him. It is said of Jewish proselytizing of that day: "Out of a bad heathen they made a worse Jew." As with the other woes, this one befell them because they rejected Him who came to bring them light and truth and salvation.

Woe unto you, blind guides, who say, Whosoever shall swear by the temple, it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the temple, he committeth sin, and is a debtor. Ye fools and blind: for whether is greater, the gold, or the temple that sanctifieth the gold?

And, whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whosoever sweareth by the gift that is upon it, he is guilty. Ye fools and blind: for whether is greater, the gift or the altar that sanctifieth the gift? Verily I say unto you, Whoso, therefore, sweareth by it, sweareth by the altar, and by all things thereon.

"Woe for the blind hair-splitting folly which so confused the sanctity of oaths as to tempt their followers into gross profanity!"

In few things did the moral depravity of Pharisaism rear its ugly head with such studied wickedness as in their profane perversion of the divine law relative to oaths. From the beginning, down through the patriarchal dispensations, and through the whole Mosaic era, Jehovah had allowed his people the privilege of swearing with an oath—of making a divine affirmation, of asserting an assured verity in a sacred way—so as to guarantee the immutable verity of the spoken word. An oath made God a partner in the matter to which solemn attestation was being made. It could not, therefore, fail; for God does not fail, and the Cause of Righteousness is as prevailing and eternal as Deity himself.

But these Jews—in their apostate debauchery—had so perverted the true order of vows and oaths that they had become a sword of evil instead of a shield of good. Technical, trifling rules by which oaths could be annulled and avoided came forth from the Great Sanhedrin. An indulgence here, some special privilege there, as the Rabbinists taught, enabled men to ignore their solemn vows made in Jehovah's name. Causistry of the most complicated kind guided the Pharisees in their avoidance of their moral and sworn obligations. Thus: "If a man swore by the temple, the House of Jehovah, he could obtain an indulgence for breaking his oath: but if he vowed by the gold and treasure of the Holy House, he was bound by the unbreakable bonds of priestly dictum. Though one should swear by the altar of God, his oath could be annulled; but if he vowed by the corban gift or by the gold upon the altar, his obligation was imperative. To what depths of unreason and hopeless depravity had men fallen, how sinfully foolish and how wilfully blind were they, who saw not that the Temple was greater than its gold, and the altar than the gift that lay upon it! In the Sermon on the Mount the Lord had said 'Swear not at all'; but upon such as would not live according to that higher law, upon those who persisted in the use of oaths and vows, the lesser and evidently just requirement of strict fidelity to the terms of self-assumed obligations was to be enforced, without unrighteous quibble or inequitable discrimination." (Talmage, p. 556.)

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone. Ye blind guides, who strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel; who make yourselves appear unto men that ye would not commit the least sin, and yet ye yourselves, transgress the whole law.

"Woe for the petty paltry sham scrupulosity which paid tithes of potherbs, and thought nothing of justice, mercy, and faith—which strained out animalculae from the goblet, and swallowed camels into the heart!"

One of the marks of personal or universal apostasy is to center on religious trifles to the exclusion of eternal principles. Abstain from the use of tea, coffee, and tobacco, but indulge in lustful acts or forsake standards of business integrity; refrain from picking an olive or shucking an ear of maize on the Sabbath, but ignore the command to worship the Father in spirit and in truth on his holy day; pay tithing on the leaves and stalks of herbs grown in pots on the windowsill, but give no heed to judgment, mercy, and faith—such are the marks of apostate fanaticism. By such a course it is easy to have a form of godliness and a zeal for religion without doing the basic things that require the whole heart and the whole soul. Those so doing filter their drinking water through a linen cloth to avoid swallowing an unclean insect while, figuratively, gulping down a camel.

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye make clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and excess. Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first that which is within the cup and platter, that the outside of them may be clean also.

"Woe for the external cleanliness of cup and platter contrasted with the gluttony and drunkenness to which they ministered!"

Again the woe pronounced by Jesus has application to the apostate scribes and Pharisees of all ages and among all peoples. Under a religious cloak, with unbounded zeal, they perform some ritualistic minutae, as though such solved all the problems of life and attuned them forever to the Infinite One. Cups and platters must be polished to perfection; they must be ceremonially clean; what does it matter that the contents are purchased with the gold of extortion, or that the meat will pander to gluttony, or that the wine will assure drunkenness. It is the form, not the substance, with which Rabbinism is concerned.

Earlier in Perea, while dining in the home of a Pharisee, Jesus abstained from the ritualistic washings that played such a vital role in their lives. On that occasion he denounced the same hypocritical pettiness with even greater exacerbation.

Now do ye Pharisees make clean the outside of the cup and the platter; but your inward part is full of ravening and wickedness. Ye fools, did not he that made that which is without make that which is within also?

But if ye would rather give alms of such things as ye have; and observe to do all things which I have commanded you then would your inward parts be clean also.

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness. Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

"Woe to the tombs that simulated the sanctity of temples—to the glistening outward plaster of hypocrisy which did but render more ghastly by contrast the reeking pollutions of the sepulchre within!"

"It was an awful figure, that of likening them to whitewashed tombs, full of dead bones and rotting flesh. As the dogmas of the rabbis made even the slightest contact with a corpse or its cerements, or with the bier upon which it was borne, or the grave in which it has been lain, a cause of personal defilement, which only ceremonial washing and the offering of sacrifices could remove, care was taken to make tombs conspicuously white, so that no person need be defiled through ignorance or proximity to such unclean places; and, moreover, the periodical whitening of sepulchres was regarded as a memorial act of honor to the dead. But even as no amount of care or degree of diligence in keeping bright the outside of a tomb could stay the putrescence going on within, so no externals of pretended righteousness could mitigate the revolving corruption of a heart reeking with iniquity." (Talmage, p. 558.)

On that previous occasion in Perea, while sitting at meat in a Pharisaic home, Jesus had likened the scribes and Pharisees to "graves which appear not, and the men that walk over them are not aware of them." This woe he has now perfected and expanded. Clearly, his gift of plain and incisive speech is without parallel in all history.

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye build tombs of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchres of the righteous, And say, If we had been in the day of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.

Wherefore, we are witnesses unto yourselves of your own wickedness, and ye are the children of them who killed the prophets; And will fill up the measure then of your fathers; for ye, yourselves, kill the prophets like unto your fathers.

"Woe for the mock repentance which condemned their fathers for the murder of the prophets, and yet reflected the murderous spirit of those fathers—nay, filled up and exceeded the measure of their guilt by a yet deadlier and more dreadful sacrifice!"

Of all the woes, this is the chief and crowning one. To reject living prophets, under the pretext of honoring the seers of old, is to deny all the prophets and forfeit any hope of eternal reward. We have long since learned that to believe in Abraham, or Moses, or any of the prophets, or John the Baptist, meant to believe in Christ, for they all testified of him. All the prophets of all the ages bear the same testimony; all preach the same saving truths; all bear witness of the same Atoning One. Salvation is in Christ, and the prophets are his messengers who announce his saving truths to the mortals of their day.

And to reject the prophets of any age is to reject those of all ages, for they all teach the same truths; they all bear the same witness; they all possess the same spirit. The spirit of murderous rebellion that thirsts for the blood of Christ is the same spirit that caused Jeremiah to be cast into a dungeon, Isaiah to be sawn asunder, and prophets without number to seal their testimonies with their own blood. The great test for all men is whether they will believe and obey the living oracles sent to them, not what they suppose they think about the prophets of old.

If these scribes and Pharisees, these priests and Rabbis, these Jewish elders and Israelite guides—if they and all the people would but believe in Christ, no woes would befall them. When any people believe the word which Deity sends to them—let it come from earth's Chief Prophet or the Lord's lowest elder—then past cursings slink away like a jackal before a lion, to be replaced by the blessed glories of the gospel. But always the religious pretext for rejecting living prophets, the conscience-salving excuse for turning away from living oracles, is a supposed belief in dead prophets and is an assumed reverence for buried seers. By professing to believe the prophetic word of old—which brought salvation to them of old—the door of salvation seems open and the need for new revelation to be done away. Come, then, let us slay the living prophets lest they muddy the prophetic message of the past.

On that previous occasion in Perea, our Lord's similarly phrased invective, against others equally evil, came forth in these words:

Woe unto you also, ye lawyers! for ye lade men with burdens grievous to be borne, and ye yourselves touch not the burdens with one of your fingers.

Woe unto you! for ye build the sepulchres of the prophets, and your fathers killed them. Truly ye bear witness that ye allow the deeds of your fathers: for they indeed killed them, and ye build their sepulchres.

Truly, the woe for rejecting living prophets is the woe of woes—the woe that thrusts men into the eternal woes of an eternal hell with its eternal damnation where their worm dieth not and the fire is not quenched!

Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers. Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell?

Jewish Accountability for the Sins of Their Ancestors

(Matthew 23:34-36; JST Matthew 23:33-35; Luke 11:49-54; JST Luke 11:53-54)

What other woes Jesus may have thundered forth on this ominous day—"with crash on crash of moral anger"—we do not know. Matthew records only the eight we have considered, and we cannot believe that he has preserved for us all that was said with reference to any of them. Inspired authors often write only in headlines and follow the practice of digesting and abridging much that falls from prophetic lips. We do know that on that prior Perean occasion when Jesus rebuked others whose hearts were black and whose deeds were evil, he had some cutting things to say about those who had not cared properly for the scriptural records entrusted to them.

Woe unto you, lawyers! For ye have taken away the key of knowledge, the fulness of the scriptures; ye enter not in yourselves into the kingdom; and those who were entering in, ye hindered.

"The holy scriptures"—the mind and will and word and voice of the Lord—how can their worth be weighed? Who can tell what wonders have been wrought because the pure word of the Perfect God lay open before men? And who can envision what evils have befallen the sons of men when the pure word has been tainted and twisted and made to say that which is not true?

"The holy scriptures," Paul said to Timothy, which "from a child thou hast known . . . are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus." (2 Tim. 3:15.) Did not Jesus say, "They are they which testify of me"? (John 5:39.) Sad though it be, few are the men who hear the audible voice, thundering from Sinai, revealing in prophetic ears the mind and will of Jehovah; few are they who hear the still small voice, whispering in prophetic ears, revealing the principles and ordinances of the gospel; but millions comprise the hosts of earth's inhabitants who have before them the recorded words of holy men who wrote as they were prompted from on high. And all those who read these words—words preserved in the holy scriptures—and who do so by the power of the Holy Ghost can testify that they have heard the Lord's voice and know his words. (D&C 18:33-36.) And so, Paul continues, "All scripture is given by inspiration of God"—or, better, every scripture inspired of God—"is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness: That the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works." (2 Tim. 3:16-17.)

And yet these evil leaders of an erring people had taken away the fulness of the scriptures. The word no longer lay open before the chosen seed. We have no reason to believe they had the writings of Abraham, the complete Book of Enoch, the portions of Genesis revealed anew through Joseph Smith, or the words of Zenos or Zenock or Neum or, perhaps, hosts of prophets whose very names are buried with their lost writings.

But let us return to the woes pronounced this day in the temple. In spite of all the evils of the scribes and Pharisees, Jesus yet offered his saving truths to the people. Though these blind spiritual guides comprised a generation of serpents and vipers whose assured destination was hell, the Blessed One said:

Behold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes: and some of them ye shall kill and crucify; and some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and persecute them from city to city: That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar. Verily I say unto you, All these things shall come upon this generation.

Ye bear testimony against your fathers, when ye, yourselves, are partakers of the same wickedness. Behold your fathers did it through ignorance, but ye do not; wherefore, their sins shall be upon your heads.

This is strong doctrine. In it is a great principle of eternal truth that none but the true saints can comprehend; from it we learn, with an impact scarcely found elsewhere, how all generations of men tie together and how all of us are truly our brother's keeper.

Jesus sends apostles and prophets among the Jews of his day. He is Jehovah; he calls the prophets and wise men; the true scribes bear a true witness of him by the power of his Spirit. Even he himself ministers among them, testifying with words such as no other man ever spake, and in deeds such as no other man ever did, that he is truly God's Son. All this they reject, and they are damned; no man can reject the light of heaven and be saved—of course they are damned; they are a generation of vipers who cannot escape the damnation of hell. They shall die in their sins. Thus saith Jesus.

But this is not all. They are accountable for the sins of their fathers who through ignorance rejected the message of salvation. Such is the worst of woes, the crowning curse—to be accountable, not alone for their own sins, but for the sins of those who might have been saved had these spiritual leaders done their duty. From the day of Abel the son of Adam, whom Cain slew, to the day of Zacharias the father of John, who "was slain by Herod's order, between the porch and the altar" (Teachings, p. 261)—between these two days, which covered the whole span of earth history, many good men lived and died without a knowledge of the gospel. All these could have been freed from their spirit prison by the men of Jesus' day, if those to whom Jesus then preached had believed his words.

Joseph Smith, in the course of a sermon on salvation for the dead, and after quoting the denunciation of these scribes and Pharisees by Jesus, said: "Hence as they possessed greater privileges than any other generation, not only pertaining to themselves, but to their dead, their sin was greater, as they not only neglected their own salvation but that of their progenitors, and hence their blood [that of the progenitors] was required at their hands." (Teachings, pp. 222-23.)

"Am I my brother's keeper?" Cain responded when the Lord asked him about Abel (Gen. 4:9), whom he had slain, who was indeed slain for the love of God and the testimony of Jesus, as also was Zacharias. "My brother's keeper!" Truly it is so. All men, Jesus included, are brothers, children of the same Father. And as Christ laid down his life to save all men, his ministers are called to do all things necessary, even unto death, to save such portion of their brethren as they can.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Be it noted that these are the words of the Lord Jesus; he is the One who shall gather his children. Implicit in the context is another affirmation of his divine Sonship. A similar lament has come from his lips in modern times: "O, ye nations of the earth," his solemn voice intones, "how often would I have gathered you together as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, but ye would not!" (D&C 43:24.)
[^2] To the Nephites, Jesus gave utterance to this same thought in these words: "My Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross; and after that I had been lifted up upon the cross, that I might draw all men unto me, that as I have been lifted up by men even so should men be lifted up by the Father, to stand before me, to be judged of their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil-And for this cause have I been lifted up; therefore, according to the power of the Father I will draw all men unto me, that they may be judged according to their works." (3 Ne. 27:14-15.)
