Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 89

Jesus' Final Teaching in the Temple

He that believeth on me, believeth . . . on him that sent me. I am come a light into the world. I came . . . to save the world. I have not spoken of myself. . . . even as the Father said unto me, so I speak. (John 12:44-50.)

He Laments over Doomed Jerusalem

(Matthew 23:37-39; JST Matthew 23:36-41; Luke 13:34-35; JST Luke 13:34-36)

As the great denunciation of the evil guides of a blinded people ended, the rupture between Jesus and the Jews was complete. Virtue and vice can only be reconciled when vice becomes virtue, and those whom Jesus has just arraigned before Jehovah's bar have neither the desire nor the will to repent. Their hearts of stone will retain their flinty hardness until they are melted in the fires of Gehenna.

As the woes ceased, our Lord's lamentation began. As the rolling thunders of his moral indignation no longer echoed within the walls of Jehovah's House, Jesus was heavy of heart. These blind guides, these scribes and Pharisees whom he has just called serpents and vipers and for whom he has decreed the damnation of hell, have also led thousands of their fellow Israelites in the paths of destruction. The people are following the false teachings and supporting the dark deeds of their rulers even though the Light of Life in all its brilliance now shines in their streets, and in their synagogues, and is even, at this very moment, teaching in the temple courts. Can we imagine the sorrow that filled the Divine Being as he "began to weep over Jerusalem," saying:

O Jerusalem! Jerusalem! Ye who will kill the prophets, and will stone them who are sent unto you; how often would I have gathered your children together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not. Behold, your house is left unto you desolate! [^1]

But yesterday when he cleansed the temple for the second time, he called it "my house," for such it was, and such it had been through the ages. Their fathers had built it at his behest. His ordinances were performed therein. Now, however, he is withdrawing his divine approval from that splendid and magnificent structure, which is no longer needed in his dealings with men on earth. The House of the Lord, constructed to meet Mosaic needs, is no longer needed in the eternal scheme of things. Jesus is establishing new ordinances—sacramental emblems instead of sacrificial offerings, among others—and the need for the old temple is over. He is now giving it back to men; it is no longer "my house," but "your house."

Nor was the temple to be the only desolate house. Jesus is also turning Jerusalem itself back into the hands of men. From the days of Melchizedek who was king in Salem, and with reference to Israel, from the days of David, who took Jerusalem from the Jebusites, it had been the Lord's own city, the Zion of God, the religious capital of the world. Soon it would be left to evil men and the new Zion would be the congregations of the pure in heart as they assembled to worship the Father in the name of Jesus in all the nations of the earth. It was as though "my city" was now to be "your city." And so it became as we shall see in our consideration of the Olivet Discourse. (Chapter 90.) And all this came upon them because they rejected him whose temple it was, and him whose city it was. And so Jesus continued:

For I say unto you, that ye shall not see me henceforth, and know that I am he of whom it is written by the prophets, until ye shall say, Blessed is he who cometh in the name of the Lord, in the clouds of heaven, and all the holy angels with him.

Matthew says: "Then understood his disciples that he should come again on the earth, after that he was glorified and crowned on the right hand of God." And Luke, recording what was said in Perea, when our Lord said he must go up to Jerusalem, for—and what biting irony this is—"it cannot be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem," Luke tells us that Jesus then said:

And verily I say unto you, Ye shall not know me, until ye have received from the hand of the Lord a just recompense for all your sins; until the time come when ye shall say, Blessed is he who cometh in the name of the Lord.

Jesus is withdrawing his face from the Jews until they pay the penalty for their sins and until they learn that he is their Messiah, the one of whom all the prophets have written! And in the providences of the Lord that is a not far distant day.

The Widow's Mite

(Mark 12:41-44; JST Mark 12:50; Luke 21:1-4)

We pass now from the thunderous woes that consigned the scribes and Pharisees to hell, and from the tears of sorrow that wet the divine cheeks as Jesus withdrew his approval from the temple and the city, and turn rather to a sweet and hallowed scene. Jesus has left the porches and the wrangling, and the contentious mobs of men who are there debating his words and defaming his person. He seats himself "over against the treasury," apparently upon the steps that gave him a view of the Court of the Women. Under the colonnades that surround this court are thirteen trumpet-shaped boxes into which various religious and charitable contributions may be placed. Each of the trumpets bears an inscription that identifies the object of the contributions placed therein.

Jesus' heart is brimful with sorrow as he reflects on the sins of the people and their rejection of him. His tears of a few moments before have dried on his cheeks. The hour of the daily sacrifice is past, and those now in the court are engaged in private devotions, private sacrifices, and the paying of their various offerings. He watches as rich and affluent people, desiring to be seen of men and with that ostentation so common among them, drop great treasures of silver and gold into the receptacles. Among the worshippers is a poor widow, identified by her garb of mourning. She comes quietly, meekly, hoping perhaps that others will not see the smallness of her offering; she drops two mites—the smallest legal amount that can be given—into one of the chests.

Two mites! Together they are less than a farthing. Her total contribution is about half a cent in American money. But it is all she has. She has lived the law of sacrifice to the full. Jesus calls his disciples and says:

Verily I say unto you, That this poor widow hath cast more in, than all they which have cast into the treasury: For all the rich did cast in of their abundance; but she, notwithstanding her want, did cast in all that she had; yea, even all her living.

No word was spoken to the sorrowing widow who in her penury had sacrificed her all, nor did she then so much as know that the Judge of all had weighed her gift in the eternal scales and found it of more worth than the wealth of kings. It is pleasant to suppose, however, that she now knows that her deed, done in secret and with no thought of reward, was not far removed from that of Mary of Bethany, who poured the anointing oil on the feet of the Master. Both acts have been memorialized forever among those whose hearts are centered upon sacred things.

Nor should we miss the message—that on the records kept by the angels of God in heaven, the meager gifts of faithful people far outweigh the ostentatiously bestowed largess of the rich who bestow their bounties to be seen of men; and that those who expend the Lord's money to build up his kingdom and further his interests should do so as though it all came from the mites of sorrowing widows.

Jesus Offers Salvation to the Gentiles

(John 12:20-33)

We are now nearing the end and the climax of Jesus' public ministry. He is yet in the temple on this the third day of the week of his passion. What is about to transpire, and which has been preserved for us by the Beloved John only, is Jesus' crowning demonstration that his saving truths are for all men, Jew and Gentile alike. After his resurrection he will tell his apostolic witnesses to go into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature, Jew and Gentile alike. Now he will foreshadow that glorious change of direction—a change from his previous command that they should go only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel—by himself proclaiming the message of salvation to certain Greeks. True they were proselytes of Judaism, but they were not Abraham's seed, and the blood of the ancient patriarch did not flow in their veins; they were not part of the chosen people in the true and full sense of the word.

These Greeks had come up to Jerusalem to the Passover "to worship at the feast." They were Jews by adoption and had submitted to circumcision so as to be allowed fellowship in the regular worship. As devout men they were now feeling the exhilaration of the first three days of Passover worship and more particularly the impact of Jesus on the festive celebration.

They may well have been caught up in the outpouring of the Spirit that accompanied the triumphal entry into Jerusalem, amid shouts of Hosanna to the Son of David, on the first day; in any event they would have been fully apprised of that prophetically wondrous day. They must have been present when Jesus cleansed the temple on the second day, and manifestly on this third day they had heard and seen and felt such glorious things as have seldom fallen to the lot of men on earth to experience.

No doubt they were present when our Lord discomfited the chief priests and rulers on the question of authority, and then heard the parables of the two sons, the wicked husbandman, and the king's son. Jesus' discussion with the Pharisees on the tribute money and his pronouncements to the Sadducees about eternal marriage were still ringing in their ears. They had heard the discussion with the lawyer relative to the first and great commandment; had heard him ask the Pharisees, "What think ye of Christ? whose son is he?"; and had heard him heap woes upon the scribes and Pharisees, and seen him weep over doomed Jerusalem.

They were devout men in whose hearts a spirit of faith now welled up. Unlike those Jews who had in their veins the blood of Abraham naturally, these Greeks had not been led far astray by the blind guides of the day. They had come to the Passover as "Proselytes of Righteousness," as the Jews called their converts, but after hearing, and seeing, and feeling the message of Jesus, they had become in their hearts disciples of "the Lord our Righteousness," as Jesus was Messianically called.

But with it all they were timid, hesitant to approach Jesus directly. Perhaps they were overawed by his personal majesty; perhaps their cultural background called for a personal introduction; perhaps they felt that as Jewish non-Jews they might not receive the welcome reserved for Israel proper. The separation of the Jew from the Gentile was well fixed in every mind in that day. In any event they came to Philip and said, "Sir, we would see Jesus." Aware of the reasons for their timidity, and accepting them as proper, Philip himself hesitated to approach Jesus with the Greek entourage. Instead he went to Andrew; then these two apostles, obviously after consultation together, took the matter to Jesus.

It is evident that these Gentile converts were then taught by our Lord, but only a few fragmentary portions of what was said have been preserved for us by John. We suppose the Greeks acclaimed him as Lord and testified of his Messiahship, perhaps in words that meant he was soon to rule and reign on an earthly throne, as some Jews had affirmed in the past. Our Lord's first recorded words to them were:

The hour is come, that the Son of man should be glorified. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit.

"The simile is an apt one, and at once impressively simple and beautiful. A farmer who neglects or refuses to cast his wheat into the earth, because he wants to keep it, can have no increase: but if he sow the wheat in good rich soil, each living grain may multiply itself many fold, though of necessity the seed must be sacrificed in the process. (Talmage, pp. 518-19.) To this Jesus then added:

He that loveth his life shall lose it; and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto eternal life.

"The Master's meaning is clear; he that loves his life so well that he will not imperil it, or, if need be, give it up, in the service of God, shall forfeit his opportunity to win the bounteous increase of eternal life; while he who esteems the call of God as so greatly superior to life that his love of life is as hatred in comparison, shall find the life he freely yields or is willing to yield, though for the time being it disappear like the grain buried in the soil; and he shall rejoice in the bounty of eternal development. If such be true of every man's existence, how transcendently so was it of the life of Him who came to die that men may live? Therefore was it necessary that He die, as He had said He was about to do; but His death, far from being life lost, was to be life glorified." (Talmage, p. 519.)

We suppose also that they said something about their Grecian ancestry and pleaded for the blessings of the gospel for those not of the chosen race. In any event Jesus said:

If any man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there shall also my servant be: if any man serve me, him will my Father honour.

Jesus' death was to be for all men, Jew and Gentile alike. Any man—let him be of whatever nation or kindred or tongue or people, black or white, bond or free, male or female, Jew or Gentile—any man may come unto Christ and be saved. There is no aristocracy except the aristocracy of personal righteousness, no nobility except the nobility of worthiness, no salvation except the salvation that comes by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. All are to be saved on the same terms and conditions, and the salvation involved is exaltation: it is to be where he is; it is to be like him: it is to sit down on his throne, even as he sits on the throne of his Father.

As thoughts of his coming suffering and death pressed in upon Jesus; as the awesome reality and nearness of it all hung heavily upon him; as he seemed to feel in advance some of the agonizing pains of Gethsemane and the cross, he exclaimed:

Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour. Father, glorify thy name.

Thus a God speaks to a God. Overwhelming as the coming agony might be, crushing as the weight of his burden might be, yet this was the very purpose for which he had come to earth; yet he would glorify the Father's name by drinking the dregs of the bitter cup. "Then came there a voice from heaven," the voice of the Father, saying:

I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again.

Twice has the Gentile world, prefiguring that which is to be, come to the Mortal Messiah to testify and worship—once at his birth in Bethlehem and now at his death in Jerusalem. Wise men from the East bowed before his cradle, and Gentiles from Greece now kneel before his cross. And thrice has the Father spoken from heaven to testify and strengthen his Son—once at Bethabara when the Holy Ghost descended bodily in calm serenity like a dove; then on Mount Hermon when Jesus was transfigured before the Three; and now in the temple as the message is given that the gospel is for all men. And on none of these occasions was it clear to the wicked and ungodly what wondrous realities were then being portrayed. This time, perhaps at all times, it was an audible voice that all present heard. This time, as also on the previous occasions, some besides Jesus understood the spoken words; others now said, "It thundered"; and yet others, "An angel spake to him." Then Jesus said:

This voice came not because of me, but for your sakes. Now is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this world be cast out. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me. [^2]

There is glory and triumph in these words. Jesus is comforted by his Father's voice; the people, having heard the sound from heaven, have a witness from on high of his divine Sonship, and Jesus, speaking of things to come as though they were already accomplished, announces that Satan, "the prince of this world," is doomed. Righteousness will eventually triumph. As to our Lord's being "lifted up," John says: "This he said, signifying what death he should die." After Gethsemane he would suffer the agony of the cross.

"Who Is This Son of Man?"

(John 12:34-50)

Jesus is to be lifted up and slain for all men, not for the Jews only. This message he has given to the Gentile Greeks. We cannot doubt that they understood his words and rejoiced in his goodness. But the captious, caviling critics among his own people chose to ignore this concept of a universal religion, brought by the Savior of all men, and to take issue with him instead on the matter of whether he could be the Savior of any people, let alone all men of all races.

"We have heard out of the law that Christ abideth for ever," the people then said, having reference to their Messianic traditions and the teachings of the Rabbis that Messiah's reign would be followed by the resurrection. How, then, could the Messiah be lifted up and slain as Jesus now said? "How sayest thou, The Son of man must be lifted up? who is this Son of man?" they asked. How can the Son of Man be the Messiah if he is to lose his life? [^3]

Jesus will answer their question, with power and authority, in words of doctrine and of testimony. It is the very question he has been answering for nearly three and a half years from one end of Palestine to the other—to the Jews of Judea, the Galileans of Galilee, the Samaritans of Samaria, and the Pereans of Perea, and to the Gentiles in Phoenicia and the mixed races around Decapolis. There has not been, there is not now, and there never shall be any doubt in the minds of spiritually enlightened persons as to who this Son of Man is.

The Father is a Holy Man. "In the language of Adam, Man of Holiness is his name, and the name of his Only Begotten is the Son of Man, even Jesus Christ, a righteous Judge." (Moses 6:57.) Jesus will now make such a proclamation. He will not quibble about their interpretation of their law. What he has heretofore said about their false traditions, their legends and fantasies, their wicked wresting of holy writ—all such is well known to them. Rather he will deliver his last public sermon, and he will make it a fitting testimony of himself and his Father. He begins with these words:

Yet a little while is the light with you. Walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you: for he that walketh in darkness knoweth not whither he goeth. While ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children of light.

He who is the Light of the World, whose spirit enlighteneth every man born into the world, who invites all men to believe in him and come unto the Father by him—the Blessed Christ again issues his new and everlasting plea. 'Come, believe in me. I am the Light; believe in the Light. Become my sons and daughters, the children of Light. If ye do not this, darkness will come upon you, and those who walk in darkness trudge an undeviating course to everlasting doom.'

At this point, before the full sermon is preached, John makes some parenthetical comments about the disbelief of the Jews and includes this statement: "These things spake Jesus, and departed, and did hide himself from them." This statement clearly should have been made at the end, not in the middle of the sermon.

As is always the case when the gospel is preached, some believe, many disbelieve, and even among believers there are those who will not make an open confession. Of the Jews generally John says: "Though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him."

Let there be no misunderstanding on this point: Some few accepted Jesus as the Messiah, but the generality of the people rejected him with a vengeance. This rejection was not the isolated act of their leaders or of a few rabble rousers. It had the sustaining support of the generality of the people and was the outgrowth of their whole religious system. As evidence that such would be the case, John quotes Isaiah's Messianic word: "Lord, who hath believed our report? and to whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed?" Further, John says, "they could not believe," because as Isaiah prophesied: "He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart; that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them."

A further sad note, interjected into John's account at this point, says: "Nevertheless among the chief rulers also many believed on him; but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the synagogue: For they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God." Truly it was an onerous burden—religiously, socially, economically—to be cast out of the synagogue by the judges of men, but how much greater is it to he cast out eternally from the society of the saved by the Eternal Judge.

Now we return to the sermon about the Son of Man. In it Jesus probably said many things that are not preserved for us. This we do know, however, that the rest of his recorded words were proclaimed in a loud voice, and we cannot do other than believe they were the climax of his sayings in this his last public sermon.

He that believeth on me, believeth not on me, but on him that sent me. And he that seeth me seeth him that sent me.

"Who is this Son of Man?" He is the Son of Man of Holiness. There is a Father and a Son. Those who believe in the Son must of necessity believe in the Father. It is not possible to believe a man is a son without believing he has a father, nor to believe a man is a father unless he has offspring. God the Eternal Father is a father because he has children. The Son of God is God because God is his Father. And in this case, to see one is to see the other, as it were, because they are in the express image of each other.

I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believeth on me should not abide in darkness.

"Who is this Son of Man?" He is the Light of the World, the perfect pattern for all men, the great Exemplar, the only one who can say, without any limitation whatever: "What manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am." (3 Ne. 27:27.) Those who believe in him leave the darkness of the world and come into the marvelous light of Christ.

And if any man hear my words, and believe not, I judge him not: for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.

He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my words, hath one that judgeth him: the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day.

"Who is this Son of Man?" He is a preacher of righteousness whose words have saving power. He came to save the world through the gospel. If men do not believe his words, they reject him; and if they reject him, his words will condemn them in the day of judgment when he standeth to judge the world.

For I have not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak.

"Who is this Son of Man?" He is the Son of God, his servant, his agent, his ambassador, his representative. The Father sent him into the world, and he speaks the word of the Father.

And I know that his commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak.

"Who is this Son of Man?" He is the Son of God who speaks the word of the Father, and the Father's commandments lead men to eternal life, which is the greatest of all the gifts of God.

Thus Jesus ended his public teaching: ended it with a testimony of his own divine Sonship; ended it with a call to all men to believe in him and live his laws; ended it with the promise that all the obedient shall have eternal life in his Father's kingdom.

With this he left the temple forever.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Tell us, when shall these things be which thou hast said concerning the destruction of the temple, and the Jews?" F. W. Farrar, The Early Days of Christianity (London, 1882), 1:58-69.
[^2] "And what is the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world? (or the destruction of the wicked, which is the end of the world.)" Similarly the saints of latter days are to stand in holy places and be not moved when the scourges and desolations preceding the Second Coming sweep over the earth. (D&C 45:31-32.)
[^3] As an introduction to the quoted passage, Farrar says: "Speaking of the murder of the younger Hanan, and other eminent nobles and hierarchs, Josephus says, 'I cannot but think that it was because God had doomed this city to destruction as a polluted city, and was resolved to purge His sanctuary by fire, that He cut off these their great defenders and well-wishers; while those that a little before had worn the sacred garments and presided over the public worship, and had been esteemed venerable by those that dwelt in the whole habitable earth, were cast out naked, and seen to be the food of dogs and wild beasts.'" (Farrar, The Life of Christ, pp. 572-73.)
