Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 90

The Olivet Discourse: Jerusalem and the Temple

The end is come upon my people of Israel. . . . And the songs of the temple shall be howlings in that day, saith the Lord God: there shall be many dead bodies in every place; they shall cast them forth with silence. (Amos 8:2-3.)

Messiah [shall] be cut off, . . . and the people of the prince that shall come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary; and . . . he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease, and for the overspreading of abominations he shall make it desolate, even until the consummation, and that determined shall be poured upon the desolate. (Dan. 9:26-27.)

"Your House Is Left unto You Desolate"

(Matthew 24:1-2; JST Matthew 24:1-2; Mark 13:1-2; JST Mark 13:1-6; Luke 21:5-6)

To mortal eyes it seemed as though all the wealth and glory and grandeur of the world was centered in the Temple of Jehovah, which crowned the Holy City. We know of no other buildings either before or since that have shown forth such splendid architectural perfection and such surpassing beauty. And yet he who had blessed it with his presence now cursed it with his mouth: "Your house is left unto you desolate," he said as tears of sorrow streamed down his cheeks.

And now Jesus was leaving the temple forever. Henceforth the House of God could be a den of thieves; no matter, it had served its purpose, and its end had come. It was a sad moment; tears might well flow again on every cheek. Was all this glory and beauty to be as Sodom and Gomorrah? How could such grandeur turn to dust? Luke tells us that then "some spake of the temple, how it was adorned with goodly stones and gifts." But Jesus said:

As for these things which ye behold, the days will come, in the which there shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down.

We can understand how the feelings of the disciples were engulfed in despair as the divine decree was uttered. "The feelings of the Apostles still clung with the loving pride of their nationality to that sacred and memorable spot. They stopped to cast upon it one last lingering gaze, and one of them was eager to call His attention to its goodly stones and priceless offerings—those nine gates overlaid with gold and silver, and the one of solid Corinthian brass yet more precious; those graceful and towering porches; those polished and bevelled blocks forty cubits long and ten cubits high, testifying to the toil and munificence of so many generations; those double cloisters and stately pillars; that lavish adornment of sculpture and arabesque; those alternate blocks of red and white marble, recalling the crest and hollow of the sea-waves; those vast clusters of golden grapes, each cluster as large as a man, which twined their splendid luxuriance over the golden doors.

"They would have Him gaze with them on the rising terraces of courts—the Court of the Gentiles with its monolithic columns and rich mosaic; above this the flight of fourteen steps which led to the Court of the Women; then the flight of fifteen steps which led up to the Court of the Priests; then, once more, the twelve steps which led to the final platform crowned by the actual Holy, and Holy of Holies, which the Rabbis fondly compared for its shape to a couchant lion, and which, with its marble whiteness and golden roofs, looked like a glorious mountain whose snowy summit was gilded by the sun.

"It is as though they thought that the loveliness and magnificence of this scene would intercede with Him, touching His heart with mute appeal. But the heart of Jesus was sad. To Him the sole beauty of a Temple was the sincerity of its worshippers, and no gold or marble, no brilliant vermilion, or curiously-carven cedar-wood, no delicate sculpturing or votive gems, could change for Him a den of robbers into a House of Prayer. The builders were still busily at work, as they had been for nearly fifty years, but their work, unblessed of God, was destined—like the earthquake-shaken forum of guilty Pompeii—to be destroyed before it was finished." (Farrar, pp. 577-78.)

Thus we find the disciples as "Jesus went out, and departed from the temple," coming to him and saying: "Master, show us concerning the buildings of the temple; as thou hast said; They shall be thrown down, and left unto you desolate." His answer:

Behold ye these stones of the temple, and all this great work, and buildings of the temple? Verily I say unto you, they shall be thrown down and left unto the Jews desolate.

See ye not all these things, and do ye not understand them? Verily I say unto you, There shall not be left here upon this temple, one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down.

Literal fulfillment of this dire prophecy came in 70 A.D. when Titus and his legions turned Jerusalem into a ghastly ruin and wrenched each temple stone from its place and foundation as the heathen forces searched out every carat of gold and every gem of worth, and the temple treasures were carried to Rome. What had once adorned the House of God found its way to the synagogue of Satan.

And Jesus, having so spoken, "left them and went upon the mount of Olives."

The Dispensation of Persecution and Martyrdom

(Matthew 24:3-5, 9-13; JST Matthew 24:3-4, 8, 11; Mark 13:3-6, 9, 11-13; JST Mark 13:7-13; Luke 21:7-8, 12-19; JST Luke 21:7-8, 11-14, 16; D&C 45:15-21)

Upon that holy mount, east of Jerusalem—from which the Risen Lord shall soon ascend unto his Father, and where at the day of his glorious return he shall again place his feet—there Jesus and the Twelve rested quietly after an arduous day in the wicked city below them. Alone there, apart from the maddening throngs of Passover pilgrims and separated from the cursed leaders of a damned people, Jesus was prepared to teach and the Twelve to receive the mysteries of the kingdom. Thoughts of the doomed temple and of the Lord's return to receive the glad acclaim, "Blessed is he who cometh in the name of the Lord, in the clouds of heaven, and all the holy angels with him," are uppermost in the minds of the spiritual giants there seated. They propose to the Lord two questions:

Portions of our Lord's reply are found in Matthew, in Mark, and in Luke, and a revealed account of other parts was given to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Each account lays emphasis upon one part or another of his reply. As nearly as we can piece his sermon together, the doctrine came forth as we shall now recite in this and the next three chapters.

As ye have asked of me concerning the signs of my coming, in the day when I shall come in my glory in the clouds of heaven, to fulfil the promises that I have made unto your fathers, For as ye have looked upon the long absence of your spirits from your bodies to be a bondage, I will show unto you how the day of redemption shall come, and also the restoration of the scattered Israel.

As is his wont, he will answer their questions by a recital of basic principles, and he will tell them additional things that even they had not been led to ask.

And now ye behold this temple which is in Jerusalem, which ye call the house of God, and your enemies say that this house shall never fall.

But, verily I say unto you, that desolation shall come upon this generation as a thief in the night, and this people shall be destroyed and scattered among all nations. And this temple which ye now see shall be thrown down that there shall not be left one stone upon another.

And it shall come to pass, that this generation of Jews shall not pass away until every desolation which I have told you concerning them shall come to pass.

Such is his introduction, given in general terms and reaffirming what had just fallen from his lips relative to the magnificent buildings comprising the holy temple, which the scribes and leaders boasted should never fall. And yet this very generation of proud and haughty ones shall see and feel and sorrow as desolations come upon them as a thief in the night. As pertaining to these desolations about to be poured out upon their generation, Jesus said:

The time draweth near, and therefore take heed that ye be not deceived; for many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ; go ye not therefore after them.

False prophets always arise to oppose those who are truly sent of God. False Christs will always be proclaimed when the truth from heaven is being set forth by true ministers. False religions will forever arise to fight the Lord's saints. And because error cannot long stand against truth, evil men will turn to persecution and begin to wield those satanic forces of hatred and evil which have ever been hurled at the faithful.

But take heed to yourselves: for they shall deliver you up to councils; and in the synagogues ye shall be beaten: and ye shall be brought before rulers and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them.

'All the civil and religious power of the world will combine against you. The councils (the Sanhedrins, both local and general) with their civil power; the synagogues, which exercise the power of the church; kings and rulers, who wield the sword and command armies—all these shall combine to fight against God.' Nor is it any different today. Many governments in many lands, influenced by the religions of men and of devils, proscribe the preaching of true religion and provide legal penalities for those sent to bear witness of the truth.

But when they shall lead you, and deliver you up, take no thought beforehand what ye shall speak, neither do ye premeditate: but whatsoever shall be given you in that hour, that speak ye: for it is not ye that speak, but the Holy Ghost.

Though they are persecuted; though prison walls house their bodies; though priests deride and rulers mock; though all the forces of earth and hell combine to close the mouths of the living witnesses of the Lord Jesus Christ, yet their voices must and shall be heard; yet the words will be his, for the Holy Ghost will speak by their mouths.

Now the brother shall betray the brother to death, and the father the son; and children shall rise up against their parents, and shall cause them to be put to death.

Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you, and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name's sake.

And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another; and many false prophets shall arise, and shall deceive many;

And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall was cold; but he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.

With two millennia to separate us from the early Christians, the agony of their sufferings, the burden of their pains, and the horrors of the persecutions heaped upon them seem to fade away. But if ever there was a dispensation of martyrdom it was in the day of Jesus and Peter and Paul. In that day to join the Church was to prepare to die. Lest we forget, let us note a few lines from the history of the past; let us view a small part of the persecutions of the saints in time's meridian.

Rome went up in flames, it is supposed by the hand of a mad tyrant, Nero. He immediately "endeavoured to fix the odious crime of having destroyed the capital of the world upon the most innocent and faithful of his subjects—upon the only subjects who offered heartfelt prayers on his behalf—the Roman Christians. They were the defenseless victims of this horrible charge; for though they were the most harmless, they were also the most hated and the most slandered of living men. . . .

"Nero sought popularity and partly averted the deep rage which was rankling in many hearts against himself, by torturing men and women, on whose agonies he thought that the populace would gaze not only with a stolid indifference, but even with fierce satisfaction. . . .

"It is clear that a shedding of blood—in fact, some form or other of human sacrifice—was imperatively demanded by popular feeling as an expiation of the ruinous crime which had plunged so many thousands into the depths of misery . . . Blood cried for blood, before the sullen suspicion against Nero could be averted, or the indignation of Heaven appeased. . . .

"No man is more systematically heartless than a corrupted debauchee. Like people, like prince. In the then condition of Rome, Nero well knew that a nation 'cruel, by their sports to blood inured,' would be most likely to forget their miseries, and condone their suspicions, by mixing games and gaiety with spectacles of refined and atrocious cruelty, of which, for eighteen centuries, the most passing record has sufficed to make men's blood run cold. . . .

"Tacitus tells us that '. . . a huge multitude were convicted, not so much on the charge of incendiarism as for their hatred to mankind.'" Then he adds: "'And various forms of mockery were added to enhance their dying agonies. Covered with the skins of wild beasts, they were doomed to die by the mangling of dogs, or by being nailed to crosses; or to be set on fire and burnt after twilight by way of nightly illumination. Nero offered his own gardens for this show, and gave a chariot race, mingling with the mob in the dress of a charioteer, or actually driving about among them."

The gardens of Nero "were thronged with gay crowds, among whom the Emperor moved in his frivolous degradation—and on every side were men dying slowly on their crosses of shame. Along the paths of those gardens on the autumn nights were ghastly torches, blackening the ground beneath them with streams of sulphurous pitch, and each of those living torches was a martyr in his shirt of fire. And in the amphitheatre hard by, in sight of twenty thousand spectators, famished dogs were tearing to pieces some of the best and purest of men and women, hideously disguised in the skins of bears or wolves. Thus did Nero baptize in the blood of martyrs the city which was to be for ages the capital of the world!" [^1]

A compassionate providence impels us to draw the curtain over a further recitation of such scenes. It suffices for us to know that the saints in that day—in the dispensation of death, in the era of martyrdom—became followers of the lowly Nazarene, only to have their blood mingled with the blood of all the martyrs of the past, that together that great river of blood might cry unto the Lord of Hosts till he, in his own good time, chose to avenge it.

Jerusalem and the Abomination of Desolation

(Matthew 24:15-22; JST Matthew 24:12-21; Mark 13:14-20; JST Mark 13:14-23; Luke 17:31-33; 21:20-24; JST Luke 17:31; 21:20)

Whatever may be said of the sufferings and sorrows and death of the Lord's saints in the age of martyrdom, it was but a type and a shadow of the vengeance and slaughter destined to be poured out upon the Jews of that generation. The synagogues in which apostles were scourged would soon be drenched in the blood of those who wielded the lash. The currents of hatred that swept many of Jesus' disciples to untimely deaths would soon become a great tidal wave of anger and animosity against the Jewish people that would destroy their city, overrun their nation, and scatter their people. Those who with Roman hands crucified their King at Jerusalem would soon themselves be hanging by the thousands upon Roman crosses in that same benighted area. The sensitivities of refined persons will overflow with revulsion as we now hear the dire predictions of Jesus against his own people and then see the beginning of their fulfillment in the very day of those then living.

When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, then ye shall stand in the holy place.

At this point in Jesus' discourse, Matthew and Luke insert the statement, "Whoso readeth let him understand." We know that Daniel foretold that desolation, born of abomination and wickedness, would sweep Jerusalem as with a flood in the day that the Messiah was cut off from among the living. (Dan. 9:27; 11:31; 12:11.) According to Luke's account, Jesus said: "And when ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with armies, then know that the desolation thereof is nigh." The sorrows and evils of this dread day we shall relate shortly. The counsel that the saints should then "stand in the holy place" means that they should assemble together where they could receive prophetic guidance that would preserve them from the desolations of the day. The place of their assembly became holy because of the righteousness of the holy ones who comprised the Lord's congregation. [^2] As Matthew recorded:

Then let them who are in Judea, flee into the mountains. Let him who is on the housetop, flee, and not return to take anything out of his house: Neither let him who is in the field, return back to take his clothes.

Luke's account speaks similarly: "Then let them who are in Judea flee to the mountains; and let them who are in the midst of it, depart out; and let not them who are in the countries, return to enter into the city." "Remember Lot's wife."

And woe unto them that are with child, and unto them that give suck in those days! Therefore, pray ye the Lord, that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the Sabbath day.

In all this, speedy flight is enjoined. 'Flee to the mountains. Let him who is on the housetop take the outside staircase, or go over the roofs of the houses. Let him who is in the field go in his work clothes. Abandon your property. Those who are in country areas must not return into the city. The time for escape will be short. Look not back to Sodom and the wealth and luxury you are leaving. Stay not in the burning house, in the hope of salvaging your treasures, lest the flame destroy you. Pray that your flight will not be impeded by the cold of winter or the shut gates and travel restrictions of the Sabbath. Flee, flee to the mountains.' (And when the day came, the true saints, guided as true saints always are by the spirit of revelation, fled to Pella in Perea and were spared.)

For then, in those days, shall be great tribulation on the Jews, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem; such as was not before sent upon Israel, of God, since the beginning of their kingdom, (for it is written their enemies shall scatter them,) until this time; no, nor ever shall be sent again upon Israel.

All things which have befallen them, are only the beginning of the sorrows which shall come upon them; and except those days should be shortened, there should none of their flesh be saved. But for the elect's sake, according to the covenant, those days shall be shortened.

Behold, these things I have spoken unto you concerning the Jews.

To this we must add those words of Jesus which Luke preserved: "For these be the days of vengeance, that all things which are written may be fulfilled. . . . For there shall be great distress in the land, and wrath upon this people. . . . And they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive into all nations."

Before viewing the desolation that came upon them—lest we think the historical account be overdrawn—we must remind ourselves of the prophetic word that foresaw the awful horrors of that day. Jesus has just said: "For it is written their enemies shall scatter them," and "These be the days of vengeance, that all things which are written may be fulfilled." Though many prophets spoke of these days, none did so with such force and power as Moses, the man of God in whom they trusted. He it was who placed before their forebears the blessings of obedience and the cursings of disobedience.

Israel, the favored and chosen of Jehovah, in the very day of their birth as a nation, heard from the mouth of Moses such an array of curses as no other people has ever faced. In more than fifty consecutive verses of Holy Writ, Jehovah proclaimed the calamities, desolations, diseases, plagues, and evils that would befall his people if they forsook him and his law.

And now fourteen hundred years later that remnant of the chosen seed which resided in old Canaan had waged open war against Jehovah as he walked in their streets, taught in their synagogues, and worked wonders in the holy house that bore his name and that they viewed as the glory of the whole earth. And so the ax was laid at the root of the rotted tree; Jerusalem was about to suffer all that the prophets had foretold.

The specific word and the exact portion of the ancient curses about to be fulfilled were these: Thou shalt "serve thine enemies which the Lord shall send against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all things: and he shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck, until he have destroyed thee.

"The Lord shall bring a nation against thee from far, from the end of the earth, as swift as the eagle flieth; a nation whose tongue thou shalt not understand; A nation of fierce countenance, which shall not regard the person of the old, nor shew favour to the young. . . .

"And he shall besiege thee in all thy gates, until thy high and fenced walls come down, wherein thou trustedst, throughout all thy land. . . .

"And thou shalt eat the fruit of thine own body, the flesh of thy sons and of thy daughters, which the Lord thy God hath given thee, in the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall distress thee. . . .

"The tender and delicate woman among you, which would not adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness and tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the husband of her bosom, and toward her son, and toward her daughter, And toward her young one that cometh out from between her feet, and toward her children which she shall bear: for she shall eat them for want of all things secretly in the siege and straitness, wherewith thine enemy shall distress thee in thy gates. . . .

"And the Lord shall scatter thee among all people, from the one end of the earth even unto the other; . . . And among these nations shalt thou find no ease, neither shall the sole of thy foot have rest: but the Lord shall give thee there a trembling heart, and failing eyes, and sorrow of mind: And thy life shall hang in doubt before thee; and thou shalt fear day and night, and shalt have none assurance of life: In the morning thou shalt say, Would God it were even! and at even thou shalt say, Would God it were morning!" (Deut. 28:15-68.)

Thus saith Jehovah; such is the prophetic word, and his word shall not return unto him void. Summarizing the details given by Josephus of the siege of Jerusalem, our friend Farrar, with his usual literary craftsmanship, says: "Never was a narrative more full of horrors, frenzies, unspeakable degradations, and overwhelming miseries than is the history of the siege of Jerusalem. Never was any prophecy more closely, more terribly, more overwhelmingly fulfilled than this of Christ.

"The men going about in the disguise of women with swords concealed under their gay robes; the rival outrages and infamies of John and Simon; the priests struck by darts from the upper court of the Temple, and falling slain by their own sacrifices; 'the blood of all sorts of dead carcases—priests, strangers, profane—standing in lakes in the holy courts'; the corpses themselves lying in piles and mounds on the very altar slopes; the fires feeding luxuriously on cedar-work overlaid with gold: friend and foe trampled to death on the gleaming mosaics in promiscuous carnage; priests, swollen with hunger, leaping madly into the devouring flames, till at last those flames had done their work, and what had been the Temple of Jerusalem, the beautiful and holy House of God, was a heap of ghastly ruin, where the burning embers were half-slaked in pools of gore.

"And did not all the righteous blood shed upon the earth since the days of Abel come upon that generation? Did not many of that generation survive to witness and feel the unutterable horrors which Josephus tells?—to see their fellows crucified in jest 'some one way, and some another,' till 'room was wanting for the crosses, and crosses for the carcases?'—to experience the 'deep silence' and the kind of deadly night which seized upon the city in the intervals of rage?—to see 600,000 dead bodies carried out of the gates?—to see friends fighting madly for grass and nettles, and the refuse of the drains?—to see the bloody zealots 'gaping for want, and stumbling and staggering along like mad dogs?'—to hear the horrid tale of the miserable mother who, in the pangs of famine, had devoured her own child?—to be sold for slaves in such multitudes that at last none would buy them?—to see the streets running with blood, and the 'fire of burning houses quenched in the blood of their defenders?'—to have their young sons sold in hundreds, or exposed in the amphitheatres to the sword of the gladiator or the fury of the lion, until at last, 'since the people were now slain, the Holy House burnt down, and the city in flames, there was nothing farther left for the enemy to do?'

"In that awful siege it is believed that there perished 1,100,000 men, besides the 97,000 who were carried captive, and most of whom perished subsequently in the arena or the mine; and it was an awful thing to feel, as some of the survivors and eyewitnesses—and they not Christians—did feel, that 'the city had deserved its overthrow by producing a generation of men who were the causes of its misfortunes;' and that 'neither did any other city ever suffer such miseries, nor did any age ever breed a generation more fruitful in wickedness than this was, since the beginning of the world.'" (Farrar, pp. 573-74.) [^3]

Thus saith the Lord: "Vengeance is mine; I will repay." (Rom. 12:19.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] A perfect illustration of this religious turmoil is found in the religious revival that swept the frontier areas of America in the day of Joseph Smith. "It commenced with the Methodists," he said, "but soon became general among all the sects in that region of country. Indeed, the whole district of country seemed affected by it, and great multitudes united themselves to the different religious parties, which created no small stir and division among the people, some crying, 'Lo, here!' and others, 'Lo, there!' Some were contending for the Methodist faith, some for the Presbyterian, and some for the Baptist." (Joseph Smith-History 1:5.)
[^2] How glorious is the voice we hear, announcing the fulfillment of that which John wrote. "I have sent forth mine angel flying through the midst of heaven," the voice says, "having the everlasting gospel, who hath appeared unto some and hath committed it unto man, who shall appear unto many that dwell on the earth. And this gospel shall be preached unto every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. And the servants of God shall go forth, saying with a loud voice: Fear God and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come; And worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters." (D&C 133:36-39.)
[^3] As an introduction to the quoted passage, Farrar says: "Speaking of the murder of the younger Hanan, and other eminent nobles and hierarchs, Josephus says, 'I cannot but think that it was because God had doomed this city to destruction as a polluted city, and was resolved to purge His sanctuary by fire, that He cut off these their great defenders and well-wishers; while those that a little before had worn the sacred garments and presided over the public worship, and had been esteemed venerable by those that dwelt in the whole habitable earth, were cast out naked, and seen to be the food of dogs and wild beasts.'" (Farrar, The Life of Christ, pp. 572-73.)
