Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 91

The Olivet Discourse: The Last Days

He shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you: Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began. (Acts 3:20-21.)

Universal Apostasy before the Second Coming

(Matthew 24:23-27; JST Matthew 24:22-24, 27; Mark 13:21-23; JST Mark 13:24-26, 28-29; Luke 17:22-25; JST Luke 17:22-24)

How sad and dire it is to hear the babble of discordant voices saying, "Lo, here is Christ, and lo, there," each voice supposing that his philosophy of religion is the one that will save men in the everlasting realms ahead!

How far from the truth it is for men to suppose that what Jesus taught would remain in its pure and perfect form, with all its saving power, so that men in the latter days would, through it, have the same blessings as their forebears!

Has no one read the promises made of old that the Lord Jesus cannot return "except there come a falling away first" (2 Thes. 2:1-12); that before that day, "darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people" (Isa. 60:2; D&C 112:23-24); that the whole earth "is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant" (Isa. 24:5)?

Does anyone really suppose that the sects of modern Christendom—with their silks and robes and rituals; with their notions of a salvation without works and by grace alone; with neither signs, nor miracles, nor apostles, nor prophets, nor revelation—does anyone really believe such a Christianity is the same as that of Jesus and Peter and Paul?

Truly, before the Lord returns, the divine decree is: Lucifer shall have his day; Satan shall reign in the hearts of men; the man of sin—who is the master of sin and the father of lies—shall hold dominion over all the earth. The Lord, according to the promises, will make the earth empty; his saving truths shall be taken away, and universal apostasy shall prevail.

Thus, Jesus—having spoken to the disciples of what shall be in their generation; having told of the destruction of Jerusalem and the scattering of the Jews; having warned those then living of what impends in their day—Jesus now raises his warning voice to us relative to what is to be in the latter days.

And again, after the tribulation of those days which shall come upon Jerusalem, if any man shall say unto you, Lo! here is Christ, or there; believe him not; For in those days, there shall also arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if possible, they shall deceive the very elect, who are the elect according to the covenant.

In the day preceding our Lord's return, false religions will cover the earth. Each will be, as it were, a false Christ, inviting men to this or that system of salvation; each will have its own ministers and evangelists who, as false prophets, will propound its doctrines and extol its wonders. [^1] So great and wondrous will be these false systems that men will think, How could a church be false that builds such cathedrals as these? How could a church be false that crowns kings and emperors; that sends forth armies into battle; that commands the services of artists and sculptors; that has, as it seems, all the gold and power of earth? With such "signs" and "wonders" as these, will not all but the very elect be deceived?

Behold, I speak these things unto you for the elect's sake. Behold, I have told you before. Wherefore if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert; go not forth: behold, he is in the secret chambers; believe it not.

For as the light of the morning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west, and covereth the whole earth; so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be.

Let the elect know of the great apostasy of latter days; let them shun false teachers who would reveal Christ, as they suppose, in a life of asceticism in the deserts, or in the seclusion of secret monastic chambers; let them know that when the restored truths of everlasting life come again among men, they shall be as the rising sun which gradually sheds its wholesome rays over all the earth. Let them know that the Son of Man will not come to reign personally on earth until this light, in millennial brilliance, shall have cast out all the darkness of long ages of apostasy.

An Era of Restoration before the Second Coming

(Matthew 24:14, 28; JST Matthew 24:28, 32; Mark 13:10; JST Mark 13:30-31, 36)

As set forth in our scriptural text that heads this chapter, Christ cannot come again—he must be retained in heaven—until the great era of restoration, "until the times of restitution" in which the Lord will restore all things which he hath spoken "by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." Jesus now names two of these things—things that must be given again before his Second Advent. They are: the fulness of the everlasting gospel and the gathering together again of the house of Israel.

And now I show unto you a parable. Behold, wheresoever the carcass is, there will the eagles be gathered together; so likewise shall mine elect be gathered from the four quarters of the earth. . . .

And again, this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come, or the destruction of the wicked.

Nothing so touched the hearts of Jewish-Israel as the many prophetic assurances that the dispersed and scattered remnants of that once favored nation would someday come together to worship the Lord their God as in former days. Nothing instilled in them a greater hope of ultimate glory and triumph than the divine word that some day the kingdom would be restored to Israel and that the Gentiles would then bow beneath their rod. It is this very hope in the hearts of the Twelve that will cause them a little more than forty days hence, on this very Mount, to ask the then-risen Lord, ere he ascends to his Father, when it is that such a restoration shall take place. They will then be reminded of its deferral to a later day. But here Jesus tells them that the gathering of Israel will commence before he comes again. It is one of the signs of the times.

And in this connection the very gospel he has given them, the same saving truths, the same plan of salvation that they have received, will, in that future day, come forth to be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations. Until this has been done the Lord Jesus will not return.

How aptly do these words of the Lord Jesus lay a foundation for those yet to be written by the Beloved John, who will tell of the angelic ministrant flying through the midst of heaven to restore, in a day subsequent to New Testament times, the fulness of the everlasting gospel. (Rev. 14:6-7.) [^2]

Sad it is that there will be universal apostasy for a long period before the great and dreadful day of the Lord. But, praise be to him, there shall also be a day of restoration when the ancient blessed truths shall come again, and when Israel shall be gathered to the ancient standard, a standard that shall again be set up on earth.

Desolations Precede the Second Coming

(Matthew 24:6-8; JST Matthew 24:25, 29-31; Mark 13:7-8; JST Mark 13:27, 32-35; Luke 21:9-11; JST Luke 21:9)

In the latter-day age of restoration, when once again the glorious wonders of the gospel are available to men, and when Israel is gathering again round the ancient standard, the powers of evil will be unleashed as never before in all history. Satan will then fight the truth and stir up the hearts of men to do evil and work wickedness to an extent and with an intensity never before known.

And ye also shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars; see that ye be not troubled; for all I have told you must come to pass. But the end is not yet.

And they shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars. Behold I speak unto you for mine elect's sake. For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; there shall be famine and pestilences, and earthquakes in divers places.

And again, because iniquity shall abound, the love of men shall wax cold; but he that shall not be overcome, the same shall be saved.

There will be wars and rumors of wars in the day of the Twelve to whom Jesus then spoke, but they are not to be troubled thereby; many things must yet transpire before the day of Jesus' return, and the end of all things is not for their day.

But when those of us who live in the day of restoration hear of wars; when voices of contention and conspiracy among us threaten to use the sword in this eventuality or that; when we hear reports and rumors about the use of atomic bombs, poisonous gases, and other weapons of unbelievable power and cruelty; when these things happen in our day, it is quite another thing. Such things are among the signs of the times, and the wars and desolations of our day will make the hostilities of the past seem like feeble skirmishes among childish combatants.

Ours is the dispensation of desolation and war that will be climaxed by a worldwide Armageddon of butchery and blood at the very hour of the coming of the Son of Man. Jesus speaks thus for the elect's sake; none others can read the signs of the times. Carnal men will consider war as a way of life and a norm of society, not as a scourge sent of God to cleanse the earth preparatory to the return of his Son.

Nor is war all we face; as the crusades of carnage increase, so will the plagues and pestilence. Famine and disease will stalk the earth. And for some reason, as yet undiscovered by modern geologists, earthquakes will increase in number and intensity. These are the last days, and the judgments of God are at hand.

All this shall be because iniquity abounds. Sin is the father of all the ills poured out upon mankind.

Gentile Fulness Ends before the Second Coming

(Luke 21:24-28; JST Luke 21:23-28; D&C 45:22-35)

As we have seen, Jerusalem, the Holy City, was to become a ghastly ruin; the pleasant home of the prophets was to be turned into a field of blood; its strong walls and magnificent Temple were to be as ashes and dust. And as we know, all that was promised came speedily to pass. Then, on the ancient site, there arose a Gentile Jerusalem, which remains unto this day. Of it Jesus now says:

And Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

He is here classifying all men as Jews or Gentiles. There are no others. Jews are the Israelites, no matter what their tribal ancestry (Paul, for instance, was of Benjamin), who in the meridian of time comprised the Israelite inhabitants of Palestine plus their kindred who had spread forth from them into Egypt and Greece and Rome and other nations where they dwelt as distinct groups. All other people are Gentiles, including Israelites who were not Jewish nationals as herein defined. In this sense Joseph Smith, a pure Ephraimite, was a Gentile, and the Book of Mormon came forth as promised by way of the Gentile. In this sense those of us of Ephraim and Manasseh and other tribes who are already gathered with latter-day Israel are Gentiles. The Gentiles are the non-Jews within the meaning of words as here used.

The times of the Gentiles is the period during which the gospel will be preached to the Gentiles in preference to the Jews, and the times of the Jews is the similar period when the Jewish nationals, so to speak, will again receive the message of salvation that is in Christ. We are living in the times of the Gentiles, but that era is drawing to its close, and the gospel will soon go to the Jews.

In the generation in which the times of the Gentiles shall be fulfilled, there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars; and upon the earth distress of nations with perplexity, like the sea and the waves roaring. The earth also shall be troubled, and the waters of the great deep; Men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth: for the powers of heaven shall be shaken.

We see here, again, the perplexities and problems of nations and kingdoms, as wars and evil abound; we see men, subject to disease and pestilence, as their hearts fail them; and we see the geological changes out of which come earthquakes, tidal waves, and changes in the sea. In this respect, from the more amplified account of what Jesus said, we learn:

Ye say that ye know that the end of the world cometh; ye say also that ye know that the heavens and the earth shall pass away; And in this ye say truly, for so it is; but these things which I have told you shall not pass away until all shall be fulfilled.

Though there will be a new heaven and a new earth whereon dwelleth righteousness, such a millennial condition will not come into being until all the things of which Jesus is now speaking have been fulfilled.

And this I have told you concerning Jerusalem; and when that day shall come, shall a remnant be scattered among all nations; But they shall be gathered again; but they shall remain until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

The scattered remnants of the ancient Jews are even now in all nations, where, in the main they will remain until they accept their Messiah and believe in the true gospel. That stirrings within them are preparing the way for this day of conversion is seen from the religious-political movement that already has assembled some—still in their unbelief—back to the land of their ancestors. The identifying characteristics of the day when the Jews will begin to believe and come again into the true fold are described in these words:

And in that day shall be heard of wars and rumors of wars, and the whole earth shall be in commotion, and men's hearts shall fail them, and they shall say that Christ delayeth his coming until the end of the earth. And the love of men shall wax cold, and iniquity shall abound.

This is the description of the world in which we now live. Of this there can be no doubt. The signs of the times are being fulfilled, and the elect can discern their true meaning by the power of the Spirit.

And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up and lift up your heads, for the day of your redemption draweth nigh.

Such are our Lord's words as Luke has preserved them. The revealed account given in our day says:

And when the times of the Gentiles is come in, a light shall break forth among them that sit in darkness, and it shall be the fulness of my gospel; But they receive it not; for they perceive not the light, and they turn their hearts from me because of the precepts of men. And in that generation shall the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

The time is at hand; the light has broken forth; it is the fulness of the everlasting gospel. So far the Jews have not received it, with isolated exceptions, because of the precepts of men. But soon the times of the Gentiles will be fulfilled, and the day of the Jews will commence.

And there shall be men standing in that generation, that shall not pass until they shall see an overflowing scourge; for a desolating sickness shall cover the land.

But my disciples shall stand in holy places and shall not be moved; but among the wicked, men shall lift up their voices and curse God and die.

And there shall be earthquakes also in divers places, and many desolations; yet men will harden their hearts against me, and they will take up the sword, one against another, and they will kill one another.

That the disciples of old should have been sorely troubled by these words is almost self-evident. Hence Jesus said:

Be not troubled, for, when all these things shall come to pass, ye may know that the promises which have been made unto you shall be fulfilled.

That as modern disciples we should feel as our Lord counseled his ancient disciples is also self-evident. As the glorious conclusion of it all, Jesus said:

And then shall they see the Son of man coming in a cloud, with power and great glory.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Signs and Wonders Shall Precede the Second Coming. The sin of surfeiting—the intemperate indulgence in food and drink, symbolical of setting one's heart and interests on carnal rather than spiritual things. "But what will the world do," the Prophet Joseph Smith asked, when they see the sign of the Coming of the Son of Man? "They will say it is a planet, a comet, etc. But the Son of man will come as the sign of the coming of the Son of Man, which will be as the light of the morning cometh out of the east." (Teachings, p. 287.)
[^2] The Jews Shall Gather at Jerusalem Before the Second Coming. The sin of drunkenness—literally, the dulling of one's mental and spiritual faculties by alcohol; figuratively, the dulling of one's spiritual senses by imbibing the false doctrines and views of the world. Joseph Smith said: "Judah must return, Jerusalem must be rebuilt, and the temple. . . . It will take some time to rebuild the walls of the city and the temple, etc.; and all this must be done before the Son of Man will make His appearance." (Teachings, p. 286.)
