Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 92

The Olivet Discourse: The Second Coming

Prepare ye for the coming of the Bridegroom; go ye, go ye out to meet him. (D&C 133:19-20.)

Behold, the day of the Lord cometh. . . . And his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the east. (Zech. 14:1, 4.)

The Abomination of Desolation at the Second Coming

(Matthew 24:29, 34-35; JST Matthew 24:33-36; Mark 13:24-25, 30-31; JST Mark 13:37-40; Luke 21:32-33; JST Luke 23:32)

Titus crucified Jerusalem on a cross of Roman steel; desolation and death swept down the streets where apostles and prophets once taught; the spiritual capital of the world became the synagogue of Satan; the Holy City sank to the depths of Sodom and Egypt; and Jehovah's House was torn to bits—to rise no more. The Jewish Jerusalem made way for a Gentile Jerusalem that would continue until the day when the abomination of desolation would again pour its fury upon the place and the people.

In "the generation when the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled," this awesome scene will be reenacted. Jerusalem, this time besieged by the armies of the earth, shall be direly desolated. But this time there will be a different destiny. The Lord himself will come to fight her battles; a remnant of the people will be saved; and the Gentile Jerusalem will become again a Jewish Jerusalem. Sodomic influences will be consumed with devouring fire, and the New Jerusalem will become, in all her glory and magnificence, the spiritual capital of the world. Jehovah himself will come to the new temple, there to be constructed after the order of his new kingdom, and the saints shall worship in those sacred halls for a thousand years. And so, as Jesus continues the Olivet Discourse, we hear him say:

And again shall the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, be fulfilled. And immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken.

Verily I say unto you, this generation, in which these things shall be shown forth, shall not pass away until all I have told you shall be fulfilled. Although the days will come that heaven and earth shall pass away, yet my word shall not pass away; but all shall be fulfilled.

"I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle," the Lord says of this coming day, "and the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city." This is the dread day of Armageddon, the day when Satan shall be arrayed against freedom and light, the day when the armies of men shall number two hundred million men of arms. "Then shall the Lord go forth," the prophetic record says, "and fight against those nations, as when he fought in the day of battle. And his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the east. . . . And the Lord my God shall come, and all the saints with thee. . . . And the Lord shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall there be one Lord, and his name one." (Zech. 14:2-5, 9.)

Be it noted that the Lord—who is the lowly Nazarene, and who is also a man of war—will come in his glory when war and desolation are sweeping the earth; when all nations are engaged in mortal combat; when the powers of earth are arrayed, ready for the burning destruction he will bring.

And be it also noted that it is "immediately after the tribulation of those days" that the heavenly manifestations incident to the Second Coming will shower their display before men, and that all this shall surely come to pass in the generation when the times of the Gentiles is fulfilled.

The Glories Attending Our Lord's Return

(Matthew 24:30-31; JST Matthew 24:37-40; Mark 13:26-27; JST Mark 13:41-44; D&C 45:39-55)

And as I said before, after the tribulation of those days, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken, then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in heaven; and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn.

After the abomination of desolation sweeps Jerusalem in the last days; after the city is taken, its houses rifled, its women ravished, and half its inhabitants taken into captivity; after the sun and the moon refuse to give light and the stars fall from heaven—then will appear one grand sign of the Son of Man in heaven. At this time, the Lord in his wisdom has not seen fit to reveal the nature of this sign, though from what follows it is clear that the elect will recognize it as the heavenly portent given to announce the coming of their King. [^1]

When the sign appears, there will be such mourning throughout the earth as has not before been known. As to the mourning in Israel, the prophetic word acclaims: "They shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn. In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, . . . And the land shall mourn, every family apart." (Zech. 12:10-12.)

And they shall see the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory;

And whoso treasureth up my word shall not be deceived.

For the Son of Man shall come; and he shall send his angels before him with the great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together the remainder of his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.

Lo, he cometh; none can stay his hand, and all who remain on earth shall see him and know who he is. Once as the Suffering Servant he sat with his weary disciples on the Mount of Olives; now as Lord and Master that same mountain will cleave at his touch, and he shall be King over all the earth. And whereas the gathering of his people has heretofore been directed by fallible mortals, now the angels will direct the work, and none who deserve to be saved with chosen Israel shall be overlooked.

In the revealed account of the Olivet Discourse, the Lord gives us more of the words spoken on that sacred spot than have been preserved by the three Synoptists. From this latter-day record we take these additions and amplifications of the biblical accounts:

And it shall come to pass that he that feareth me shall be looking forth for the great day of the Lord to come, even for the signs of the coming of the Son of Man.

And they shall see signs and wonders, for they shall be shown forth in the heavens above, and in the earth beneath. And they shall behold blood, and fire, and vapors of smoke. And before the day of the Lord shall come, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon be turned into blood, and the stars fall from heaven.

Signs follow those who believe; signs are for people who have faith; signs reveal the handdealings of the Lord to those who treasure up his word. From the standpoint of the disciples, sitting with Jesus on Olivet, surely railroads and airplanes, radio and television, and satellites orbiting the earth would be signs and wonders on earth and in heaven. Vapors of smoke spray forth when atomic bombs are exploded; blood and fire are descriptive of modern warfare; and the sun, moon, and stars will yet speak forth their messages. When "the earth shall tremble and reel to and fro as a drunken man" (D&C 88:87) and "shall remove out of her place" (Isa. 13:10-13); when "the islands shall become one land" (D&C 133:23) and the whole face of the earth be changed, as a new heaven and a new earth is born, it will seem as though the very stars in the sidereal heavens are hurling themselves out of their places. These are signs that have been, signs that are, and signs that will yet herald the coming of the Promised One.

And the remnant shall be gathered unto this place; And then they shall look for me, and, behold, I will come; and they shall see me in the clouds of heaven, clothed with power and great glory; with all the holy angels; and he that watches not for me shall be cut off.

These Jews, gathered at Jerusalem—pursuant to the command: "Let them who be of Judah flee unto Jerusalem, unto the mountains of the Lord's house" (D&C 133:13)—shall be members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. They will be Christians; they will believe in Christ; they will accept him as their Messiah; and they will be looking forward to his return. As Ezekiel prophesied, the Lord will make with them "a covenant of peace," they will receive his "everlasting covenant," and he will set his "sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore." (Ezek. 37:26-28.) [^2]

All the faithful—their bodies in the grave, their spirits in paradise—shall come forth in glorious immortality; they shall rise in celestial splendor; they shall meet their gracious Lord and then return with him as part of his triumphal entourage. And the mortal saints, though they be scattered to the four quarters of the earth, shall be caught up to meet him and shall return to live and reign with him a thousand years. (D&C 88:95-98.)

But before the arm of the Lord shall fall, an angel shall sound his trump, and the saints that have slept shall come forth to meet me in the cloud.

Wherefore, if ye have slept in peace blessed are you; for as you now behold me and know that I am, even so shall ye come unto me and your souls shall live, and your redemption shall be perfected; and the saints shall come forth from the four quarters of the earth.

Then shall the arm of the Lord fall upon the nations.

And then shall the Lord set his foot upon this mount, and it shall cleave in twain, and the earth shall tremble, and reel to and fro, and the heavens also shall shake.

And the Lord shall utter his voice, and all the ends of the earth shall hear it; and the nations of the earth shall mourn, and they that have laughed shall see their folly.

And calamity shall cover the mocker, and the scorner shall be consumed; and they that have watched for iniquity shall be hewn down and cast into the fire.

This is the day of vengeance which was in the heart of the Lord. It is the day when mourning and sorrow shall be universal; it is the day when all the nations of the earth shall weep because of the calamities that have befallen them; it is the day when rivers of blood shed in battle shall leave every family in deep anguish.

What of those who laughed at the upright and the godly, at those who would not stoop to live after the manner of the world? They shall see their folly, a folly that leaves them bound with the hellish chains of sin.

What of those who mocked the saints and derided the humble followers of Christ? The judgments of God will rest upon them; the calamities of nature will fall as hail and lightning from heaven.

What of the scorners, wise in their own worldly conceits, who belittle true believers for their creeds and doctrine? They shall be consumed by the glory of His presence.

And what of those who watched for iniquity? Would God they had watched and waited instead for the Lord, for they shall be hewn down, cast into the fire, and consigned to a burning endless hell.

And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet? Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God.

And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king.

The nail marks in his hands and in his feet, the gaping spear wound in his side—these are the signs of the cross; the signs of his crucifixion; the signs that he is the One who was lifted up that he might draw all men unto him on conditions of repentance. He manifests them in his resurrected flesh as and when occasion requires.

"And one shall say unto him," Zechariah prophesied, "What are these wounds in thine hands? Then shall he answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends." (Zech. 13:6.) Hearing the answer, the Jews will lament and mourn for their own iniquities—and on behalf of their fathers—because they persecuted and slew their King. Then shall the great conversion of the Jews take place; then shall be fulfilled that which the Lord spake by the mouth of Zechariah: "I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications: and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced." (Zech. 12:10.)

And then shall the heathen nations be redeemed, and they that knew no law shall have part in the first resurrection; and it shall be tolerable for them. And Satan shall be bound, that he shall have no place in the hearts of the children of men.

A gracious Lord offers to all men all that they are capable of receiving. Even the heathen who are without the law shall come forth in the afternoon of the first resurrection and be blessed with a terrestrial inheritance that shall be tolerable for them. And, finally, O glorious millennial reality, Satan shall be bound for a thousand years by "the righteousness" of men, and he shall have "no power over the hearts of the people, for they dwell in righteousness, and the Holy One of Israel reigneth." (1 Ne. 22:26.)

When Will the Son of Man Come?

(Matthew 24:32-33, 36-39; JST Matthew 24:41-45; Mark 13:28-29, 32; JST Mark 13:45-49; Luke 17:26-30; 21:29-31; D&C 45:34-38)

"What is the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world, or the destruction of the wicked, which is the end of the world?" Such was the question propounded by the Twelve as they sat with their Lord on the pleasant slopes of the Mount of Olives. He has answered by naming the signs that will take place in the "generation" of his return. He will not particularize beyond this; indeed, he is about to decline to name the day and the hour. But first he will give the parable of the fig tree. The disciples are troubled, as well they might be, at the desolations and sorrows that will yet befall men; at the bloodshed and wickedness that shall reign until the end comes; and over the many souls who shall be lost because men harden their hearts against the Holy One. Jesus says:

Be not troubled, for, when all these things shall come to pass, ye may know that the promises which have been made unto you shall be fulfilled.

And when the light shall begin to break forth, it shall be with them like unto a parable which I will show you—

Ye look and behold the fig-trees, and ye see them with your eyes, and ye say when they begin to shoot forth, and their leaves are yet tender, that summer is now nigh at hand; Even so it shall be in that day when they shall see all these things, then shall they know that the hour is nigh.

As Matthew records it, Jesus said: "Mine elect, when they shall see all these things, they shall know that he is near, even at the doors."

Thus: "Jesus both reveals and keeps hidden the time of his coming. The parable is perfect for his purposes. It announces that he will most assuredly return in the 'season' when the promised signs are shown. But it refrains from specifying the day or the hour when the figs will be harvested, thus leaving men in a state of expectant hope, ever keeping themselves ready for the coming harvest. . . .

"This parable pertains to the latter days. The restoration of the gospel, with the light that thereby breaks forth in darkness, is the beginning of the shooting forth of the leaves of the fig tree." (Commentary 1:664.)

But of that day and hour no one knoweth; no, not the angels of God in heaven, but my Father only.

But as it was in the days of Noah, so it shall be also at the coming of the Son of Man. For it shall be with them as it was in the days which were before the flood; for until the day that Noah entered into the ark, they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, and knew not until the flood came and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be.

Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed.

The flood of Noah and the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah are types of the Second Coming. In Noah's day the normal affairs of life continued until the flood came to destroy the world that then was; in Lot's day, all went on, as was common among men, until the Lord rained fire and brimstone from heaven upon those wicked cities and destroyed their world. So shall it be with the destruction of the wicked, which is the end of the world. Such shall come without warning, as a thief in the night, where the wicked and ungodly are concerned. But with the elect of God, it is quite another matter. Though even they do not know the day or the hour, yet the season and the generation are clearly revealed. It shall be the season and the generation in which the signs of the times are manifest.

"Who May Abide the Day of His Coming?"

(Matthew 24:40-41; JST Matthew 24:46-48; JST Mark 13:50-51; Luke 17:34-37; JST Luke 17:34-40)

When the Lord comes—

Then shall be fulfilled that which is written, That in the last days, two shall be in the field, one shall be taken and the other left. Two shall be grinding at the mill: the one taken, and the other left.

We have no present source for the scripture here quoted by Jesus relative to the last days. Malachi, however, in a Messianic passage of superlative power, says of the Second Coming: "The Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, . . . But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fuller's soap. . . . For, behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch." In addition to "the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly," this passage also names sorcerers, adulterers, false swearers, those who oppress the hireling, the widow, and the fatherless in their wages, those who lead men away from the truth, and members of the true Church who do not pay an honest tithing—all these are named as among those who will not abide the day. (Mal. 3, 4.) Paul speaks of "them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel," as among those "who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord" at his Second Coming. (2 Thes. 1:7-9.) And our revelation proclaims that when he comes, "Every corruptible thing, both of man, or of the beasts of the field, or of the fowls of the heavens, or of the fish of the sea, that dwells upon all the face of the earth, shall be consumed." (D&C 101:24.)

Thus, when the Lord Jesus returns, he will destroy the wicked by the breath of his lips, the ungodly shall be burned as stubble, and the vineyard shall be cleansed of corruption. Though two, seemingly alike, work or walk or sleep or live together, one shall be destroyed by the brightness of his coming and the other preserved to enjoy the fruits of the millennial earth.

In an earlier day, in Galilee, after proclaiming this same doctrine, Jesus was asked: "Where, Lord, shall they be taken?" His answer:

Wheresoever the body is gathered; or, in other words, whithersoever the saints are gathered, thither will the eagles be gathered together.

Luke, our recorder of this prior teaching, writing by way of prophecy and revelation, then said: "This he spake, signifying the gathering of his saints; and of angels descending and gathering the remainder unto them: the one from the bed, the other from the grinding, and the other from the field, whithersoever he listeth. For verily there shall be new heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness." Truly the angels shall complete the gathering of the elect. And as to those who are consumed and who abide not the day, Luke continues: "And there shall be no unclean thing; for the earth becoming old, even as a garment, having waxed in corruption, wherefore it vanisheth away, and the footstool remaineth sanctified, cleansed from all sin." Such is the new heaven and the new earth which shall come into being at the end of the world, which is the destruction of the wicked.

Watch, Pray, Take Heed, Be Ready!

(Matthew 24:42-51; JST Matthew 24:49-50, 56; Mark 13:33-37; JST Mark 13:52-61; Luke 12:35-48; 21:34-36; JST Luke 12:38-57; 21:34, 36)

Prophetic preachments have a purpose; doctrines are not taught simply to entertain, or even to edify without more. Jesus has now taught the doctrine of the Second Coming of the Son of Man so that his disciples—and all future followers into whose hands the teachings come—may use them to prepare their own souls for salvation.

If there is to be a universal apostasy before the Lord returns, the elect must know this, lest they espouse false religions and lose their souls. If the gospel is to be restored and Israel gathered, let the chosen seed find the new gospel and learn where they should gather, lest they fail to gain the promised blessings. If the Gentile fulness is at hand and Jewish Israel is soon to be favored again, let this be known to the Jews, lest they remain in darkness and be rejected with their fathers. If there are to be wars and calamities, desolations and signs, let the elect view these things in their eternal perspective, lest they remain as other men and reap the curses that shall be poured out without measure. If at our Lord's return the wicked will be as stubble and every corruptible thing shall be consumed by the brightness of his coming, how important it is to know how to escape the flames!

Thus, Jesus calls upon his disciples and all men to watch, pray, take heed, and be ready!

And what I say unto one, I say unto all men; Watch, therefore, for ye know not at what hour your Lord doth come. But know this, if the good man of the house had known in what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house to have been broken up; but would have been ready.

Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son of Man cometh.

The illustration is perfect; the application can never be forgotten. He will come as a thief in the night, unexpectedly and without warning, where the wicked and ungodly are concerned. And even as pertaining to his saints, it shall be at such an hour—though the generation is known!—which they think not.

Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord hath made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season? Blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing. Verily I say unto you, That he shall make him ruler over all his goods.

But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming; And shall begin to smite his fellowservants, and to eat and drink with the drunken; The lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, And shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

So the Lord purposes with reference to his own! His holy apostles, all his disciples, the army of servants who hold his holy priesthood—let them care for his earthly church. Their reward? Rulership over all his house everlastingly. But those servants who are overcome by the world, though they retain their church title and power, shall be as the stubble of the world. The blessed hour of his return overtaking them unawares, they shall be cast out to be damned with their ilk.

Both Mark and Luke, in recording the Olivet Discourse, preserve for us some expressive verities not contained in the Matthew version and not revealed anew in Doctrine and Covenants, section 45. Mark tells us that Jesus said:

Take ye heed, watch and pray: for ye know not when the time is. For the Son of man is as a man taking a far journey, who left his house, and gave authority to his servants, and to every man his work, and commanded the porter to watch.

Watch ye therefore: for ye know not when the master of the house cometh, at even, or at midnight, or at the cockcrowing, or in the morning: Lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping.

And what I say unto you I say unto all, Watch.

That is: Jesus leaves his church and journeys to his Father; he gives his disciples authority to regulate his earthly kingdom in his absence. They know not the time of his return, whether in the darkness of the night or the dawning of the day. They and all men must watch and be ready, lest when he comes he find them indifferent to their Lord's business. Similar counsel, couched in different words, has been preserved for us by Luke:

Let my disciples therefore take heed to themselves, lest at any time their hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and that day come upon them unawares. For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole earth.

And what I say unto one, I say unto all, Watch ye therefore, and pray always, and keep my commandments, that ye may be counted worthy to escape all these things which shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man when he shall come clothed in the glory of his Father.

Three sins, common everywhere and among all peoples; three sins, which are scarcely deemed by men to be transgressions of the divine will; three sins, which are part of the common walk of almost all men—such are here named by Jesus; and the disciples are counseled to avoid them. They are:

These sins are a snare that entraps the whole earth. Only those who avoid them and who keep the commandments will be prepared to stand before the Son of Man when he comes again in glory.

Between four and six months before, at an unnamed place in Judea, perhaps in Jerusalem, Jesus taught some similar things that it is opportune for us to consider here:

Let your loins be girded about and have your lights burning; That ye yourselves may be like unto men who wait for their Lord, when he will return from the wedding; that, when he cometh and knocketh, they may open unto him immediately.

Verily I say unto you, Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord when he cometh shall find watching; for he shall gird himself, and make them sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them.

This is a sweet and lovely illustration, one that warns the Twelve (and all disciples) to be ready for the Second Coming, which will come suddenly. The Lord leaves his servants to care for his church while he ascends into heaven. Their loins are girded for labor, for there is work to be done; there are souls to be saved. Their lamps are lighted, for they must enlighten a dark and sinful world; their words must shine forth in celestial splendor, and their deeds must be beacons of brightness to be seen by all men. The Lord's return from the marriage feast is either his Second Advent or, as we shall see, the judgment of each individual soul at death.

What blessed joy shall fill the hearts of those who watch for his return! They will be in his presence and eat at his table, where he himself will serve them. Having so taught, Jesus then shows how the blessings of the Second Coming will attend all faithful watchers, even though they do not live at the day and the hour of his glorious return.

For behold, he cometh in the first watch of the night, and he shall also come in the second watch, and again he shall come in the third watch.

And verily I say unto you, He hath already come, as it is written of him; and again when he shall come in the second watch, or come in the third watch, blessed are those servants when he cometh, that he shall find so doing; For the Lord of those servants shall gird himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them.

And now, verily I say these things unto you, that ye may know this, that the coming of the Lord is as a thief in the night. And it is like unto a man who is an householder, who, if he watcheth not his goods, the thief cometh in an hour of which he is not aware, and taketh his goods, and divideth them among his fellows.

All men shall not be alive at the day of his coming, but whenever they live, it will be as though the great and dreadful day of the Lord had come in their day. If his servants have served faithfully in his earthly house—the Church and kingdom of God on earth—his coming (to them) will be the year of his redeemed. If they have eaten and drunken with the wicked; if their lives have been overcharged with surfeiting and the cares of this life; if they have been proud and evil and prone to wickedness—his coming (to them) will be the day of vengeance which was in his heart.

And not only that—he hath come already! For those then living, the Second Coming, as it were, was passed. The Lord was there—at least their day of judgment had come—and those who watched for righteousness were saved while those who watched for iniquity were ready for the fire. He was about to gird himself, wash the feet of the Twelve, and serve them as they partook of the Passover meal. To them he had already come as thief in the night. If they had watched, their goods would not now be ready for the flames, for "the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is." (1 Cor. 3:12-15.)

Hearing and understanding all these things, the disciples "said among themselves, If the good man of the house had known what hour the thief would come, he would have watched, and not have suffered his house to be broken through and the loss of his goods." To this Jesus said:

Verily I say unto you, be ye therefore ready also; for the Son of Man cometh at an hour when ye think not.

Peter, even then acting as a spokesman for the group, asked: "Lord, speakest thou this parable unto us, or unto all?" To this Jesus said: "I speak unto those whom the Lord shall make rulers over his household, to give his children their portion of meat in due season." The word is addressed to the servants of the Lord! They are accountable for the welfare of their brethren. Anxious to know their own state in this respect, they asked, "Who then is that faithful and wise servant?" Jesus replied:

It is that servant who watcheth, to impart his portion of meat in due season. Blessed be that servant whom his Lord shall find, when he cometh, so doing. Of a truth I say unto you, that he will make him ruler over all that he hath.

But the evil servant is he who is not found watching. And if that servant is not found watching, he will say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming; and shall begin to beat the menservants, and the maidens, and to eat, and drink, and to be drunken.

The Lord of that servant will come in a day he looketh not for, and at an hour when he is not aware and will cut him down, and will appoint him his portion with the unbelievers.

And that servant who knew his Lord's will, and prepared not for his Lord's coming, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes.

But he that knew not his Lord's will, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few. For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required; and to whom the Lord has committed much, of him will men ask the more. [^3]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] To be made ruler over many things. This life is the probationary estate in which the Lord's servants learn how to rule their own houses—"For if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the church of God?" Paul asks (1 Tim. 3:5)—and how to rule some small part of the Lord's earthly kingdom. Men are called to rule a deacons quorum, an auxiliary organization, a Sunday School class, a ward or a stake, or whatever, all to gain experience for future eternal administration. Those who operate on true principles and succeed in this life will have power and ability to rule greater and larger kingdoms hereafter. Farrar gives as a translation of the phrase "our lamps are gone out," as found in Matt. 25:8, "are smouldering," or, "are being quenched," which he, quite aptly, interprets to mean that the light of God's Holy Spirit is dying away in the "earthen vessels" of their lives. (Farrar, p. 584, footnote 1.)
[^2] To enter into the joy of the Lord. Eternal life itself is to dwell in the presence of God, to receive, inherit, and possess as he does. The fulness of the joy of the Lord is to be like him, to be one with him, to have glory and exaltation forever as he does. Of the millennial day, ushered in by the Second Coming, when there shall be "a new heaven and a new earth," the Beloved John says: "I . . . saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband." (Rev. 21:1-2.) Thereafter an angelic ministrant said to him, "Come hither, I will shew thee the bride, the Lamb's wife." What he saw was "that great city, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God." (Rev. 21:9-10.) Both the New Jerusalem, which will be set up on earth during the Millennium, and the Holy Jerusalem, which shall abide on this sphere when it becomes a celestial orb, are inhabited by the saints, the faithful members of the Lord's Church and kingdom. Hence the well-known expression in the text that the Church is the Lamb's bride.
[^3] "Not good and bad, not righteous and wicked, but wise and foolish. That is, all of them have accepted the invitation to meet the Bridegroom; all are members of the Church; the contrast is not between the wicked and the worthy. Instead, five are zealous and devoted, while five are inactive and lukewarm; ten have the testimony of Jesus, but only five are valiant therein. Hence, five shall enter into the house where Jesus is and five shall remain without-all of which raises the question: What portion of the Church shall be saved? Surely this parable is not intended to divide half the saints into one group and half into another. But it does teach, pointedly and plainly, that there are foolish saints who shall fail to gain the promised rewards." (Commentary 1:685.)
