Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 3 ( 1980)

Chapter 93

The Olivet Discourse: Parables and the Judgment

In prison I saw him next, condemned To meet a traitor's doom at morn; The tide of lying tongues I stemmed, And honored him 'mid shame and scorn. My friendship's utmost zeal to try, He asked if I for him would die; The flesh was weak; my blood ran chill; But the free spirit cried, "I will!"

Then in a moment to my view The stranger started from disguise; The tokens in his hands I knew; The Savior stood before mine eyes. He spake, and my poor name he named, "Of me thou hast not been ashamed; These deeds shall thy memorial be, Fear not, thou didst them unto me." (Hymns, no. 153.)

Parable of the Ten Virgins

(Matthew 25:1-13; JST Matthew 15:1, 8, 11)

If the disciples of old, seated with Jesus on the gentle slopes of Olivet, desired to know when he would return, in all the glory of his Father's kingdom, how much more ought we who live in the generation when the promised signs, one by one, are making their appearance, how much more ought we to desire to know when the glorious day will be.

If those who, in that day, were destined to die for the name of Jesus and the testimony that was theirs, sought to read the signs of the times, how much more ought we, in this day, who are privileged to live to honor his name and testify of his goodness, how much more ought we to see and read the signs heralding his coming.

If the saints of former days who knew his coming would not be in their generation, were yet counseled to watch, pray, take heed, and be ready, how much more ought the saints of latter days, who know his coming will be in their generation (for the signs have now been given!), how much more ought they to make themselves ready.

"To impress yet more indelibly upon their minds the lessons of watchfulness and faithfulness, and to warn them yet more emphatically against the peril of the ungirdled loin and the smouldering lamp, [^1] He told them the exquisite Parables—so beautiful, so simple, yet so rich in instruction—of the Ten Virgins and of the Talents; and drew for them a picture of that Great Day of Judgment on which the King should separate all nations from one another as the shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats." (Farrar, p. 584.)

All these things shall find fulfillment in this, the dispensation of the fulness of times, for the other signs have now been given and the time is at hand. He standeth at the door! In this setting, then, let us consider each of these events. First we must view this precious parable about the Bridegroom, the wedding feast, the virgins who attended the bride, and the lamps that lighted their way and gave a festive spirit to the marriage celebration.

And then, at that day, before the Son of Man comes, the kingdom of heaven shall be likened unto ten virgins, who took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom.

The Bridegroom, as he has before designated himself, is the Lord Jesus, returning from a far country, to attend the marriage feast when he will take the Church as his bride. [^2] The ten virgins are the members of the Church; they are in the house of the Lord (which is the Church) awaiting his return and the great feast of good things of which the faithful will then partake. "The 'lamps'—not 'torches'—which the Ten Virgins carried, were of well-known construction. They bear in Talmudic writings commonly the name Lappid, but the Aramaised form of the Greek word in the New Testament also occurs as Lampad and Lampadas. The lamps consisted of a round receptacle for pitch or oil for the wick. This was placed in a hollow cup or deep saucer—the Beth Shiqqua—which was fastened by a pointed end into a long wooden pole, on which it was borne aloft. According to Jewish authorities, it was the custom in the East to carry in a bridal procession about ten such lamps. We have the less reason to doubt that such was also the case in Palestine, since, according to rubric, ten was the number required to be present at any office or ceremony, such as at the benedictions accompanying the marriage-ceremonies. And, in the peculiar circumstances supposed in the Parable, Ten Virgins are represented as going forth to meet the Bridegroom, each bearing her lamp." (Edersheim 2:455.)

And five of them were wise, and five were foolish. They that were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with them: But the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps. [^3]

"And at that day, when I shall come in my glory," the Lord tells us in latter-day revelation, "shall the parable be fulfilled which I spake concerning the ten virgins. For they that are wise and have received the truth, and have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived—verily I say unto you, they shall not be hewn down and cast into the fire, but shall abide the day." As to their reward, the Great Judge continues: "And the earth shall be given unto them for an inheritance; and they shall multiply and wax strong, and their children shall grow up without sin unto salvation. For the Lord shall be in their midst, and his glory shall be upon them, and he will be their king and their lawgiver." (D&C 45:56-59.)

While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept. And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold, the bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him.

The call is to the Church, to those who have forsaken the world, to those who are under covenant to wait for their Lord and to prepare themselves for his return. And now, almost two thousand years after he gave the parable, the call has gone forth. "O my people," saith the Lord, "sanctify yourselves; gather ye together, O ye people of my church. . . . Go ye out from Babylon. Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord. Call your solemn assemblies, and speak often one to another. And let every man call upon the name of the Lord." Be ready; prepare yourselves; cleanse your souls; take the Holy Spirit as a guide; seek the Lord; keep his commandments. "Yea, let the cry go forth among all people: Awake and arise and go forth to meet the Bridegroom; behold and lo, the Bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him. Prepare yourselves for the great day of the Lord. Watch, therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour." (D&C 133:4-11.)

These are the last days—church members sleep; they are not watching on the towers of Zion; it is so long since the ascension; so many have waited in vain for his return; surely he will not come in our day. And then, at midnight, while the world sleeps—a most unlikely hour for a bridegroom to come and claim his bride—behold he cometh and his reward is with him.

Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps. And the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your oil; for our lamps are gone out. But the wise answered, saying, Lest there be not enough for us and you, go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves.

And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that were ready went in with him to the marriage: and the door was shut.

Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, ye know me not.

Watch therefore for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh.

Salvation is a personal matter. It comes only to those who keep the commandments and whose souls are filled with the Holy Spirit of God. No man can keep the commandments for and on behalf of another; no one can gain the sanctifying power of the Holy Spirit in his life and give or sell that holy oil to another. Every man must light his own lamp with the oil of righteousness which he buys at the market of obedience. Few doctrines are more evil and wicked than the false doctrine of supererogation, which is, that the saints, by doing more than is necessary for their own salvation, build up an immense treasure of merit in heaven, which can be dispensed and assigned to others so they too can be saved.

All that one person can do for the salvation of another is to preach, teach, expound, and exhort; all that one man can do for his fellows is to teach them the truth and guide their feet into paths of virtue and rectitude. All that the five wise virgins can do for the foolish is to tell them how to gain oil for themselves.

And the foolish virgins who do not come to know the Bridegroom by the power of the Spirit will not qualify to sit down with him at the marriage feast and there partake of the blessings reserved for the wise.

Parable of the Talents

(Matthew 25:14-30; JST Matthew 25:13-14, 24-31)

There is an eternal principle that states: Service is essential to salvation. In the parable of the ten virgins, Jesus dramatized the truth that to gain salvation men must keep the commandments and be guided by the Holy Spirit. Thus, Obedience is essential to salvation. By now giving the parable of the talents, he completes the picture. Not only must mortals keep the commandments to gain an inheritance in the Father's kingdom, but they must also get outside themselves in service to their fellowmen. It is one thing to be virtuous and pay tithing; it is another to persuade others to walk in paths of purity and to make their means available for the building up of the Lord's earthly kingdom. The Lord will not be satisfied with the salvation of Moses alone; he expects that great lawgiver to guide all Israel to the summit of Sinai. Both obedience and service are essential to salvation. [^4] And so Jesus says:

Now I will liken these things unto a parable. For it is like as a man travelling into a far country, who called his own servants, and delivered unto them his goods.

And unto one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one; to every man according to his several ability; and straightway took his journey.

Jesus is speaking to the Twelve, who, in this as in all things, are made a pattern and a type of all disciples. In principle, thus, he is speaking to all of his servants and to all the members of his kingdom; and, for that matter, the same principle can be applied to all men in their varied walks, for all have talents and all will be accountable before the judgment bar for the use to which their talents are put. But the specific intent of the parable is to teach how the servants of the Lord must use their native endowments to further the work of Him who is now going on a long journey to a far-off heaven, there to be with his Father until that day when he shall return to live and reign on earth a thousand years.

Members of the Church in general and those called to ministerial service in particular are endowed with "spiritual gifts." All do not receive the same gift, and all are not endowed with the same talents. "There are diversities of gifts," Paul says, all of which come from "the same Spirit." To one is given the gift of prophecy, to another the working of miracles, to yet another the gift of knowledge, or of wisdom, or of scriptural understanding, or any of the thousands of things that edify and uplift the souls of men. (1 Cor. 12.)

Further, all men, and the servants of the Lord in particular, acquired, in preexistence, by obedience to law, the specific talents and capacities with which they are endowed in this life. Men are not born equal; they come into mortality endowed with the abilities earned and developed in a long period of premortal schooling. And a just and equitable Being, who deals fairly and impartially with all his children, expects each of them to use the talents and abilities with which they are endowed and the gifts that are given them by a divine Providence.

Then he that had received the five talents went and traded with the same, and made them other five talents. And likewise he that had received two, he also gained other two. But he that had received one went and digged in the earth, and hid his lord's money.

Those who "embark in the service of God" are commanded to serve him with all their "heart, might, mind and strength." (D&C 4:2.) It is the will of Him who created us that "men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness." (D&C 58:27.) All those who are sent forth to preach the gospel are subject to the divine decree: "Thou shalt not idle away thy time, neither shalt thou bury thy talent that it may not be known." (D&C 60:13.) "Be not weary in well-doing," is the counsel to all, for "the Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind." (D&C 64:33-34.) The Lord expects his servants to be diligent; to be occupied till he comes; to labor on his errand with all the strength and power they possess.

After a long time the lord of those servants cometh, and reckoneth with them. And so he that had received five talents came and brought other five talents, saying, Lord, thou deliveredst unto me five talents: behold, I have gained beside them five talents more.

His lord said unto him, Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord.

The reward for faithful service is twofold:

He also that had received two talents came and said, Lord, thou deliveredst unto me two talents: behold, I have gained two other talents beside them.

His lord said unto him, Well done, good and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord.

Again the reward is the same—to be ruler over many things and to enter into the joy of the Lord. No matter that one man serve with apostolic fervor in administering the worldwide kingdom of Him whose witness he is, while the other labor in a bishopric where the boundaries are scarcely a stone's throw in length—both gain the same reward. Truly, of those who reign in celestial splendor, it is written: "And he makes them equal in power, and in might, and in dominion." (D&C 76:95.) And also: "And the saints shall be filled with his glory, and receive their inheritance and be made equal with him." (D&C 88:107.)

Then he who had received the one talent came, and said, Lord, I knew thee that thou art a hard man, reaping where thou hast not sown, and gathering where thou hast not scattered. And I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent in the earth; and lo, here is thy talent; take it from me as thou hast from thine other servants, for it is thine.

This is idleness and indifference and more. It is also disobedience and dereliction; it is even defiance of him who is Master and Lord. The Lord's servants are under covenant, made in the waters of baptism, to love and serve him all their days. They have agreed to mourn with those that mourn, to weep with those that weep, and to bear the burdens of their brethren. Having put their hands to the plough, they must not look back lest they certify thereby that they are not fit for the kingdom of God. Hence:

His lord answered and said unto him, O wicked and slothful servant, thou knewest that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I have not scattered. Having known this, therefore, thou oughtest to have put my money to the exchangers, and at my coming I should have received mine own with usury.

When the Lord's servants neglect and fail to do their Master's work, they are wicked!

I will take, therefore, the talent from you, and give it unto him who hath ten talents. For unto every one who hath obtained other talents, shall be given, and he shall have in abundance.

But from him that hath not obtained other talents, shall be taken away even that which he hath received.

And his lord shall say unto his servants, Cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

As arms that are never used wither; as legs that never walk shrivel; as eyes that are never opened become dull and blind—so the gifts of God that are unexercised soon fall away. As those who never walk lose the power of mobility, so those who bury their talents soon become as though they were never endowed with goodly gifts and glorious graces. The lot of the one is to be lame forever, of the other to die as pertaining to goodness and righteousness.

Christ Shall Sit in Judgment at His Coming

(Matthew 25:31-46; JST Matthew 25:33-34)

As a crown of pure gold, signaling kingship and victory, so are these concluding words of the Olivet Discourse. Seldom—nay, never—has such a sweet and tender presentation been made relative to the coming of the Son of Man. Nothing shows more clearly the basis on which the disciples will then be judged.

Jesus has told the Twelve the things that will precede his coming; he has testified of the desolations and sorrows that will attend his return; his apostolic friends now know that the wicked will be as stubble and the vineyard will be cleansed by the brightness of his Presence. [^5] Now he speaks of sitting with them in judgment on his saints, saints who in that day will be scattered—a few here and a small congregation there—in all the nations of the earth.

When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: And before him shall be gathered all nations: and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats: And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on his left.

And he shall sit upon his throne, and the twelve apostles with him.

This is the day of judgment for the saints of the Most High. For them the judgment is set and the books are opened. Their eternal destiny is to be determined on the basis of their earthly works. This is the great day of division in the Church, the sheep being divided from the goats, the one group going to the right hand of honor, the other to the left hand of disgrace. It is the story of the ten virgins all over again—five wise, five foolish—half of whom entered the house and sat at the marriage feast and half of whom were locked out because they never knew the Bridegroom.

What feelings of wonderment and exultation must have filled the breasts of these humble Galileans—who served as his witnesses—to learn that they too would sit on thrones with their Lord and play a part in this glorious day of judgment. [^6]

Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world: For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me.

"From the foundation of the world," from the beginning, from all eternity—for such a length of time that no man can measure it—for just such a time has "the kingdom" been prepared for the faithful. And their inheritance therein is dependent upon their charitable works in mortality, upon how they give of themselves to serve their Lord and King.

Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?

And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.

Such is the law of life. All men cannot feed and clothe and heal the Son of God; his mortal life was but for a moment in an appointed day; and his personal contacts were limited to the thousands who dwelt in the lands of his dwelling. But the billions of earth's inhabitants, everywhere and in all ages, are also the children of the Father of us all. And "when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.) Or, as it is similarly expressed: "He that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen?" (1 Jn. 4:20.) Or, as he said it in our day, "He that receiveth my servants receiveth me." (D&C 84:36.)

Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels: For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not: sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not.

Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee?

Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.

And these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into life eternal.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] To be made ruler over many things. This life is the probationary estate in which the Lord's servants learn how to rule their own houses—"For if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the church of God?" Paul asks (1 Tim. 3:5)—and how to rule some small part of the Lord's earthly kingdom. Men are called to rule a deacons quorum, an auxiliary organization, a Sunday School class, a ward or a stake, or whatever, all to gain experience for future eternal administration. Those who operate on true principles and succeed in this life will have power and ability to rule greater and larger kingdoms hereafter. Farrar gives as a translation of the phrase "our lamps are gone out," as found in Matt. 25:8, "are smouldering," or, "are being quenched," which he, quite aptly, interprets to mean that the light of God's Holy Spirit is dying away in the "earthen vessels" of their lives. (Farrar, p. 584, footnote 1.)
[^2] To enter into the joy of the Lord. Eternal life itself is to dwell in the presence of God, to receive, inherit, and possess as he does. The fulness of the joy of the Lord is to be like him, to be one with him, to have glory and exaltation forever as he does. Of the millennial day, ushered in by the Second Coming, when there shall be "a new heaven and a new earth," the Beloved John says: "I . . . saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband." (Rev. 21:1-2.) Thereafter an angelic ministrant said to him, "Come hither, I will shew thee the bride, the Lamb's wife." What he saw was "that great city, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God." (Rev. 21:9-10.) Both the New Jerusalem, which will be set up on earth during the Millennium, and the Holy Jerusalem, which shall abide on this sphere when it becomes a celestial orb, are inhabited by the saints, the faithful members of the Lord's Church and kingdom. Hence the well-known expression in the text that the Church is the Lamb's bride.
[^3] "Not good and bad, not righteous and wicked, but wise and foolish. That is, all of them have accepted the invitation to meet the Bridegroom; all are members of the Church; the contrast is not between the wicked and the worthy. Instead, five are zealous and devoted, while five are inactive and lukewarm; ten have the testimony of Jesus, but only five are valiant therein. Hence, five shall enter into the house where Jesus is and five shall remain without-all of which raises the question: What portion of the Church shall be saved? Surely this parable is not intended to divide half the saints into one group and half into another. But it does teach, pointedly and plainly, that there are foolish saints who shall fail to gain the promised rewards." (Commentary 1:685.)
[^4] "The Parable of the Talents-their use and misuse-follows closely on the admonition to watch, in view of the sudden and certain Return of Christ, and the reward or punishment which will then be meted out. Only that, whereas in the Parable of the Ten Virgins the reference was to the personal state, in that of 'the Talents' it is to the personal work of the Disciples. In the former instance, they are portrayed as the bridal maidens who are to welcome His Return; in the latter, as the servants who are to give an account of their stewardship." (Edersheim 2:459.)
[^5] Of these same events, the Lord has told us in latter-day revelation: "For the hour is nigh and the day soon at hand when the earth is ripe; and all the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, saith the Lord of Hosts, that wickedness shall not be upon the earth; For the hour is nigh, and that which was spoken by mine apostles must be fulfilled; for as they spoke so shall it come to pass; For I will reveal myself from heaven with power and great glory, with all the hosts thereof, and dwell in righteousness with men on earth a thousand years, and the wicked shall not stand." (D&C 29:9-11.)
[^6] "Mine apostles, the Twelve which were with me in my ministry at Jerusalem, shall stand at my right hand at the day of my coming in a pillar of fire, being clothed with robes of righteousness, with crowns upon their heads, in glory even as I am, to judge the whole house of Israel, even as many as have loved me and kept my commandments, and none else." (D&C 29:12.)
