No specific author, Anglo-Saxon Chronicle ( 1154)

First Century

A.D. 1

Octavianus reigned fifty-six winters; and in the forty-second year of his reign Christ was born. Then three astrologers from the east came to worship Christ; and the children in Bethlehem were slain by Herod in persecution of Christ.

A.D. 3

This year died Herod, stabbed by his own hand; and Archelaus his son succeeded him. The child Christ was also this year brought back again from Egypt.

A.D. 6

From the beginning of the world to this year were agone five thousand and two hundred winters.

A.D. 11

This year Herod the son of Antipater undertook the government in Judea.

A.D. 12

This year Philip and Herod divided Judea into four kingdoms.

A.D. 16

This year Tiberius succeeded to the empire.

A.D. 26

This year Pilate began to reign over the Jews.

A.D. 30

This year was Christ baptized; and Peter and Andrew were converted, together with James, and John, and Philip, and all the twelve apostles.

A.D. 33

This year was Christ crucified; about five thousand two hundred and twenty six winters from the beginning of the world.

A.D. 34

This year was St. Paul converted, and St. Stephen stoned.

A.D. 35

This year the blessed Peter the apostle settled an episcopal see in the city of Antioch.

A.D. 37

This year Pilate slew himself with his own hand.

A.D. 39

This year Caius undertook the empire.

A.D. 44

This year the blessed Peter the apostle settled an episcopal see at Rome; and James, the brother of John, was slain by Herod.

A.D. 45

This year died Herod, who slew James one year ere his own death.

A.D. 46

This year Claudius, the second of the Roman emperors who invaded Britain, took the greater part of the island into his power, and added the Orkneys to rite dominion of the Romans. This was in the fourth year of his reign. And in the same year happened the great famine in Syria which Luke mentions in the book called "The Acts of the Apostles". After Claudius Nero succeeded to the empire, who almost lost the island Britain through his incapacity.

A.D. 47

This year Mark, the evangelist in Egypt beginneth to write the gospel.

A.D. 50

This year Paul was sent bound to Rome.

A.D. 62

This year James, the brother of Christ, suffered.

A.D. 63

This year Mark the evangelist departed this life.

A.D. 69

This year Peter and Paul suffered.

A.D. 70

This year Vespasian undertook the empire.

A.D. 71

This year Titus, son of Vespasian, slew in Jerusalem eleven hundred thousand Jews.

A.D. 81

This year Titus came to the empire, after Vespasian, who said that he considered the day lost in which he did no good.

A.D. 83

This year Domitian, the brother of Titus, assumed the government.

A.D. 84

This year John the evangelist in the island Patmos wrote the book called "The Apocalypse".

A.D. 90

This year Simon, the apostle, a relation of Christ, was crucified: and John the evangelist rested at Ephesus.

A.D. 92

This year died Pope Clement.
