Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

PREFACE

The Old Testament is a witness of God at work. It records how he made covenants with his people, delivered them from bondage, blessed them with a promised land, gave them laws and ordinances, challenged them to reject the world and live in accordance with revealed standards, and warned them of the consequences of unrighteous behavior. In the Old Testament, the Lord used the events of history to teach the validity of his covenants, the sanctity of his laws, and the certainty of his word. In it we see demonstrated, in vivid and dramatic fashion, the fulfillment of prophecy. The destructions that decimated Israel and Judah bear testimony that God's word through his prophets is a lifeline for the faithful but a condemnation for those who choose to reject it. That is one of the great messages of the Old Testament, and it is a message that we, in our day, need to learn.

Studies in Scripture, Volume Four: 1 Kings to Malachi has been written to assist Latter-day Saints in their study of the second half of the Old Testament, which for some is the most unfamiliar part of the Standard Works. This book was not written to be a substitute for scripture study. On the contrary, it has been our goal to point readers to the scriptures themselves. We desire that this book will be a helpful resource but that Latter-day Saints will base their understanding of divine things on the revealed word of the Lord.

What we have written in this volume is intended to be our own best insights into the biblical text. Authoritative interpretation of scripture is found only in scripture itself and in the words of our latter-day prophets. Although we have sought earnestly to write in harmony with the teachings of the scriptures and the leaders of the Church, each contributor is responsible for his or her own conclusions.

This commentary frequently refers to modern revelation, including the Joseph Smith Translation (JST). The Old Testament should not be read without the constant assistance of modern scripture. We encourage readers to use the Church's edition of the King James Version of the Bible, first published in 1979, which in this book is called, for the sake of convenience and brevity, "the LDS Bible." Readers can benefit greatly from its footnotes, which provide inspired readings from the Joseph Smith Translation and cross-references to other Standard Works. Reference is also made to the excellent maps, Topical Guide, and the Bible Dictionary, all of which should be the companions of careful students of the Old Testament.

Finally, I would like to express my thanks to my wife and children, who have been my patient friends during the writing and editing of this book, to my colleagues who contributed to it, to Anthony Rivera, my able and dependable research assistant, and to the staff and management of Deseret Book Company, for their skillful work.

Kent P. Jackson
