Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

1

ALL THINGS POINT TO CHRIST

KENT P. JACKSON

As do our other Standard Works, the Old Testament teaches us of God and of our relationship to him. It does that by recounting, in historical books, the record of his interaction with his people and his work to bring about their well-being through the process of history. It also does that by recording the words of the prophets, who served as his messengers and spoke as directed by his Spirit. And it teaches us of God by preserving psalms, poems, hymns, stories, and sayings which describe, praise, and typify his divine character. Through these means, the Old Testament testifies of the Lord Jehovah and brings glory to his holy name.

The Old Testament reveals the character of Jehovah, [^1] but it is to modern revelation that we turn to learn more of his identity and the full nature of his work. From the Book of Mormon we learn that he would come into the world as Jesus Christ, that "the Lord Omnipotent who reigneth, who was, and is from all eternity to all eternity, shall come down from heaven among the children of men, and shall dwell in a tabernacle of clay, and shall go forth amongst men. . . . And he shall be called Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of heaven and earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning" (Mosiah 3:5, 8). The knowledge that Jesus is the God of the Old Testament helps us to understand this book of scripture in ways that would not be possible otherwise. We understand, for example, that his mighty acts of deliverance anciently were types of, and bore testimony to, his ultimate act of deliverance, the Atonement. Indeed, all of Israel's religion, law, history, and daily experience bore testimony to this greatest act of salvation. "All things have their likeness, and all things are created and made to bear record of me," the Lord said, "both things which are temporal, and things which are spiritual; . . . all things bear record of me" (Moses 6:63).

The Law of Moses was given to the Israelites when they were found unworthy and unwilling to receive greater things (D&C 84:23-27; cf. Alma 12:10-11). It was "a very strict law" for "a stiffnecked people" (Mosiah 13:29). Still, it bore a forceful testimony of the Atonement by means of what the Book of Mormon calls "types" and "shadows" (Mosiah 3:15). That was done primarily through the teaching power of ordinances. "This is the whole meaning of the law," Amulek said, "every whit pointing to that great and last sacrifice; and that great and last sacrifice will be the Son of God, yea, infinite and eternal" (Alma 34:14). Jacob wrote, "My soul delighteth in proving unto my people the truth of the coming of Christ; for, for this end hath the law of Moses been given; and all things which have been given of God from the beginning of the world, unto man, are the typifying of him" (2 Ne. 11:4). [^2]

As with all other scripture, the Old Testament is a testament of Jesus Christ, but it presents special challenges for its readers. Because of the imperfect transmission of the record and the all-too-frequent apostasy of the Israelites, the message of Christ is not as visible in it as in our other scriptures. According to the prophets, the Israelites were a rebellious people, unable to live up to the moral requirements of the Law of Moses. [^3] The limitations of their faith are reflected in the nature of the Old Testament. For the most part, it is a book directed to, and recorded for, the Israelite nation in general, not the worthy Saints who were among them. The words of the prophets in it are their public pronouncements to their wayward society, not their private teachings to those who had risen above the sins of their generation. That is why there is a heavy emphasis on judgment and punishment and also why celestial things, "the solemnities of eternity" (D&C 43:34), are not as apparent.

True prophets testify of Christ and proclaim that salvation is brought about through his redeeming love. That is the primary function of their calling. In ancient Israel, the prophets labored under circumstances that required that their message be first and foremost a call for Israel to repent. But they also proclaimed the message of salvation by prophesying of deliverance from temporal foes at the Lord's coming in glory and of deliverance from sin and death through the Atonement. In harmony with the principle of keeping sacred things from the abuse of the irreverent (JST Matt. 7:10), prophecies of the Atonement were generally veiled in types and shadows. Frequently they were written in such a way that only those who understand the plan of salvation or are familiar with the happenings of Jesus' mortal ministry can understand their full meaning. Thus the Old Testament writings and ancient Israel's religion present an invitation not only for the Lord's people anciently but for us as well to look through eyes of faith and see that all things point to Christ.

Modern revelation is the key. I do not hesitate to state that no one can fully understand the Old Testament without the aid of what God has revealed in the latter days through the Book of Mormon, the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible, the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price, and the sermons and writings of Joseph Smith. It is from these sources that we learn the true nature of God, the true doctrines of heaven, and the true message of the Lord's prophets. Our study of the Old Testament must be undertaken with a consistent and steady view through the lens of modern revelation.

We are privileged to live in a day in which the gospel is restored, the heavens are open, the Church is on earth, and modern prophets guide the Lord's Saints. But we are especially privileged to enjoy the blessings of the Lord's redeeming work, which has been the message of the prophets and the scriptures in all ages.

Notes

Kent P. Jackson is professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Kings 17-2 Kings 2:11. Elijah First Chronicles 1-9. From Adam to David (genealogies) The Jewish canon is divided into three sections: the Law (or Torah), the Prophets, and the Writings. The Law contains the five books of Moses, or the Pentateuch: Genesis through Deuteronomy. The Prophets is subdivided between the Former Prophets, Joshua through Kings, and the Latter Prophets, Isaiah through Malachi. The Writings contain the poetic books, some historical books, and one prophetic book: Psalms, Job, Proverbs, Ruth, Song of Solomon, Ecclesiastes, Lamentations, Esther, Daniel, Ezra-Nehemiah, and Chronicles. For some reason, in the Jewish canon Ezra-Nehemiah occurs before Chronicles, which is the last book in the Hebrew Bible; however, the last two verses of Chronicles (2 Chron. 36:22-23) are repeated as the first two verses in Ezra (Ezra 1:1-2), demonstrating that the books are to be related in that sequence.
[^2] 2 Kings 2:12-13:21. Elisha Data about age, length of reign, 2. Data about length of reign and name, and queen mother (v. 2) place of capital (v. 23) First Chronicles 10-29. The reign of David See, for example, 1 Ne. 16:29; Alma 28:13-14; Hel. 3:27-30; 12:3-26; Ether 14:25.
[^3] Evaluation of reign, compared 3. Condemnation for following in with David's (v. 3) apostasy of Jeroboam (vv. 25-26) Second Chronicles 1-9. The reign of Solomon Cf., for example, Deut. 11:26-28: "Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse; A blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the Lord your God . . . And a curse, if ye will not obey the commandments of the Lord your God"; and 2 Ne. 1:20: "Inasmuch as ye shall keep my commandments ye shall prosper in the land; but inasmuch as ye will not keep my commandments ye shall be cut off from my presence."
