Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

2

KINGS AND CHRONICLES

DAVID ROLPH SEELY

The Old Testament contains two separate histories of Israel. The longest and most familiar of the two is found in the books from Genesis through 2 Kings, which recount in sequence the events from the creation of the world in Genesis to the destruction of Jerusalem and the Exile in 2 Kings 25. The second history is found in the books of Chronicles and Ezra and Nehemiah (Ezra-Nehemiah is counted as one book in the Jewish canon). It begins with Adam, in 1 Chronicles, and continues through the return from the Exile, the rebuilding of the temple, and the restoration of Israel recounted in Ezra and Nehemiah. In the Jewish canon, the books of Kings are a part of the Former Prophets, in the same position as in the Christian canon. The books of Chronicles are found in the Writings, at the end of the canon. [^1] The Christian canon, reflected in the King James Translation, places all of the historical books together; thus a reader will begin at Genesis and read a continuous historical narrative to the end of 2 Kings and will then start reading the history over again with Chronicles and continue through Nehemiah.

The history preserved in the Bible is sacred history in that it acknowledges the hand of the Lord in human affairs. Biblical history dramatically illustrates many spiritual lessons of value for future generations. It is not known who the authors and editors of these histories were, but it is clear that they understood their story to be one of importance for future Israel. From the Book of Mormon, Latter-day Saint readers are familiar with the process of authorship (as demonstrated by the small plates of Nephi) and the process of editing and abridging by Mormon and Moroni (as demonstrated by Mormon's abridgment from the large plates). In the Book of Mormon, the authors and editors are identified, and a careful reader can identify passages, often introduced by the phrase "and thus we see," [^2] inserted by the authors or editors to indicate, emphasize, and explain the lessons we can learn from the record of the historical events. In contrast, the authors and editors of the biblical histories are almost always anonymous. Although they remain anonymous, their messages, just as in the Book of Mormon, can be examined when we look at what they chose to include in their narrative, the judgments they made about the characters and events they recounted, and the themes that they emphasized throughout. Occasionally a biblical author or editor inserted an explicit passage pointing to the lesson of an event, but more often the spiritual lessons of biblical history are simply imbedded in the narrative itself.

The covenant the Lord made with Israel at Sinai was a conditional one, promising blessings for obedience to the Mosaic law and curses for disobedience (see, for example, Lev. 26; Deut. 27-30). This covenant, of course, is the same kind made later with Lehi and his descendants. [^3] The history of Israel from Sinai to the destruction of Jerusalem in 587 B.C. records centuries of Israel's disobedience countered by divinely sent prophetic warnings that were ultimately rejected. There were times of repentance and hope under the reigns of David, Solomon, Hezekiah, and Josiah, but in every case righteousness gave way to apostasy and sin: idolatry, immorality, dishonesty, and oppression of the poor and helpless. Finally the mercy of the Lord was exhausted, and the promises and prophecies of destruction were fulfilled — first in 721 B.C., when the Assyrians destroyed the Northern Kingdom of Israel and deported her people, and then in 587 B.C., when the Babylonians destroyed Jerusalem and the temple and took the people of the Southern Kingdom of Judah into exile in Babylon. The disastrous consequence of rejecting the covenant is a central theme of the books of Kings and Chronicles, just as it is in the Book of Mormon.

In the original Hebrew, the book of Kings was the longest book in the Bible, followed by the books of Samuel and Chronicles. [^4] The translation into Greek, the Septuagint, made these books even longer. [^5] For convenience' sake, in the Septuagint the books were each divided in two at a logical break in the text. This practice was, in medieval times, adopted in Hebrew. Thus today we have 1 and 2 Samuel, 1 and 2 Kings, and 1 and 2 Chronicles. In reading these books it should be remembered that because the divisions are artificial, it is best to deal with them as single books.

Kings

The book of Kings (Hebrew melakim, "kings") derives its name from its being an account of all of the kings in the North and the South from the death of David. Kings begins where Samuel leaves off, at the end of the reign of David and the ascension of Solomon to the throne. It then tells the story of the United Monarchy under Solomon, the division of the kingdom into the North and the South (Israel and Judah, or Samaria and Jerusalem) under his son Rehoboam, and the history and destruction of the two kingdoms — the destruction and exile of the North by Assyria in 721 B.C. (2 Kgs. 17) and the destruction of Jerusalem and the exile of the South by Babylon in 587 B.C. (2 Kgs. 24-25). The final passage in Kings (2 Kgs. 25:27-30) inserts a note of hope into the narrative, recording the death of Nebuchadnezzar in 562 B.C., and stating that Jehoiachin, the Davidic king of Judah, was still alive in exile. A brief outline of Kings may be helpful:

I. 1 Kings 1-11. The reign of Solomon

A. 1 Kings 1:1-2:11. Death of David; ascension of Solomon

B. 1 Kings 2:12-4:34. Beginning of Solomon's reign

C. 1 Kings 5-8. Building of the Temple

D. 1 Kings 9-11. End of Solomon's reign

II. 1 Kings 12-2 Kings 17. The Divided Monarchy and the end of the Northern Kingdom

A. 1 Kings 12-14. Kingdom divided: Rehoboam and Jeroboam

B. 1 Kings 15-2 Kings 17. Kings from North and South and the destruction of the North

III. 2 Kings 18-25. The end of the Southern Kingdom

Throughout Kings, emphasis is given to the breaking of the covenant as the theological reason for the downfall of Israel — expressed in 2 Kings 17:6-23 concerning the destruction of Samaria and in 2 Kings 21:1-16, during the reign of Manasseh, about the impending destruction of Judah. Because the language throughout the books of Joshua through Kings is so reminiscent of that in Deuteronomy, scholars often refer to this history as the Deuteronomic history. They point to the possibility of the scroll discovered by Josiah as being all or part of Deuteronomy (2 Kgs. 22) — a discovery that may have influenced the final editing of the entire history. Whatever the case may be, the spirit and the language of Deuteronomy pervade Kings, and a reading of Deuteronomy is helpful for reading Kings. It should be further noted that the narratives in Kings concerning Elijah and Elisha are among the best scriptural accounts of the function of prophets in Israel.

The writer(s) or editor(s) of Kings attempted to preserve a complete account of each king in both the Northern and the Southern Kingdoms and devised an ingenious system that allowed the telling of both histories simultaneously. The system consists of a series of simple formulas that provide the relevant information for each king in both kingdoms and allow both histories to be told in sequence, alternating between the Southern and the Northern Kingdom. The formulas differed slightly for the North and the South, generally including more information from the South. Important historical events are narrated in the reign of the king in which they occurred, and a relative chronology is maintained throughout the book. [^6] Recognition of these formulas enhances a reading of Kings. A simplified chart of this system of formulas follows, with reference to one example in each kingdom for illustration.

Southern Kingdom: Judah Northern Kingdom: Israel

Example: Amaziah, in 2 Kings 14 Example: Omri, in 1 Kings 16 1. Reign dated from king in North 1. Reign dated from king in South (v. 1) (v. 23)

The results are more than satisfactory, and a conscientious reader following the formulas can easily follow the history of both kingdoms at the same time and be able to master the basic story line. In some ways this formulaic system represents a breakthrough in historiography, producing a method which allowed the editor to preserve the data present in a chronicle and at the same time set up a framework for the narration and interpretation of the events themselves — that is, history proper.

Chronicles

Chronicles begins with Adam and ends, like Kings, with the destruction of Jerusalem and the temple. While much of the story is the same as that in Genesis through Kings, there are many additions, deletions, and significant differences in the way it is told that make it a very valuable source in the study of biblical history.

In Hebrew the name of the book of Chronicles (dibre hayyamim) can be translated "daily events," or perhaps simply as "annals." In the Greek Septuagint it was called "the things left out" (paraleipomena) — a title representing an attitude toward this book that persists to this day. The translators of the Septuagint apparently understood Chronicles to be no more than a retelling of the story known in Genesis through Kings, attempting to preserve details that were left out in that account. Chronicles presupposes an understanding of the history and closely follows the text in Genesis through Kings (about half of the text of Chronicles is word for word that in Samuel and Kings). Consequently, most readers read Chronicles only as a supplement to Kings, following footnotes to passages in Kings that direct the reader to more information in Chronicles. Chronicles is an invaluable supplement to Kings, but it is much more than just a supplement.

Kings and Chronicles have much in common, and the story they tell is basically the same. Often, however, they tell the story with significant differences in what each chooses to include and omit, in emphasis given to various periods or people, and in details they include. Chronicles is much more than just a collection of "things left out." It is an independent work vivid in its presentation, rich in detail, and distinctive in perspective. As such it should be read, studied, and appreciated as an independent history of Israel. [^7]

The books of Chronicles can be conveniently divided into four units:

First Chronicles 1 through 9 covers the period from Adam to David — the same period covered in Genesis through 1 Samuel. The history of this period in Chronicles is told primarily with lists of genealogies, which focus attention on the lineage of the chosen people in general, tracing the descendants of each of the twelve tribes of Israel and the lineage of David in particular. Of special interest in 1 Chronicles are a note that the birthright that belonged to Reuben was given to Joseph (5:1-5), the complete, high priestly lineage from Levi to the Exile (6:1-15), and a passage about the function of the Levites before the Exile (6:31-53) and after (9:26-34), particularly with regard to their participation in the music at the temple (6:31; 9:33-34). There is no formal account of many significant events before David; Chronicles presupposes familiarity with the covenants made with the patriarchs and with the Mosaic law.

First Chronicles 10 through 29 gives a detailed description of the reign of David, beginning with the death of Saul — roughly the same period covered in 2 Samuel. The picture given in Chronicles is an idealistic one, as emphasis is given to the good kings of Judah: David (1 Chron. 10-29); Solomon (2 Chron. 1-9); Jehoshaphat (2 Chron. 17-20); Hezekiah (2 Chron. 29-32); and Josiah (2 Chron. 34-35). The reign of David is particularly glorified, omitting his struggles with Saul (1 Sam. 17-31), his sin with Bathsheba (2 Sam. 11), and the problems in his house including Amnon (2 Sam. 13), Absalom (2 Sam. 13-19), and Adonijah (1 Kgs. 1-2) — all of which are detailed in 2 Samuel and 1 Kings 1 and 2.

Although Chronicles agrees with Samuel that David was not suited to build the temple (2 Sam. 22:1-17; 1 Kgs. 5:3; 1 Chron. 22:8), David is closely associated in Chronicles with the foundation of the temple ritual. In fact, Chronicles records that the pattern of the temple was revealed to David by the Spirit (1 Chron. 28:11-12), which allowed him to make preparations for its building and which he then passed on to his son Solomon. In this connection, Chronicles contains a long and detailed description of David's bringing the ark of the covenant from Kirjath-jearim to Jerusalem (1 Chron. 13-16) — as compared with a shorter version in 2 Samuel (2 Sam. 6:1-5) — and an extensive description of David's preparations for building the temple (1 Chron. 22-29). The emphasis in Chronicles on the temple, the temple ordinances, and the details about the priesthood have led some to speculate that the authors or editors may have been Levites.

Second Chronicles 1 through 9 covers the reign of Solomon — the same period as found in 1 Kings 1 through 11, which the account in Chronicles follows very closely. As with David, the account of Solomon's reign is idealized, and Chronicles omits the sins of Solomon at the end of his life (1 Kgs. 11:4-13) as well as the Lord's appointment during Solomon's reign of Jeroboam as the one who would divide Solomon's kingdom (1 Kgs. 11:26-43).

Second Chronicles 10 through 36 recounts the division of the kingdoms under Solomon's son Rehoboam and the ensuing history of both kingdoms to their respective destructions. Chronicles is primarily interested in the Southern Kingdom. Unlike the account in Kings — which often deals in detail with the kings, prophets, and events in the Northern Kingdom (see for example the long accounts of Elijah and Elisha, prophets in the North) — Chronicles only briefly mentions the kings in Israel when they cross paths with Judah (for example, Ahab's alliance with Jehoshaphat in 2 Chron. 18).

Chronicles contains an explanation of Shishak's invasion and sacking of the temple as the result of Rehoboam's apostasy (2 Chron. 12:1-12), a detail that is missing in the account in 1 Kings 14:21-31. Chronicles also records that Manasseh, the most wicked king in Judah, was captured and sent to Babylon where he repented of his wickedness to return as a righteous king who led a religious reform (2 Chron. 33). In the contrasting account in 2 Kings 21, Manasseh died at the height of his wickedness.

At the end of Chronicles, just as in Kings, [^8] there is an appended note of hope from a later period, 539 B.C., indicating the rise of Cyrus the Persian and his proclamation that Judah may return from exile (2 Chron. 36:22-23). These same two verses are found at the beginning of the book of Ezra (Ezra 1:1-3), providing a link between the story in Chronicles and Ezra-Nehemiah, [^9] where the story then continues into the Persian period with the restoration of Judah, the rebuilding and rededication of the temple, and the renewal of the covenant in Nehemiah 9 through 13.

Notes

David Rolph Seely is assistant professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] George E. Mendenhall, The Tenth Generation (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins, 1973), p. 121.
[^2] Another son, Absalom, had done the same thing when he tried to wrest the throne from David on an earlier occasion (2 Sam. 15:1).
[^3] Cf. 1 Kgs. 1:39. The four corners of the altar rose to points, called "horns," which Adonijah grasped; they are especially a symbol of sanctuary and safety. Cf. Amos 3:14;John Gray,I & II Kings, 2d ed. (London: SCM, 1970), p. 96.
[^4] "The members of the king's harem were considered royal property, to be passed on to the next king"; Herbert G. May and Bruce M. Metzger, ed., The New Oxford Annotated Bible (New York: Oxford University Press, 1971), pp. 416-17.
[^5] Solomon's justification may have been that the Law taught that only a man accused of manslaughter could claim sanctuary, not a murderer ( Ex. 21:12-14). For Joab's killing of Abner, see 2 Sam. 3:22-34.
[^6] Solomon's wisdom was so great that he came to be known as the author of Proverbs in the Old Testament (Prov. 1:1); see also, in the apocryphal tradition, "The Psalms of Solomon" and "The Odes of Solomon," in James H. Charlesworth, ed., The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha, 2 vols. (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1985), 2:639-70, and 2:725-71.
[^7] Some scholars feel that the extent of Solomon's empire may have been exaggerated by the biblical historians.
[^8] See John Bright, A History of Israel, 3d ed. (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1981), pp. 211-28.
[^9] For Solomon's large standing army, distinguished by its use of chariots, see Bright, p. 213.
