Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

3

THE REIGN OF SOLOMON (1 KINGS 1-11; 2 CHRONICLES 1-9)

TERRENCE L. SZINK

Solomon, son of David and Bathsheba, is perhaps the most difficult of Israel's kings to understand. On one hand, he was the paradigm of the wise ruler who built the temple of the Lord and took the kingdom of Israel to new heights economically. On the other, he sowed the seeds for the disintegration of Israel and became involved in the worship of foreign gods, "which thing," we are told in the Book of Mormon, "was abominable" before the Lord (Jacob 2:24), leading one scholar to aptly refer to him as "the wisest of fools." [^1]

Solomon Becomes King (1 Kgs. 1-2)

As 1 Kings begins, David had become old and weak. In an effort to invigorate their beloved king, his servants brought him Abishag, a young virgin, to comfort him as a wife or concubine. Adonijah, David's oldest surviving son, sensed his father's decline and moved to take his place on the throne. He assembled "chariots and horsemen, and fifty men to run before him" (1 Kgs. 1:5). [^2] In addition to this ceremonial army, Adonijah had the support of Joab, David's nephew and captain of his army, and Abiathar the priest, both of whom had previously been loyal to David. Thus Adonijah had the backing of important members of both military and religious institutions. A sacrifice was held to which Adonijah invited "all his brethren the king's sons, and all the men of Judah the king's servants" (1 Kgs. 1:9). This was most likely a political-religious ceremony, which had as its purpose the solidifying of Adonijah's power. The list of those who were not invited is interesting: Solomon, Nathan the prophet, Zadok the priest, and several of David's "mighty men," who formed the core of David's personal army.

Informed of this gathering, Bathsheba and Nathan went to David and reminded him that he had promised earlier to make Solomon king (see 1 Chron. 22:5-13). David immediately assented and gave instructions for Solomon to be anointed king by Zadok. When this event took place, at the Gihon spring in Jerusalem (see Map 17, LDS Bible), Solomon was acclaimed by a great crowd (1 Kgs. 1:11-40). Adonijah and his friends heard the noise as they were finishing their feast. When a messenger told them what had happened, Adonijah immediately realized that he had been outmaneuvered and fled to the altar by the sanctuary that preceded Solomon's temple — the tent, or tabernacle. [^3] Solomon vowed to spare his older brother, provided he did not turn to "wickedness" (1 Kgs. 1:41-53).

David instructed Solomon to punish Joab and Shimei, who had been disloyal to him, and soon afterward the aged king died (1 Kgs. 2:1-11; see also 2 Sam. 16:5-13). Solomon succeeded to the throne peacefully, but soon thereafter, Adonijah asked Bathsheba to persuade King Solomon to give him Abishag, David's final wife, in marriage. Solomon refused, however, for he assumed that Adonijah would use Abishag to strengthen his claim to the throne, and he took this request as a sure sign that Adonijah was plotting against him. [^4] Solomon sent his right-hand military man, Benaiah, to execute Adonijah (1 Kgs. 2:13-25). Solomon also expelled Abiathar from the priesthood and had Benaiah execute Joab, even as he clasped the altar in front of the sanctuary. [^5] Zadok became the sole high priest, and Benaiah took Joab's position. Later, Solomon put Shimei on probation — he must stay in Jerusalem; when Shimei left the city to repossess runaway slaves, Solomon had him executed also (1 Kgs. 2:26-46).

So "the kingdom was established in the hand of Solomon" (1 Kgs. 2:46). Though these actions may seem extreme to us, they were perhaps demanded by the harsh politics of the day. In many cases, Solomon gave his enemies mercy, provided they acted circumspectly — which often they did not. The priest Abiathar, however, is an example of an opponent whose life was spared. Still, though Solomon is considered a man of peace rather than a man of war such as his father, David, his reign did not begin without violence.

Solomon's Wisdom and Power (1 Kgs. 3-4, 10; 2 Chron. 1, 9)

As Solomon commenced his reign, "he began to love the Lord" and "called on the name of the Lord" (JST 1 Kgs. 3:3). His worship included frequent offerings, which were made at the high places (outdoor places of worship), because the temple had not yet been built. Once, when he was at a chief high place at Gibeon, where the tabernacle was then located (2 Chron. 1:3-6; see Map 9, LDS Bible), Solomon spoke with the Lord in a vision. The Lord offered to bless him as he desired; but instead of asking for long life, riches, or power over enemies, Solomon asked for "an understanding heart" to govern the people. The Lord was pleased with this choice, granted him wisdom, and then blessed him with riches and honor in addition (1 Kgs. 3:1-15). Still, he warned the new king: "Thou shalt not walk in unrighteousness, as did thy father David" (JST 1 Kgs. 3:14).

As an example of Solomon's divinely given wisdom, the author of 1 Kings recorded the incident of two women contending over one child. Two prostitutes approached Solomon for judgment, each claiming the baby to be hers. When Solomon pretended to pick up his sword to cut the baby in half so he could give one piece to each of the women, one woman agreed, but the other was horrified and offered to give up her half of the baby so it could live. Solomon, of course, awarded the baby to the one who wanted to protect the child (1 Kgs. 3:16-28).

Because of that and other incidents, the fame of Solomon's wisdom spread throughout Israel, and even beyond: people from other nations came to visit him and hear his wisdom. The example provided by the author of Kings is that of the queen of Sheba (apparently in south Arabia), who came to Jerusalem to test Solomon's knowledge. When Solomon answered all of her "hard questions" perfectly, she was struck with awe. She was also impressed by his wealth and building projects. She gave Solomon expensive gifts, he reciprocated, and the queen returned to her own country (1 Kgs. 10:1-13; 2 Chron. 9:1-12). [^6]

In Solomon's day, according to 1 Kings, his kingdom stretched from the border of Egypt east to the Euphrates, including the land of the Philistines. [^7] His subjects lived in prosperity and safety. [^8] Solomon's name means "peace"; and God gave him and his people nearly complete peace throughout his life (see 1 Chron. 22:9). Solomon had an extensive royal bureaucracy, household, army, [^9] and navy, which a different district supported every month of the year. [^10] Trade with other nations was frequent, [^11] and the ships of Tarshish brought Solomon gold, silver, ivory, and even apes and peacocks (1 Kgs. 10:22; 2 Chron. 29:25).

Solomon the Builder (1 Kgs. 5-9; 1 Chron. 28; 2 Chron. 2-8)

In the fourth year of his reign, Solomon began to build the temple, though preparations had been underway since before David had died (1 Kgs. 6:1; 1 Chron. 28). [^12] Because he was friendly with Hiram, king of Tyre, he sent Israelites to import cedars from Lebanon (see Map 7, LDS Bible). Hiram also provided craftsmen to help construct the building (1 Kgs. 5:1-18; 2 Chron. 2:1-16). The temple turned out to be ninety feet by thirty feet in length and width and forty-five feet high (1 Kgs. 6:2). It was divided into three rooms: an entrance hall ('ulam; 1 Kgs. 6:3); a main room sixty feet long (hekal; 1 Kgs. 6:17); and a holy of holies (debir; 1 Kgs. 6:19-20), which was a cube of about thirty feet (1 Kgs. 6:19-20). In the holy of holies (called the "oracle" in the KJV) were placed two cherubim — gold-plated angel figures, perhaps in the shape of sphinxes, whose wings touched (1 Kgs. 6:23-28). [^13] Much of the temple was overlaid with gold. Two massive pillars, named Jachin and Boaz, were placed in front of the building (1 Kgs. 7:15-21), [^14] as was a molten bronze water basin supported by twelve bronze oxen (1 Kgs. 7:23-26). Inside the main room was a golden incense altar, a table for the bread of presence ("shewbread" in the KJV), and the lamp stands (1 Kgs. 7:48-49; the word "candlesticks" in the KJV is anachronistic). [^15]

After seven years of labor, the temple was finished (see 1 Kgs. 6:38). On the day of its dedication, priests took the ark of the covenant and placed it beneath the wings of the cherubim in the holy of holies. When they emerged, a cloud of glory, symbolizing God's presence, filled the building (1 Kgs. 8:1-11; cf. Ex. 40:34-35; Mark 9:7). Solomon blessed the people and then gave the dedicatory prayer for the temple (1 Kgs. 8:22-53). He expressed thanksgiving and then prayed that the Lord would forgive Israel of offenses, providing they repented, and that the Lord would hear the prayers of both Israelites and foreigners. He asked for success in battle, or, if Israel were defeated and taken captive, that they would be restored if they repented.

After this prayer, Solomon blessed the people once more and then offered sacrifice of twenty-two thousand oxen and one hundred twenty thousand sheep. There was a seven-day feast (probably the Feast of Tabernacles; see 1 Kgs. 8:2; Lev. 23:34 [^16]), and on the eighth day the people returned home rejoicing (1 Kgs. 8:63-66).

The Lord appeared to Solomon in another dream. In it he was told that God had accepted the temple as his own and that if Solomon acted righteously, his throne would be eternal. If Israel stayed righteous, the nation would fare well also, but if there were apostasy in Israel, they would be cut off and plucked out by the roots (2 Chron. 7:20) and the temple would be destroyed (1 Kgs. 9:1-9; 2 Chron. 7:12-22).

To build fortresses, cities, the temple, and other royal buildings, including an elaborate, costly palace, Solomon used forced labor allotted periodically to different districts. [^17] But he also used teams of non-Israelite slaves (1 Kgs. 9:20-21). Thus Solomon's glory was at least partially based on the oppression of conquered peoples and native Israelites, and it was deeply resented. When Rehoboam succeeded his father, Solomon, Israel told him that they would not tolerate the "grievous service" of Solomon any more. When he vowed to increase their burdens, he was rejected by the ten northern tribes. He sent them an official as a forced labor leader, and they stoned him. Rehoboam was forced to flee unceremoniously (1 Kgs. 12:1-20). Though this incident took place after Solomon's death, it tells us much about Solomon's reign.

Although the temple was built in response to the Lord's will, had a valid religious motivation, and was of great spiritual value to Israel, Solomon's palace and luxurious court seem to have resulted from other motivations. One thinks of King Noah's elaborate building projects recorded in the Book of Mormon (see Mosiah 11). [^18]

Solomon's Apostasy (1 Kgs. 11)

Early in his reign, Solomon married the daughter of the king of Egypt (1 Kgs. 3:1), which was probably a political marriage to protect him from invasion by the traditionally powerful and dangerous Egyptians. It was something of an accomplishment for the new Israelite king and probably shows that Israel was strong and somewhat prestigious at this time, but it also shows that Egypt was weak. [^19] The Joseph Smith Translation records that "the Lord was not pleased with Solomon" because of this marriage, and thereafter he blessed him "for the people's sake only" (JST 1 Kgs. 3:1). He went on to marry other non-Israelite women, for king Solomon "loved many foreign women" (1 Kgs. 11:1, NIV [^20]). The record states that he had seven hundred wives and three hundred concubines (1 Kgs. 11:3). [^21] Probably almost all of his wives represented political marriages meant to solidify peace treaties with surrounding nations. The Lord had expressly forbidden marriage with non-Israelites, however, and Solomon paid for his disobedience — his foreign wives led him to worship foreign gods: Ashtoreth of the Sidonians, Milcom of the Ammonites, and Chemosh of the Moabites (1 Kgs. 11:5-8).

The Lord was angry with Solomon and communicated with him once more. He told him that because he had gone astray, the kingdom would be taken from him and given to another after his death. Only one tribe would stay in his kingdom; the rest would secede from it (1 Kgs. 11:9-13). [^22]

God also raised up military enemies to harass Solomon: Hadad the Edomite and Rezon of Damascus, who annoyed Solomon during his reign (1 Kgs. 11:14-25). But Solomon's worst fears resulted from an internal threat. He had appointed a man named Jeroboam, son of Nebat, to be overseer of all the forced labor in the tribe of Joseph. While Solomon was still alive, a prophet named Ahijah met Jeroboam once in open country, tore his own garment into twelve pieces, and gave ten of them to Jeroboam. They symbolized the Lord's taking ten tribes away from Solomon because of his apostasy. Out of respect for David, however, they would be taken only after Solomon's death. If Jeroboam would stay close to the Lord, the Lord would preserve him.

When Solomon heard of this prophecy, he tried to have Jeroboam killed, [^23] but the future ruler of the Northern Kingdom of Israel escaped to Egypt, where he stayed until Solomon died (1 Kgs. 11:26-40).

Conclusions

Solomon is a troubling figure. It almost seems as if there were two Solomons. The first was a king of great power and glory who gave Israel legendary prestige and a sense of self-worth. He was a ruler of supernatural wisdom who had semiprophetic status, for he had visions and was selected by the Lord to build his temple. He also had a kind of priestly status, for he prayed to dedicate the temple [^24] and performed frequent sacrifices. This positive Solomon is emphasized in the account in 2 Chronicles.

The second Solomon (absent in Chronicles) carried out purges to eliminate his rivals. With an extensive court, he lived on a lavish scale and required his people to shoulder the burden. His building projects were vast and impressive but came into being through oppression of the people — foreign slaves and Israelites who were forced to endure temporary slave status. He married foreign women, perhaps because he desired political security or power, and as a result he turned from his piety, his semiprophetic and priestly status, to worship pagan gods. And he sought to kill the man whom the Lord had selected to lead most of Israel after his death — much as Saul had sought to kill Solomon's father, David, whom the Lord had similarly chosen to rule (1 Sam. 19-24; 26).

Notes

Terrence L. Szink is a doctoral candidate in ancient Near Eastern studies at the University of California at Los Angeles.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The biblical record mentions no other sons or daughters, though some traditions do.
[^2] The covenant was one of protection and obedience between God and the people (Josh. 24:1, 24). Shechem is an important city mentioned in many other passages. See "Shechem," Bible Dictionary, LDS Bible.
[^3] The phrase "unto this day" is intriguing, but we do not know with certainty how long after the actual events the text was established.
[^4] The division substantially weakened both kingdoms but especially the North, which exhibited a steady decline politically and militarily. That made it "ripe for plucking" by the Assyrians, who, though wicked and ruthless, were instruments in God's hands (see Isa. 10:5-12).
[^5] See also the Hebrew of Gen. 49:24, in which the phrase 'abir ya'akob is used, the literal meaning being "bull of Jacob." The King James Version translates the phrase as "mighty God of Jacob." The bull was a symbol for divine power in the ancient Near East. The earliest dated archeological object of Pharaonic Egypt — the Narmer Palette — depicts the bull as a symbol of the power of the first Pharaoh. The Canaanites of Ugarit worshipped their god El as a bull, and Baal was depicted as mounted on a bull.
[^6] Not unexpectedly, the Lord sent another of his prophets to warn Jeroboam of the wickedness he was perpetrating. Yet he "returned [repented] not from his evil way," adding the dregs of society to the ranks of his apostate priesthood (1 Kgs. 13:33). Called simply "the man of God that came from Judah" (1 Kgs. 13), this prophet from the Southern Kingdom was entreated by a northern prophet from Bethel to go against the Lord's instructions. When the prophet from Judah at first refused to enjoy the hospitality of the old prophet from Bethel because God had forbidden it, the latter tested the resolve of the former by telling him that an angel had approved the invitation to dine together. The prophet of Judah acquiesced and then received the prophecy of his own death from the lips of his host. Just as the old prophet had foreseen, when his guest left to return home, a lion slew him and stood guard over the carcass in the roadway until the old prophet mournfully retrieved the body of his younger associate (1 Kgs. 13:23-31).
[^7] The North survived as a kingdom until 721 B.C., about one hundred eighty years after Jeroboam. The South survived longer, until 587 B.C.
[^8] See "Jezebel," Bible Dictionary, LDS Bible.
[^9] Bruce B. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), p. 222.
[^10] See Robert J. Matthews, "Tradition, Testimony, Transfiguration, and Keys," in Studies in Scripture, Volume Five: The Gospels, ed. Kent P. Jackson and Robert L. Millet (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986), pp. 305-8.
[^11] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), p. 172.
[^12] Ibid., pp. 337-38.
[^13] Ibid.; see also D&C 131:5.
[^14] Spencer W. Kimball, "The Mantle of the Prophet," devotional address delivered at the Salt Lake LDS Institute of Religion, 13 Apr. 1973.
[^15] Elisha's performance of this miracle proved to the sons of the prophets that he had indeed inherited the prophetic powers of Elijah. Both men's miracles showed that they continued the ministries of earlier great prophets: Moses (Ex. 14) and Joshua (Josh. 3-4). [^17]
[^16] Perhaps the most puzzling episode in Elisha's ministry is that of his cursing of the little children in 2 Kgs. 2:23-24, in consequence of which they were attacked by bears. Footnote 23a in the LDS Bible identifies the mockers as "youths (not little children)." But the Hebrew words clearly identify them as little children: ne'arim qetannim, "little boys" (v. 23), and yeladim, "children" (v. 24). Whatever the meaning of the words, the account is problematic. Since the prophet's response seems so out of character for a servant of the Lord, it may well be that the story is a fictional tale that was added to the record of Elisha's ministry.
[^17] 17. See Bright, pp. 220-23.
[^18] 18. For archaeological remains from Solomon's era, which confirm the lavish nature of his building projects, see W. F. Albright, From the Stone Age to Christianity, 2d ed. (New York: Doubleday, 1957), pp. 291-92. Also, K. M. Kenyon and P.R.S. Moorey, The Bible and Recent Archaeology, rev. ed. (Atlanta: John Knox, 1987), pp. 85-107.
[^19] 19. Solomon's Egyptian wife was probably the daughter of one of the weak kings of the Twenty-first Dynasty, perhaps Siamun. See Bright, p. 212; Martin North, The History of Israel, 2d ed. (New York: Harper and Row, 1960), p. 216. Cf. "Suppiluliumas and the Egyptian Queen," trans. Albrecht Goetze, in Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testament, 3d ed. with Supplement, ed. J.B. Pritchard (Princeton: Princeton University, 1969), p. 319. Earlier, when Egypt was strong, it would not give princesses even to Babylon or Assyria.
[^20] 20. New International Version. The word should be translated "foreign." "Strange" in the KJV has unfortunate modern connotations.
[^21] 21. It is possible that the round figure of seven hundred wives and three hundred concubines (total, one thousand) is greatly exaggerated. A concubine, incidentally, is a wife who does not enjoy the legal status of a free woman — she is usually a household servant or a slave captured in war.
[^22] 22. The issue involved in the Lord's anger against Solomon was not that he had many wives but that he had married foreign women outside of the covenant (see D&C 132:38).
[^23] 23. Bright suggests that Jeroboam may have started to plot actively against the king; p. 228.
[^24] 24. Cf. Robinson, p. 97.
