Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

4

KINGS AND PROPHETS IN DIVIDED ISRAEL (1 KINGS 12-2 KINGS 10; 2 CHRONICLES 10-22)

ANDREW C. SKINNER

After Solomon's death, long-standing jealousies, antagonisms, and tensions between Judah and Israel (the northern tribes) erupted violently when rebellion against Rehoboam, Solomon's only known child and successor, [^1] shattered the unity of the Israelite kingdom. The tensions had been aggravated in Solomon's later years by heavy taxation and forced labor. Hence, the prophesied division of the great Davidic kingdom came to pass: "For thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, Behold, I will rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon. . . . I will take the kingdom out of his son's hand" (1 Kgs. 11:31, 35). The division of the kingdom was the Lord's doing.

The message is subtle but profound. God is not outside the historical process. He is the principal agent in history. He has a plan for Israel and intervenes through his prophets in the affairs of men to bring about his work and purposes. The division of the Davidic kingdom, or house of Israel, was a step preparatory to the scattering of Israel, in which Deity also took a personal role (Jer. 16:13; Ezek. 5:10; Jacob 5:8).

The Division of the Kingdom (1 Kgs. 12; 2 Chron. 10)

When the forty-one-year-old Rehoboam traveled to Shechem to be installed as the new king, he met Jeroboam, the Ephraimite adversary of Solomon, who had returned from exile in Egypt at the request of the northern tribes of Israel (1 Kgs. 12:1-3; 2 Chron. 10:1-3). It was important for Rehoboam to go to Shechem to be formally recognized as king because Shechem was among the most ancient of the sacred towns of northern Palestine and, thus, a chief city of the northern tribes of Israel (see Map 9, LDS Bible). It was at Shechem that Abraham camped when he first arrived in Canaan (Gen. 12:6). It was at Shechem that the Israelites buried the bones of Joseph when they came out of Egypt (Josh. 24:32). It was at Shechem that Joshua gathered together all the tribes of Israel to give them instructions and establish a special covenant between God and the people. [^2] Undoubtedly, the heir apparent to Solomon recognized the need to be confirmed at this important place in order to cement northern allegiance to a united kingdom.

But the people of the North attached conditions to their acceptance of Rehoboam. Before supporting him, they asked for a decrease in the severe financial and labor demands that had been instituted by Solomon (1 Kgs. 12:3-19; 2 Chron. 10:3-19). When the new king made known his decision to increase their burdens instead (the record says he answered roughly or harshly), northern support was effectively destroyed, assuring a divided nation. The author of this section of the biblical narrative puts it succinctly: "So Israel rebelled against the house of David unto this day" (1 Kgs. 12:19). [^3]

Rehoboam reacted to the secession by mobilizing an army from Judah and Benjamin to quell the rebellion, force the return of the errant northern territories, and preserve political unity. But the Lord, through the prophet Shemaiah, forbade him to carry out a war (1 Kgs. 12:20-24; 2 Chron. 11:1-4). When war did come a short time later, it proved to be a futile and lengthy enterprise. We are told simply that "there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all their days" (1 Kgs. 14:30). The division between their two kingdoms created two separate nations with separate histories from that time on. It will only be in Christ's millennial kingdom that the two will become one again (Ezek. 37:22).

Jeroboam's Perversions (1 Kgs. 12-13; 2 Chron. 11)

Jeroboam the son of Nebat was made king over the Israelites in the North, with their first capital city at Shechem. His kingdom, which consisted of the northern ten tribes, was usually called Israel, or Ephraim. Later, Omri made Samaria its capital (see Map 9, LDS Bible). Rehoboam (922-915 B.C.) became king over the tribes of Judah and Benjamin in the South. His kingdom, Judah, had its capital at Jerusalem (1 Kgs. 12:19-21). [^4]

The most significant aspect of Jeroboam's reign in Israel (922-901 B.C.) was his immediate idolatry. By establishing two golden calves (or young bulls) at open-air sanctuaries at Dan and Bethel—opposite ends of his kingdom (see Map 9)—Jeroboam hoped to compete effectively with the Judahite temple in order to strengthen his political position against Rehoboam, expand his religious influence, and solidify the division of the once-unified Davidic kingdom. What he succeeded in doing was to teach his people to shun Jehovah, Jehovah's prophets, and Jehovah's holy temple at Jerusalem. He cleverly manipulated an ancient Near Eastern symbol of strength and divinity (the bull or calf), which was already linked to the northern tribe of Joseph in old prophecy (Deut. 33:17). [^5] It appears Jeroboam also hoped that his people had forgotten the idolatrous nature of calf worship (Ex. 32:19-35) and that they would associate his golden calves with the Exodus. In another clever manipulation, he used the Exodus, an event central to the very identity of Israelites and one always to be remembered by them (Ex. 13) as a tool to justify his own schemes and wicked religious reformation. He declared: "It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem: behold thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt" (1 Kgs. 12:28). This was an almost verbatim quotation of the people's proclamation at the golden calf incident during the Exodus (Ex. 32:4).

In imitation of the Feast of Tabernacles, which was also related to the Exodus, Jeroboam instituted his own perverted feast in the North, created his own priesthood, cast out of his kingdom true priesthood holders, and made unauthorized sacrifices (2 Chron. 11:13-17; 13:9; 1 Kgs. 12:26-31). In all this he sinned greatly (1 Kgs. 12:30), yet in his view these innovations gave the Israelites everything they could want: the god of Joseph, the god of the Exodus, their own holy days, their own priests, and their own sympathetic king. In short, what he hoped the people would believe he was providing was not a new, perverted religious order but rather a new royal administration legitimized by old religious rites that were now being given renewed attention in a new day and age. [^6]

Decline of the North and the South (1 Kgs. 14-16; 2 Chron. 12-16)

Because of Jeroboam's wickedness, the Lord foretold the destruction of his royal house through the same prophet, Ahijah, who had predicted his rise (1 Kgs. 11:28-39). The Lord also foretold the scattering of the northern tribes because of their sins—two hundred years before its occurrence (1 Kgs. 14:15-16). Israel's future was bleak. But Judah in the South was little better off during the time of northern wickedness, because they also did evil in the sight of the Lord beyond anything that had been done by their fathers (1 Kgs. 14:22). Judah's practices included the worship of the god Baal.

As a consequence of the moral, emotional, social, and physical weakness that accompanies such behavior among an unfit people in 918 B.C. a foreign power, Egypt, led by Pharaoh Shishak, invaded Judah and ravaged the temple in Jerusalem by taking away as booty all "the treasures of the house of the Lord" (1 Kgs. 14:25-26). A fragment of Shishak's inscription has been found at Megiddo, and a representation of his victory over Rehoboam is found at the Temple of Karnak in Egypt. Although the Bible mentions only Judah, evidence indicates that Shishak invaded the Northern Kingdom as well. He inscribed the names of many northern cities on his victory relief at Karnak. Thus, both Israel in the North and Judah in the South were greatly weakened during and after the reigns of their respective evil kings, Jeroboam and Rehoboam. [^7]

From this point in the historical narrative (1 Kgs. 15) to the account of the actual fall and deportation of the kingdom of Israel (2 Kgs. 17:6), the writers of Kings skillfully weave back and forth from one kingdom to the other to report contemporaneous occurrences in both. It is important to note that the compilers of the biblical text as presently constituted used sources no longer in existence today (1 Kgs. 14:19). Those missing official records, kept by the kings of both Judah and Israel, are one more bit of evidence for the actuality of lost scripture and the importance that was placed on record keeping in ancient times, even during the reigns of wicked rulers.

The house of David continued on throughout the entire history of the kingdom of Judah, while a series of kings—some related to each other and some not—reigned in Israel after the slaughter of all the house of Jeroboam by Baasha, just as had been prophesied (1 Kgs. 15:29). The Bible depicts all of Israel's rulers as wicked, and many of Judah's also. A notable exception was King Asa (third king of Judah; 913-873 B.C.), whose name comes from the Hebrew root meaning "heal." Indeed, he was able to heal the kingdom spiritually, politically, and economically for a time because his "heart was perfect with the Lord all his days" (1 Kgs. 15:14). Asa had a long and prosperous reign (forty-one years), during which time he saw a number of wicked kings come and go on the throne of Israel in the North. The worst of Israel's kings was Ahab (869-850 B.C.): "And Ahab the son of Omri did evil in the sight of the Lord above all that were before him" (1 Kgs. 16:30). Ahab's reign represents the nadir of both the dynasty of Omri and the Northern Kingdom. The notorious wickedness of the Omride dynasty, including the statutes of Omri and the works of the house of Ahab, was immortalized in later prophetic chastisement (e.g., Micah. 6:16).

Among Ahab's great mistakes was his marriage to a woman whose very name has come to stand for the ultimate in wicked influence. Jezebel was a Phoenician princess who not only promoted Baal worship to the exclusion of true religion but also was personally responsible for slaying the prophets of the Lord and other righteous men (1 Kgs. 18:13). It has been said that more than any other single event, the marriage of Ahab to Jezebel caused the downfall of the Northern Kingdom. [^8]

Elijah (1 Kgs. 17-2 Kgs. 2; 2 Chron. 17-19)

It is a true principle that when great evil exists in the Lord's kingdom, there will also be great righteousness manifest alongside it so that truth seekers will not be left to themselves. Hence, it is with the evil reign of Ahab and his wife Jezebel that we are introduced to one of the greatest of the prophets, the man named Elijah (literally, "My God is Jehovah"), who came from Tishbeh in the hill country east of the Jordan River. Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "For dramatic manifestations and the visible exhibition of divine power, the ministry of Elijah the Prophet scarcely has an equal." [^9] The very first verse in which Elijah is introduced immediately gives us an idea of his impressive stature and powers: "As the Lord God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word" (1 Kgs. 17:1). Who can doubt that Elijah, in mortality, stood before the Lord? Certainly his sealing powers were demonstrated when the heavens were sealed shut and a devastating drought ravaged the land of Israel (1 Kgs. 17-18). Apparently, control over the elements is an integral part of the sealing powers of the priesthood; whoever possesses them has power over the earth and the accompanying elements in the heavens, including wind and rain. Nephi the son of Helaman was taught this truth by the Lord when he received the sealing powers (see Hel. 10:6-9; 11:4-13).

But the sealing power of Elijah is greater than having control over the elements. The same Elijah who confronted Ahab appeared to the Savior on the Mount of Transfiguration as a translated being (Matt. 17:1-9) and later stood before Joseph Smith to deliver his powers and authority to redeem the dead (D&C 110:13-16). [^10]

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that "Elijah was the last Prophet that held the keys of the Priesthood" to administer in all its ordinances, including the sealing ordinances. [^11] That is why Elijah was translated without tasting death and was chosen to restore those great keys—first to Peter, James, and John, and then, before the Second Coming, to Joseph Smith (Mal. 4:5-6; D&C 2:1; 35:4; 110:13-16; 128:17; 138:46; 3 Ne. 25:5). The Prophet further said:

The spirit, power, and calling of Elijah is, that ye have power to hold the key of the revelations, ordinances, oracles, powers and endowments of the fullness of the earth; and to receive, obtain, and perform all the ordinances belonging to the kingdom of God, even unto the turning of the hearts of the fathers unto the children, and the hearts of the children unto the fathers, even those who are in heaven. . . . What is this office and work of Elijah? It is one of the greatest and most important subjects that God has revealed. He should send Elijah to seal the children to the fathers, and the fathers to the children . . . this is the spirit of Elijah, that we redeem our dead, and connect ourselves with our fathers which are in heaven, and seal up our dead to come forth in the first resurrection; and here we want the power of Elijah to seal those who dwell on earth to those who dwell in heaven. This is the power of Elijah and the keys of the kingdom of Jehovah. [^12]

Ultimately, the power of Elijah is also the power whereby one is sealed up to eternal life, or the power to have one's calling and election made sure. [^13]

Of all the mighty works performed by Elijah, including the raising of the widow's dead son (1 Kgs. 17:17-24), no episode in the Old Testament better demonstrates the strength of the prophet's priesthood power than his contest with the priests of Baal, in which he called down fire from heaven, and his opening, or unsealing, the heavens for rain (1 Kgs. 18:17-45). All these things he did that the hearts of the people might be turned to their God (1 Kgs. 18:37), but sadly, no lasting reform of the Northern Kingdom's evil ways could be effected.

It is reasonable to expect that even prophets of God become discouraged, as the experience of Elijah bears out. Having heard of the slaughter of his comrades and fellow prophets and being hunted as a fugitive by Jezebel, who vowed to take his life, Elijah fled the court of Ahab without food or drink and journeyed for a day until circumstances overwhelmed him—whereupon he sat down under a tree and requested to die (1 Kgs. 19:1-4). With great pathos he cried: "It is enough; now, O Lord, take away my life; for I am not better than my fathers" (1 Kgs. 19:4).

But the Lord did not abandon Elijah, either physically or spiritually. It is significant that the first thing that occurred to restore his well-being was the provision for his physical needs—food, drink, and shelter (1 Kgs. 19:5-8). The physical and spiritual natures of our existence must both be fed. Indeed, it requires great spiritual power to remain attuned to the Spirit when one is hurting physically. After Elijah's physical needs were met, the Lord spoke to him to restore his emotional and spiritual welfare also. And, in a great lesson for us, Elijah found the Lord not in earth-shattering signs of power but in the still small voice of the Holy Spirit (1 Kgs. 19:9-12). Those who listen carefully in our day will also hear and should heed the same still small voice.

Encouraged and renewed, Elijah completed his mission, which included the anointing of new kings and a successor prophet, Elisha. The new prophet knew he was chosen when Elijah cast his mantle upon him (1 Kgs. 19:19-21). Elijah's tangible mantle (a coat or cloak) was symbolic of an intangible mantle — the power, authority, light, revelation, and direction given by God to his chosen servants. The casting of the physical mantle was a symbol of the bestowal of the right to succeed the great prophet. [^14] Elisha was a man of great loyalty, commitment, and dedication to the work of Jehovah. Though wealthy (as the numerous oxen in his possession testify; 1 Kgs. 19:19), he unhesitatingly rejected the things of the world and "went after Elijah, and ministered unto him" (1 Kgs. 19:19-21). So, too, all true disciples must resolutely reject the world and follow the Lord (Matt. 4:18-20; 8:19-22; 9:9; JST Matt. 16:26).

The last activities of Elijah, before he was taken into heaven in a fiery chariot by a whirlwind, included training Elisha and calling down fire from heaven again — this time to consume soldiers sent to apprehend him (2 Kgs. 1:9-15). He also confronted Ahaziah and Ahab, whose deaths he prophesied (2 Kgs. 1:1-4, 16-17).

Ahab and Jezebel had become participants in, and perpetuators of, one of the very foundational principles of Satan's kingdom: murder to get gain. Their plot to take the life of Naboth the Jezreelite, the owner of a beautiful vineyard which he refused to sell to the covetous king Ahab, surely represents the low point in the royal couple's morally bankrupt existence. The scheme itself was the diabolical concoction of queen Jezebel. She used the ruse of proclaiming a fast day which, in ancient Israelite culture, signaled a grave national emergency brought on by crimes committed by one member which brought the whole covenant community under God's condemnation. Two "sons of Belial" (literally, "worthlessness") were pressed into service as witnesses, as required by Mosaic statute in capital offenses. They perjured themselves to convict Naboth, who was stoned, thus giving the king free access to the vineyard (1 Kgs. 21:1-15).

God sent Elijah to Ahab to remind him in grim fashion that nothing escapes the awareness of the Lord. Elijah laid out in explicit terms the consequences of Jezebel's great treachery and the king's complicity in Naboth's murder. In parallelistic Hebrew prose, Elijah prophesied that the Lord would "consume [Ahab's] descendants" and cause "dogs [to] devour Jezebel by the wall of Jezreel" (1 Kgs. 21:21-23, translation mine). As for Ahab, the Lord said, "In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine" (1 Kgs. 21:19). All of these prophecies were fulfilled in due time (1 Kgs. 22:34-38; see also vv. 1-40; 2 Kgs. 9-10).

Elisha and the Sons of the Prophets (2 Kgs. 2-8; 2 Chron. 20-21)

As the time of Elijah's celestial departure approached, a curious group of men known as the "sons of the prophets" became more prominent in the events surrounding the transition of authority from one prophet to another. Perhaps they are best understood as a group of disciples who followed the prophets, preserved their words, and spread their messages. Since "the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy" (Rev. 19:10), perhaps we should look upon these individuals (also called "prophets") as the devoted disciples of the Lord in their day. In a time of general apostasy in the kingdom of Israel, it may be that these men and their families were the few who had the light of the gospel, which was largely absent in their generation because of unworthiness. People who live by the Spirit are "prophets" in their own right, and these, who looked on Elijah and then Elisha as their teachers and leaders, were called, symbolically, the sons of their masters. In this regard, Elisha cried out to Elijah, "My father, my father," when he saw the fiery chariot (2 Kgs. 2:12).

How the sons of the prophets were organized is not known. During the time of Elijah and Elisha they were found at various places, including Gilgal, Bethel, and Jericho. We know that some of them had families and that they were not exempt from working for their livelihood. Their families were not unfamiliar with economic misfortune (2 Kgs. 4:1).

The sons of the prophets were spiritually mature and perceptive, as is evident in their recognition that the promised mantle of authority actually rested on Elisha at the time of Elijah's departure (2 Kgs. 2:15). They also assisted the great prophets in their duties and even officiated when called in the prophetic office themselves, as was the case when Elisha sent one of them to Ramoth-gilead to anoint Jehu king over Israel (2 Kgs. 9:1-10). That young prophet was specifically commanded to use the prophetic formula "Thus saith the Lord" in fulfilling his appointed task (2 Kgs. 9:3).

Elijah, Elisha, and Christ

Elisha's ministry in the Northern Kingdom began in the last years of Ahab's reign and spanned the second half of the ninth century to the first years of the reign of Joash (2 Kgs. 13:14-20). Though there were specific differences between the two, Elisha's ministry greatly resembled and paralleled that of his master, Elijah. That was due in part to Elisha's granted request that he be endowed with a double portion of Elijah's spirit. More importantly, the similar lives and ministries of both men foreshadowed and typified the life of Christ.

Elisha's first miracle—smiting the waters of the Jordan with Elijah's mantle—was also the last miracle performed by his master (2 Kgs. 2:8, 14). [^15] Elisha, like Elijah and Christ, had control over the elements (2 Kgs. 3:17; Mark 4:41). Elisha, again much like Elijah, multiplied a widow's oil to sustain her family (1 Kgs. 17:10-16; 2 Kgs. 4:1-7). In an episode foreshadowing one of Christ's great miracles, Elisha even fed one hundred men with only twenty loaves and some grain and had food left over (Mark 6:33-44; 2 Kgs. 4:42-44). Like Christ, he healed the sick, as in the example of the Syrian general Naaman (2 Kgs. 5). Elisha raised a woman's son from the dead in much the same way as had Elijah when he raised the widow's son (1 Kgs. 17:21-22; 2 Kgs. 4:32-35). Raising the dead, especially a widow's son (Luke 7:11-17), was also graphic testimony of Christ's divine power (Mark 5:41-42; John 11:41-46). Finally, Elisha, like both his masters, Elijah and Christ (who was the heavenly Jehovah come to earth), prophesied the future and constantly inveighed against the idolatry of Israel.

The resemblance between the ministries of Elijah, Elisha, and Christ is attested by the New Testament, especially those references that show that Jesus was mistaken by some for the returning Elijah (see Matt. 16:14). The New Testament also indicates that Christ was keenly aware of and even identified with Elijah's and Elisha's missions (Luke 4:24-27). Truly, the lives and activities of these men were similitudes of the God whom they served. [^16]

Jehu's Revolt (2 Kgs. 9-10; 2 Chron. 22)

Elisha presided over the establishment of a new king in Israel, Jehu (842-815 B.C.). Though he did not personally anoint the new king, he specifically commissioned the prophet who did (2 Kgs. 9:1-10). Jehu immediately set out to obliterate the family of Ahab and Jezebel, thus fulfilling the prophecies first made by Elijah and later reiterated by the young prophet at Ramoth-gilead concerning Ahab, Jezebel, and their posterity (1 Kgs. 21:17-29; 2 Kgs. 9:8-10).

After being anointed, Jehu met Joram, king of Israel and son of Ahab, along with Ahaziah, king of Judah, in Naboth's vineyard, where some years earlier Jezebel had had Naboth killed and where Elijah had come to Ahab to prophesy the destruction of his family — the last of the Omride dynasty (1 Kgs. 21:17-21). With prophetic justice it was there in Naboth's vineyard that Joram was killed by Jehu (2 Kgs. 9:14-26; cf. 2 Chron. 22:5-8). Ahaziah, who was a nephew of Ahab, fled but was later wounded and died at Megiddo (2 Kgs. 9:27; cf. 2 Chron. 22:9).

Jehu next turned his attention to Jezebel at Jezreel. Even in her old age Jezebel tried to misuse feminine charm (and lots of makeup) to get Jehu to spare her (2 Kgs. 9:30). Or perhaps she simply wanted to die in style. In any case, she failed. Jehu trampled her on his horse, and when the burial crew went to bury her, only her skull, her feet, and the palms of her hands could be found (2 Kgs. 9:30-35). Thus, we learn that the word of the Lord is sure. The prophecy of Elijah was fulfilled: "The dogs shall eat Jezebel by the wall of Jezreel" (1 Kgs. 21:23; 2 Kgs. 9:36). Jehu then went on to kill all that remained of Ahab's family (2 Kgs. 10:1-14).

Jehu's revolt against the ruling house of Ahab was also a repudiation of Ahab's religion. He destroyed the worship of Baal (2 Kgs. 10:28) and in doing so obtained favor in God's eyes (2 Kgs. 10:30). It was promised him that his posterity to the fourth generation would sit on the throne of Israel. But despite his destruction of Ahab's family and the worship of Baal, Jehu did not continue to keep the Lord's commandments. He "departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, which made Israel to sin" (2 Kgs. 10:31). The Northern Kingdom declined rapidly under Jehu and his son, Joahaz (815-802 B.C.). That which the God of Israel had foreseen long before — the scattering of Israel — began to loom in the distance. The God of history continued to operate and work his design: "In those days the Lord began to cut Israel short" (2 Kgs. 10:32).

A Challenge

After the division of the Davidic empire, the kings of Judah were generally more stable and longer-lived than those of Israel, because they were generally less corrupt. The history of the two kingdoms centers on the Lord's active involvement in the affairs of his people, his purposes, and the prophets through whom he brought about those purposes. It is essentially the history of good confronting evil and of the efforts of prophets and other righteous individuals to promote repentance and bring people to the true religion of Jehovah. One of those prophets, Elijah, issued a challenge in ancient times that still stands as a prod today to those who vacillate between the call of the world and the beckonings of the Spirit: "How long halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him" (1 Kgs. 18:21).

Notes

Andrew C. Skinner is assistant professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

Perhaps the temptation exists to lay responsibility for the death of the Judahite prophet at the feet of the old prophet from Bethel; however, as Joseph Smith's translation of 1 Kgs. 13:18 makes clear, the old prophet was himself righteous and acting as God's instrument to test the prophet from Judah (JST 1 Kgs. 13:18). Ultimately the Judahite prophet was responsible for his own demise because of his disobedience. That is the broad lesson emphasized by the biblical narrative (see 1 Kgs. 13:21, 26).

Perhaps another important and personalized lesson can be drawn from this episode. Revelation is sometimes given as a test of spiritual maturity just as much as to answer questions or solve problems. To continue to receive personal revelations, we need to act on those we know we have appropriately received and walk by faith. Those alternate voices who might try to divert our attention and commitment away from our callings (even though they may be the voices of well-meaning, well-intended individuals) ought not to be heeded.

---
Notas:
[^1] See, for example, desert way stations and combination religious centers, such as the one unearthed at Kuntilet Ajrud, a site halfway between Beersheba and Elath, where travelers from both Judah and Israel rested, worshiped, and deposited offerings to the deities El, Baal, and Asherah.
[^2] 2 Kgs. 8:18 and 2 Chron. 21:6 seem to have Athaliah as the daughter of Ahab, though the passages may refer to someone else. But 2 Kgs. 8:26 and 2 Chron. 22:2 explicitly identify her as the daughter of Omri and thus a sister or half-sister of Ahab. John Bright points out: "Since her son was born ca. 864 (2 Kgs. 8:26), she could not have been the daughter of Ahab and Jezebel, who could scarcely have been married over ten years at the time. She may have been Ahab's daughter by an earlier marriage, or . . . a daughter of Omri who was raised by Ahab and Jezebel after the former's death." John Bright, A History of Israel, 3d ed. (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1981), p. 242, n. 38.
[^3] David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals (Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1953), p. 449.
[^4] Ibid., p. 452.
[^5] Jehosheba was the daughter of Joram but not by Athaliah.
[^6] It seems that many important covenantal events occurred by the temple pillars (2 Kgs. 23:3). When the temple was first built, Solomon had erected two pillars at the porch of the temple and given them names with messianic and covenantal overtones: "And he set up the right pillar, and called the name thereof Jachin [Hebrew, 'He Will Establish']: and he set up the left pillar, and called the name thereof Boaz ['In Him Is Strength']" (1 Kgs. 7:21).
[^7] Note the use of the plural "sons." Perhaps there were other sons of the priest besides Zechariah who met similar fates. We know that the Lord sent several prophets to Joash, and maybe these were related to Jehoiada, who is known to have had two wives as well as "sons and daughters" (2 Chron. 24:3). Another possibility is that the "sons of Jehoiada the priest," whose deaths were avenged by the servants of Joash, were disciples and priesthood followers of the high priest, much like the group known as the sons of the prophets. Perhaps Joash's servants were upset by both the king's willful murder of righteous men and his negligent disbursal of the Lord's property as a bribe to appease the Syrian king (2 Kgs. 12:18).
[^8] The initial battle occurred at Beth-shemesh in the Shephelah and moved east up the mountains to Jerusalem, where the Israelites broke down part of the city wall.
[^9] Lachish was a large city, next to Jerusalem in military and political importance. The conspiracy had been fomenting because the king "turned[ed] away from following the Lord" (2 Chron. 25:27). For the locations of Beth-shemesh and Lachish, see Map 9, LDS Bible.
[^10] Elath is Ezion-geber at the bottom of Map 7, LDS Bible.
[^11] Several Judean settlements dating from Uzziah's time — equipped with cisterns, irrigation systems, and fortifications—have been found in the southern desert near Mizpeh Ramon. We are told specifically that Uzziah "built towers in the desert, and digged many wells" (2 Chron. 26:10).
[^12] A fine but small royal palace two miles south of Jerusalem at Ramat Rachel is thought by its excavator, Yohanan Aharoni, to be the "separate house" (2 Kgs. 15:5) to which Azariah/Uzziah was confined. Several idolatrous symbols removed from its interior are witness of the continual idolatry in Judah (2 Kgs. 15:4).
[^13] This is probably the upper gate of Benjamin mentioned in Jer. 20:2.
[^14] For an overview of this period, see Bright, pp. 247-66.
[^15] See Bright, pp. 269-78.
[^16] Robert and Helen Howe, The Ancient World (White Plains, N.Y.: Longman, 1988), pp. 34-36.
