Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

6

THE BOOK OF JONAH

DAVID ROLPH SEELY

It is ironic that the profound message of the book of Jonah is often swallowed up in the speculations about the great fish, dwarfed by the debates about the size of Nineveh, ignored because of the image of fasting beasts draped in sackcloth, or diminished by the dramatic growth of a gourd plant. The book of Jonah contains a compelling story of Jonah, an Israelite, and his encounter with foreign men and foreign place replete with all of these wonders. The medium of the message is most often irony—that is, a constant incongruity between what is expected and what actually occurs. But just as the props are not the play, neither is the medium the message; it is only a means to the end. The book of Jonah teaches in its four short chapters much about the nature of God and man and ultimately has something profound to say about relationships, specifically that the relationship between a man and his Maker has profound implications for a man's relationship with his fellow humans. Because we recognize ourselves in Jonah, we initially smile at his humanness—but by the end we are sobered, as we, like Jonah, are humbled by the grace of God and come to recognize our own hidden duplicities.

Jonah, son of Amittai, was a northerner from the village of Gathhepher [^1] and is known elsewhere in scripture as a prophet of the Lord who during the reign of Jeroboam II (786-46 B.C.) accurately prophesied Israel's territorial restoration (2 Kgs. 14:25). The Lord God called Jonah on a mission but, as portrayed in chapters 1 and 2 and then 3 and 4, Jonah ended up going on two missions—one on the sea and the other on the dry land. The call was the same in both cases. As recorded in Jonah 1:1-2, "Now the word of the Lord came unto Jonah the son of Amittai, saying, Arise [Hebrew qum], go to Nineveh, that great city, and cry against it; for their wickedness is come up before me." And as recorded in Jonah 3:1-2, "The word of the Lord came unto Jonah the second time, saying, Arise [qum], go unto Nineveh, that great city, and preach unto it the preaching that I bid thee." Jonah's response was prompt, and to each call he "rose up" [wayyaqam]—only in different directions. The first time he rose up to disobey, "to flee unto Tarshish [presumably a port in Spain which in the ancient world was approximately the opposite end of the earth from Nineveh] from the presence of the Lord" (Jonah 1:3). The second time, after less-than-subtle persuasion, he finally did obey when he "arose, and went unto Nineveh, according to the word of the Lord" (Jonah 3:3).

There is an inconsistency between what Jonah said he believed and what he did. Although none of us could sufficiently justify it, we all can—from experience—understand his flight. Jonah was finally identified by a casting of lots as the cause of the great storm on the sea (yam) that threatened the lives of his fellows. The frightened sailors unleashed a panicked barrage of questions: "For whose cause this evil is upon us; What is thine occupation? and whence comest thou? what is thy country? and of what people art thou?" (Jonah 1:8)—all of which could be answered by Jonah's simple statement, "I am an Hebrew; and I fear the Lord, the God of heaven, which hath made the sea [yam] and the dry land [yabasa]" (Jonah 1:9). The label of Hebrew identifies him as one of the chosen people—a member of the covenant community of Israel bound to the Lord and thus to each other by sacred obligations. His "fear" of the Lord God who hath made the "sea and the dry land" (a merism that is tantamount to saying "everything") is a statement of belief—in opposition to the polytheism of his day—in one universal God, who created and thus controls all of creation. The disobedience of a simple Hebrew is enough to bring about this calamity, even in "international waters." How could one professing such a belief ever hope to escape from the presence of such an omnipresent Being? Yet Jonah fled, and on his two missions he would meet this Being on and in the sea and on the dry land.

Jonah demonstrated his selfless charity to his fellowmen by urging them to toss him overboard, while the sailors demonstrated their own charity and fear of shedding innocent blood in attempting to preserve him. In the end the Lord had his way and Jonah was cast overboard, presumably to perish in the sea. The net result of Jonah's first mission was that the sailors, pious Gentiles, feared Jehovah, the Israelite God, and offered sacrifices to him (Jonah 1:16). Jonah, a disobedient Israelite, by the grace of God, was preserved in the belly of a great fish which the Lord had prepared. In the belly of the fish a humbled Jonah prayed for deliverance. The words from his own mouth are "Salvation is of the Lord" (Jonah 2:9). Through his mercy the Lord did deliver Jonah, and the fist "vomited out Jonah upon the dry land [yabasa]" (Jonah 2:10)—also the arena of God's creation and power—where the next scene would take place.

After Jonah's second mission call, he arrived at the great city of Nineveh, the capital of the Assyrian empire, which in the day of Jonah was the intellectual, cultural, artistic, and technological center of the ancient civilized world (see Map 10, LDS Bible). At last Jonah bravely began to proclaim the word of the Lord: "Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown" (Jonah 3:4). Much to his surprise—and chagrin—all of Nineveh repented, "from the greatest of them even to the least of them" (Jonah 3:5). From the king to the lowliest of beasts, they all humbly repented and fasted in sackcloth and ashes to see "if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not" (Jonah 3:9). The merciful God of heaven heard the repentant cries from Nineveh and turned away his anger, as he had preserved his children on the sea. The net result of Jonah's second mission was that the entire city of Nineveh—a "great city of three days' journey" (Jonah 3:4)—repented and turned to God.

Jonah, who on his first mission in time of crisis was willing to give up his own life to save his fellow sailors, now was displeased and very angry at the demonstration of the Lord's mercy to preserve a penitent Nineveh. Whereas Jonah had prayed to the Lord for mercy to be delivered from drowning and praised the Lord with a psalm of thanksgiving that he was delivered (Jonah 2:1-9), now he prayed that the Lord would rescind his mercy from the Ninevites. At last Jonah offered his excuse for not wanting to go to Nineveh in the first place: "Therefore I fled before unto Tarshish: for I knew that thou art a gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of the evil" (Jonah 4:2). [^2] The problem is now finally clear. Jonah didn't like Assyrians, a not uncommon position held by many of the Northern Kingdom in the time of Jonah, for they were his enemies. And Israelites were not alone in their resentment of the often cruel and uncompromising rule of the mighty Assyrian empire. While not eager to preach to them in the first place, he found solace in preaching his message only when he could anticipate their ultimate destruction. Though he was eager to proclaim the Lord God of heaven as the Creator of all things and reluctantly admitted that the Lord can control all things on the sea and the earth, he would not allow for a universal application of God's mercy to all of his creatures.

The prophetic calling in Israel often entailed the office of Mediator—even pleading for mercy for the unrighteous. [^3] Jonah did the opposite, pleading for judgment against the repentant. Jonah is described as the antithesis of his great northern Israelite predecessor Elijah: Elijah sought the Lord in sorrow over the hardness of the hearts of the people (1 Kgs. 19:4-18); Jonah, in anger at their penitence. Both declared to the Lord that it would be better to die than to live—Elijah out of discouragement and Jonah out of self-righteous despair. On his first mission, in his disobedience, Jonah had prayed for his life; now, in his obedience, he prayed for death. Jonah would rather have died than live to see his enemies receive the mercy of the Lord.

As so often in missionary work, the final convert must be the missionary himself. It was the Lord's turn to preach repentance to his servant. He asked Jonah, "Doest thou well to be angry?" (Jonah 4:4) and then proceeded to teach him a powerful object lesson. While Jonah nurtured his bruised ego with the slight hope that perhaps the Lord would still destroy Nineveh (Jonah 4:5), the Lord prepared a gourd plant that provided shade for him "to deliver him from his grief. So Jonah was exceeding glad of the gourd" (Jonah 4:6). At last Jonah was comforted, or at least comfortable, in his grief, and thus he cared about one of God's creations, which so conveniently offered him relief.

But the Lord sent a worm to eat the plant so that it withered. The loss of the shade once again made Jonah angry "even unto death" (Jonah 4:9). Then the Lord said, "Thou hast had pity on the gourd, for the which thou hast not laboured, neither madest it grow; which came up in a night, and perished in a night: And should not I spare Nineveh, that great city, wherein are more than sixscore thousand persons that cannot discern between their right hand and their left hand; [^4] and also much cattle?" (Jonah 4:10-11). Thus the Lord's message ended with a rhetorical question, to which the answer is obvious but missing.

The message is clear to the children of Israel, both ancient and modern. As demonstrated by Zenos' allegory of the olive tree, the branches of the wild olives can be grafted into the tree and can bear good fruit (Jacob 5). From the Old Testament we can cite the souls who followed Abraham (Gen. 12:5), the mixed multitude that came out from Egypt with Israel (Ex. 12:38), Rahab (Josh. 2), Naaman (2 Kgs. 5), Ruth (Ruth), and undoubtedly many others who are unmentioned. The gospel net continues to gather of every kind (Matt. 13:47) for the God of heaven who created us all loves us all. "Behold, the Lord esteemeth all flesh in one; he that is righteous is favored of God" (1 Ne. 17:35). Speaking of the doctrine of adoption, John the Baptist warned the children of Israel in his day: "Think not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham" (Matt. 3:9). [^5]

Near the end of chapter 4 the Lord responded to Jonah with a question: "Doest thou well to be angry for the gourd?" (Jonah 4:9), to which Jonah would have answered in the affirmative. The final statement by the Lord is also phrased in an unanswered question addressed to Jonah as well as to us: "Should not I spare Nineveh?" (Jonah 4:11). For the children of the covenant who profess to "fear the Lord, the God of heaven, which hath made the sea and the dry land," it echoes other such provocative questions posed throughout the scriptures. A certain lawyer once asked, " Who is my neighbour?" (Luke 10:29). King Benjamin queried, "For behold, are we not all beggars?" (Mosiah 4:19). And from the parable of the laborers in the vineyard, the Lord responded to him that would begrudge the latecomer to the covenant a full reward: "Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Is thine eye evil, because I am good?" (Matt. 20:15).

Notes

David Rolph Seely is assistant professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Michael Avi-Yonah and Emil G. Kraeling, Our Living Bible (Jerusalem-Ramat Gan: International Publishing Co., 1962), p. 229; Richard S. Cripps, A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Book of Amos (London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1929), p. 9. See also Andor Szabo, "Textual Problems in Amos and Hosea," Vetus Testamentum 25 (1975): 500-501.
[^2] The only other biblical occurrence of noqed is in 2 Kgs. 3:4 with reference to Mesha, king of Moab, who had to deliver annually to the king of Israel one hundred thousand lambs and one hundred thousand rams.
[^3] Erling Hammershaimb, The Book of Amos: A Commentary (New York: Schocken Books, 1970), p. 12; George Adam Smith, The Book of the Twelve Prophets (London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1906), p. 74.
[^4] Ficus sycomorus is a species of fig, or fig-mulberry (the fruit being like a fig and the leaf like the mulberry). The tree is known to grow to great size, sometimes attaining more than fifty feet in circumference, and is evergreen. Its existence, in Israel at least, totally depends on cultivation. The fruit shoots forth on all parts of the stem, several figs on each leafless twig. In the Holy Land it grows in the mild coastal plains and in the Jordan Valley. David considered the sycomore valuable enough that he appointed a special overseer "over the olive trees and the sycomore trees that were in the low plains [Hebrew, Shephelah]" (1 Chron. 27:28). Three times scripture mentions that Solomon made cedars as plentiful as the sycomores of the Shephelah (1 Kgs. 10:27; 2 Chron. 1:15; 9:27). From historical and climatic information it is understood that Amos would have nurtured sycomore trees in the Judean Shephelah or in the Jordan Valley.
[^5] As the JST changes at Amos 7:3 and 7:6 show, though the nation would be destroyed, a remnant would be preserved for a latter-day repentance and restoration.
