Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

7

THE BOOK OF AMOS

D. KELLY OGDEN

Amos, apparently the first of a series of Israelite and Judahite prophets whose words were committed to writing, prophesied in the Northern Kingdom in the mid eighth century during the reigns of Jeroboam II of Israel and Uzziah of Judah. [^1] He was, before his call to be a prophet, "among the herdmen of Tekoa" (Amos 1:1). His hometown of Tekoa lies about six miles southeast of Bethlehem and twelve miles from Jerusalem (see Map 9, LDS Bible). It was one of the easternmost villages in Judah and was on the dividing line between cultivated land and pastureland. It was also on the caravan route which led from Jerusalem/Bethlehem to En Gedi and beyond to Arabia.

Amos gave a first-person description of his call to Amaziah, Jeroboam's priest at the Bethel shrine: "I was no prophet, neither was I a prophet's son; but I was an herdman, and a gatherer of sycomore fruit: And the Lord took me as I followed the flock" (Amos 7:14-15). He was called from his pastoral occupations and specifically disclaimed association with professionally trained prophets. He was a noqed, or sheep-breeder (Amos 1:1). That may suggest that he supervised the work of other shepherds, being a substantial and respected man in his community. [^2] Amos also identified himself as a boqer, a herdman of sheep and goats (Amos 7:14). As a wool-grower in Judah he may have made journeys to markets all over the land, to the Northern Kingdom, and even possibly to Damascus. [^3]

In addition to his work as a sheep breeder, Amos was a cultivator, or dresser, of sycomores (Amos 7:14). The biblical sycomore (Ficus sycomorus) is not found in the Near East at elevations higher than one thousand feet above sea level. It does not grow near Tekoa, since Tekoa is much more than twice that elevation. Amos's work with sycomore figs, then, would have taken him into the lowland (the Shephelah) of Judah. [^4]

Geographical Background of Amos

Amos's geographical milieu figures prominently in his prophetic message. At least ten lands outside the territories of Israel and Judah are referred to in the book of Amos, and the book includes prophetic pronouncements concerning at least twenty-six cities. Amos's writings are replete with images reflecting the agricultural and pastoral background and the breadth of education and life experience of the prophet. There are in his book some highly picturesque figures of speech from the contemporary world of fauna and flora and from phenomena of nature, climate, rainfall, and other meteorological conditions. Amos, like most of the prophet-writers who succeeded him and like the Savior and his apostles, drew many parallels to the human experience from his natural surroundings. Hebrew writers loved to compare the experience of individuals and nations to what was occurring in nature.

Amos expressed his words of rebuke and warning to the northern Israelites in powerful metaphor, as did his contemporaries and successors in the prophetic office. For example, he did not record the Lord's merely saying to his people, "You are a burden to me," but rather, "I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves" (Amos 2:13). Amos uttered his message with illustrations from nature. He called on locusts, lions, bird-traps, cows of Bashan, fish-hooks, cedars, oaks, wormwood, blight, mildew, kings' mowings, fruit baskets, threshing sledges, siroccos, drought, storms, eclipses, and earthquakes to vividly and poignantly prophesy against and warn the people. We might call this the "over-geography" of Amos's prophesying.

Amos saw what was happening to Israelite society and what God was about to do to it by way of chastisement and punishment, and he found the proper expressions in his nature-environment, collocating human actions and divine actions. His visions of locusts and drought-fire devouring the land (Amos 7:1-6) were symbolic of the destruction of Israel as a nation. [^5] Amos saw upheaval and disruption in nature as a direct result of upheaval and disruption in society. "You cause the poor of the land to fail" (Amos 8:4); "I'll cause the crops of the land to fail" (Amos 4:9). High society had withheld necessary sustenance from the poor, and God withheld necessary sustenance from the Israelites (Amos 4:6-8). Leaders had swallowed up the needy (Amos 8:4), so God would swallow them up with various catastrophes. Merchants had sold the refuse of the wheat (Amos 8:6), so God would sell them as refuse into the hands of the enemy (Amos 6:8).

Relationship between Nature and Humankind

Amos saw a cause-and-effect relationship in operation: catastrophe in nature was a direct result of catastrophe in society. He saw evidence of an ethically or morally destroyed society: luxurious living, music-making, reveling while some in society were suffering (Amos 5:23; 6:4-7); prostitution committed in holy sanctuaries (Amos 2:7); shallow, hypocritical festivities and ritual performances (Amos 5:21-22); anticipating the conclusion of holy days so that deceitful business practices and falsifying balances could be resumed (Amos 8:5-6); the wealthy enjoying winter houses and summer "cabins," ivory-decorated houses, cut-stone houses, and palaces, while the poor lived in hovels (Amos 3:15; 5:11; 6:8, 11); treading on the poor, making merchandise of human beings, buying the poor for silver and the needy for a pair of shoes (Amos 5:11; 2:6, 7; 8:6); corrupted court and legal processes, perverted judgment, despising the righteous and afflicting the just (Amos 2:8; 5:7, 10, 12; 6:12). All these practices wrecked or spoiled society. As a result, Amos saw evidence of a destroyed ecosystem and therefore a physically destroyed society: rains were withheld, causing famine (Amos 4:6-8); blight and mildew consumed crops (Amos 4:9); earthquakes devastated pasture lands, garden lands, and cities (Amos 1:2; 4:11); locusts devoured the grains (Amos 7:1-2); and drought devoured the land generally (Amos 7:4-5).

Several of the characteristics Amos identified in society he compared with objects in his environment: on the positive side, height and strength were related to the majestic cedar and the mighty oak (Amos 2:9); constancy and consistency in justice and righteousness were related to an ever-flowing stream (Amos 5:24). On the negative side, injustice and unrighteousness were compared to poison and wormwood (Amos 6:12); and pride and vanity were represented in Bashan's full-fed, contented cows (Amos 4:1).

Even the cities and lands cited in the book of Amos were used because of their didactic potential. The corruption capitals of Damascus, Gaza, Tyre, Bozrah, Rabbah, Kerioth, Jerusalem, and Samaria were condemned because of their offensive behavior in the sight of God and man. [^6] Further, Amos called on specific cities and lands from history and current events because of their value as examples in moral instruction. Lo-debar and Karnaim typified arrogance and boasting of strength. [^7] Calneh, Hamath, and Gath served as moral comparisons for Samaria (Amos 6:2). Sodom and Gomorrah (Amos 4:11) and the Valley of Aven [^8] were selected as examples of sin centers. Bethel, Dan, Gilgal, and Beersheba represented the perversion of true religion. [^9] Cush and Caphtor were used to illustrate parental care of all God's children, a strike against the assumed superiority of Israelite society. [^10]

Warnings of Captivity

Prophesying approximately a generation before the destruction of the kingdom of Israel, Amos's mission was to warn Israel of its present disastrous state and forewarn it of impending captivity. He pointedly delivered the latter message with such curt exclamations as "I will take you into exile beyond Damascus" (Amos 5:27); "they shall now be the first of those to go into exile" (Amos 6:7); "Israel must go into exile away from his land" (Amos 7:11); and "Israel shall surely go into exile away from its land" (Amos 7:17). But the prophet was not always satisfied with direct statements. He reinforced his message with metaphorical illustrations, which are often more memorable and vivid than literal words. That Israel would be captured or caught is expressed through the images of a lion devouring an animal and leaving only pieces (Amos 3:12), either the lion, bear, or serpent finally catching up with a fleeing man (Amos 5:19), a bird trapped in a snare (Amos 3:5), sinners carried away hooked as a fish (Amos 4:2), or caught in a sieve (Amos 9:9). There would be no escape from the judgment of God, just as vegetation has no chance of escape before the ravages of the locust-swarm, the sirocco's blasting, or the scorching of drought. The man (Israel) could not escape from the lion, bear, or serpent (enemy nations). The sheep or goat (Israel) could not escape from the lion (God). No one would escape but a righteous few, a remnant (Amos 6:10; 9:1-3, 10).

In due time Amos's prophecies were fulfilled, soon by the Assyrians and then later by other conquerors. The kingdom of Israel was destroyed and taken captive within a few years after Amos warned clearly that such would happen. The Israelites were exiled "beyond Damascus," as he had said (Amos 5:27). [^11]

Although God had raised up Israel to perform a special service in the world, its people had fallen from their high commission and appointed purpose. The virgin Israel had fallen (Amos 5:2), and the tabernacle of David had fallen (Amos 9:11). Amos warned that sons and daughters would fall (Amos 7:17), worshipers of false gods would fall (Amos 8:14), the altar-horns (symbolic of holiness) and the sanctuary itself would fall (Amos 3:14; 9:1).

Comparison of Agriculture and Society

Amos perceived that God controlled both nature and society and that there must be system and order in both. This sense of order, system, and completeness is evident in Amos's use of metaphor from the cycle of agricultural production: as with agriculture and the produce of the field, so with society and the produce of humankind. The land must be plowed or prepared; God had created or prepared a land for his covenant people. The land would then be planted with the choicest vines, fig trees, and olive trees; God had planted Israel in the good land (Ex. 15:17; 2 Sam. 7:10; Amos 9:14, 15). The husbandman/farmer would water and care for his plants; God had nourished and cared for the people of Israel in their promised land (Deut. 7:6-15; 11:12-17; Amos 3:2). Following a time of careful cultivation, the farmer would expect to reap a bounteous harvest; God expected fruit from Israel (Gen. 35:11; 48:4; Lev. 26:9; Isa. 27:6; Amos 6:12). Upon harvesting his crops, the farmer transported his yield from the fields for storage or consumption; God would transport Israel from their native fields in judgment, where they would be sifted through other lands (Amos 9:9) or to exile in enemies' lands where they would be threshed and trodden down (Amos 7:11, 17). Then the land might be replowed and replanted, so the cycle would begin anew. What the prophet saw occurring in the fields of Judah and Israel was also occurring in Judahite and Israelite societies — this parallel filtered through into his verbal encounters with the people in Samaria and Bethel.

The "over-geography" is everywhere present in Amos's oracles and judgments, and only one who had lived with such fauna, flora, agriculture, and natural phenomena could have drawn parallels from them to put flesh on the bare-bones facts of devastation, deportation, and death.

The Vision of Restoration to the Land

Because the last five verses of the book of Amos (the epilogue; Amos 9:11-15) paint a wholly different scene — restoration to the land and prosperity in it, some scholars view those verses as presupposing a different time and situation than that of Amos (mid eighth century B.C.) and consider them the minimasterpiece of a later disciple or redactor, thus denying their authorship to Amos. [^12] They also deny the possibility of prophetic preview and see in the description of prosperous times detail which could have been written only by firsthand experience at a later date. Despite these claims, I maintain that the final verses of the book of Amos are not only an acceptable but an essential climax to his writings. The phrase "in that day" (Amos 9:11) in and of itself indicates that a writer living in one time period projects his thoughts into a future time period. Though some would argue that the epilogue is out of harmony with, or even contradictory to, the whole tenor of Amos's pronouncements of ruin, and inconsistent with his condemning voice, it must not be overlooked that there is a pattern visible in Hebrew literature of pronouncing curses, judgments, and destruction followed by a message of hope.

After the catalogue of plagues, desolations, and pestilences recorded in Leviticus 26, hope is held out to Israel (Lev. 26:40-46). Following Isaiah's predicted doom and destruction to Israel and Judah, there is comforting and assuring hope held out for a glorious day of restoration (Isa. 40-66; denied, of course, to Isaiah by the same critics who refuse to credit Amos 9:11-15 to Amos). [^13] Following Hosea's recitations of Israel's unfaithfulness and consequent punishment and exile, that prophet records the Lord saying that he will return them to their homeland: "I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely. . . . I will be as the dew unto Israel. . . . They that dwell under his shadow shall return; they shall revive" (Hosea 14:4-5, 7). Following Micah's forthright iteration of the disgraceful ruin of both Samaria and Jerusalem, he follows up with predictions of future restoration to good fortune (Micah 4-5). Following the great devastation caused by the armies of locusts, Joel reveals God's promises: "I will restore to you the years that the locust hath eaten. . . . Ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied. . . . When I shall bring again the captivity [cause the return] of Judah and Jerusalem" (Joel 2:25-26; 3:1).

It may properly be suggested, then, that Amos was perpetuating and cementing a prophetic form as he presented a merciful God who ultimately promises hope and restoration after disciplinary punishment and repentance. Amos is certainly not alone in foreseeing reinstatement, restoration, and recovery.

The message of Amos was the same as the message of other prophets. His was a warning voice; he called people to repentance. Unlike the abstract English word repent (which may suggest a passive regret or sorrow for sin), the sense of the Hebrew verb sub is to return to God. Just as Moses had raised up a symbolic serpent in the wilderness and promised that as many as would look upon it should live (see Hel. 8:13-15), so now Amos, half a millennium later, actively admonished the nation of Israel to "seek the Lord, and ye shall live" (Amos 5:6).

Notes

D. Kelly Ogden is associate professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

On the timing of Amos's ministry, the mention of "Uzziah king of Judah" and "Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel" clearly places the prophet in the mid eighth century B.C. In the superscription to the book of Amos (Amos 1:1), the prophet's preaching is also dated (beginning) at "two years before the earthquake." Though seismic disturbances are anything but rare in the land of Amos, this very earthquake, the only one explicitly mentioned in the Old Testament, was apparently so severe that it was used for some time to date historical events. It was of such unusual intensity and inflicted such devastation that the memory of it survived for more than two and a half centuries, and in Zechariah 14:5, this earthquake served as a pattern for extremely intense and destructive earthquakes: "And you shall flee as you fled from the earthquake in the days of Uzziah, king of Judah." This earthquake caused damage over a wide area; evidence of it has been discovered in archaeological excavations from one end of the country to the other, particularly at Hazor in the north, Deir-Alla in the Jordan Valley, and Beersheba in the south. Yigael Yadin dated the earthquake to approximately 760 B.C.; Yigael Yadin, Hazor: The Head of All Those Kingdoms (London: Oxford University, 1972), pp. 113, 181.

---
Notas:
[^1] The length of Hosea's ministry is a matter of discussion. For instance, Bernard W. Anderson, Understanding the Old Testament, 4th ed. (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1986), p. 304, holds to a view of a ten-year ministry. Others accept a longer period. See Sidney B. Sperry, The Voice of Israel's Prophets (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1965), p. 274; and Roland K. Harrison, Introduction to the Old Testament (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1969), p. 860.
[^2] A review of the various proposals for understanding Hosea 1 and 3 is to be found in Harold H. Rowley, "The Marriage of Hosea," in Men of God (London: Thomas Nelson, 1963), pp. 66-97. See also Kent P. Jackson, "The Marriage of Hosea and Jehovah's Covenant with Israel," in Isaiah and the Prophets, ed. M. S. Nyman (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1984), pp. 58-60.
[^3] See the observations of Abraham Heschel, The Prophets (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 1962), pp. 55-56.
[^4] The years following the death of Jeroboam II in 746 B.C. were chaotic. Disaster first struck Jeroboam's son, Zechariah, who reigned six months and was then murdered by Shallum, who himself held the throne for one month. Menahem (745-737 B.C.) murdered Shallum and held onto power by brutally repressing those who opposed him. Although Menahem died in his bed, his son and successor, Pekahiah, after ruling two years, was assassinated by his army commander Pekah, who in turn held the throne for about five years (736-732 B.C.). Pekah's reign was cut short by assassination. Hoshea, Pekah's successor and murderer, ruled during Israel's last few years before dying in Assyrian custody.
[^5] The Hebrew term is hesed. It is translated variously as "covenant love," that is, love based in a covenant relationship (Henry J. Flanders, Jr., et al., People of the Covenant, 3d ed. [Oxford: Oxford University, 1988], pp. 313, 315; see also "Love in the OT," in The Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, 5 vols., ed. G. A. Buttrick, et al. [Nashville: Abingdon, 1962], 3:165, 167), and as "loving kindness" or "steadfast love." See Anderson, pp. 308-9.
[^6] Revised Standard Version.
[^7] Heschel, pp. 50-51.
[^8] See Jackson, p. 60.
[^9] See the summary article "Impassibility of God," in The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church, 2d ed., ed. F. L. Cross and E. A. Livingstone (Oxford: Oxford University, 1974), p. 694. The notion of God being "free from passions" derived from strands of Middle Platonic thought; see "God" and "Middle Platonism" in the Encyclopedia of the Early Church, 2 vols., ed. A. Di Berardino (New York: Oxford University, 1992), 1:355; 1:557-58.
[^10] Cushites, Nubians, and Ethiopians are the same people, from a biblical point of view. Caphtor is the ancient equivalent of modern Crete. Amos perceived that Israel's pride and self-esteem had become distorted or exaggerated. He humbled them with the cold fact that they were not intrinsically more valuable or more important to Jehovah than were the Arameans, or the Philistines, or even the far-off Cushites, and he put the Israelite exodus on the same footing as the migrations of other peoples of antiquity (Amos 9:7). There is no denying that God had entrusted to Israel the precious blessing of laws, statutes, and ordinances under which he wanted all people to live. Jehovah had, in a sense, cared for Israel above all the families of the earth (Amos 3:2), but Israel did not have a privileged position or preferential status before God because of especially deserving behavior. Amos seemed to be pointing out in response to an assertion of spiritual superiority on the part of Israel that Jehovah is God of all peoples, from "beyond Damascus" to the land of Cush, and he warned Israel in unmistakably plain language that "the eyes of the Lord God are upon the sinful kingdom" (Amos 9:8).
[^11] Damascus (Amos 1:5) was taken by Tiglath-pileser III in 732 B.C. He did exactly what Amos prophesied: he sent military fire upon and destroyed the house of Hazael and the strongholds of Ben-hadad (Amos 1:4), broke the security-bar of Damascus (Amos 1:5), and cut off inhabitants from the Valley of Aven and officials from Beth-eden by exiling the Syrians (2 Kgs. 16:9). The chief Philistine cities (Amos 1:6-8) were also besieged by Tiglath-pileser two years earlier in 734 B.C. Amos's promise of punishment on Tyre was only gradually fulfilled. Tiglath-pileser was successfully "bought off," but Tyre was later attacked by Shalmaneser V (a five-year siege), and then by the Babylonian Nebuchadnezzar (a thirteen-year siege). Alexander the Great later laid his causeway, forever connecting the island with the mainland, and marched his armies to destroy the island-city, selling thirty thousand of its inhabitants into slavery, which was the very charge for which Amos had condemned the Tyrians (Amos 1:9-10). Jerusalem was miraculously spared destruction by the Assyrians under Sennacherib in 701 B.C. but was burned by Nebuchadnezzar in 587 B.C.—to literally fulfill Amos's prophecy: "I will send a fire upon Judah, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem" (Amos 2:5).
[^12] Some scholars view the epilogue as presupposing a different time and situation than that of Amos. See William Rainey Harper, A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on Amos and Hosea (Edinburgh: T.&T. Clark, 1936), p. 199. On the other hand, many scholars give credence to its origin in the days of Amos.
[^13] But see also Isa. 4; 11; 12; 27; 30; 32; and 35 — all with promises of restoration and blessing after the discipline of exile.
