Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

10

THE REIGN OF HEZEKIAH (2 KINGS 18-20; 2 CHRONICLES 29-32)

ANDREW C. SKINNER

The life of Hezekiah, king of Judah, dramatically validates the Lord's declaration in 2 Kings 17 that he delivers his people from difficulties and prospers them when they honor him (2 Kgs. 17:39; 18:11-12). Almost immediately upon ascending the throne, Hezekiah, unlike his father Ahaz, began enjoying the constant help of the Lord. Thus he prospered in all he did (2 Chron. 32:21; 2 Kgs. 18:7). Hezekiah's righteous rule was a repudiation of all that his wicked father had stood for. His twenty-nine year reign (715-687 B.C.) was such that the author of 2 Kings 18 ranked him as the greatest king Judah had ever known or ever would know (2 Kgs. 18:3-5). Chronicles devotes more attention to Hezekiah than any other king since Solomon, including three chapters dedicated to his good deeds and inspired leadership (2 Chron. 29-31).

Hezekiah's Religious Reform (2 Chron. 29-31)

At the heart of the Chronicler's admiration for Hezekiah's rule was the monarch's religious reform. Numerous parallels in Chronicles between Hezekiah and the great king Solomon suggest that the Chronicler may have viewed Hezekiah as a "second Solomon." Wasting no time (beginning in the very first month of his reign, as the text says) Hezekiah reopened, repaired, and repurified the temple (2 Chron. 29:3, 15-19). He revitalized the Levites and Aaronic priests and reestablished proper sacrificial worship (2 Chron. 29:4-12, 20-36). Last but not least, Hezekiah decreed a Passover celebration that sought to bring together all the tribes of Israel for the first time since Solomon's days, even delaying the date of its celebration one month to coincide with the deferred Passover of the Northern Kingdom's calendar (2 Chron. 30).

Following through with the parallel to Solomon, the Chronicler subtly mentioned the rewards of Hezekiah's loyalty to Jehovah: wealth (2 Chron. 32:27-29), magnified respect in the eyes of all the gentile nations (2 Chron. 32:23), and an expanded dominion — much more than his predecessors had experienced (2 Chron. 30:25). All of these were also enjoyed by Solomon in his righteous days.

While Hezekiah's reforms may not seem like much to modern Saints who live under the gospel covenant, those reforms engendered in the people of Judah far more righteousness than had existed for several years. Hezekiah explained to the priests and Levites that the Lord's past anger against Judah (and hence their political and social woes) were traceable to their forefathers' defilement of God's holy house (2 Chron. 29:6-9). The message, therefore, seems clear for every group in every dispensation which has placed itself in a covenant relationship to God through temple ordinances: community well-being depends on purity and exactness in temple worship (2 Chron. 29:10-11).

The Assyrian Threat (2 Kgs. 18-19; 2 Chron. 32:1-22)

Upon the death of Sargon II in 705 B.C., Hezekiah decided to break altogether from the grasp of Assyria (2 Kgs. 18:7). In 701 B.C. Sargon's son, Sennacherib (704-681 B.C.), invaded Judah to crush the rebellion. Before approaching Jerusalem, he attacked and conquered all the other fortified cities of Judah (2 Kgs. 18:13) — forty-six, according to Assyrian royal records. [^1] Judging from the narrative of 2 Kings 18:13-16, things were perilous for Hezekiah. But 2 Chronicles 32 provides additional important information that shows that he was able to face the challenge.

In wise anticipation of a potential Assyrian invasion of Jerusalem, Hezekiah consulted with his advisers to carry out life-saving plans. The fortifications of the city were repaired, and a secret tunnel (now commonly called Hezekiah's Tunnel) was dug through solid rock to bring into the city the waters of the Gihon Spring, which bubbled in the Kidron Valley outside the city walls (2 Kgs. 20:20; 2 Chron. 32:4, 30). [^2]

As the systematic destruction of the kingdom of Judah reached a crescendo, Sennacherib took personal charge of the siege of Lachish, the last remaining crucial fortified city that guarded the southern route to Jerusalem. [^3] During this time, Hezekiah encouraged his military commanders with a message of comfort and courage: "Be strong and courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the king of Assyria, nor for all the multitude that is with him: for there be more with us than with him: With him is an arm of flesh; but with us is the Lord our God to help us, and to fight our battles" (2 Chron. 32:7-8; emphasis added). The account in 2 Kings reports that Hezekiah also made a bid for peace. He sent tribute to the Assyrian king encamped at Lachish in an attempt to induce the Assyrians to go home. The tribute included the silver from the temple treasury as well as the gold overlay from the temple doors and pillars (2 Kgs. 18:14-16). While it is likely that we do not have the whole story, it appears that Hezekiah sent tribute as a way of stalling for time to complete the last of his preparations for defense against an expected siege.

Hezekiah's tribute payment hardly satisfied Sennacherib. He later sent two officials, his Rab-saris or "army commander" and his Rab-shakeh or "chief chamberlain," [^4] to intimidate and humiliate both the leaders and the people of Judah into submission. They said, in effect: "We have already destroyed other lands; we have already destroyed your territory; you are the last to hold out. Your feeble god cannot possibly deliver you, just as the gods of other lands could not deliver them. Give up and resign yourselves to the inevitable" (see 2 Kgs. 18:17-36).

Hezekiah turned to what he knew was his only salvation — the Lord. He himself went to the temple and sent messengers to the prophet Isaiah (2 Kgs. 19:1-5). The Lord's word through his prophet was one of assurance: "Be not afraid" (2 Kgs. 19:6). In fervent prayer at the temple, Hezekiah petitioned the Lord for deliverance (2 Kgs. 19:14-19). Isaiah responded again in behalf of Jehovah with a longer oracle against Assyria, rich in powerful poetic imagery (2 Kgs. 19:20-34). Jerusalem could "laugh" Assyria "to scorn," he said, for the invaders had not offended mere mortals; they had "reproached and blasphemed" the Holy One of Israel (2 Kgs. 19:21-22). Concerning Assyria's king, "he shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shield, nor cast a bank against it. By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and shall not come into this city, saith the Lord. For I will defend this city, to save it" (2 Kgs. 19:32-34).

Through divine intervention, Sennacherib did abandon his planned attack on Jerusalem. At night an "angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand: and when they who were left arose early in the morning" they found the bodies of those who were smitten (JST 2 Kgs. 19:35). Some scholars have proposed that an epidemic struck the Assyrian troops. Others postulate that rumors of revolt back home forced Sennacherib to pull out. An interesting reason for the Assyrian withdrawal was proffered by the ancient Greek historian Herodotus: "[A] number of field mice, pouring in among their enemies, devoured their quivers and their bows, the handles of their shields; so that on the next day, when they fled bereft of their arms, many of them fell." [^5] Whatever method the Lord used, the Assyrian demise was an act of God, in clear fulfillment of prophetic promises. It is imperative that its message not be obscured: the Lord delivers his righteous people "out of the hand of all [their] enemies" (2 Kgs. 17:39).

Sennacherib's death also occurred as Isaiah had predicted (2 Kgs. 19:7, 36-37). He was assassinated in 681 B.C. as a result of some palace intrigue, and his son Esarhaddon (680-669 B.C.) came to the throne, followed by Ashurbanipal (668-627 B.C.). After that, Assyria's power was soon eclipsed by that of Babylon. [^6]

I Have Heard Thy Prayer (2 Kgs. 20; 2 Chron. 32:24-33)

The record of Hezekiah in 2 Kings includes an episode in which he learned by revelation of his imminent death (2 Kgs. 20:1-11). With faith he asked the Lord to grant him continued life, and he was promised fifteen more years. "I have heard thy prayer," the Lord said, and "I will heal thee" (2 Kgs. 20:5). Hezekiah was also granted a sign that it would be so.

Along with Hezekiah's many good points, the authors of Kings and Chronicles candidly recorded some things he did wrong (e.g., 2 Chron. 32:25-26). He made a big mistake when he showed his kingdom's wealth to the messengers of Babylon, for in due time, as Isaiah pointed out to him, the Babylonians would return to take possession of it (2 Kgs. 20:12-18; 2 Chron. 32:31).

But even with weaknesses, Hezekiah clearly was one of the greatest—perhaps the greatest, as our historian suggested (2 Kgs. 18:5) — of all the kings who ever presided over Israel and Judah, including David and Solomon. He was great because he trusted in the Lord and governed his kingdom in harmony with the divine will, following the guidance of the prophet whom the Lord sent to assist him. Here was a king on the throne of his father David who exemplified righteous kingship. In that way, he foreshadowed to a degree the greatest of all rulers, his future descendant Jesus Christ, who one day would come as King of Kings.

Notes

Andrew C. Skinner is assistant professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Unlike First Isaiah, the prophecies in Second and Third Isaiah make no mention of Isaiah's name and give no other biographical clues that would link them to him. It is true that Isaiah's name is never mentioned after chapter 39, but neither do the later chapters ascribe authorship to anyone else. The earliest known translation of Isaiah (the Greek Septuagint, third century B.C.) and the earliest existing manuscript of Isaiah (the Isaiah Scroll from Qumran) both include all the material now found in the book of Isaiah. In fact, no ancient document — including the New Testament and the rabbinic literature — shows any hint that readers in antiquity questioned Isaiah's authorship of the entire book. [^3] The fact that the material is found in the book of Isaiah — and has been as far back as the evidence can be traced — clearly places the burden of proof on those who choose to assign it to other authors. Good summaries are provided in W. S. LaSor, D. A. Hubbard, F. W. Bush, Old Testament Survey (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1982), pp. 371-77; R. K. Harrison, Introduction to the Old Testament (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1969), pp. 764-80; B. W. Anderson, Understanding the Old Testament, 4th ed. (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1986), pp. 321-23, 472-75, 502-6.
[^2] The historical setting of Second and Third Isaiah is different from that of First Isaiah, as in the following examples: (a) Cyrus, a Persian king who lived more than a century after Isaiah, is mentioned by name; (b) emphasis is placed on the power of the Babylonians, who in Isaiah's day were neither powerful nor very important politically; (c) the cities of Judah are described as already being destroyed, seemingly reflecting circumstances a century after Isaiah; (d) the temple is described as already being in ruins, though it was not destroyed until 587 B.C.; (e) the Israelites are described as already being punished and exiled, which events took place after 587 B.C. The material in chapters 40 through 66 does seem to address, to a degree, historical circumstances different from those of Isaiah's day. In the Book of Mormon we find a similar situation. President Ezra Taft Benson reminded the Church in 1986 that the Book of Mormon "was written for our day," [^4] adding his witness on that topic to those expressed by the book's authors. Moroni explained: "Behold, I speak unto you as if ye were present, and yet ye are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing" (Morm. 8:35). Because the Nephite writers saw and understood our time, they also wrote to meet our needs, not exclusively those of their contemporaries, who would never see the Book of Mormon as we have it. I find in the book of Isaiah a striking parallel: Isaiah saw and understood the circumstances of his countrymen a century and a half after his death, and through the inspiration of heaven he wrote in their behalf, as he also did for his contemporaries. But his scope does not stop there. He also saw our own latter-day setting, and the powerful witness that he left in his record speaks, when appropriately "likened" unto us, to our generation as well (see 1 Ne. 19:23). Anderson assigns chapters 34 through 35 to Deutero-Isaiah also; p. 322.
[^3] The theological perspective is different: there is a shift from judgment to reconciliation. The theme of God's coming judgment is indeed found in the last half of the book, but it does not receive the emphasis there that it does in chapters 1 through 35. Similarly, though forgiveness and reconciliation are found in First Isaiah, in chapters 40 through 66 they predominate. I, too, perceive a significant shift in tone and subject matter that begins in Isaiah 40, and I believe that the shift was deliberate. In the prophetic books, as a general rule, prophecies of judgment and punishment precede those of blessing and restoration. That organization is true of individual prophecies and chapters as well as of entire books. This order of things mirrors real life, particularly the history of the house of Israel: God's judgment would be the inevitable consequence of Israel's rebellion; but in the latter days Israel would repent, be gathered and restored, and would enjoy full reconciliation with its God. It seems likely that Isaiah's prophecies were meant to follow the same sequence. We should not be surprised if he prepared two collections of revelations (or if his disciples arranged them later) — one, chapters 1 through 39, a "Book of Judgment," and the other, chapters 40 through 66, a "Book of Reconciliation." [^5] The earliest known suggestion of multiple authorship comes from Rabbi Ibn-Ezra in the twelfth century A.D.
[^4] The literary style of chapters 40 through 66 differs from that of the earlier chapters. Even conservative scholars who argue for the unity of the entire book note some stylistic differences between First and Second (and Third) Isaiah. More significant, however, is that even critical scholars who argue for multiple authorship see a great deal of Isaiah son of Amoz throughout the entire collection, pointing to "Isaianic" themes that were carried on by Deutero-Isaiah and his successors. [^6] Moreover, almost all of Isaiah was written in poetry, and Hebrew poetry has sufficient flexibility to allow an author a wide range of literary options. Thus arguments for different literary styles are inconclusive, especially since we do not know the history of Isaiah's words once they left his mouth or his pen. In Conference Report, Oct. 1986, p. 5; or Ezra Taft Benson, "The Book of Mormon—Keystone of Our Religion," in Studies in Scripture, Volume Seven: 1 Nephi to Alma 29, ed. Kent P. Jackson (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1987), p. 5.
[^5] Those who believe in the Book of Mormon have additional evidence for the essential unity of the book of Isaiah, at least through chapter 55. When Lehi and his family left Jerusalem, they took with them the plates of brass, which contained, among other things, the writings of Isaiah, who preceded them by about one hundred years. The Nephite authors quoted extensively from Isaiah and included in the Book of Mormon all or part of the following chapters of Isaiah: 2 through 14, 28 and 29, 40, and 48 through 55. [^7] The Book of Mormon thus proves that at least those chapters were known to be the writings of Isaiah when Lehi left Jerusalem in 600 B.C. — many decades before Second and Third Isaiah were supposed to have been written. [^8] This, in my view, is the most important piece of evidence for Isaiah's authorship of later chapters. The book of Ezekiel contains an unmistakable shift in tone that begins after the prophet learned that Jerusalem had fallen (Ezek. 33:21). The earlier part of the book is a message of doom for Judah and other nations. The latter part is, for the most part, a message of future hope.
[^6] E.g., Anderson, pp. 504-6.
