Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

11

AUTHORSHIP OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH

KENT P. JACKSON

The book of Isaiah has been the subject of intense study by Bible scholars for the past two centuries. As could be predicted, a variety of biases and approaches has yielded a variety of conclusions. One common interpretation among critical scholars is that the book in its present state is not the product of one author but of two, three, or perhaps more. [^1] Given the preconceptions of its proponents, this multiple-authorship proposal is inevitable, but the major supposition upon which it is based is clearly false. And for Latter-day Saints, the Book of Mormon provides strong evidence on behalf of the essential unity of the book as we have it.

Approaches to Isaiah

Though several different approaches to dividing Isaiah have been set forth, the following is the most common system:

First Isaiah—chapters 1 through 39: From Isaiah son of Amoz, ca. 740-700 B.C. (chaps. 1-35); plus an extended excerpt from 2 Kings (chaps. 36-39)

Second Isaiah—chapters 40 through 55: From an anonymous prophet (often called Deutero-Isaiah) during the Babylonian exile, ca. 540 B.C. [^2]

Third Isaiah—chapters 56 through 66: From one or more anonymous disciples of Second Isaiah after the return from exile, ca. 515 B.C. Some commentators include these chapters under Deutero-Isaiah.

According to the proponents of multiple authorship, the anonymous Second and Third Isaiah materials became attached to Isaiah's writings probably because the succeeding prophets were disciples of the first, and the entire collection was viewed as representing one specific branch of prophetic tradition. Scholars who hold to the theory generally do so for the following major reasons:

These are interesting observations, and for the most part they accurately represent the change in tone that begins in chapter 40. But by no means do they constitute grounds for denying the material in chapters 40 through 66 to Isaiah son of Amoz.

Prophetic Foresight

The fundamental issue in the multiple-authorship theory is whether or not a prophet can see beyond his own time. Those who begin with the supposition that men cannot see beyond their own day must logically conclude that Isaiah could not have written those sections of the book that speak to a different historical setting from his own. But those who understand the true nature of revelation and prophetic foresight have no trouble with prophecies of future events. Latter-day Saints are blessed with abundant evidence revealed in the latter days that shows that God can indeed inspire his servants with views of future days and, when appropriate, they impart that vision to others.

Some responses to the question of authorship include the following:

An Anthology of Prophetic Thought

Latter-day Saints, who accept the evidence from the Book of Mormon and believe that prophets can write to future generations, should have no difficulty accepting the essential unity of the book of Isaiah as the product of Isaiah son of Amoz from the eighth century B.C. Yet many interesting questions about it remain to be answered.

The noted Old Testament scholar W. F. Albright pointed out that the prophetic books are not books but "anthologies of oracles and sermons." [^9] This description certainly fits the book of Isaiah. Like the Bible itself, it is not a book but a collection. And, as with the Bible itself, the circumstances under which it was written and compiled are not clearly known. Did Isaiah record his prophecies himself, or did he dictate them to scribes? If they were dictated, was Isaiah responsible for their final poetic structure, or were others? Did Isaiah gather and compile the revelations himself, or did others do it? Were they collected in his lifetime, or later? Were they edited or reworded by later scribes? [^10] Though the answers to these questions are not critical for our understanding of Isaiah's message, they may explain such things as changes in emphasis, organization, and literary style of the revelations that make up the book of Isaiah. [^11]

Notes

Kent P. Jackson is professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The birth of a baby is the sign of deliverance (Isa. 7:14; 8:18). Latter-day Saint commentaries on Isaiah include Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1982); and Monte S. Nyman, "Great Are the Words of Isaiah" (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980). Other helpful (and conservative) commentaries include Edward J. Young, The Book of Isaiah, 3 vols. (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1965); and Homer Hailey, A Commentary on Isaiah, with Emphasis on the Messianic Hope (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker, 1985).
[^2] The baby is a boy (Isa. 7:14; 8:3). A rabbinic tradition dates Isaiah's death to the reign of Hezekiah's son Manasseh, in which case he would have died no earlier than 687 B.C.
[^9] President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote, "The Book of Mormon states that Joseph Smith the Prophet was a descendant of Joseph, son of Jacob. By revelation we learn also that he is of the tribe of Ephraim, but it is evident that he also had some Gentile blood in him, for it is written in the Book of Mormon, that it came forth, 'by way of the Gentile' (1 Ne. 13:35, 39), and it came by Joseph Smith. It is reasonable, therefore, to understand that we one and all have come through a mixed relationship, and that the blood of Ephraim and also of Manasseh could be in the veins of many of us, likewise the blood of others of the twelve tribes of Israel, and that none of us had come through the ages with clear exclusive descent from father to son through any one of the tribes." Answers to Gospel Questions, 5 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1957-66), 3:63-64; see also 3:61-63.
[^10] See, for example, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), pp. 83, 92, 101, 163, 183, 307-8, 310, 312.
[^11] Other large collections of prophecies against the nations are found in Jer. 46-51 and Ezek. 25-32. Note how Israel and Judah are included in Isaiah's list.
