Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

13

THE LORD IS OUR JUDGE AND OUR KING (ISAIAH 18-33)

DAVID ROLPH SEELY

"The Lord is our judge, the Lord is our lawgiver, the Lord is our king; he will save us" (Isa. 33:22). Commenting on this passage, and on the people who had it as their motto, Joseph Smith said, "Happy is that people, whose God is the Lord." [^1] Isaiah was addressing a people who had accepted by covenant the Lord God as their judge, lawgiver, king, and—according to their obedience—their savior. [^2] Yet the people of Isaiah's day were not happy. Because of apostasy, the house of Israel was personified by the Lord in Isaiah's introductory chapter as sick and wounded. Through his prophet the Lord pleaded, "Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more: the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint. From the sole of the foot even to the head there is no soundness in it; but wounds, and bruises, and putrifying sores: they have not been closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with ointment" (Isa. 1:5-6). The remedy prescribed by the Lord was not a "multitude of sacrifices" (Isa. 1:11), nor "vain oblations" (Isa. 1:13), nor "many prayers" (Isa. 1:15)—but repentance: "Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil" (Isa. 1:16).

Chapters 18 through 33 span three distinct units in the book of Isaiah: chapters 18 through 23 are part of the Oracles against Foreign Nations in chapters 13 through 23; chapters 24 through 27 form a single unit of last-days prophecies often called the The Apocalypse of Isaiah; and chapters 28 through 33 are a collection of more loosely related prophecies also involving latter-day events of judgment and restoration. Some of the prophecies are well known to Latter-day Saints—such as that in chapter 29, a detailed prophecy about the coming forth of the Book of Mormon—but most of the chapters in this section are relatively unfamiliar. For example, although about one-third of the entire book of Isaiah is directly quoted and interpreted in the Book of Mormon, apart from chapter 29 (which is cited and commented on at length by Nephi in 2 Ne. 26-27), only one verse of Isaiah from chapters 18 through 33 is cited in the Book of Mormon (Isa. 28:10, in 2 Ne. 28:30). [^3]

The unifying theme of these chapters is the Lord as lawgiver and judge sending judgment on his disobedient children, in Israel as well as in other nations. Many of the prophecies refer to identifiable events in Isaiah's day, and many more refer to the last days—the day of the Lord—when judgment will be universal and destruction cosmic. In the words of Amos, "Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord! to what end is it for you? the day of the Lord is darkness, and not light" (Amos 5:18). When the king returns in the "day of the Lord," he will bring judgment because of the wickedness of the children of men. But darkness and destruction are balanced by restoration and rebuilding. For the righteous the day of the Lord is a day of light, vindication, healing, and salvation. With the return of the king—the light of the world (John 8:12)—"the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day that the Lord bindeth up the breach of his people, and healeth the stroke of their wound" (Isa. 30:26).

Oracles against Foreign Nations (Isa. 18-23)

Isaiah 18 through 23 is only a part of the collection of oracles against foreign nations in Isaiah 13 through 23. [^4] In all, these prophecies of judgment include eleven sets of oracles against ten nations: Babylon (Isa. 13:1-14:23), Assyria (Isa. 14:24-27), Moab (Isa. 15:1-16:14), Damascus (Isa. 17:1-3), Ephraim (Isa. 17:4-14), Egypt (Isa. 18:1-20:6), Babylon (Isa. 21:1-10), Edom (Isa. 21:11-12), Arabia (Isa. 21:13-17), Jerusalem (Isa. 22:1-25), and Tyre (Isa. 23:1-18).

The Old Testament prophets viewed their mission and responsibility in a worldwide setting, and the oracles against foreign nations are an important, though often neglected, part of the prophetic corpus demonstrating this fact. Even among the former prophets, whose writings are not preserved, we have evidence that the prophets saw themselves in this universal setting. For example, in 1 Kings 19:15-18, Elijah was commissioned to participate in international affairs by anointing a new king over Syria—a job finally carried out by his successor, Elisha. [^5] In addition to the isolated statements that occur throughout the prophetic writings, Isaiah (Isa. 13-23), Jeremiah (Jer. 46-51), and Ezekiel (Ezek. 25-32), as well as Amos (Amos 1-2) and Zephaniah (Zeph. 2:4-15), have significant collections of oracles against nations. The entire books of Obadiah and Nahum are oracles against Edom and Assyria, respectively.

In general terms, five points can be made about the significance of the Oracles against Foreign Nations in the prophetic writings:

This theme of the sovereignty of God over all nations is particularly important for Isaiah. In the oracle against Assyria the Lord declares, "This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth; and this is the hand that is stretched out upon all the nations. For the Lord of hosts hath purposed, and who shall disannul it? and his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back" (Isa. 14:26-27). And just as the Lord is the God of all the earth, so the prophets are his representatives to the world.

Prophecies against Egypt (Isa. 18-20)

Throughout the history of Israel, the Lord continually told his people they must put their trust in him and not in foreign alliances (Isa. 7:9). Political conditions at the time of Isaiah made this a true test of faith and a difficult political decision for the leaders of Israel and Judah. In Isaiah's lifetime, Assyria was the dominant world power. All other nations had either to submit and pay tribute or to rebel by making alliances with neighbors, hoping that together they would be powerful enough to stand against Assyria and maintain their autonomy. Early in Isaiah's lifetime, the Northern Kingdom made a pact with Syria to revolt against Assyria (2 Kgs. 16:1-9) and to force Judah to join with them. The Lord commanded Judah not to join but rather to trust in his power to deliver them (Isa. 7:1-9). The other major power during this period was Egypt. Judah was greatly tempted at various times to make alliances with that nation in hopes of being delivered from Assyrian domination and being relieved of tribute. The oracles of destruction against Egypt in Isaiah 18 through 20 may have been given to further discourage God's chosen people from unwise alliances with the world—a theme that is continued and elaborated in chapters 30 through 31.

Isaiah 18 seems to refer to Egyptian ambassadors sent to Judah to encourage her to join an anti-Assyrian confederacy. Evidence of such coalitions against Assyria exists in historical sources. [^7] If that interpretation is correct, then chapter 18 can be read with the following two chapters (19-20) as a prophecy against Egypt. In Isaiah's day, Egypt was ruled by Shabako, a pharaoh from an Ethiopian dynasty. Thus here, as in several other prophecies, the terms Egypt and Ethiopia are used interchangeably. Even with this interpretation, however, the oracle presents difficulties. [^8] Verses 5 and 6 may describe the destruction of this ill-fated coalition against Assyria or perhaps the destruction of Assyria itself.

At the end of the oracle is an optimistic vision of restoration (Isa. 18:7). Scholars note that if this is an oracle against Assyria, then it spells deliverance for Egypt. If so, the KJV rendering of the first word as "Woe" may be misleading. The Hebrew word hoy, considering the context of the chapter, could be rendered as a greeting or word of encouragement, such as "Ah" (RSV). [^9] On the other hand, some in the Church have interpreted Isaiah 18 as foretelling missionary work that will proceed from the Americas to the world. [^10] If this interpretation is correct, chapter 18 would not be considered an oracle against Egypt.

Several of the prophecies against the nations begin with the phrase "the burden of," followed by the name of the nation targeted. [^11] The precise meaning of the term "burden" (Hebrew massa') is debated. Literally, the Hebrew word means "burden," suggesting that the prophecy of doom is a "heavy load" for Isaiah to deliver. Others derive meaning from the verbal root ns', "to raise," and suggest that the word means "to raise one's voice" in an oracle or prophecy.

In Isaiah 19, verses 1 through 15 constitute an obvious prophecy of doom against Egypt presented in vivid poetic images of social and environmental chaos. Neither their arms, their gods, nor the wisdom of their people would be able to save them. The message should have been clear for the citizens of Judah: do not turn to Egypt for help, which will not be able to save itself, let alone anyone else. Isaiah foretold that the Egyptians would be given over "into the hand of a cruel lord; and a fierce king shall rule over them" (Isa. 19:4). The precise historical fulfillment of these events is debated. During the lifetime of Isaiah, Egypt was conquered in 714 B.C. by the Ethiopian pharaoh Shabako and defeated in battle by Sargon II of Assyria in 711; later, probably after Isaiah's death, Egypt was again conquered, by Esarhaddon in 671 B.C. and by Ashurbanipal in 663. Each of these conquests was accompanied by civil disorder such as that described in Isaiah 19:2.

The remainder of Isaiah 19 is punctuated by the phrase "in that day," a prophetic idiom which almost always points to a setting in the latter days. "In that day," Egypt will recognize the Lord's power among his people (Isa. 19:16-17); Israel's language will be spoken in cities of Egypt, and the Lord will be worshiped there (Isa. 19:18); an altar to the Lord will be built there—a reference to a temple—and "the Lord shall be known to Egypt, and the Egyptians shall know the Lord" (Isa. 19:19-21). Though he once punished the Egyptians, now "he shall be intreated of them, and shall heal them" (Isa. 19:22). "In that day," Egypt and Assyria, mortal enemies and rival superpowers in Isaiah's time, will be brought together with the Lord's people in a common bond and will together enjoy his favor: "Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance" (Isa. 19:23-25).

In Isaiah 20, Egypt's inability to withstand Assyrian power is again the topic. The Lord commanded Isaiah to strip himself as an impoverished exile and walk around "naked and barefoot" (Isa. 20:2). Isaiah's attire was to symbolize the plight of the Egyptians, who would be overpowered and taken captive by Assyrian forces. The message, of course, was to Judah, whose reliance on Egypt would be to no avail. In despair they would say, "See what has happened to those we relied on, those we fled to for help and deliverance from the king of Assyria! How then can we escape?" (Isa. 20:6, NIV). [^12] Fortunately, Judah's king, Hezekiah, wisely chose to follow Isaiah's counsel and trusted in Jehovah for deliverance (Isa. 36:1-37:38).

Prophecies against Judah and Other Nations (Isa. 21-23)

Five prophecies in Isaiah 21 through 23 complete the Oracles against Foreign Nations and demonstrate with specific examples the universal nature of the Lord's judgments. They are a bridge between the prophecies of destruction, many of which were fulfilled in ancient times, and the last-days prophecies in chapters 24 through 27, which foretell judgment being poured out on the whole world.

Isaiah 21:1-10 is a prophecy directed against Babylon, called "the desert of the sea" because of its arid setting at the head of the Persian Gulf: "Babylon is fallen, is fallen; and all the graven images of her gods he hath broken unto the ground" (Isa. 21:9). Babylon was conquered by the Assyrian king Sennacherib in 691-89 B.C. and again by Cyrus of Persia in 539 B.C. But perhaps here, as in other places, Babylon is used as a type of the world, and its fall typifies the universal destruction of wickedness. The Lord spoke in similar words to Joseph Smith of the latter-day manifestation of Babylon: "Every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own god, whose image is in the likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol, which waxeth old and shall perish in Babylon, even Babylon the great, which shall fall" (D&C 1:16).

Isaiah 21 concludes with two short prophecies. Verses 11 and 12 seem to foretell alternating periods of light and darkness for Edom. [^13] Verses 13 through 17 prophesy doom for the tribes of Arabia.

The following prophecy, Isaiah 22, is directed against Jerusalem, a city of hills and valleys that is referred to here as "the valley of vision" (Isa. 22:1). Just as Ephraim was counted among the nations for destruction in Isaiah 17, now Jerusalem is also included. The setting of the prophecy seems to reflect the circumstances of Sennacherib's invasion of Judah in 701 B.C. The Assyrian king successfully conquered all of the country but Jerusalem, which was saved in a miraculous way when King Hezekiah and his people put their trust in Jehovah's power to deliver them, reversing Judah's former policy of trusting in misguided alliances with foreign kings. When Sennacherib invaded, the people of Jerusalem turned to their weapons, fortified their defensive walls, and stored water inside the city (Isa. 22:8, 10-11). But these measures, which would have been no match for Assyria's power, were not needed. God intervened, as he promised he would, and defended Jerusalem himself (Isa. 36-37; 2 Kgs. 18:13-19:37).

The miraculous deliverance was to be seen as another opportunity to repent, but instead of repenting, the people celebrated: "In that day did the Lord God of hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth: And behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine: let us eat and drink; for to morrow we shall die" (Isa. 22:12-13). For that response, Isaiah wrote, they would eventually be held accountable: "And it was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of hosts, Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die" (Isa. 22:14).

This same attitude of arrogance is also identifiable in two of Jerusalem's public servants. Shebna, a court official, had in his self-assurance built himself a splendid sepulchre in a high place (Isa. 22:16) and rode in a glorious royal chariot (Isa. 22:18). The Lord promised to bring down all of that: Shebna would fall from his high position, and captivity would be his reward. Another man, Eliakim, would be given authority and power. "The key of the house of David" would be laid on his shoulders (Isa. 22:22). He would be as secure as "a nail in a sure place" (Isa. 22:23), but eventually he too would "be cut down, and fall" (Isa. 22:25). Some have read the imagery in this passage messianically. But much caution is required: Eliakim failed in his calling, but the Messiah did not.

The last in this series of prophecies, Isaiah 23, foretells the destruction of the Phoenician port city of Tyre. Tyre, the marketplace of the nations (Isa. 23:3), was one of the most important and prosperous cities of the world, because it controlled much of the trade in the eastern Mediterranean. Its wealth had led to pride, which is abhorrent to the Lord. In Isaiah's day, Tyre was an island off the Phoenician coast (see Map 9, LDS Bible). [^14] Although the city was forced to pay tribute several times during the Assyrian and Babylonian periods, it was not captured or destroyed until almost four centuries after Isaiah, when in 332 B.C. it fell to Alexander the Great. [^15] The oracle concludes with the prophecy that Tyre will one day be dedicated to the work of the Lord: "Her merchandise and her hire shall be holiness to the Lord" (Isa. 23:18).

The Apocalypse of Isaiah (Isa. 24-27)

The word apocalypse literally means "from hiding" and refers to prophetic discourse or revelation in general. The common definition of this word, however, is derived from the New Testament, in Revelation 1:1, in which it refers to the vision given to John the Beloved on the Island of Patmos concerning the events surrounding the latter days, the Second Coming, and the end of the world. Today apocalyptic is used as a virtual synonym of eschatology (Greek, "teachings about last things") and also denotes visions and revelations about events of cosmic destruction and the end of the world. [^16] The absolute nature and the finality of the language in Isaiah 24 through 27 is clearly eschatological, and the fulfillment of these prophecies is best looked for in the last days.

This section provides a climax to the book of Isaiah up to this point. Isaiah begins with prophecies of destruction and restoration for Israel in chapters 1 through 12, followed by the Oracles against Foreign Nations in chapters 13 through 23, each directed against a specific nation. Chapters 24 through 27 then move to the universal destruction.

Isaiah 24 depicts the end of the world as the reversal of creation. The Creation, recorded in Genesis, is a cosmic event: "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth" (Gen. 1:1). The Lord, through his word ("And God said . . . and it was so"), made the earth, set the lights in the firmament, filled the earth with life (first animal and then humans), and then "planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the man whom he had formed" (Gen. 2:8). At the end of each phase of creation, the Lord "saw that it was good."

As portrayed in Isaiah 24, the judgment of the Lord, at the end of time, will also be of cosmic proportions. The Lord, through his word, will declare destruction on his creation, which, though once good, has now become corrupt: "Behold, the Lord maketh the earth empty, and maketh it waste, and turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad the inhabitants thereof" (Isa. 24:1); "the earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard" (Isa. 24:20); "then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed" (Isa. 24:23). The catastrophes that will afflict a world that "lieth in sin, and groaneth under darkness and under the bondage of sin" (D&C 84:49) include earthquakes (Isa. 24:1, 18-20), drought (Isa. 24:4), a curse that devours the earth (Isa. 24:6), burning (Isa. 24:6), desolation and destruction (Isa. 24:12), and flood (Isa. 24:18).

In short, the end of the world is a reversal of creation: "The land shall be utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled: for the Lord hath spoken this word" (Isa. 24:3). The reason for such drastic action is clear: "The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant" (Isa. 24:5). [^17] All of the inhabitants will suffer: people and priests, servant and master, maid and mistress, buyer and seller, lender and borrower, and taker and giver of usury (Isa. 24:2). [^18] After the burning, only a few will be left (Isa. 24:6). One prominent image is that of the harvest—"the shaking of an olive tree, and as the gleaning grapes when the vintage is done" (Isa. 24:13).

At the end of judgment, the Creator will return in his glory—"the Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before his ancients [elders] gloriously"—with which the sun and the moon will pale in comparison (Isa. 24:23).

The reversal of creation through destruction when the "earth mourneth and fadeth away" (Isa. 24:4) is the Lord's preparation for the new creation, described at length in Isaiah 40 through 66 [^19] (especially 60-66), when the Lord will create "the new heavens and the new earth" (Isa. 65:17; 66:22) and will form a new people (Isa. 43:21), with whom he will make an everlasting covenant (Isa. 61:8).

Isaiah 25 contains a psalm of praise and thanksgiving to the Lord God, who has been a "strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against the wall" (Isa. 25:4). The Lord upon his return will celebrate a great feast, called the messianic banquet, when he will "make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined" (Isa. 25:6). Feasting is a powerful symbol, incorporating imagery from the sacrament of the Lord's supper and the partaking and eating of the tree of life, as well as imagery of communal meals and fellowship. This feast is to be understood literally as well as spiritually as an occasion that has been prepared for the rich and mighty but is also attended by the poor and humble, an occasion for rejoicing in the richness and fellowship of the Saints with their king (see Zech. 14:16-19; Matt. 8:11; 22:1-10; Luke 14:15-24; 22:18; Rev. 19:9; D&C 58:8-12). At this day the Lord will remove "the vail that is spread over all nations. He will swallow up death in victory; and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces; and the rebuke of his people shall he take away from off all the earth" (Isa. 25:7-8).

Isaiah 26 teaches that God's righteous judgment is a reversal of the ways of the world. "Like as a woman with child, that draweth near the time of her delivery, is in pain, and crieth out in her pangs; so have we been in thy sight, O Lord" (Isa. 26:17). Throughout history, the Saints in the world have uttered such laments. When the judge and king returns, he will come in judgment and restore justice, for which the righteous have longed and the wicked feared (Isa. 26:8-9). Justice entails a reversal of the ways of the world: the Lord "bringeth down them that dwell on high; the lofty city, he layeth it low; he layeth it low even to the ground; he bringeth it even to the dust. The foot shall tread it down, even the feet of the poor, and the steps of the needy" (Isa. 26:5-6). [^20] Then will "the inhabitants of the world learn righteousness" (Isa. 26:9), and the earth will be full of peace (Isa. 26:3, 12). The Lord answers his Saints with the promise of resurrection—through the Atonement the consequences of the Fall can be reversed: "Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead" (Isa. 26:19).

Throughout the scriptures, covenant Israel is often depicted in horticultural terms (Ps. 80:8-13; Jer. 2:21; Ezek. 15; Hos. 10:1; Matt. 21:33-43; Mark 12:1-11; Luke 20:9-17; Jacob 5, etc.). In Isaiah 5:1-7 the Lord addressed his beloved Israel as a vineyard that in spite of his constant care had brought forth wild grapes and was thus ready for destruction. Just as the destruction of the people had been couched in the images of harvesting, so restoration and gathering is expressed as planting a vineyard, watering it, and weeding it (Isa. 27:2-4). Through the care of the Lord, "Israel shall blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit" (Isa. 27:6). [^21] When "the iniquity of Jacob be purged" and Israel cleansed of idolatry (Isa. 27:9), the Lord will "thresh" (KJV, "beat off") his people—separate the wheat from the chaff—and gather his people "one by one" (Isa. 27:12). Eventually the harvest will be gathered from Egypt and Assyria (perhaps symbolic of the whole world), and they "shall worship the Lord in the holy mount at Jerusalem" (Isa. 27:13).

The Six Woes (Isa. 28-33)

Isaiah 28 through 33 is a collection of many diverse prophecies, mostly eschatological, in a framework of six Woes, each illustrating a timeless lesson as relevant today as it was to ancient Israel.

The condition of the Northern Kingdom is also the condition of Judah in the south (Isa. 28:7, "but they also"), where the drunkenness is spiritual as well. A stupor is upon priest and prophet, which renders them incapable of discernment either in vision or in judgment (Isa. 28:7). The vomit and filthiness of their parties are unclean (Isa. 28:8). One sophisticated and scornful drunkard sarcastically questions the prophet (or the Lord): "Whom shall he teach knowledge? and whom shall he make to understand doctrine? them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts?" He mimics the simplicity of the prophet's message, "For precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little, and there a little" (Isa. 28:9-10). [^23] The prophet responds by repeating their mocking lines. Indeed the message is simple—precept by precept, line upon line—but deceptively so; if not followed, it will lead to their destruction (Isa. 28:13).

Isaiah 28:10 is quoted as the word of the Lord in 2 Nephi, without the sarcasm, as a demonstration that the mastery of the word of the Lord is a simple yet gradual process. A promise is added: "And blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more; and from them that shall say, We have enough, from them shall be taken away that which they have" (2 Ne. 28:30; see also D&C 98:12; 128:21).

Isaiah 29:3-24 is quoted extensively, with significant changes and additions, in 2 Nephi 26:15 through 27:35. [^25] In the Book of Mormon, Nephi applies the prophecy of destruction to his own people and identifies the voice from the dust as the Nephite record, the Book of Mormon, which will speak from the dust. This is clearly an example of a prophecy that is best understood by those who live in the time of its fulfillment (2 Ne. 25:7), and we in the latter days have witnessed a detailed fulfillment of this prophecy. The promised apostasy occurred: "For the Lord hath poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and hath closed your eyes: the prophets and your rulers, the seers hath he covered" (Isa. 29:10). The "words of a book that is sealed" (the golden plates) were delivered to the "one that is learned" (Charles Anthon) who could not read it and then delivered back to "him that is not learned" (Joseph Smith; 29:11-12), as recounted in Joseph Smith—History 1:63-65. And today the Book of Mormon speaks "low out of the dust" (in the words of Nephi, "I speak unto you as the voice of one crying from the dust"; 2 Ne. 33:13; see also Moro. 10:27). The circumstances of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon through the unlearned demonstrate that the Lord is able to do his own work in his own due time (2 Ne. 27:21). [^26] We have seen the "marvellous work and a wonder" (Isa. 29:14) as the restored gospel goes forth to the world.

The Lord commanded Isaiah to preserve a record of his prophecies as a witness against the people in the day of their fulfillment (Isa. 30:8; 8:16). Then the Lord indicted the house of Israel on several counts: they are rebellious children who "will not hear the law of the Lord" (Isa. 30:9), and they deny the visions of the seers and only want to hear "smooth things" from the prophets (Isa. 30:10). Indeed, they are a people who "hear but understand not, and see but do not perceive" (Isa. 6:9). In addition, this is a people who trust in the speed of their horses—their military might—rather than in the Lord (Isa. 30:11-12, 15-16). They will discover that without the Lord they are no match for their enemies, who will pursue and destroy them until they are "left as a beacon upon the top of a mountain, and as an ensign on an hill" (Isa. 30:17).

This oracle of doom is balanced by one of hope in Isaiah 30:18-26. The Lord promised that after "the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction" (Isa. 30:20), deliverance will come, which will include rain, abundance, light, and healing (Isa. 30:23-26)—all imagery pointing to the Millennium. This suggests that the oracle of destruction against Assyria in Isaiah 30:27-33 is a type of the cosmic destruction of Satan in the last days. Deliverance is not to be found in foreign alliances but in the arm of the Lord, which will once more be turned against Israel's enemies (Isa. 30:30). The king of Assyria will be defeated and laid on a pyre, which "the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle" (Isa. 30:33).

The Book of Mormon expression of this principle is found in a Woe uttered by Nephi against those who say, "We have received the word of God, and we need no more of the word of God, for we have enough!" (2 Ne. 28:29). Then Nephi wrote, "Thus saith the Lord God: I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept," a quotation of Isaiah 28:13 2 Ne.28:30). Nephi continued echoing Isaiah's injunction in Isaiah 30:1: "Cursed is he that putteth his trust in man, or maketh flesh his arm, or shall hearken unto the precepts of men, save their precepts shall be given by the power of the Holy Ghost" (2 Ne. 28:31; see also 4:34).

Isaiah 32 is a messianic prophecy looking forward to the many years of hardship that remain for the covenant people "until the spirit be poured upon us from on high, and the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful field be counted for a forest" (Isa. 32:15). Then with the Messiah will come justice, righteousness, and peace (Isa. 32:16-18).

Isaiah's message to Israel from beginning to end is simple: repent or be destroyed. It is a message of hope for the humble and of doom for the disobedient. The Lord told Israel at the outset: "Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool" (Isa. 1:18). Isaiah 33 looks to the time when the Lord as judge and lawgiver will return as king and Savior (Isa. 33:22) to usher in the Millennium. Israel, who in chapter 1 was stricken, sick, and wounded (Isa. 1:5-6), will finally, after she has received her punishment, be healed and forgiven: "And the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick: the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity" (Isa. 33:24). [^29]

Notes

David Rolph Seely is assistant professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The political reality of Judah and Israel (Ephraim) as separate peoples is no longer mentioned. Instead, the whole family is known by the name Israel or by the synonymous name Jacob. "Comfort ye, comfort ye my people." Verses 1 and 2 of Isaiah 40 foretell the consoling message that the sorrows and horrors of Jerusalem's probation are over: "her warfare is accomplished," "her iniquity is pardoned," and she has "received of the Lord's hand double for all her sins." Up to that yet-future time, Jerusalem's history will have been one of all too frequent sadness, brought about because its inhabitants refused to obey the laws that would have guaranteed its peace (Luke 13:34-35). As the Old Testament prophets foretold, Jerusalem was destroyed at the hands of the Babylonians in 587 B.C., climaxing a four-hundred-year vain experiment of mortals replacing Jehovah as king of Israel. Sorrow continued for Jerusalem's later inhabitants under the oppressive rule of succeeding foreign powers, down to the time of Jesus. "How often would I have gathered thy children together," the Savior lamented, "and ye would not!" (Matt. 23:37). Even greater sorrows would follow. Foretelling Jerusalem's destruction by the Romans in A.D. 70, Jesus taught, "For then, in those days, shall be great tribulation on the Jews, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, such as was not before sent upon Israel, of God, since the beginning of their kingdom until this time" (JS-M 1:18). When God made covenants with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, he called them to bless the world through their service. They and their descendants became "chosen people." Too often members of the house of Israel have looked upon this "chosen" condition as an elite status—a status that gives them automatic advantage in the eyes of God over others (e.g., Matt. 3:9-10). It is true that membership in the covenant family is a blessing, but it is important that we understand what it means to be "chosen." The scriptures make it clear that Israel is chosen to serve (e.g., Abr. 2:9-11). Much as one is chosen for callings in the Church today, members of the house of Israel are called to represent the Lord in service to others. On the most basic level, Israel itself seems to fit the description of the Lord's chosen servant in Isaiah: "Thou, Israel, art my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend" (Isa. 41:8); "Yet now hear, O Jacob my servant; and Israel, whom I have chosen" (44:1). [^13] Jesus taught his disciples how they should serve: "Ye are the salt of the earth" (Matt. 5:13); "Ye are the light of the world" (Matt. 5:14); "Feed my sheep" (John 21:16). Given the historical setting, a revelation concerning the fall of Babylon was clearly not as important for Isaiah's own time as it would be for readers several generations later. Perhaps this revelation, like the Book of Mormon, was written not for his contemporaries but for later people whom the prophet foresaw and whose circumstances he knew. [^20] Almost always in the Old Testament of the KJV the word judgment is used to translate the Hebrew word mispat, which would more accurately be translated as "justice."
[^2] The Millennium is stressed, because the emphasis is on God's reconciliation with his people and their future blessing. "Prepare ye the way of the Lord." Isaiah 40:3-5, presented in the words of a messenger, announce the coming of the Lord in glory and challenge us to be prepared for his arrival. [^7] At his coming the earth will undergo a dramatic transformation, characterized by the elevation of valleys, the sinking of mountains, and other profound changes (Isa. 40:4). Recall that at Christ's coming to the children of Lehi—a pattern for what will transpire at his second coming—"the whole face of the land was changed" (3 Ne. 8:12; see also vv. 5-18). Ether, foretelling this transition to millennial splendor, wrote that it would be "a new heaven and a new earth; and they shall be like unto the old save the old have passed away, and all things have become new" (Ether 13:9). [^8] When "the glory of the Lord shall be revealed," Isaiah wrote, "all flesh shall see it together" (Isa. 40:5), consistent with Jesus' own words that his coming will be so obvious and conspicuous that it will be like the light of the sun coming up in the east, moving across the sky to the west, and covering the whole earth (JS-M 1:26). Just as the Lord has called Israel collectively to be his servant, some individuals within Israel have been called to a more specific level of service. Some of Isaiah's servant passages may find more appropriate application to the mission of the prophets rather than to Israel at large. The prophets are servants within God's servant nation. As elsewhere in prophetic writings, the circumstances of contemporary nations often serve as types for latter-day things. The degrading fall of Babylon prefigures the fall of those unholy things that are characterized by it: lust, opulence, the political machinations of the world, and pride. As Babylon falls-both the ancient kingdom literally and its latter-day counterpart figuratively-God commands his people to flee: "Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean" (Isa. 52:11; see also 48:20). This passage is the only occurrence of the term "host of heaven" in Isaiah. Elsewhere in the Bible it is used with reference to stars (e.g., Deut. 4:19; 17:3; 2 Kgs. 23:5; Jer. 8:2), or heavenly beings (e.g., 1 Kgs. 22:19; 2 Kgs. 17:16). In several of these passages the term may refer to both, given the popularity of astral deities in the ancient Near East.
[^3] There is emphasis on God's power to foretell the future (e.g., Isa. 41:22-23; 42:9; 44:7-8, 26; 45:21; 46:10, 11; 48:3-7, 14). It is ironic that this part of Isaiah stresses God's capacity to give knowledge of the future to his prophets—the very point that causes some to deny its authorship to Isaiah. "Good tidings." Isaiah 40:9-11 rejoices at the announcement that Jerusalem's God has come. Isaiah called for Jerusalem to "get thee up into the high mountain," to lift her voice "with strength," and to proclaim, "Behold your God!" (Isa. 40:9). His coming is characterized both by his strength, "His arm shall rule for him" (Isa. 40:10), and his tenderness, "He shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom" (Isa. 40:11). [^10] Finally, Jesus Christ himself is the Servant; it is in him that Isaiah's servant passages find their most complete fulfillment. Jesus is the source of all the good gifts with which his servants minister. He is the light of the world in the fullest way; the light that the prophets and the house of Israel possess simply reflects his character and glory—the source of all true light. Whatever priesthood, virtue, or wisdom his servants may be found to possess comes from him. Similarly, though his servants have been called to feed his sheep (John 21:16), he himself is the Good Shepherd (John 10:14). Jesus stated, "The Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister" (Matt. 20:28). Appropriately, then, Isaiah's prophecies identify him in that role. Also in Ezek. 35:15; 36:5. Idumea is the Greek form of the name Edom. It was known as Idumea during the Hellenistic period, including the New Testament period, when Greek was the common language of the Near East.
[^4] The work of God's "Servant" is foretold. Two of these "wild beasts" are of special interest. The KJV translates the Hebrew word for "wild oxen," reemim (Isa. 34:7), as "unicorns." Joseph Smith, in the JST, removed the word "unicorns" and transliterated the Hebrew word to "reem." The KJV word "dragons" in v. 13 (Hebrew, tannim) means "jackals."
[^5] See Chap. 10 of this volume.
[^7] It appears that a more accurate translation of the Hebrew of Isa. 40:3 would be:
[^8] Terms such as "new heaven" and "new earth" are sometimes used to describe the final state of the earth when it becomes a celestial globe (Rev. 21:1; D&C 29:23-24). It is clear, however, that Ether was using these terms to refer to the millennial earth, when it "will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory" (A of F 10; other examples are Isa. 65:17; 66:22; 2 Pet. 3:13). The changes mentioned by Ether will take place before the coming of the New Jerusalem in America (Ether 13:10) and the restored Jerusalem in Palestine (Ether 13:11).
[^9] For more on messengers sent to prepare for the Lord's coming, see Kent P. Jackson, "The Appearance of Moroni to Joseph Smith," in Studies in Scripture, Volume Two: The Pearl of Great Price, ed. Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson (Salt Lake City: Randall Book, 1985), pp. 348-49, and n. 25.
[^10] Readers often notice that some of the numbers from George Frideric Handel's Messiah come from Isaiah 40: "Comfort Ye My People" (Isa. 40:1-3); "Every Valley Shall Be Exalted" (Isa. 40:4); "And the Glory of the Lord" (Isa. 40:5); "O Thou That Tellest Good Tidings to Zion" (Isa. 40:9; see also 60:1); "He Shall Feed His Flock like a Shepherd" (Isa. 40:11). Also coming from Isaiah are the following: "Behold! A Virgin Shall Conceive" (Isa. 7:14); "For Behold, Darkness Shall Cover the Earth" (Isa. 60:2-3); "The People That Walked in Darkness" (Isa. 9:2); "For unto Us a Child Is Born" (Isa. 9:6); "Then Shall the Eyes of the Blind Be Opened" (Isa. 35:5-6); "He Was Despised" (Isa. 53:3; Isa. 50:6); "Surely He Hath Borne Our Griefs" (Isa. 53:4-5); "And with His Stripes We Are Healed" (Isa. 53:5); "All We like Sheep Have Gone Astray" (Isa. 53:6); "He Was Cut Off Out of the Land of the Living" (Isa. 53:8).
[^11] Latter-day Saint readers will recognize the promises in Isa. 41:10 as underlying verse 3 of the hymn "How Firm a Foundation."
[^12] See the discussion in Chap. 11 of this volume.
[^13] In both of these passages, "Jacob" and "Israel" are used synonymously and refer to the same people.
[^14] A good summary of the "Servant" issue is found in W. S. LaSor, D. A. Hubbard, F. W. Bush, Old Testament Survey (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1982), pp. 392-95.
[^15] KJV, "judgment," in Isa. 42:1, 4; see n. 1, above.
[^16] According to Oliver Cowdery, Isaiah 43:6 was quoted by Moroni to Joseph Smith when he appeared to him on the night of 21-22 September 1823; Messenger and Advocate, Apr. 1835, p. 111. Other Isaiah passages quoted by Moroni on that occasion, according to Oliver Cowdery, are Isaiah 1:7, 23-24, 25-26; 2:1-4; 4:5-6; 11:15-16; 29:11, 13, 14. Of these, the Prophet himself mentioned only Isaiah 11 (presumably the entire chapter; JS-H 1:40). See Jackson, pp. 359-61.
[^17] Meaning "belonging to Jehovah"—used to designate ownership.
[^18] The NIV (New International Version) is one of the very best English-language Bible translations, in my opinion. Written in beautiful contemporary English, it has the sense of reverence and devotion that plays such an important role in the King James Translation.
[^19] See the discussion in Chap. 11 of this volume.
[^20] See Chap. 11 of this volume.
[^21] The KJV is difficult in Isa. 49:5, as is the Hebrew manuscript on which it is based: "to bring Jacob again to him, Though Israel be not gathered." A seemingly better-preserved Hebrew original in the Qumran Isaiah Scroll (1Qisaa) provides a more likely translation: "to bring Jacob back to him and gather Israel to himself."
[^23] This is the Old Testament definition of Gentiles. The Book of Mormon definition is usually different. There the term seems to be defined culturally, not genealogically: those who are not Lamanites or Jews are Gentiles, regardless of their lineage.
[^25] For more specific suggestions, see Monte S. Nyman, "Great Are the Words of Isaiah" (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), pp. 175-78; Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1982), pp. 408-10; Kent P. Jackson, "Revelations Concerning Isaiah," in Studies in Scripture, Volume One: The Doctrine and Covenants, ed. Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson (Salt Lake City: Randall Book, 1984), pp. 326-30.
[^26] My discussion here is necessarily very brief. A more detailed analysis can be found in Nyman, pp. 182-84.
[^29] 29. The language of Isa. 33:24 appears to be a deliberate echo and inclusio of Isa. 1:5-6.
