Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

14

COMFORT MY PEOPLE (ISAIAH 34-50)

KENT P. JACKSON

As a general rule, when Latter-day Saints use the word restoration they think of the restoration of the gospel—the process by which the true Church, true priesthood, and true doctrine were brought back to the earth through the ministry of Joseph Smith. In Old Testament prophecy, the idea of restoration adds upon those things to include the restoration of the house of Israel to its covenant status, the restoration of its people to their promised lands, and the restoration of the Lord himself to his rightful position as Israel's king. Also included in the prophetic vision are the restoration of justice to the world, the restoration of the earth to the status it enjoyed prior to the Fall (see A of F 10), and the restoration of peace and happiness to God's faithful children. God's justice is a major theme in the book of Isaiah. When the Lord restores justice, all people will receive what they justly deserve, whether good or bad. [^1] It is the totality of these blessings that readers should have in mind as they study the words of Isaiah, who saw and recorded the marvelous latter-day circumstances that would make the restoration process complete.

The Lord's Vengeance and Recompense (Isa. 34-35)

Isaiah 34 and 35 constitute a single prophecy of two parts. The first part, chapter 34, is a warning of the judgment which God will bring upon the world because of its wickedness. The second, chapter 35, is a promise of the earth's subsequent millennial renewal.

In expressing his anger against "all nations" (Isa. 34:1-4), the Lord gave us a glimpse into the cataclysmic circumstances that will attend his second coming: the "host of heaven," presumably the stars, [^2] will be "dissolved," the heavens will be "rolled together as a scroll," and "all their host shall fall down," like autumn leaves (Isa. 34:4). The exact nature of this cosmic occurrence cannot be determined now, but its reality is well attested in the scriptures (see Matt. 24:29; D&C 29:14; 34:9; 45:42; see also Joel 2:31).

The Lord singled out Edom (Isa. 34:5-6; "Idumea" in the KJV) [^3] as being a specific object of his wrath and vengeance. In Isaiah's day Edom bordered the kingdom of Judah on the southeast, south of Moab. According to the biblical genealogies, the Edomites were descendants of Jacob's brother Esau (see Gen. 25:30; 36:1). They are frequently the object of God's anger in the Old Testament (see Jer. 49:7-22; Ezek. 25:12-14; Obad. 1), so seeing them specified here as a nation to be destroyed by the Lord's justice is not surprising. But in this context it appears that Edom has a broader meaning as well. In the writings of the Old Testament prophets, the names of unrighteous nations are frequently used typologically to represent the wickedness of the world in general. As the references to Edom are part of a larger prophecy that deals with the destruction and later glorification of the whole world, it is likely that in this passage Edom represents the entire earth. This extended symbolism finds a distinct parallel in Doctrine and Covenants 1:36, in which the Lord uses the term Idumea to represent the world.

So great will be the destruction of the world in Isaiah's depiction that it will become a desolate wilderness, devoid of human habitation, the home of thorns, brambles, and the "wild beasts of the desert" (Isa. 34:11-17). [^4]

There can be no question that Isaiah's words, as given him by the spirit of prophecy, were intended to evoke deep feelings in the hearts of his ancient and modern readers. The day of the Lord is the day of the Lord's recompense; it is the day in which he will measure out to individuals and nations alike the fruits of their deeds—rewards or punishments that suit, in God's just judgment, their actions. Those nations or individuals whose actions reveal pride, vanity, and hatred will receive a just reward that is characterized by many of the dreadful punishments listed in Isaiah 34. It will be by these that the earth will be cleansed to become the inheritance of the Lord's Saints in Zion: "For it is the day of the Lord's vengeance, and the year of recompences, for the [cause] of Zion" (Isa. 34:8).

Isaiah 35 presents a much different scene—a scene of the earth restored after the cleansing process described in the previous chapter. In its millennial renewal the earth will be restored to the state it enjoyed before the Fall (A of F 10), which will include the revival and revitalization of its landscape. The desert, Isaiah wrote, will "blossom as the rose. It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing" (Isa. 35:1-2). Waters will "break out" where once only desert was found (Isa. 35:6); "the parched ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land springs of water." The arid range of jackals (KJV, "dragons") will be covered with "grass with reeds and rushes" (Isa. 35:7). Isaiah likened the millennial earth's fruitfulness with that of areas famous in his day for their forests and fertility: the Lebanon and Carmel mountains and the Plain of Sharon (Isa. 35:2).

The millennial renewal will not be limited to the earth; its beneficiaries will also include the Lord's people, both as individuals and as a nation. When the Lord returns with vengeance and recompense, the blind, the deaf, the lame, and the mute will enjoy the healing power of his presence. Although the healing of physical impairments is a common metaphor for spiritual healing (e.g., Isa. 29:18), there is good reason to look forward to a very literal fulfillment of these words as well. As Christ's mortal ministry included the restoration of sight, hearing, mobility, and speech, so also will his millennial service to those who believe in his name (Isa. 35:5-6).

The "ransomed of the Lord" will be established in Zion, the perfect Christ-centered society that will characterize the Millennium. Isaiah described their coming as a safe return along a highway—the "Way of Holiness"—free of danger from the unrighteous and the unclean (Isa. 35:8-9). His Saints will "come to Zion," he wrote, "with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away" (Isa. 35:10).

Trusting in the Saving Power of the Lord (Isa. 36-39)

One important theme of the book of Isaiah is the need to trust in the Lord's power to save. Several passages teach this principle and emphasize the futility of putting faith either in the false gods of the nations or in the armaments of war. Because Jehovah is the true king of Israel and Judah, his people—when properly equipped and fortified with righteousness—can rely on his power to save them. He will fight their battles (Josh. 10:11; 2 Chron. 20:15-17; Ps. 44:3-8), as Isaiah taught with repeated emphasis (Isa. 7:1-16; 8:1-10; 10:24-34; 51:4-8). His faithful people need not fear, "for God is with us" (Isa. 8:10).

Perhaps the most dramatic example of this principle is found in Isaiah 36 through 39, which is a copy of 2 Kings 18:13 through 20:19 with some modifications. No indication is given why this material is included in the book of Isaiah (it starts and ends without editorial comment), but readers can readily see why its inclusion is appropriate. It contains an important episode from Isaiah's career that bears testimony to his work as God's spokesman. It also includes some important revelations that otherwise would have been left out of his prophetic record.

Because a discussion of the corresponding chapters from 2 Kings is found elsewhere in this volume, [^5] it will be necessary here only to make a few brief observations.

The issue in Isaiah 36 through 39 concerns the Lord's desire that we place our trust in him, that we put him to the test by exercising faith in his promises. The Rabshakeh, speaking in behalf of Sennacherib, king of Assyria (704-681 B.C.), taunted Hezekiah and the people of Jerusalem: Do not trust your king Hezekiah (Isa. 36:14), and do not trust your god (Isa. 36:15; 37:10-13). No other nation's god has been able to deliver it from Assyrian conquest. Neither can yours; nothing can save you from the power of the king of Assyria.

In response to this display of arrogance, the Lord responded through his prophet with a biting announcement that Sennacherib had now taken on a foe much too powerful for him: "Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom hast thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against the Holy One of Israel" (Isa. 37:23). To Hezekiah the assuring word came: "He shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shields, nor cast a bank against it. By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and shall not come into this city, saith the Lord. For I will defend this city" (Isa. 37:33-35). Because Hezekiah and his people were willing to turn to the Lord for deliverance, Jerusalem was saved.

Chapters 38 and 39 record other events in which Isaiah's prophecies came true. Through Hezekiah's faith and fervent prayer, the Lord extended his life by fifteen years, delivering him from the effects of illness (Isa. 38:1-8). Chapter 39 ends on a less happy note, as Isaiah foretold that one day Babylon would plunder Jerusalem and take some of its population into exile (Isa. 39:6-7).

The Book of Reconciliation

Isaiah 40 begins a new and significant section (chaps. 40-66) that I call the "Book of Reconciliation" (see the explanation in Chap. 11 of this volume). Some significant features of this part of Isaiah include the following:

Good Tidings for Zion (Isa. 40-41)

Perhaps no chapter better sums up the spirit and message of Isaiah's "Book of Reconciliation" than chapter 40. It is a chapter of annunciation—the announcement that Israel's day of trial and sadness is over and that the Lord has come to save and heal the world. Three beautiful passages in the first half of the chapter express joy in the announcement of the good news of salvation (Isa. 40:1-2, 3-5, and 9-11):

Sorrow would continue to be Jerusalem's lot, even into the latter days, as its inhabitants would continue to refuse Jesus' message of salvation. John characterized the latter-day Jerusalem as "Sodom and Egypt" (Rev. 11:8), and Ether foretold yet another destruction (Ether 13:5).

Isaiah's announcement in Isaiah 40:1-2 proclaims the end of these tragedies and the end of the circumstances that brought them about. Jerusalem's rebellion will end, its inhabitants will be converted to Christ, and it will be restored to what Ether called "a holy city unto the Lord. . . . And the inhabitants thereof, blessed are they, for they have been washed in the blood of the Lamb; and they are they who were scattered and gathered in from the four quarters of the earth, and from the north countries, and are partakers of the fulfilling of the covenant which God made with their father, Abraham" (Ether 13:5, 11). [^6]

In the New Testament, all three of the Synoptic Gospels refer to Isaiah 40:3 in connection with the mission of John the Baptist as forerunner (Matt. 3:3; Mark 1:2-3; Luke 3:4-6). Like the messenger(s) who would be sent to prepare the way for Christ's millennial work, John was sent to prepare for his mortal coming; thus this passage can be appropriately applied to John's ministry. John announced that the kingdom of heaven was "at hand" and that those who would take part in it would need to be found worthy (Matt. 3:2). [^9]

The rest of Isaiah 40 contains a discussion of God's incomparable wisdom and power. Those who reject it and rely on their own strength "shall faint," "be weary," and "utterly fall" (Isa. 40:30). Those who hope in the Lord, however, "shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint" (Isa. 40:31).

In chapter 41 the Lord emphasized his special relationship with his people, calling Israel "my servant," the one "whom I have chosen," and "my friend" (Isa. 41:8). Because the family of Israel stands in that covenant relationship to God, it has important obligations to him, but it also receives the promise of his love and protection. [^11]

The prophecy of the earth's millennial restoration in Isaiah 41:17-20 is similar to that in Isaiah 35:1-2, 6-7, discussed above. In the place of desert and parched land will be water and vegetation in abundance. And all will recognize "that the hand of the Lord hath done this, and the Holy One of Israel hath created it" (Isa. 41:20).

One of the important topics in the second half of Isaiah is God's capacity to foretell the future, a power which he refused to concede to the false gods that others worshiped (see Isa. 42:8). [^12] The Lord challenged idol worshipers to bring forth their idols "and shew us what shall happen. . . . Shew the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods" (Isa. 41:22-23). The outcome of the challenge is obvious: "Ye are of nothing, and your work of nought: an abomination is he that chooseth you" (Isa. 41:24). In contrast, "Behold, the former things are come to pass, and new things do I declare: before they spring forth I tell you of them" (Isa. 42:9).

The Lord's Servant in Isaiah

One characteristic of Isaiah's "Book of Reconciliation" is the emphasis on the work of the Lord's "servant." Several passages in this section speak of a servant whom the Lord has chosen to do his will, but the servant's identity is not made clear. Perhaps more than one interpretation is valid.

Because all good things and all good people are types of Christ and reflect his nature, perhaps we can identify the servant of whom Isaiah wrote on different levels, depending on the information provided: the house of Israel collectively, the prophets, and the Lord himself. Some of the passages seem to apply to more than one of these. [^14]

Redeemer of Israel (Isa. 42-44)

Isaiah 42 begins with a servant passage (vv. 1-7) that seems to refer to the Savior in both his mortal and postmortal roles. In all meekness he will bring justice [^15] to the nations of the world (Isa. 42:3-4), as "a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles" (Isa. 42:6). His mission will include opening blind eyes and bringing "out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house" (Isa. 42:7). For those whose spiritual vision is impaired, he "will make darkness light before them, and crooked things straight" (Isa. 42:16). The message of freeing those who are imprisoned bears a striking similarity to Jesus' work among the spirits of the dead, as recorded by the Apostle Peter and President Joseph F. Smith: "Being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit: by which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison" (1 Pet. 3:18-19); "From among the righteous, he organized his forces and appointed messengers, clothed with power and authority, and commissioned them to go forth and carry the light of the gospel to them that were in darkness, even to all the spirits of men; and thus was the gospel preached to the dead" (D&C 138:30). Christ's message is one of liberation from the bondage of spiritual impairment and the prison of sin, both for the living and for the dead.

In Isaiah 43 the Lord made clear to his covenant people that he is their Savior, reminding them of some of the things that he had done in their behalf and would yet do for them (Isa. 43:1-21). But Israel responded to his goodness with ingratitude and unfaithfulness (Isa. 43:22-28), for which he gave "Jacob to the curse, and Israel to reproaches" (Isa. 43:28). Although their rebellion could only lead to sorrow and scattering, still the Lord promised their descendants a latter-day restoration: "I will bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from the west; I will say to the north, Give up; and to the south, Keep not back: bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth" (Isa. 43:5-6). [^16]

Chapter 44 continues the theme of blessings for future Israelites: "I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring: And they shall spring up as among the grass, as willows by the water courses" (Isa. 44:3-4). Repentant Israel will be identified as Jehovah's own people, signifying the reestablishment of their covenant relationship with him: "One shall say, I am the Lord's; and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob" (Isa. 44:5). "Still another will write on his hand, 'The Lord's,' [^17] and will take the name Israel" (Isa. 44:5, NIV [^18]).

One temptation to which the Israelites all too frequently fell prey was to worship other gods. In the ancient Near Eastern society of Isaiah's day, the existence of a variety of deities was taken for granted. Worshipers would have favorites among them (usually based on cultural and political identity), but few would doubt the existence even of the gods of their enemies. But Israel's God, Jehovah, not only demanded that his people worship only him but also proclaimed that no other deities existed: "Thus saith the Lord the King of Israel, and his redeemer the Lord of hosts; I am the first, and I am the last; and beside me there is no God" (Isa. 44:6). Following this passage comes a powerful rebuke of idol worship-the worship of nonexistent gods in the form of metal, stone, and wooden images (Isa. 44:9-20). Isaiah pointed out in biting, satirical, words what a folly the worship of manmade objects is. How vain it is, he wrote, that a man can chop down a tree, use part of the wood to build a fire to warm himself and roast his meat, and then use what is left to construct a god to which he bows down and worships! Is the poor fool not bright enough to ask, "Is there not a lie in my right hand?" (Isa. 44:20).

The Lord at Work in History (Isa. 45-48)

Cyrus the Great became ruler of Persia in 550 B.C. It is not without reason that he is considered to be one of the great men of the ancient world. It was he who brought to an end, in 539 B.C., the Neo-Babylonian empire that Nebuchadnezzar had built up about fifty years earlier. The Persian Achaemenid empire that Cyrus founded in its place showed little resemblance to the empires of Babylon and Assyria that had preceded it. Unlike his predecessors, Cyrus did not treat his subject nations as an inexhaustible plundering ground. Instead, he set up a well-organized imperial structure that almost universally was considered to be a blessing compared to the atrocities of previous conquerors. Cyrus allowed the Jews who had been deported by Nebuchadnezzar to return from their Babylonian exile to their ancestral homeland and to rebuild their temple and cities there (2 Chron. 36:22-23; Ezra 1:1-11).

The importance of Cyrus in the book of Isaiah lies in that he is mentioned by name-more than a century before he was born. [^19] Speaking of future things as though they had already transpired-a style common in the writings of the prophets (see Mosiah 16:6)-the Lord spoke of Cyrus as his agent in bringing to pass the rebuilding of Jerusalem and its temple (Isa. 44:28). Though Cyrus was unaware, the God of Israel was prospering his work and blessing him with success: "I have even called thee by thy name: I have surnamed thee, though thou hast not known me" (Isa. 45:4; see also vv. 1-14). God is at work in history, as the Old Testament and the Book of Mormon attest. Because he knows the future, he can also make it known to his servants-even to the point of describing the missions of individuals not yet born and calling them by name: "Yea, I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass; I have purposed it, I will also do it" (Isa. 46:11).

Isaiah 47 is a lengthy prophecy against Babylon, which in Isaiah's day was under the domination of the Assyrian empire, the great superpower of the eighth and seventh centuries B.C. In Isaiah's day, Babylon was not a threat to his homeland, Judah, nor would it be for another one hundred years (Assyria did not fall until 609 B.C., at which time Babylon ascended to rule the Near East). Yet soon it would be known for its wealth and wickedness, and the very mention of its name would bring such things to mind.

Babylon is depicted in Isaiah 47 as a spoiled and pampered queen whose fall would quickly reduce her to the status of a peasant (Isa. 47:1-3). Though she had boasted that she would be a lady forever, to God she was a "wanton creature" (Isa. 47:8, NIV), and he made her both childless and widowed in a single day (Isa. 47:9). Neither her magic nor her astrology could help her now, as the Lord said-"None shall save thee" (Isa. 47:12-15).

This revelation deserves our attention for two important reasons:

The Lord reminded his people in Isaiah 48 that he can see and foretell the future (Isa. 48:1-7), which is one of many mighty acts that he has done to bless their lives. He desired to give them every chance; he even deferred his anger from them (Isa. 48:9), but they remained rebellious. Thus, in words that are as moving poetically as they are spiritually, the Lord lamented: "I am the Lord thy God which teacheth thee to profit, which leadeth thee by the way that thou shouldest go. O that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments! then had thy peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea: Thy seed also had been as the sand, and the offspring of thy bowels like the gravel thereof; his name should not have been cut off nor destroyed from before me" (Isa. 48:17-19). Yet "there is no peace," the Lord reminds us, "unto the wicked" (Isa. 48:22).

A Day of Salvation (Isa. 49-50)

Isaiah 49 is a very important chapter, because we see in it the servant in a significant role that seems to find fulfillment in the latter days. In the first part of the chapter we learn something of the servant's call: he was foreordained, set apart, and prepared to show forth God's glory (Isa. 49:3). Yet in spite of his call and his qualifications, he felt, as have others in the Lord's service on occasion, that his work was to no avail—"I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for naught" (Isa. 49:4). Verse 5 reveals the nature of his service: he was called to restore the house of Israel, "to bring Jacob again to him." [^21]

The restoration of the house of Israel is one of the great events of the last days, and the servant could rejoice in his role in it (Isa. 49:5b). That restoration includes not only the gathering to promised lands but especially the reestablishment of covenants between God and his people, both as a nation and as individuals. Jeremiah looked upon the latter-day restoration as being far greater than the Lord's gathering his people the first time, from Egypt. So great would be this new latter-day exodus that the old one in the days of Moses would soon be forgotten (Jer. 16:14-15).

But this would not be all for the Lord's servant. He learned that the gathering of Israel would be too small a task. [^22] The Lord had something more for him to do: "I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth" (Isa. 49:6). In other words, the servant's mission is even greater than simply to restore the house of Israel. It also includes a work on behalf of the Gentiles—those who are not descendants of Israel [^23]—to bring salvation to them as well. The scriptures bear consistent testimony to the dual mission of the latter-day gathering, both of Israel and of the Gentiles. Even the Gentiles, Jeremiah wrote, "shall come unto thee from the ends of the earth" (Jer. 16:19), and Isaiah foresaw an "ensign" to which "the outcasts of Israel," "the dispersed of Judah," and "the nations" will gather (Isa. 11:12; see also D&C 86:11; Abr. 2:9-11).

The essence of the gathering is the gathering to the covenants of the gospel of Jesus Christ, as Nephi taught (1 Ne. 10:14)—the same covenants that God made with Israel's great ancestors, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Because such phrases as "the gathering of Israel" usually refer to joining the Church, the idea of a physical return in the scriptures may often be a metaphor for returning to the covenants, accepting the gospel, and joining Christ's church. Geographical relocation plays a lesser role. Today the gathering of Israel is taking place as individuals from all over the earth are gathering to the Church in their own lands. [^24] And Gentiles—those who are not of literal Israelite descent—are equally welcome.

These verses point to Christ, as do all of Isaiah's servant passages. At the same time, the work of the servant in these verses seems to embody the gathering mission of the Church in the latter days. Thus it seems reasonable to see a fulfillment in the work of the Church, the tribes of Joseph who are now gathering others, and specifically the Prophet Joseph Smith. [^25]

Isaiah 49 continues with a poetic description of the return of the scattered sheep of Israel (Isa. 49:8-13): "They shall not hunger nor thirst; neither shall the heat nor sun smite them: for he that hath mercy on them shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide them" (Isa. 49:10).

Zion, in the next section of chapter 49, is depicted as a mother bereaved of her children, "forsaken" and "forgotten." But just as a mother cannot forget her child, the Lord cannot forget his chosen one; her memory is ever before him (Isa. 49:14-15) and he will bless her according to her desire. The return of her lost children will be so dramatic that she will hardly be prepared to receive them. In her joy, excitement, and bewilderment she will ask, "Who hath begotten me these, seeing I have lost my children, and am desolate, a captive, and removing to and fro? and who hath brought up these? Behold, I was left alone; these, where had they been?" (Isa. 49:21).

An important revelation follows: "Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people: and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders. And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing mothers" (Isa. 49:22-23). This is one of several prophecies that show the nations no longer oppressing the Lord's people but serving them. The Book of Mormon provides important interpretations. Nephi, who recognized that Isaiah's prophecies are fulfilled in "temporal and spiritual" ways (1 Ne. 22:3), foresaw the Gentiles contributing to the temporal blessing of his descendants and others of the house of Israel (1 Ne. 22:6). He also saw them contributing in an even more important spiritual way. According to Nephi, the fulfillment of this prophecy will be "the making known of the covenants of the Father," "in bringing about his covenants and his gospel unto those who are of the house of Israel." The bringing of the gospel of Jesus Christ to the house of Israel is the great blessing from the Gentiles and the great fulfillment of this prophecy. It began with the restoration of the gospel and continues as missionaries from Gentile nations take the gospel to Lehi's descendants and others of the house of Israel. Being "brought out of obscurity and out of darkness," the covenant people are thus learning "that the Lord is their Savior and their Redeemer, the Mighty One of Israel" (1 Ne. 22:9, 11-12). The Lord revealed to Jacob a yet-future temporal fulfillment of Isaiah 49:23. When the Jews believe in him, that he is Christ, then he will fulfill the covenant to their fathers that they will be restored "unto the lands of their inheritance" and will be "gathered in from their long dispersion. . . . And the nations of the Gentiles shall be great in the eyes of me, saith God, in carrying them forth to the lands of their inheritance. Yea, the kings of the Gentiles shall be nursing fathers unto them, and their queens shall become nursing mothers" (2 Ne. 10:7-9). [^26]

Isaiah 50 continues the theme of God's unceasing desire to save his people. He asked, "Is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot redeem? or have I no power to deliver?" (Isa. 50:2). Sadly, some will reject his invitation to salvation and will prefer to walk in the light of their own fire. "This shall ye have of mine hand," the Lord promised them, "ye shall lie down in sorrow" (Isa. 50:11).

Isaiah 50:4-9 is a servant passage that is often regarded as messianic, i.e., foretelling the mission of Christ. In it the servant submits himself to all things, including the derision and physical abuse of others; "I hid not my face from shame and spitting" (Isa. 50:6). Yet knowing that he was justified by God, he set his "face like a flint," firm in the confidence of his vindication (Isa. 50:7-8).

It seems likely that Isaiah himself is the servant in this passage. Although righteous King Hezekiah (715-687 B.C.) ruled in Isaiah's day, so also did his wicked father Ahaz (735-715 B.C.) and perhaps also his equally wicked son Manasseh (687-642 B.C.). [^27] It is not unlikely that Isaiah's career included persecution and abuse from evil men, and perhaps this passage reflects such things. At the same time, the servant's experience clearly parallels that of the mortal Christ. Even if it is indeed Isaiah who is called the servant here, he, like others of the Lord's ministers, typified the life of his Master and reflected his nature.

Notes

Kent P. Jackson is professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

A voice is calling:

"Clear in the desert

a way for the Lord;

Straighten in the wilderness

a highway for our God."

---
Notas:
[^1] Who hath believed our report? John 12:37-38 quoted and to whom is the arm of the Lord Rom. 10:16 quoted revealed A primary meaning of the Hebrew root ys' is "deliver" or "be victorious" in battle, which is consistent with the metaphor common in Isaiah of God as the Divine Warrior.
[^2] For he shall grow up before him Rev. 22:16 I am the root and the as a tender plant, and as a root off-spring of David out of a dry ground D&C 93:13 And he received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness See also Isa. 11:1; Jer. 23:5; Ezek. 17:6, 22; Zech. 3:8 For a complete discussion of this passage in Revelation, see Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991), pp. 118-27.
[^3] He is despised and rejected of Matt. 13:57 A prophet is not without men honour, save in his own country Luke 4:24 No prophet is accepted in his own country And we hid as it were our faces John 1:5 And the light shineth in from him darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not John 1:11 He came unto his own, and his own received him not Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), p. 182.
[^4] He hath borne our griefs, and Mosiah 15:5 Suffereth himself to be carried our sorrows mocked, and scourged, and cast out, and disowned by his people Matt. 8:16-17 quoted Mark 9:12 quoted For further discussion of the servant theme, see Kent P. Jackson, "The Lord's Servant in Isaiah," in Chap. 14 of this volume.
[^5] With his stripes we are healed 2 Ne. 25:13 They will crucify him; and after he is laid in a sepulchre for the space of three days he shall rise from the dead, with healing in his wings Rom. 4:25 quoted 1 Pet. 2:24 quoted See Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1982), pp. 439-41.
[^6] All we like sheep have gone 1 Pet. 2:25 quoted astray We have turned every one to his Jer. 17:5 Cursed be the man that own way trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm D&C 1:16 Every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own god It has long been assumed that ritual prostitution was a common practice of Canaanite religion. The allusions to such practices, however, are nearly all found in the Old Testament rather than in Canaanite texts and in contexts of idolatry as "metaphorical adultery." Therefore many scholars question whether such allusions are to be taken literally as cultic prostitution or simply as metaphors for being unfaithful to the Lord through idolatry.
[^9] And he made his grave with the Matt. 27:38 Then were there two wicked, and with the rich in his thieves crucified with him, one on death the right hand, and another on the left Matt. 27:57-60 There came a rich man of Arimathaea, named Joseph, . . .and begged the body of Jesus . . . and laid it in his own new tomb
[^11] Latter-day Saint readers will recognize the promises in Isa. 41:10 as underlying verse 3 of the hymn "How Firm a Foundation."
[^12] Therefore will I divide him a John 14:2 In my Father's house are portion with the great, and many mansions . . . I go to prepare he shall divide the spoil a place for you with the strong D&C 76:20 And we beheld the glory of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and received of his fulness D&C 84:37-38 And he that receiveth me receiveth my Father; And he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him And he was numbered with the Luke 22:37 quoted transgressors He bare the sin of many, and Mosiah 15:9 Standing betwixt them and made intercession for the justice; having broken the bands of transgressors death, taken upon himself their iniquity and their transgressions, having redeemed them, and satisfied the demands of justice Mark 10:45 And to give his life a ransom for many
[^14] A good summary of the "Servant" issue is found in W. S. LaSor, D. A. Hubbard, F. W. Bush, Old Testament Survey (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1982), pp. 392-95.
[^15] KJV, "judgment," in Isa. 42:1, 4; see n. 1, above.
[^16] According to Oliver Cowdery, Isaiah 43:6 was quoted by Moroni to Joseph Smith when he appeared to him on the night of 21-22 September 1823; Messenger and Advocate, Apr. 1835, p. 111. Other Isaiah passages quoted by Moroni on that occasion, according to Oliver Cowdery, are Isaiah 1:7, 23-24, 25-26; 2:1-4; 4:5-6; 11:15-16; 29:11, 13, 14. Of these, the Prophet himself mentioned only Isaiah 11 (presumably the entire chapter; JS-H 1:40). See Jackson, pp. 359-61.
[^17] Meaning "belonging to Jehovah"—used to designate ownership.
[^18] The NIV (New International Version) is one of the very best English-language Bible translations, in my opinion. Written in beautiful contemporary English, it has the sense of reverence and devotion that plays such an important role in the King James Translation.
[^19] See the discussion in Chap. 11 of this volume.
[^21] The KJV is difficult in Isa. 49:5, as is the Hebrew manuscript on which it is based: "to bring Jacob again to him, Though Israel be not gathered." A seemingly better-preserved Hebrew original in the Qumran Isaiah Scroll (1Qisaa) provides a more likely translation: "to bring Jacob back to him and gather Israel to himself."
[^22] The KJV phrase "a light thing" (Isa. 49:6) means "a small thing" or "an insignificant thing." The word light also appears later in the same verse, but there it is translated from a different word and means something entirely different.
[^23] This is the Old Testament definition of Gentiles. The Book of Mormon definition is usually different. There the term seems to be defined culturally, not genealogically: those who are not Lamanites or Jews are Gentiles, regardless of their lineage.
[^24] President Spencer W. Kimball taught: "The gathering of Israel consists of joining the true church and their coming to a knowledge of the true God. . . . Any person, therefore, who has accepted the restored gospel, and who now seeks to worship the Lord in his own tongue and with the Saints in the nation where he lives, has complied with the law of the gathering of Israel and is heir to all of the blessings promised the Saints in these last days." The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), p. 439.
[^25] For more specific suggestions, see Monte S. Nyman, "Great Are the Words of Isaiah" (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), pp. 175-78; Victor L. Ludlow, Isaiah: Prophet, Seer, and Poet (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1982), pp. 408-10; Kent P. Jackson, "Revelations Concerning Isaiah," in Studies in Scripture, Volume One: The Doctrine and Covenants, ed. Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson (Salt Lake City: Randall Book, 1984), pp. 326-30.
[^26] My discussion here is necessarily very brief. A more detailed analysis can be found in Nyman, pp. 182-84.
[^27] According to Jewish tradition, Isaiah was executed by being cut in half with a saw during the reign of Manasseh. But the superscription to the book (Isa. 1:1) does not mention Manasseh as ruling during the days of Isaiah.
