Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

16

THE FALL OF THE KINGDOM OF JUDAH (2 KINGS 21-25; 2 CHRONICLES 33-36)

GARY LEE WALKER

Few examples in recorded history equal the dramatic and sudden reversal of national fortune that befell the kingdom of Judah during the last century before the fall of Jerusalem. During this one-hundred-year period recorded in 2 Kings 21 through 25 and in 2 Chronicles 33 through 36, seven kings reigned in Judah, only one of whom, Josiah, was righteous and found favor in the eyes of the Lord. From 697 to 597 B.C. [^1], Judah plummeted toward the abyss of destruction, as foretold by the prophets of God.

For the twenty—nine years preceding the final century before Jerusalem's fall, however, the righteous Hezekiah reigned as king of Judah. Encouraged by the prophet Isaiah, he desired to achieve two goals: to gain independence from Assyria, and to purify his kingdom's religion and abolish the worship of foreign deities. He achieved the latter goal, for he suppressed idolatry and reestablished pure temple service. Although he never achieved independence from Assyria, Hezekiah generally listened to the counsel of the Lord given through Isaiah and saw his nation delivered from its enemy through divine intervention (2 Kgs. 19:35).

Manasseh (2 Kgs. 21; 2 Chron. 33)

Sometimes faithful and worthy parents have children who choose unrighteousness. Such was the case with Hezekiah, whose son Manasseh (687-642 B.C.) can certainly be considered among the most wicked of all the kings of Judah. The Bible confirms that in an extremely long reign he had many years in which to accomplish his restitution of idolatry in Judah. He sat on the throne for forty-five years, among the longest reigns of any of the sons of David. The Lord's displeasure with him is vividly recalled at the time of the fall of Jerusalem, when the writer of Kings states: "Surely at the commandment of the Lord came this upon Judah, to remove them out of his sight, for the sins of Manasseh, according to all that he did; And also for the innocent blood that he shed: for he filled Jerusalem with innocent blood; which the Lord would not pardon" (2 Kgs. 24:3-4).

Manasseh collaborated with Assyria and succeeded in becoming a faithful vassal of that powerful nation. [^2] He may have had little choice in submitting, for the Assyrian empire was at the apex of its power and its authority reached far and wide (see Map 10, LDS Bible). Totally reversing the policies and accomplishments of Hezekiah, his father and predecessor, Manasseh successfully introduced every form of idolatry and pagan worship back into the religion of his kingdom. This action earned for him the scathing rebuke and denunciation: "And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, after the abominations of the heathen, whom the Lord cast out before the children of Israel" (2 Kgs. 21:2; see also 2 Chron. 33:2, 9).

Manasseh rebuilt the high places which his father had destroyed (2 Kgs. 21:3). These were hilltop areas where images and altars to Baal and other foreign gods were erected. In addition, the account states that an Asherah (called a "grove" in the KJV) was set up. An Asherah was a tree or pole, symbolizing the female side of nature worship—the Canaanite goddess Asherah. In 2 Kings 21:3, the writer states that "all the host of heaven" were worshipped, indicating that the king reintroduced the polytheistic deities of the Near East into Judah's religious practices. Astrological cults and magic were also introduced, as noted in 2 Kings 21:6, for Manasseh "observed times, and used enchantments, and dealt with familiar spirits and wizards."

To complete his reintroduction of wickedness and idolatry into Judah, Manasseh desecrated the temple by building altars in it for the worshipping of gods other than Jehovah (2 Kgs. 21:4-5). Flagrantly defying the wrath of God, he placed the image of Asherah within the walls of the temple proper (2 Kgs. 21:7). The capstone of Manasseh's reign of idolatry and sin was the introduction of the practice of child sacrifice, for we are told that "he made his son pass through the fire" (2 Kgs. 21:6; 2 Chron. 33:6). [^3]

It was common for vassals to submit to the worship and religious practices of their overlords. But a careful reading of the accounts of Manasseh makes it clear that he went much further than was necessary in appeasing his Assyrian masters. The author of 2 Kings surely recognized his evil intent when he summarized Manasseh's accomplishments: "And Manasseh seduced them to do more evil than did the nations whom the Lord destroyed before the children of Israel. . . . Moreover Manasseh shed innocent blood very much, till he had filled Jerusalem from one end to another; beside his sin wherewith he made Judah to sin, in doing that which was evil in the sight of the Lord" (2 Kgs. 21:9, 16). It should be noted that 2 Chronicles 33:12-20 tells of a brief period in Manasseh's reign that would indicate a change of heart. According to that narrative (which is absent from 2 Kings), he was taken in chains to Babylon (2 Chron. 33:11-13), where in his afflictions he "humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers" (2 Chron. 33:12). In attempting to at least show some outward sign of submitting to the Lord's will, Manasseh undertook some purifying restorations. The records indicate that his efforts, if indeed even sincere, went unnoticed and unheeded by his people, for they were now steeped in idolatry. Manasseh had succeeded in influencing Judah to become a wicked nation.

Upon the death of Manasseh, his twenty-two-year-old son Amon ascended the throne of Judah (2 Kgs. 21:18-26; 2 Chron. 33:20-25). The brief two-year reign (642-640 B.C.) saw a continuation of his father's policies: "And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, as his father Manasseh did. And he walked in, and served the idols that his father served, and worshipped them: And he forsook the Lord God of his fathers, and walked not in the way of the Lord" (2 Kgs. 21:20-22). Political assassination by "servants" ended Amon's reign, possibly the result of anti-Assyrian feelings among political factions in the kingdom. [^4] In turn, "the people of the land" hunted down and assassinated the murderous conspirators and placed Amon's son Josiah on the throne (2 Kgs. 21:24).

The Political Situation in the Near East

The final drama in Judah was being played against a backdrop of political intrigue and decay in the Near East. Although at the height of her power, Assyria was overextended and maintained her status only by sheer terror and force. Enemies in the form of Babylonia, Egypt, Persia, various others pressing upon her northern frontier, and Arab tribes of the Syrian desert, were threatening to overcome the stranglehold of the Assyrian empire on the nations. Under the leadership of Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria (668-627 B.C.), enemies to the empire remained subjected as vassals. Upon his death, however, internal strife overtook his government, thus weakening the hold Assyria had maintained on her neighbors. In less than twenty years, Assyria was overthrown by some of her former vassals. The Babylonians, also known in the scriptures as the Chaldeans, became the dominant force in the Near East, crushing all who stood in their way. By 609 B.C., Assyria was no more.

Josiah (2 Kgs. 22:1-23:30; 2 Chron. 34-35)

As the grip of Assyria weakened, Judah once again found herself a free country. Josiah's thirty-one-year reign (640-609 B.C.) began when he was but eight years of age. Our ancient historian tells us that "he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and walked in all the way of David his father, and turned not aside to the right hand or to the left" (2 Kgs. 22:2). We can assume that righteous advisers administered the affairs of state during the childhood of the king. A passage in 2 Chronicles, however, indicates the nature of the young monarch: "For in the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of David his father: and in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, and the groves, and the carved images, and the molten images" (2 Chron. 34:3).

Josiah's reforms should be viewed in light of the rapid decline of the Assyrian empire. As the conquering empire released her grip on Judah and her other vassal nations, the decision to rid the country of the idolatrous religion of the Assyrians and other foreign cults could be made and executed.

The religious reforms of this young and righteous king were among the most consistent and thorough in his country's history. The writer of Chronicles tells us that he removed all of the pagan idols, Asherah pillars, and altars from throughout the land of Judah (2 Chron. 34:3-7). His desire to remove any corrupt religious object from Judah was so profound that he made dust from the idolatrous images and had it sprinkled on the graves of those who had sacrificed before them (2 Chron. 34:4). Further, he exhumed the bones of the pagan priests and had them burned on their own altars (2 Chron. 34:5).

According to the account in 2 Kings, Josiah's purge of idolatrous religious practices continued through the eighteenth year of his reign, when he was twenty-six years old. At that time, he turned his attention to the sacred temple in Jerusalem, which had fallen into disrepair through misuse and pagan worship. There are discrepancies in the chronology of events between 2 Kings and 2 Chronicles at this point, but it is safe to conclude that Josiah's purges were an ongoing enterprise that preceded and continued on after the discovery of the "book of the law" (2 Kgs. 22:8; 2 Chron. 34:14-15). This is supported by the account in 2 Chronicles, for Josiah's reforms are pictured as a series of steps.

The discovery of the "book of the law" can be considered the most important event of Josiah's reign. Apparently uncovered by the high priest Hilkiah, the book was brought before the king. Upon hearing the words of the book, Josiah, now profoundly moved and disturbed by its content, "rent his clothes" (2 Kgs. 22:11). The book that was found within the walls of the temple is generally considered to be some form of the book of Deuteronomy. [^5] Scholars have pointed to some of Josiah's reforms as reflecting things that are found only in Deuteronomy, namely the centralization of the religion in Jerusalem and the integration of religious leaders outside of Jerusalem with the temple officiators (see Deut. 12:13-14, 17-18; 18:6-8).

Josiah instructed Hilkiah and others to seek the word of the Lord concerning the book through a prophetess named Huldah (2 Kgs. 22:12-14). He recognized that if the book was indeed a sacred volume, his people were already under great condemnation for not obeying the laws of God. Huldah's prophecy testified to the sacred nature of the book and also confirmed that the people of Judah were indeed under condemnation for their idolatrous practices. Through Huldah, the Lord offered no consolation or optimistic future for his chosen people: "Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, and upon the inhabitants thereof, even all the words of the book which the king of Judah hath read: Because they have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, that they might provoke me to anger with all the works of their hands: therefore my wrath shall be kindled against this place, and shall not be quenched" (2 Kgs. 22:16-17). Elsewhere in 2 Kings, the writer recorded that the sins of Manasseh had brought destruction upon the people of Judah (2 Kgs. 23:26; 24:3-4).

But the Lord, through Huldah, made the following promise to the humble and tender-hearted Josiah: "I will gather thee unto thy fathers, and thou shalt be gathered into thy grave in peace; and thine eyes shall not see all the evil which I will bring upon this place" (2 Kgs. 22:20).

Concerned for the welfare of his erring people, Josiah gathered them to the temple area and read the words of the book so that all could hear. After the reading, Josiah and his people covenanted "before the Lord, to walk after the Lord, and to keep his commandments and his testimonies and his statutes with all their heart and all their soul to perform the words of this covenant that were written in this book. And all the people stood to the covenant" (2 Kgs. 23:3; 2 Chron. 34:31). The purging of idolatrous images and practices then took on new meaning and continued with consistency and force. Now the temple was purified by the removal of Canaanite altars and the Asherah pillar, which had been placed there by Manasseh, and by the destruction of the cultic prostitution centers adjacent to the temple (2 Kgs. 23:3-8). Topheth, the center for child sacrifice, was desecrated so "that no man might make his son or his daughter to pass through the fire to Molech" (2 Kgs. 23:10).

Although the chronology again appears to be somewhat distorted, the records indicate that a great Passover feast was held during the eighteenth year of Josiah's reign (2 Kgs. 23:23). It was to be kept "as it is written in the book [the book of the law] of this covenant" (2 Kgs. 23:21), which would indicate that the feast was part of Josiah's intense desire for the reinstitution of God's laws and ordinances in Judah. In addition, as the Passover celebrated the deliverance of the children of Israel from the Egyptians, Josiah's great feast could well have reminded the people of their developing freedom from Assyrian oppression. The authors of both Kings and Chronicles note specifically that the great feast was the most elaborate and magnificent in the history of all of Israel (2 Kgs. 23:22; 2 Chron. 35:18). In 2 Chronicles 35:1-19, the great detail and elaborate preparations that went into the execution of this Passover are outlined.

The last years of Josiah's reign are not recorded in scripture. With the Assyrian grip on the Near East ending, we can assume Josiah's kingdom was somewhat secure. He apparently retook some of the northern sections once occupied by the kingdom of Israel, as well as other areas adjacent to Judah. Further, because Josiah had reinstituted the covenant law, it can be assumed that overall public morality and government were vastly improved.

The last recorded account of Josiah deals with his battle and subsequent death at the hands of the Egyptians under the leadership of Necho II (610-594 B.C.; 2 Kgs. 23:29-30; 2 Chron. 35:20-24). The years was 609 B.C., and international affairs were confused and tenuous. For centuries Egypt had opposed Assyrian control of the Mediterranean seaboard. For whatever reason, Necho now decided to support severely wounded Assyria and her fight against the coalition of Babylonians and Medes. Perhaps a weakened Assyria appeared better in the international scheme of politics than a strong Babylonia, strengthened even more by her allies. The importance of this event lies in its relationship to the death of Josiah. The reason for Josiah and his army rushing out to stop the Egyptian army is unclear. Perhaps he saw an Egypto-Assyrian victory as a threat to his kingdom's security and independence. Regardless, Josiah and his troops marched to Megiddo and engaged Necho's army in battle. Disguised as a soldier, Josiah went into the thick of battle and was fatally wounded by Egyptian archers (2 Chron. 35:22-23). The dying king was placed in a chariot and taken back to Jerusalem.

The prophecy of Huldah had come to pass. Josiah was taken away before he could witness the final scenes of destruction in Jerusalem. When the Lord, through his prophetess, uttered the words, "And thou shalt be gathered into thy grave in peace" (2 Kgs. 22:20), the people could not have expected their righteous king to be killed in a bloody battle. Few probably discerned that the peace the Lord had spoken of was the peace revealed to Alma: "And then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness, which is called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow" (Alma 40:12).

The righteousness of Josiah is unquestioned, for we are told that the great prophet Jeremiah "lamented for Josiah" (2 Chron. 35:25). A young Jeremiah began his ministry during Josiah's reign and perhaps had an influence on the king and his reformation. His respect for Josiah's character and work can be noted in Jeremiah 22:15-16. Zephaniah also prophesied during the administration of this righteous king, probably prior to or in the early days of the reform period. [^6] Other prophets—Nahum, Habakkuk, Obadiah, and Lehi—were perhaps influenced during their youth by Josiah's faithful rule.

Despite the great reformation executed by Josiah, the judgments of the Lord were not turned away from an erring Judah. His reforms seem to have changed his kingdom on the surface, but the hearts of many of his people still reflected the works of Manasseh. Moreover, Josiah was Judah's last righteous king. Those who followed after him led their kingdom to destruction: "The Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great wrath, wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the provocations that Manasseh had provoked him withal. And the Lord said, I will remove Judah also out of my sight, as I have removed Israel, and will cast off this city Jerusalem which I have chosen, and the house of which I said, My name shall be there" (2 Kgs. 23:26-27).

The First Siege of Jerusalem (2 Kgs. 23-30-24:16; 2 Chron. 36:1-10)

In a little more than twenty years Jerusalem would fall. With Necho's victory over Josiah, Judah again became a tributary, this time to Egypt. Josiah's twenty-three-year-old son, Jehoahaz, was anointed king. Following in the evil footsteps of his great-grandfather, Manasseh, Jehoahaz ruled only three months (609 B.C.) before being removed by Necho and deported to Egypt (2 Kgs. 23:31-33). A puppet ruler named Eliakim, another son of Josiah, was then installed. Necho changed his name to Jehoiakim (609-598 B.C.) and forced him to exact massive tributes from the people of Judah (2 Kgs. 23:33, 35). Jehoiakim also followed in the footsteps of Manasseh, squandering funds and subjecting the people to forced labor (Jer. 22:13-19).

Egypt's dominance of Judah ended in 605 B.C., when Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon defeated Necho and his army at Carchemish, thus becoming the master of the Near East. Jehoiakim was now forced to submit to the Babylonian monarch and "became his servant three years: then he turned and rebelled against him" (2 Kgs. 24:1). The rebellion was a fatal error for Jehoiakim and Judah, even though retaliation was not immediate. Nebuchadnezzar had returned home to reorganize his armies after a battle with Egypt in 601 B.C. in which both sides sustained heavy losses. The Babylonian king did not march with his armies until December, 598 B.C., the same month in which Jehoiakim's eleven-year reign, declared "evil in the sight of the Lord" (2 Kgs. 23:37), ended with his death. [^7] Josiah's reforms had long since collapsed, and idolatrous worship returned along with the deterioration of public morality. Jeremiah, whose ministry overlapped with the reigns of Judah's last five kings, bore testimony of his country's degeneration (see Jer. 5:26-29; 7:1-18; 11:9-14).

Jehoiakim's eighteen-year-old son, Jehoiachin, also denounced as an evil ruler, was placed on the throne in 598 B.C. (2 Kgs. 24:9). The first Babylonian siege of Jerusalem occurred three months later, with the city surrendering to Nebuchadnezzar on 16 March 597 B.C. [^8] At this time, Jehoiachin, his mother, and the entire royal household were taken hostage and transported to Babylon (2 Kgs. 24:12). Along with the royal family, thousands of Judah's leaders, craftsmen, soldiers, and people of influence were carried away (2 Kgs. 24:14-16). This was the beginning of what is called "the Exile," the period in which the Jews were exiled from their homeland to Babylonia. It was the deportation which took Ezekiel, and probably also Daniel, to later begin prophetic ministries among the exiled Jews. The account states that "none remained, save the poorest sort of the people of the land" (2 Kgs. 24:14). We learn later, however, that a few people of status and leadership must have remained, for the weak character of Jehoiachin's successor would be no match for the stronger wills of some of the survivors. Nonetheless, Nebuchadnezzar's actions show that he did not want to leave anyone who might organize or carry out a rebellion.

The Final Days of Jerusalem (2 Kgs. 24:17-25:30; 2 Chron. 36:11-23)

The Babylonian ruler appointed Mattaniah, Josiah's son and Jehoiachin's uncle, to be king of Judah in 597 B.C. and changed his name to Zedekiah (2 Kgs. 24:17). Though Zedekiah was declared an evil king (2 Kgs. 24:19), there is evidence in the book of Jeremiah that he may have had some good intentions (Jer. 37:17-21; 38:7-28). He was a weak monarch, however, fearful of the people and unable to stand up to the nobles and his underlings (Jer. 38:5, 19). It was during the first year of his reign that Lehi and his family left Jerusalem (see 1 Ne. 1:4).

The ten years of Zedekiah's reign (597-587 B.C.), before the final siege and destruction of Jerusalem, were filled with strife, sedition, and continual agitation. Unrest was probably inflamed by the exhortations of self-appointed prophets who gave false hope to the leaders and people of Judah (Jer. 28:1-17; 29:8-9). Some of these were later executed by Nebuchadnezzar (Jer. 29:21-23). Jeremiah's denunciation of these uninspired prophets apparently fell on deaf ears (Jer. 27; 28; 29). So also did his warnings to Zedekiah to submit to the yoke of bondage under Nebuchadnezzar, for the unrighteous king openly rebelled (2 Chron. 36:12-13). Along with his condemnation of the false prophets, Jeremiah also wrote a letter to the exiled people, counseling them to prepare for a seventy-year stay in captivity (Jer. 29).

In January of 588 B.C., Jerusalem was placed under a blockade. [^9] Surrounding areas were taken over one by one until the city was encircled by the armies of Nebuchadnezzar (Jer. 34:7). The people of Jerusalem held out until July of 587 B.C., when the conquering armies prevailed "and the city was broken up" (2 Kgs. 25:1-2, 4). By this time the people of Jerusalem were in a desperate state because of famine (2 Kgs. 25:3). Zedekiah and his army fled under the cover of darkness toward the plain of Jordan but were overtaken by the army of the Chaldeans and brought before Nebuchadnezzar (2 Kgs. 25:4-6).

The sacking, spoiling, looting, burning, and physical cruelty to political prisoners by ancient Near Eastern conquerors is aptly illustrated in 2 Kings 25:7-21, as well as in the book of Jeremiah and other scriptures touching upon the final scenes in Jerusalem. No mercy was shown to the rebellious Zedekiah: he first was forced to witness the execution of his sons, [^10] then his eyes were put out, and finally he was bound in chains and transported to Babylon, where he remained until his death (2 Kgs. 25:7). A month later, Nebuzar-adan, commander of Nebuchadnezzar's guard, arrived in Jerusalem, torched the city, and leveled its walls (2 Kgs. 25:8-10), putting to an end not only Jerusalem but also the kingdom of Judah.

Much of the remaining population was deported to Babylon (2 Kgs. 25:11-12, 18-21). Nebuzar-adan only "left of the poor of the land to be vinedressers and husbandmen" (2 Kgs. 25:12). The final blow to the defeated people, a witness that God had forsaken them in their wickedness, was the sacking and destruction of the temple, built by Solomon three and one-half centuries earlier (2 Kgs. 25:13-17; Jer. 52). The once sacred and glorious temple and city of Jerusalem were reduced to rubble.

Gedaliah, a nobleman, [^11] was appointed governor over the remaining poor peasants. Even a puppet ruler was not safe in those turbulent times, for he was soon assassinated by Ishmael, a distant member of the royal family, with the assistance of other conspirators (2 Kgs. 25:25-26; Jer. 40:7-41:15). The murderers subsequently fled to Egypt, forcing the prophet Jeremiah to go with them (Jer. 41:16-43:7).

Second Kings concludes by telling of an event some thirty-seven years later. Nebuchadnezzar's son, Amel-marduk (562-560 B.C.), the Evil-merodach of the King James Version, ascended the throne of Babylon. For reasons that are unclear, he released the former king of Judah, Jehoiachin, from his long captivity in prison. He was subsequently treated very kindly, recognized as a legitimate ruler, though still a captive, and given a pension, "a daily rate for every day, all the days of his life" (2 Kgs. 25:30; see 25:27-30). It was through him that the royal lineage was preserved until the time of Jesus (Matt. 1:11-16).

The Future: "One of a City, and Two of a Family"

The people and leaders of Judah had been counseled constantly and warned for hundreds of years by authorized servants of the Lord to seek after righteousness in order to avoid the wrath of a God who would not be mocked or defied. Among the known Old Testament prophets shortly before Jerusalem's fall were Zephaniah, Huldah, Nahum, Habakkuk, and, of course, Jeremiah, whose difficult and lonely life was a testimony and a witness to the tragic events that culminated in the fall of Jerusalem and the exile of the people of Judah.

The story of a contemporary of Jeremiah is found in the Book of Mormon. Lehi, a native of Jerusalem, began his prophetic work when Zedekiah ascended the throne of Judah (1 Ne. 1:4). Blessed with a vision of things to come, Lehi faithfully preached repentance to the wicked people, but like his contemporaries, he met with violent resistance (1 Ne. 1:19-20). Favored of the Lord, he and his family were commanded to leave Jerusalem prior to its fall. Under inspiration they would eventually travel to the American continent, where great nations would descend from them. Eventually, their descendants would be blessed with a personal visitation from the Savior (3 Ne. 11-28).

The people of Judah had felt the full wrath of God. If any single lesson can be learned from the fall of Jerusalem, it is that the Lord will not tolerate sin in any form and that repentance must be complete and sincere, not merely an exercise in lip service. Even with the tragedy of Jerusalem, however, the prophets foretold a great day when Israel and Judah would be gathered and redeemed. For the righteous of those times, as well as for those of the latter days, there is great comfort in the word of the Lord through his prophet, Jeremiah: "I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion: And I will give you pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding" (Jer. 3:14-15).

Notes

Gary Lee Walker teaches history at Brigham Young University and at Utah Valley State College.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Maria Eszenyei Szeles, Wrath and Mercy: Habakkuk and Zephaniah (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1987), p. 62.
[^2] Evening and Morning Star, Feb. 1834, pp. 132-33; Mar. 1834, pp. 140-42; Apr. 1834, pp. 148-49.
[^3] Arvid S. Kapelrud, The Message of the Prophet Zephaniah (Oslo, Norway: Universitetsvorlaget, 1975), p. 46.
[^4] Kapelrud, p. 42.
[^5] John M. P. Smith, William H. Ward, and Julius A. Bewer, A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on Micah, Zephaniah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Obadiah, and Joel, The International Critical Commentary (New York: Scribner's, 1911), p. 176.
[^6] See E. A. Leslie, "Zephaniah," in The Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, 5 vols., ed. G. A. Buttrick, et al. (Nashville: Abingdon, 1962), 4:952.
[^7] Paul R. House, Zephaniah: A Prophetic Drama (Sheffield: Almond, 1988), p. 75.
[^8] Ralph L. Smith, Micah—Malachi, Word Biblical Commentary, vol. 32 (Waco, Texas: Word Books, 1984), p. 132.
[^9] Smith, p. 132.
[^10] Smith, p. 136.
[^11] Bruce R. McConkie, The Millennial Messiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1982), p. 497.
