Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

17

THE BOOK OF ZEPHANIAH

RULON D. EAMES

His writings relegated to the back of the Old Testament, it seems strangely appropriate that Zephaniah's name should be interpreted "The Lord has hidden." [^1] Yet the first commentary on any book of the Bible written by an LDS Church leader was Oliver Cowdery's treatise on the book of Zephaniah in 1834. [^2] The reason behind Elder Cowdery's fascination with this small book is clear. From the early years of the Restoration, modern prophets have seen in the visions of Zephaniah a vivid picture of the last days.

Very little is known about Zephaniah the man. The only solid information about him is in the superscription that opens his book (Zeph. 1:1). He is described as "the son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hizkiah," or, as this last name is more commonly rendered in English, Hezekiah (Zeph. 1:1). On the basis of this genealogy, it has been proposed that Zephaniah was a descendant of King Hezekiah of Judah (715-687 B.C.), a suggestion that remains a matter of conjecture. Noting the lack of detail regarding Zephaniah's personal background, one scholar has observed: "His own person apparently played no role; the message was the totally dominating feature." [^3]

Beyond the names of Zephaniah's ancestors, the only biographical datum provided by the superscription is the statement that the word of the Lord came to Zephaniah "in the days of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah." The reign of Josiah is typically assigned to the years 640 to 609 B.C. Internal clues in the book of Zephaniah suggest that the prophet's ministry may have taken place during the first half of Josiah's reign. Arguing from that evidence, "it seems reasonable to conclude that the prophet Zephaniah preached in Jerusalem in the years between 635 and 625 B.C." [^4]

The Day of the Lord

The book of Zephaniah is a prophecy of divine judgment and redemption, expressed in powerful images. Acknowledging that Zephaniah may not rank with Isaiah or even Hosea in his skill as a poet, one scholar has explained: "He had an imperative message to deliver and proceeded in the most direct and forceful way to discharge his responsibility. What he lacked in grace and charm, he in some measure atoned for by the vigour and clarity of his speech. He realised the approaching terror so keenly that he was able to present it vividly and convincingly to his hearers. No prophet has made the picture of the day of Yahweh more real." [^5]

Careful analysis of Zephaniah reveals an underlying structure that highlights the mercy and redemptive power of Jehovah. This effect is achieved through a thematic progression from scenes of total annihilation at the beginning of the book, to scenes of triumphant salvation in the closing verses. As in the writings of other Old Testament prophets, the prophecies of doom precede those of salvation and restoration. The contrast between Jehovah's fierce justice and his ultimate and enduring mercy is further emphasized by the direct juxtaposition of a prophecy of global judgment and an oracle of redemption in the book's final chapter (Zeph. 3:8-20).

Zephaniah's major theme was the day of the Lord, a term used in the scriptures for the time when the Lord will recompense all according to what they deserve. [^6] For Zephaniah's unrepentant nation, the kingdom of Judah, the day of the Lord came when the Babylonians destroyed their cities and took their people into forced exile. These events took place within a few decades of Zephaniah's warnings. For the world as a whole there will be a similar day of reckoning, on a global scale, when wickedness will be cleansed from the earth at Christ's second coming. For the faithful it will be a great day of blessing and mercy. For the unrepentant it will be a dreadful day of judgment and sorrow. In Zephaniah's writings, the earlier day of the Lord's recompense is used as a type to foreshadow the latter-day judgment on all the earth. Although the day of the Lord will end in redemption, it must commence with judgment. The first chapter of Zephaniah presents a panorama of violent and unrelenting destruction that would be poured out upon the entire human and animal creation and particularly upon the treacherous inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem. The language employed by the prophet seems deliberately evocative of the wording of the Flood narrative (Zeph. 1:2-3; cf. Gen. 6:17; 7:21-23). The result is a reversal of the Creation; the earth returns to the primordial chaotic darkness that prevailed "in the beginning" (Zeph. 1:15; cf. Gen. 1:2; Jer. 4:23-28). [^7]

The opening chapter also contains the Lord's indictment against the kingdom of Judah. The catalog of trespasses includes idol and astral worship (Zeph. 1:4-5; cf. 2 Kgs. 21:1-7, 19-21), spiritual cynicism and indifference toward religious duties (Zeph. 1:6, 12), adoption of foreign fashions and superstitions (Zeph. 1:8-9), and the acquisition of wealth through "violence and deceit" (Zeph. 1:9). These odious practices provoked the Lord to declare a holy war against his own people. [^8] The graphic imagery of divine warfare against Judah gives way to a picture of universal desolation as the whole earth is "devoured by the fire of his jealousy" (Zeph. 1:10-18). Thus the very real and imminent destruction of Judah would prefigure the universal destruction in the last days.

The book's second chapter begins on a hopeful note as the prophet pleads with Judah to seek the Lord. Still, Zephaniah cannot ensure the safety of even the penitent. One scholar has pointedly observed: "The word 'perhaps' [Zeph. 2:3; "it may be," KJV] speaks volumes. The prophet would not presume on the prerogative of Yahweh to determine who would or would not be hidden. Zephaniah, like Amos (cf. Zeph. 3:15), knew that not even righteousness nor humility could guarantee a person's safety. That was all in the hand of Yahweh." [^9]

All the writing prophets of the eighth and seventh centuries, except Hosea, pronounced oracles against foreign nations. Thus, in the second chapter of Zephaniah the anger of Jehovah shifts from Judah to her traditional enemies at each of the points of the compass: Philistines to the west, Moab and Ammon on the east, Egypt on the south (the reference to Ethiopians seems to be a taunt based on Ethiopian domination of Egypt [^10]), and Assyria on the north (Zeph. 2:4-15). The same punishments that would bring destruction to Philistia, Moab, and Ammon would yield blessings of wealth and prosperity for Judah, for "the residue of my people shall spoil them, and the remnant of my people shall possess them" (Zeph. 2:5-10).

Jehovah's wrath is focused on Jerusalem once again in the final chapter (Zeph. 3:1-7). Those whom the prophet condemned were the leaders of Judahite society: the rulers (Zeph. 3:3), the false prophets, and the priests (Zeph. 3:4). It hardly seems coincidental that the prophet's denunciation of high-level wickedness and corruption in Jerusalem comes immediately after his attack on Nineveh, capital of the arrogant and tyrannical Assyrian empire (Zeph. 2:13-15). Jerusalem is no better than Nineveh. In fact, because Jerusalem was the repository of Jehovah's law, her crimes were far worse than those of pagan Nineveh. Of the once holy city of Jerusalem he said: "Woe to her that is filthy and polluted, to the oppressing city! She obeyed not the voice; she received not correction; she trusted not in the Lord; she drew not near to her God. . . . I said, surely thou wilt fear me, thou wilt receive instruction . . . but they rose early and corrupted all their doings" (Zeph. 3:1-2, 7). Consequently, the wicked in Judah would be consumed just as would the transgressors from every nation. Jehovah would assemble all of them for destruction, "for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy" (Zeph. 3:8).

With the next verse (Zeph. 3:9), the prophetic tone is dramatically transformed. The ensuing promises of Jehovah to the righteous are like rays of pure sunlight piercing the smoke of the global holocaust. The linguistic and spiritual confusion of Babel will be undone as all people worship Jehovah in a pure speech (Zeph. 3:9; cf. Gen. 11:6-9; Moses 6:6; Isa. 6:5-7). The Lord will reign in the midst of his people (Zeph. 3:15, 17), sorrow will turn to rejoicing (Zeph. 3:14, 18), and the shame of Israel's long dispersion will be swallowed up in anthems of praise—from "all people of earth" (Zeph. 3:19-20). As the third chapter closes, the transition from destruction to redemption is complete. The judgments of Jehovah must come upon the wicked in every nation; yet it is his exaltation of the righteous that will be the final and enduring reality.

Latter-day Judgments and Gathering

From the time of Joseph Smith, modern prophets have seen in the visions of Zephaniah a multilayered view of the future with great significance for Latter-day Saints. Citing Zephaniah's declaration that "the great day of the Lord is near" (Zeph. 1:14), Elder Bruce R. McConkie declared: "He is speaking of our day. We live in the last days, when the day of the Lord is near." [^11] Zephaniah described the day of the Lord as a "day of trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness" (Zeph. 1:15). Elder Neal A. Maxwell applied this prophecy to the wickedness and resultant misery of the latter days, observing that the "coming decades will be times of despair." [^12] Zephaniah saw the destruction of the kingdom of Judah in the larger context of the ultimate and climactic judgments that must precede the Second Coming. The fall of wicked cities and nations in Zephaniah's day portended the final collapse of Satan's kingdom at the end of the world. President Joseph Fielding Smith interpreted the visions of widespread devastation as a picture of the judgments that will precede the Savior's return. [^13] In harmony with this view, Elder McConkie identified Zephaniah 1:14-18 and 3:8 as warnings of latter-day judgments in the form of "premillennial wars," [^14] and President Spencer W. Kimball cited Zephaniah 1:17-18 to illustrate the severity of God's impending vengeance. [^15]

Another subject of great importance in the prophecy of Zephaniah is the gathering and restoration of disgraced and scattered Israel. While Zephaniah hinted that this gathering could commence prior to the great day of the Lord with its attendant devastation (Zeph. 2:1-3), he seemed to assign a major part of that gathering to the period after the Savior's return (Zeph. 3:15-20). The Lord's presence among his gathered Saints will be the cause of much happiness: "The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty; he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy; he will rest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing" (Zeph. 3:17).

Although Zephaniah does not rank among the best-known books of the Old Testament, its message is one of tremendous importance for latter-day Israel. In three short chapters, Zephaniah depicted not only the judgments that would come upon Judah and Jerusalem in the sixth century B.C. but also the latter-day redemption of Israel and the global turbulence that will herald Jehovah's return. Impressed by the clarity and the power of his vision of the future, modern seers have used the words of Zephaniah to support and amplify their own teachings concerning the coming day of the Lord. To all who long for that day, the book of Zephaniah is a priceless treasure.

Notes

Rulon D. Eames is an instructor at the LDS Institute of Religion in Salt Lake City, Utah.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] James B. Pritchard, ed., Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testament, 3d ed. with Supplement (Princeton: Princeton University, 1969), pp. 276, 288, and 291.
[^2] Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985), no. 80.
[^3] Arvid S. Kapelrud, The Message of the Prophet Zephaniah (Oslo, Norway: Universitetsvorlaget, 1975), p. 46.
[^4] Kapelrud, p. 42.
[^5] John M. P. Smith, William H. Ward, and Julius A. Bewer, A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on Micah, Zephaniah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Obadiah, and Joel, The International Critical Commentary (New York: Scribner's, 1911), p. 176.
[^6] See E. A. Leslie, "Zephaniah," in The Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, 5 vols., ed. G. A. Buttrick, et al. (Nashville: Abingdon, 1962), 4:952.
[^7] Paul R. House, Zephaniah: A Prophetic Drama (Sheffield: Almond, 1988), p. 75.
[^8] Ralph L. Smith, Micah—Malachi, Word Biblical Commentary, vol. 32 (Waco, Texas: Word Books, 1984), p. 132.
[^9] Smith, p. 132.
[^10] Smith, p. 136.
[^11] Bruce R. McConkie, The Millennial Messiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1982), p. 497.
[^12] Neal A. Maxwell, in Conference Report, Oct. 1982, p. 96.
[^13] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 4 vols., sel. Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 3:19, 47.
[^14] McConkie, pp. 497-98, 543.
[^15] Spencer W. Kimball, in Conference Report, Oct. 1975, p. 8.
