Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

19

THE BOOK OF HABAKKUK

VICTOR L. LUDLOW

Habakkuk was a Judahite prophet who lived during the time when Jeremiah, Lehi, Nahum, Zephaniah, and other prophets taught in Jerusalem (see 1 Ne. 1:4). Habakkuk questioned the Lord about the decadence of his people and the power which the wicked seemed to have over the righteous (Hab. 1:1-4). He was also concerned about the ominous Babylonian (also called Chaldean) threat which the people of Judah were experiencing, and he was even more worried about the promised destruction of his country by Babylon. Very little is known about his life and background, although scholars are united in dating his pronouncements around 600 B.C. [^1]

The three brief chapters of Habakkuk are easily outlined as follows: the first dialogue between Habakkuk and the Lord (Hab. 1:1-11), the second dialogue (Hab. 1:12-2:5), a taunt song against Babylon (Hab. 2:6-20), and a prayer-psalm (Hab. 3:1-19).

The First Dialogue between Habakkuk and the Lord (Hab. 1:1-11)

The book of Habakkuk in the King James Translation begins on a heavy note by describing the writings of Habakkuk as a "burden" which he saw (Hab. 1:1). The Hebrew word translated "burden," massa', is commonly rendered as "oracle." Usually the word refers to prophecies of doom. Thus the book of Habakkuk contains the ominous prophecy or revelation that the prophet saw and which was later recorded.

Reflecting on conditions around 605 B.C., the prophet began with some weighty concerns as he asked the Lord why He had not responded to his outcries against the wickedness surrounding him. The people of Judah had not internalized the religious reforms of King Josiah (640-609 B.C.). Instead, they were quickly reverting to the evil practices fostered by King Manasseh (687-642 B.C.), including idolatry, rampant immorality, human sacrifice, and social corruption (see 2 Kgs. 21:1-15; 23:26-27). Habakkuk had witnessed many acts of violence and injustice, and although he had petitioned the Lord concerning them, the wicked were overpowering the righteous, and evil seemed to be prevailing. He asked if the Lord were going to do anything about the deteriorating situation. [^2]

Starting in Habakkuk 1:5, the Lord answered Habakkuk's question, telling the prophet to expect the unusual, something unbelievable, as a response to his prayers for justice. The unbelievable is that the Lord would raise up the Chaldean horde from Babylon to deliver justice upon the wicked citizens of Judah. Instead of calming Habakkuk's fears, however, the Lord's message generated even more anxiety as he described the awesome power and speed of the Chaldean forces. They are "terrible and dreadful," as described in Habakkuk 1:7-10. This Babylonian judgment would be much more disastrous than ever expected. Habakkuk's Judahite audience may have wondered how any people could stand up to the Chaldean juggernaut. But the Lord revealed a fatal flaw in the Babylonian attitude in verse 11. As this conqueror marched swiftly on, he offended the Lord either by giving credit for his conquests to his strange, foreign, idol god (KJV) or by relying so much on his own power that his own might and strength became his god (NIV; RSV). [^3] The independent power and arrogance of the Babylonians is suggested in verse 7, as they "proceed of themselves," without any divine help or power. By verse 11 it is clear that they had taken too much credit for themselves and in their misplaced pride had become guilty. The implication is that the Lord, and not any nation, would bring about Babylon's downfall.

The Second Dialogue between Habakkuk and the Lord (Hab. 1:12-25)

Habakkuk protested that an everlasting, holy God would not allow the wicked Babylonians to gain power over God's own people, unrighteous as they might be. After all, Habakkuk complained, how could the wicked heathens prevail over those who are more righteous? Habakkuk asserted that even the wicked Judahites were better than the Chaldeans. He reminded the Lord, You are pure and they are evil, so why do they have power over the more righteous? (see Hab. 1:13).

There are some reasons why this condition may have existed. In absolute terms, the Babylonians were likely more wicked than the Israelites. Yet God also measures wickedness in relative terms, according to the level of light and truth that a people have. Thus, lesser sins by Israelites, who should have known better because of their rich prophetic and scriptural background, would bring greater condemnation than the gross wickedness of a people who lacked the revealed light. The real question was not as much an evaluation of the external moral behavior of a people as a measurement of how large the gap was between public behavior and private accountability. That is, God is able to judge the difference between one's actions and one's knowledge and understanding of right and wrong.

Another possible explanation is that God can choose whatever resource he wants as an instrument of judgment upon his wicked children, much as he allowed the more wicked Lamanites to chasten and punish the somewhat rebellious but more accountable Nephites at one point in Book of Mormon history (2 Ne. 5:19-25). Habakkuk 1 is very similar to Isaiah 10, in which the Assyrians, who are first called the instrument of the Lord's anger, are later spoken of in terms of chastisement and judgment (Isa. 10:5-20). Vengeance is the Lord's, and although the Babylonians would have temporary power over Judah, eventually the Babylonians would receive retribution for their own wickedness.

Habakkuk continued his questioning complaint as the picture of the marauding power resumed (Hab. 1:14-17). With hooks and nets the enemy would harvest his prey and rejoice over his conquests. Echoing the Lord's comments in verse 11, the prophet also mentioned their misplaced pride, telling how the Chaldeans sacrificed to their nets and offered incense to their dragnets, as though these things were the source of their power. Regardless, their power seemed unending, and Habakkuk asked how long they would continue to mercilessly slay the nations (Hab. 1:16-17).

Finally, in a mood of desperation and resignation similar to that of Elijah (1 Kgs. 19:1-14), Job (Job 31), and Mormon (Morm. 3:9-16), Habakkuk stepped aside, retreated to his watchtower, and awaited the Lord's response. Like Abraham (Gen. 18:32), Habakkuk had pushed the Lord as far as he dared and sensed that he might even have gone too far. So he now waited for the Lord's answer or reproval (Hab. 2:1).

The marvelous pronouncement Habakkuk received is of such importance that he was commanded to write it succinctly and plainly on tablets in large enough letters that even a runner could see and read it without stopping (Hab. 2:2). The Lord's response was that Habakkuk should be patient, because the Chaldeans would eventually meet their own doom. The righteous, in contrast, would be preserved by their "faith." [^4] The promise that "the just shall live by his faith" was probed by Paul in his New Testament epistles (Rom. 1:17; Gal. 3:11) and was amplified in Hebrews 10:36-38, in which the principle of national deliverance for a righteous people was applied to spiritual salvation for the faithful. This phrase of the just living by faith later became a rallying cry of the Protestant Reformation.

The Lord continued characterizing Babylon's arrogance, which was comparable to death, hell, and its legions (Hab. 2:5). He explained that Babylon's tyranny would lead to self-destruction, portrayed in a taunt song containing five "woe oracles." These five divine judgments could apply to all wicked people and societies.

A Taunt Song against Babylon (Hab. 2:6-20)

The taunt song comprises two parts, each of ten Hebrew lines (Hab. 2:6-14, 15-20). Both conclude with a significant, positive theological statement (Hab. 2:14, 20). Three "woes" are in the first part, and two are in the second. Together, the five oracles provide a picture of how the wicked would bring about their own demise.

First, Babylon's oppression and selfishness would breed selfishness and insurrection from her subjects (Hab. 2:6b—8; cf. Isa. 5:8-22; Esth. 5:9). Second, greed and loftiness would be no security, because the inner core and foundation of their society were corrupt (Hab. 2:9-11; cf. Isa. 14:13-15; Prov. 8:36). Third, cruelty begets cruelty, and the wicked would ultimately destroy themselves until only those recognizing the Lord's glory would remain on the earth (Hab. 2:12-14; cf. Micah 3:10-12; Isa. 11:9). Fourth, those who seek to degrade others would bring about their own degradation (Hab. 2:15-17; cf. Nahum 3:5; D&C 109:29). And finally, idols and false gods would be worthless, whereas the living God would rule the earth from his holy temple (Hab. 2:18-20; cf. Isa. 44:9-20). The song ends with the same counsel that is recorded in Habakkuk 2:3: Wait patiently and silently and you will see what the Lord is going to do (see Ps. 46:10; Zech. 2:13).

The Prayer-Psalm of Habakkuk (Hab. 3:1-19)

Perhaps relieved that he had not been chastised by the Lord and grateful that God would vindicate the righteous, Habakkuk composed a prayer-psalm of praise to God for his glory and might. It comes complete with musical instructions (Hab. 3:1, 19) and functions as a hymn.

Other ancient and modern prophets have also composed psalms or hymns. The Old Testament contains examples attributed to Moses (Deut. 32; Ps. 90), Isaiah (Isa. 42; 49; 50; 53), and Jeremiah (Lam. 1-5). The contemporary Latter-day Saint hymnbook contains inspirational words from a variety of modern General Authorities. Many of God's servants have used music or verse as a means of expression.

Habakkuk's psalm is a hymn of praise to God for his deliverance of his people in times of oppression. The prophet recounted the redemptive acts of the Exodus as an example of the Lord's power for future deliverance. In the context of his questions and dialogue with the Lord about the problem of suffering, this psalm expresses Habakkuk's trust in God during a time of anxiety. The psalm is easily divided into four segments:

The book of Habakkuk raises a universal question of humankind: Why do the wicked seem to prosper while the righteous suffer? Our response should include the realization of two things: first, the wicked sow seeds of self-destruction with their prideful behavior, and second, God's deliverance in past times brings faith in his future salvation. As Habakkuk delivered a magnificent expression of the victory of faith over the unrighteous aggression of evil, he presented this issue in a compact, poetic message that finds relevance in our modern society. [^5]

Notes

Victor L. Ludlow is professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Iron Age remains of the biblical city are found at Ras el-Kharrubeh, a mile southwest of modern Anata. See S. Cohen, "Anathoth," in The Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, 5 vols., ed. G. A. Buttrick, et al. (Nashville: Abingdon, 1962-76), 1:125.
[^2] Besides the three kings mentioned in the superscription — Josiah, Jehoiakim, and Zedekiah—two other kings ruled for only a few months each: Jehoahaz, who ruled for three months until he was exiled to Egypt in 609 B.C.; and Jehoiachin, who ruled for three months before being exiled to Babylon in 598.
[^3] For more on Jer. 1, see the discussion in Chap. 21 of this volume.
[^4] Contrast his father Josiah's reaction in a similar situation, recorded in 2 Kgs. 22:10-11. The ceremony consisted of passing through the parts of a calf cut in two (Jer. 34:18). The supposed implication of such symbolism is that of imprecation—that the fate of the calf would be visited upon any who did not fulfill the oath. A similar ritual associated with an oath is found in Gen. 15:9-17, in which the Lord confirmed to Abraham the promises of the covenant. For a discussion of the symbolism of such oath rituals, see M. H. Pope, "Oaths," in The Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, 3:575-77; and George E. Mendenhall, "Ancient Oriental and Biblical Law," and "Covenant Forms in Israelite Tradition," in The Biblical Archaeologist Reader 3, ed. Edward F. Campbell and David Noel Freedman (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1970), pp. 3-53.
[^5] This compares to about 17,000 words in Isaiah, 19,000 in Ezekiel and 20,500 in Genesis—the second longest single book in scripture. The only books in the Bible larger than Jeremiah are the combined books of 1 and 2 Samuel (about 24,000), 1 and 2 Kings (25,000), and 1 and 2 Chronicles (24,000). A convenient list of the lengths of the biblical books can be found in Abraham Even-Shoshan, A New Concordance of the Old Testament (Jerusalem: Kiryat Sepher, 1985), p. xxxviii.
