Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

21

I AM WITH THEE, TO DELIVER THEE (JEREMIAH 1-20)

DAVID ROLPH SEELY

When Jeremiah received his call, the Lord delivered to him his word, both symbolically when he touched his young mouth, and also literally when he spoke with Jeremiah and revealed to him his will. From then on Jeremiah could deliver with authority the phrase "Thus saith the Lord" with the attendant message.

Along with the word, the Lord gave Jeremiah two symbolic visions when he called him. [^1] In the first vision (Jer. 1:11-12) the Lord asked Jeremiah to look at the rod of an almond tree—in Hebrew, saqed—and delivered his message to Jeremiah through a pun: "I will hasten—soqed—my word to perform it" (Jer. 1:11-12). This symbol would remind Jeremiah that the words he would be asked to deliver would indeed come to pass. The second vision contained the essence of the Lord's warning to Judah. Jeremiah looked at a "seething pot" tipping from the north southward, [^2] presumably about to spill out its contents. The Lord explained that it would be from the north that the promised destruction would come upon the cities of Judah on account of their forsaking the covenant. The Lord declared, "I will utter my judgments against them touching all their wickedness, who have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, and worshipped the works of their own hands" (Jer. 1:16). Although Babylon is located due east of Judah, the Babylonian armies would march up the Euphrates River Valley and around the fertile crescent through Syria and Lebanon, rather than taking the almost impossible route across the Arabian desert, and they would thus invade Judah from the north (see Map 10, LDS Bible).

Needless to say such a message would not be a popular one. The Lord informed Jeremiah that he would set him up to "root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down" (Jer. 1:10). What the Lord demanded he tell the inhabitants of the land would be difficult; thus he exhorted, "Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them all that I command thee: be not dismayed at their faces, lest I confound thee before them" (Jer. 1:17). He told Jeremiah he would find himself pitted "against the kings of Judah, against the princes thereof, against the priests thereof, and against the people" (Jer. 1:18)—in short, against everyone. "They shall fight against thee," the Lord said, "but they shall not prevail against thee; for I am with thee, saith the Lord, to deliver thee" (Jer. 1:19).

Throughout Jeremiah's forty-year ministry, his task would require of him almost more than he could bear. His ministry would require courage, humility, perseverance, patience, charity, and an uncompromising intolerance of sin, all of which would result in a spiritual maturity that he eloquently and poetically expressed in his writings. Jeremiah would suffer rejection, persecution, loneliness, isolation, and injustice. He would be arrested, threatened, beaten, and imprisoned. Yet in the face of all adversity, he maintained a dynamic and meaningful relationship with the Lord to whom he freely expressed the depths of his emotions—his grief, anger, and despair—as well as his spiritual triumphs. At times the Lord responded, sometimes sharply and sometimes gently; at other times he listened. But as he promised, he was always there.

In the collection of prophecies in Jeremiah 1 through 19 are only two chronological points of reference. The first is found in Jeremiah 3:6, "in the days of Josiah," and the other can be deduced for the Temple Sermon in chapter 7, assuming that this sermon is the same as that alluded to in chapter 26 in the biographical material. In chapter 26 the date of this sermon is given "in the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah" (Jer. 26:1), which would be 609 B.C. [^3] From these two notations, as well as thematic unity and other internal evidence pointing to known historical events, chapters 1 through 6 appear to contain prophecies largely from the early part of Jeremiah's ministry in the time of Josiah (627-609). Chapters 7-20 contain prophecies from the time of Jehoiakim (609-598). The assumption that these chapters can be treated as a unit is supported by an echo of the womb imagery from Jeremiah's call (Jer. 1:5) in his lament (Jer. 20:14-18), perhaps functioning as a rhetorical device indicating the unity of chapters 1 through 20. [^4] In contrast to the uncertainties of dating and organization, the themes and messages of these prophecies are for the most part clear and straightforward.

Prophecies from the Time of Josiah (Jer. 2-6)

In chapters 2 and 3 the Lord revealed to Jeremiah the covenantal lawsuit he was bringing against his people on account of their disobedience. The legal imagery of the Lord charging his people—a covenantal lawsuit—is a common feature in biblical prophecy, and good examples can be found in Deuteronomy 25, Hosea 4, Isaiah 1, Micah 6, and Psalm 50.

The stipulations of the Mosaic covenant—the Law—were from the beginning inseparably connected with specific promises of blessings and curses, depending on obedience to the commandments. These blessings and curses were specified in Deuteronomy 27 and 28. This connection between obedience and blessing is well known to Latter-day Saint readers, as it is repeated throughout the Book of Mormon in regard to the promised land: "Inasmuch as ye shall keep my commandments, ye shall prosper" (1 Ne. 2:20; 4:14). The corresponding curse is likewise expressed, "But inasmuch as ye will not keep my commandments ye shall be cut off from my presence" (2 Ne. 1:20). The eternal nature of this principle is reiterated in modern revelation: "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated" (D&C 130:20-21).

The specific punishments pronounced on Israel for disobedience to the Law are spelled out in detail in Deuteronomy 28. They include pestilence, drought, and ultimately destruction by the sword and scatering: [^5] "The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke, in all that thou settest thine hand unto for to do, until thou be destroyed, and until thou perish quickly; because of the wickedness of thy doings, whereby thou hast forsaken me" (Deut. 28:20). "And the Lord shall scatter thee among all people, from the one end of the earth even unto the other; . . . And among these nations shalt thou find no ease, neither shall the sole of thy foot have rest: but the Lord shall give thee there a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind" (Deut. 28:64-65).

In Jeremiah 2 and 3 the covenant lawsuit, like much of the biblical imagery of covenant, is based on one of the most tender and moving of biblical images—the covenant between God and his people as a marriage. The Lord portrays Israel as a young bride who was espoused in the wilderness and married at Sinai. This imagery shows remarkable similarity both in general as well as in specific phrases with the language of Hosea 1 through 3 (which is followed by the imagery of a lawsuit in Hosea 4). The imagery of the covenant as a marriage was carried on in Ezekiel 16 and in the New Testament, where it is found in the parable of the ten virgins (Matt. 25:1-13; see also Luke 14:16-24; Rev. 19:7, 9).

The Lord led his young bride "out of the land of Egypt, . . . through the wilderness, through a land of deserts and of pits, through a land of drought, and of the shadow of death, through a land that no man passed through, and where no man dwelt" (Jer. 2:6). He brought her to "a plentiful country, to eat the fruit thereof and the goodness thereof" (Jer. 2:7). But when Israel arrived she "defiled" the land and followed other gods. The charge against Israel is thus infidelity—in the imagery of the covenant as marriage, it is adultery. As demonstrated by the reign of Manasseh, seeking after foreign gods was also an integral part of foreign political alliances, which included accepting their gods and their images into the temple. The Lord placed the blame for such apostasy on the priests ("they that handle the law"), the shepherds ("pastors," perhaps a reference here to the kings and princes indicted in Jer. 1:18) [^6], and the prophets (Jer. 2:8).

In addition to portraying the Lord as husband, Jeremiah portrayed him as father. He referred to Israel as the "firstfruits" (Jer. 2:3), perhaps an allusion to Exodus 4:22, in which the Lord called Israel his firstborn son. The imagery of the Lord as father calling his son Israel out of Egypt is also found in Hosea 11:1-4. This image of the fatherhood of God is continued in Jeremiah 2:27, in which the Lord accused his children of seeking for their paternity elsewhere—in a "stock," a reference to the wood used to make an idol or perhaps the wooden Asherah, and a "stone," probably referring to the stone images that played a part in Canaanite religion. In Jeremiah 3:9 the marriage and paternity images are combined as these idols become the partners of adultery. The Lord laments, "My people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water" (Jer. 2:13). "Living water" is a phrase used to refer to running water, a spring, which would be pure. Jeremiah later explicitly used this image to describe the Lord: "They have forsaken the Lord, the fountain of living waters" (Jer. 17:13). The Savior in his ministry used this image in reference to the power of the Atonement as a "well of water springing up into everlasting life" (John 4:10-14).

Not only has Israel left her husband but in terms of worshiping other gods she has become an insatiable harlot. This theme is well developed in Hosea 1 through 3 as well as Ezekiel 16. Under the Law of Moses the punishment for adultery was death (Lev. 20:10), a sentence that hangs over Israel. The Lord reminded Israel: "If a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become another man's, shall he return unto her again? . . . but thou hast played the harlot with many lovers" (Jer. 3:1). Under the law a divorce is in order. Yet this is no ordinary husband who instead pleads, "Return again to me, saith the Lord" (Jer. 3:1). As an illustration of the potential disaster of apostate behavior, the Lord reminds Judah of her sister Israel, the Northern Kingdom. Because of her adultery the Lord gave her a bill of divorce, and the result was destruction and deportation by the Assyrians in 721 B.C. "Yet for all this her treacherous sister Judah hath not turned unto me with her whole heart, but feignedly, saith the Lord" (Jer. 3:10).

Jeremiah's assignment was to plead for the Lord: "Return, thou backsliding Israel, saith the Lord; and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you: for I am merciful, saith the Lord, and I will not keep anger forever" (Jer. 3:12). "Return, ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings" (Jer. 3:22). What the Lord envisioned is expressed in terms of marriage and fatherhood—a reuniting of the spouses, the gathering and restoration of scattered Israel and Judah, and the return of the children of Israel who will call, "My father; and shalt not turn away from me" (Jer. 3:14-19).

In Jeremiah 4 through 6 the Lord continued the lawsuit, after offering Judah the chance to return to the marriage, pronouncing judgment on an unrepentant, adulterous Judah. The Lord decreed, just as in Jeremiah's call, "I will bring evil from the north, and a great destruction. . . . to make thy land desolate; and thy cities shall be laid waste, without an inhabitant" (Jer. 4:6-7). The destruction from the north is also referred to in Jeremiah 5:15-18 and 6:22-23). The vivid terror of destruction can be felt in Jeremiah's description of the feelings he felt as he witnessed the terrible vision: "My bowels, my bowels! I am pained at my very heart; my heart maketh a noise in me; I cannot hold my peace, because thou hast heard, O my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm of war" (Jer. 4:19). "For my people is foolish, they have not known me; they are sottish children, and they have none understanding: they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge" (Jer. 4:22). Destruction is described in cosmic terms as Jeremiah reported, "I beheld the earth, and, lo, it was without form, and void [a reversal of creation]; and the heavens, and they had no light" (Jer. 4:23). The Lord taunted his adulterous bride: "And when thou art spoiled, what wilt thou do? Though thou clothest thyself with crimson, though thou deckest thee with ornaments of gold, though thou rentest thy face with painting, in vain shalt thou make thyself fair; thy lovers will despise thee, they will seek thy life" (Jer. 4:30).

The threat of destruction was tempered by the promise that the destruction would not be total: "Nevertheless in those days, saith the Lord, I will not make a full end with you," but a remnant would be sent into exile where, just as they had forsaken the Lord and worshiped strange gods in their own land, they would "serve strangers in a land that is not yours" (Jer. 5:18-19).

Once again the blame was placed not just on the corrupt political and religious authorities but on everyone: "A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the land; the prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means; and my people love to have it so" (Jer. 5:30-31).

Prophecies from the Time of Jehoiakim (Jer. 4-20)

Because only a few of the diverse themes and images of the many prophecies recorded in Jeremiah 7 through 20 can be discussed here, I will concentrate on four of them: first, Jeremiah's Temple Sermon in chapter 7, which contains a comprehensive overview of what the Lord perceived to be the problems in Judah and the proposed solutions; second, three symbolic acts in which the word of the Lord was dramatized; third, a prophecy of the scattering and the gathering; and fourth, Jeremiah's laments, which are interspersed throughout these chapters and reveal the depths of Jeremiah's personal struggles and suffering as he went about the work of the Lord.

The Temple Sermon (Jer. 7)

The description of the Temple Sermon in the biographical chapter 26 is so close to the account of the actual sermon in chapter 7 that it is almost certain that the event described is the same. The date is 609 B.C., the first year of King Jehoiakim. The circumstance is similar to Jesus' cleansing of the temple (Matt. 21:12-13; Mark 11:15-18; Luke 19:45-48), and in fact, Christ even quoted Jeremiah's charge of a "den of robbers" (Jer. 7:11; Matt. 21:13; Mark 11:17; Luke 19:46). Jeremiah faced a hard-hearted and self-righteous people who did not wish to hear his message of repentance. This people had developed a self-righteous assurance that the Lord would protect and preserve them. It was based on the existence of the temple—the house of the Lord—combined with the recent reforms of Josiah, which succeeded in reforming the external practices of religion to the Mosaic prescriptions. The people were certain that these would preserve them.

Jeremiah responded to the first of these false notions with the warning, "Trust ye not in the lying words, saying, The temple of the Lord, The temple of the Lord, The temple of the Lord" (Jer. 7:4). To the second false notion, perhaps revealing that he considered the net result of Josiah's reforms to be superficial at best, Jeremiah cited compliance with the moral injunctions of the Mosaic covenant as the only safety, not an outward adherence to the laws of sacrifice alone: "If ye throughly amend your ways and your doings; if ye throughly execute judgment between a man and his neighbour; If ye oppress not the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, and shed not innocent blood in this place, neither walk after other gods to your hurt: then will I cause you to dwell in this place, in the land that I gave to your fathers, for ever and ever" (Jer. 7:5-7).

This language was certainly familiar to those at the temple that day, because this same injunction to the people to care for the defenseless among them — widows, orphans, and foreigners — is found in Exodus 22:21-22, where it is followed by the stern warning: "If thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry; and my wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword; and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless" (vv. 23-24).

Jeremiah's message reminds us of the message of the Savior in his ministry and the self-righteous hypocrisy of the outwardly religious, which should serve as a solemn reminder to all of the covenant children who are favored in having the temple in their midst. We are reminded of such statements as "Woe unto you . . . hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith" (Matt. 23:23) and of the comparison to "whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness" (Matt. 23:27). The Savior outlined the criterion for final judgment: "For I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me" (Matt. 25:35-36).

In addition, Jeremiah cited the sins of the people as stealing, murder, adultery, false swearing, burning incense unto Baal, and walking after other gods — six of the Ten Commandments (Ex. 20:3-17). A similar list is found in the lawsuit in Hosea 4:2. Indeed, the temple had "become a den of robbers" (Jer. 7:11).

As an object lesson, Jeremiah reminded them of what happened to the house of the Lord at Shiloh (1 Sam. 1:7). If Jeremiah was indeed a descendant of Eli, custodian of the tabernacle at Shiloh (1 Sam. 1:9), this story would have been a vivid recollection in Jeremiah's family. The Lord asked Judah, "But go ye now unto my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my name at the first, and see what I did to it for the wickedness of my people Israel" (Jer. 7:12). In contrast to the well-documented capture of the ark of the covenant when unrighteous Israel was delivered into the hand of the Philistines in 1 Samuel 4 through 7, an account of the destruction of Shiloh where the ark had been kept is only preserved here (see also Ps. 78:60).

The Lord in his wrath ordered Jeremiah not even to attempt to intercede for such a people as they had become (Jer. 7:16; see also 14:11-12). Apparently idolatry was still rampant in the land, and while the children collected the wood, the fathers made the fire and the mothers baked the cakes to the queen of heaven (Jer. 7:18). [^7] The Lord, probably as hyperbole, stated that he had never ordered sacrifice in the first place but rather would have obedience. Such a sentiment, also found in Amos (5:21-25), Hosea (6:6), Isaiah (1:10-17), and Micah (6:1-8), is probably meant not as a polemic against all sacrifice but rather as a way of emphasizing the importance of obedience to the moral injunctions as opposed to only the strict adherence to ritual. [^8] The importance of obedience over sacrifice was dramatically taught by Samuel to Saul in the incident of Agag the Amalekite in 1 Samuel 15.

Throughout Israel's history the Lord reminded them of their commitment to obedience, "but they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, but walked in the counsels and in the imagination of their evil heart [see D&C 1:16], and went backward, and not forward" (Jer. 7:24). He constantly sent his prophets, "yet they hearkened not unto me, nor inclined their ear, but hardened their neck: they did worse than their fathers" (Jer. 7:26), a phenomenon that Jeremiah would personally witness and experience throughout his life. The result would be as prophesied by the Lord to Moses, "My wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword; and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless" (Ex. 22:24) — slaughter, destruction, and exile — "then will I cause to cease from the cities of Judah, and from the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride: for the land shall be desolate" (Jer. 7:34).

In chapter 26 we learn that after this sermon the people, in conjunction with the priests and prophets, took Jeremiah before the rulers of Judah, saying, "Thou shalt surely die" (Jer. 26:8-10). They charged him before the rulers as prophesying against the holy city. Jeremiah's defense was simple: "The Lord sent me to prophesy against this house and against this city all the words that ye have heard. Therefore now amend your ways and your doings, and obey the voice of the Lord your God, and repent, and the Lord will turn away the evil that he hath pronounced against you" (JST Jer. 26:12-13). In the ensuing debate "certain of the elders" argued that Jeremiah should be spared, citing the example of Micah, who also had prophesied against the city and had been spared by King Hezekiah. It was probably only the intervention of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, [^9] a high court official, that saved Jeremiah's life. The danger of being killed for delivering such a message was real, as evidenced by a note at the end of chapter 26 about an otherwise unknown prophet Urijah of Kirjath-jearim, who, like Jeremiah, prophesied against Jerusalem during the reign of King Jehoiakim. The king sought to put him to death, but he fled to Egypt. The relentless king then had him hunted down, extradited, convicted, and finally killed (Jer. 26:20-23).

Jeremiah's Symbolic Acts

Many important oracles of judgment are recorded in memorable imagery throughout the book of Jeremiah. I will concentrate on three prophecies that were accompanied by symbolic acts or allegories. The symbolic act, a dramatization of a prophetic message, was already a well-known phenomenon associated with the prophets, as, for example, the prophet Zedekiah's donning a set of iron horns (1 Kgs. 22:11), Hosea's marriage with Gomer (Hosea 1-3), Isaiah's naming his sons (Isa. 7-8), and Isaiah's walking around Jerusalem naked and barefoot (Isa. 20). Likewise the ministry of Ezekiel was characterized by several significant symbolic acts: lying on his side for a prescribed period (Ezek. 4), digging a hole through a wall (Ezek. 12), and refraining from mourning for his wife (Ezek. 24:15-27). Jeremiah participated in three such symbolic acts, one involving a linen girdle (Jer. 13:1-11), another a potter at his wheel (Jer. 18), and still another a potter's earthen bottle (Jer. 19-20), which the Lord interpreted for him allegorically. [^10] A brief look at these incidents can give us a further taste of the nature of Jeremiah's prophecies.

The Linen Girdle (Jer. 13:1-11)

The Lord commanded Jeremiah to put a linen girdle on his loins and journey to the Euphrates, a distance of between three and four hundred miles, and hide the girdle in a hole in a rock. This Jeremiah did. [^11] After many days the Lord then told him to go and retrieve his girdle. Jeremiah discovered when he dug it up that "the girdle was marred, it was profitable for nothing" (Jer. 13:7). The Lord explained: "After this manner will I mar the pride of Judah, and the great pride of Jerusalem" (Jer. 13:9). At one level the meaning is clear: if Judah were to be involved with the Euphrates it would be to her downfall. The Lord went on to explain that Israel and Judah were like the girdle in that they were wrapped around the Lord as the girdle had been wrapped around Jeremiah (Jer. 13:11). Perhaps this is a reference to the fact that when Israel or Judah were no longer faithful to the Lord—symbolized by being wrapped around the waist—then they really were worthless and would eventually be destroyed. A nation that refused to hearken to the Lord and worshiped other gods was to the Lord God of Israel just like the girdle—useless. Some have seen in the reference to the Euphrates an allusion to the eventual exile of the people there.

There is no record that anyone witnessed this event other than Jeremiah, and we can only speculate what kind of an impact this had on his prophetic understanding. Certainly it would have illustrated the close relationship between the Lord and his people and the need for them to remain pure in order to be of any use or value to the Lord.

The Potter's Wheel (Jer. 18)

In another of the most well-known images in Jeremiah, the Lord commanded him to go to the house of a potter and watch him work. The image of the work of the potter as an act of creation is well known throughout the Bible. In the statement in Genesis 2:7, "the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground," the verb used is ysr, the same verb used to mean forming a pot. This same image of the Lord "forming" individuals is used elsewhere, as in Jeremiah's call "before I formed thee in the belly" (Jer. 1:5), and "shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What makest thou?" (Isa. 45:9; see also 44:21, 24), and as a reference to the Lord's "forming" his people Israel (Isa. 27:11; 43:1, 21).

As Jeremiah watched the potter, who was probably molding a pot on a potter's wheel, the pot "was marred in the hand of the potter: so he made it again another vessel, as seemed good to the potter to make it" (Jer. 18:4). The Lord explained: "O house of Israel, cannot I do with you as this potter? saith the Lord. Behold, as the clay is in the potter's hand, so are ye in mine hand, O house of Israel" (Jer. 18:6). The Lord reaffirmed his power to intervene in history with the same verbs known from Jeremiah's call — that he has the power to "pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy" (Jer. 18:7). At this time there was still hope for repentance, and the Lord promised those who would repent and return that he would "build" and "plant" them (Jer. 18:8-9).

Apart from being a memorable image of the omnipotence of God, this image of the potter reinforces the covenantal relationship of the Lord with his people. He has the power to form them as individuals and as a nation and to then destroy them and start over again. In history, when the pot has become marred, the Lord has destroyed it and started over again. He has done this on several occasions throughout scriptural history, such as the Flood, the destruction of the Nephites, and the Apostasy and the Restoration. Once again, we have no account that this revelation was witnessed or experienced by any other than Jeremiah, suggesting that it may have been for his own spiritual understanding.

The Potter's Earthen Bottle (Jer. 19-20)

The third symbolic act is related to the imagery of the potter at his wheel, but the vessel destroyed is the finished product. Of these three incidents, this is the only one that was apparently done for the public; their reaction is most interesting. Jeremiah was instructed to take an earthen bottle and go with some of the elders and priests to the Hinnom Valley, just south of Jerusalem. There he proclaimed: "Hear ye the word of the Lord, O kings of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem; Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, the which whosoever heareth, his ears shall tingle" (Jer. 19:3). Jeremiah enumerated their acts of idolatry, many of which had become localized in the Hinnom Valley and Tophet. [^12] He then uttered the threats of the Lord of a great "slaughter" (Jer. 19:6), destruction by the sword, their carcasses to be carrion (Jer. 19:7), the city to become desolate (Jer. 19:8), and the besieged in the city forced to eat the flesh of their sons and daughters (Jer. 19:9). All this is reminiscent of the graphic prophecies in Deuteronomy 28 that were directed against the covenant people if they broke the covenant. Symbolic of this destruction, Jeremiah broke the earthen bottle and declared: "Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Even so will I break this people and this city, as one breaketh a potter's vessel, that cannot be made whole again" (Jer. 19:11). Unlike the clay on the potter's wheel (Jer. 18:1-6), the individuals represented by the finished vessel that was broken would not have a second chance but would be buried in Tophet until there was no more room.

This symbolic act was a public event, and the implications were immediately understood by those present. Jeremiah 20 recounts the persecution that Jeremiah endured for delivering the word of the Lord to those who found the truth offensive. Pashur, the chief governor in the house of the Lord — a temple official who undoubtedly had heard about the Temple Sermon — had Jeremiah beaten and put into stocks (Jer. 20:1-2). Jeremiah prophetically pronounced upon this man a new name, Magor-missabib ("Terror all around"), and prophesied that Pashur himself would witness the death of his friends and the capture of Jerusalem by the Babylonians and that he would go into exile where he would die with all of his friends "to whom thou hast prophesied lies" (Jer. 20:3-6). This is the last we hear of this particular official in Jeremiah, perhaps because he was one of those sent in the deportation of 597 B.C.

The Scattering and the Gathering (Jer. 16)

Jeremiah 16 contains a series of prophecies that foretold both sorrow and joy. The message in verses 1 through 13 is one of doom for Jeremiah's people. "I have taken away my peace from this people, saith the Lord" (Jer. 16:5), because, the Lord said, "your fathers have forsaken me" and "ye have done worse than your fathers" (Jer. 16:11-12). As a result, the people of Judah would be deported to a foreign land, where they would serve foreign gods and receive no favor from the God of Israel (Jer. 16:13).

At this point the prophecy of future sorrow is interrupted by a prophecy of future joy (Jer. 16:14-15). The imminent deportation will be followed by a latter-day return. And that return will be one of the great events of Israel's history, eclipsing even the deliverance of the children of Israel from the bondage of Egypt. The Lord will bring Israel "from the land of the north, and from all the lands whither he had driven them." And he will restore them "into their land that I gave unto their fathers" (see also Jer. 23:7-8).

Jeremiah 16:16 is often understood as a prophecy of latter-day gathering, but the context seems to identify it as part of God's relentless punishment of Judah. None of his rebellious children would be able to escape his wrath and the punishment that he had decreed for them. Their iniquity was not hidden from him, and they would pay double for it. They had defiled his land, and they had filled his inheritance "with the carcases of their detestable and abominable things" (Jer. 16:18). The chapter ends with a beautiful reference to the gathering of non-Israelites to the Lord and his covenants (Jer. 16:19-21). They will come to the realization that they have inherited falsehood from their progenitors and that their gods are "no gods." With this understanding, they will be ready to learn the truth, and they will know the Lord (see also Isa. 2:1-3; Zech. 8:20-23).

Jeremiah's Laments

"When I would comfort myself against sorrow, my heart is faint in me. . . . The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and we are not saved. For the hurt of the daughter of my people am I hurt; I am black; astonishment hath taken hold on me. . . . Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people" (Jer. 8:18-9:1). With these words Jeremiah revealed to us that he was a man with much emotion and compassion about the events that he witnessed in the past, present, and through his prophetic gift, the future. We are reminded of the prophet Mormon, who also spent his life's work crying repentance to his unrepentant people, only to witness their destruction: "My soul was rent with anguish, because of the slain of my people, and I cried: O ye fair ones, how could ye have departed from the ways of the Lord! O ye fair ones, how could ye have rejected that Jesus, who stood with open arms to receive you! Behold, if ye had not done this, ye would not have fallen. But behold, ye are fallen, and I mourn your loss" (Morm. 6:16-18).

Jeremiah the prophet saw life from the human perspective and at the same time was compelled to view it from God's perspective through the message that he bore. On the one hand, he viewed the coming disaster with compassion and sorrow; on the other hand, he felt righteous indignation as he considered the unfaithfulness of his people, which he longed to escape: "Oh that I had in the wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring men; that I might leave my people, and go from them! for they be all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men. And they bend their tongues like their bow for lies: but they are not valiant for the truth upon the earth; for they proceed from evil to evil" (Jer. 9:2-3). In short, he understood that they deserved the impending judgment. Such laments reveal his mixed feelings about his people.

At the same time, we are presented throughout the book of Jeremiah with a series of personal laments — termed by many the "confessions," which are quite unlike anything else in the biblical prophecies — in which Jeremiah revealed the personal struggles and suffering that he as servant of the Lord was called to endure. Through these laments Jeremiah sought for an understanding of many of life's most difficult questions. They remind us of the probing of Job in his trials and of Joseph Smith in Liberty Jail. For some of the laments we are presented with a historical context; for others, we can only imagine. To some of these complaints the Lord responded; to others, he was silent. A look at these haunting poetic passages helps us to appreciate better the great human drama of prophets, the burden of the uncompromising call of the Lord, and most of all, the importance of a dynamic relationship with our Maker which can help us all to "endure to the end." There are at least six examples of personal laments, each of which we will examine, identifying the issues that Jeremiah discussed and the divine answers to such questions.

Like a Lamb to the Slaughter (Jer. 11:18-12:6)

The Lord revealed to Jeremiah the sins of his people as well as the judgment that was to come. Jeremiah recorded: "And the Lord hath given me knowledge of it, and I know it: then thou shewedst me their doings" (Jer. 11:18). Because Jeremiah had faithfully delivered this message, it was he who would suffer, and in fact, there were those who sought his life. He pleaded his innocence: "But I was like a lamb or an ox that is brought to the slaughter" (Jer. 8:19) — words that remind us of the image of Christ as the Suffering Servant (Isa. 53:7) and that were quoted by the Prophet Joseph Smith as he went to Carthage (D&C 135:4). [^13] It was Jeremiah's own community that was most indignant. He cried to the Lord for "vengeance on them: for unto thee have I revealed my cause" (Jer. 11:20). The Lord assured him that divine justice would prevail, and in this case it would be in the not-too-distant future: "The men of Anathoth, that seek thy life, saying, Prophesy not in the name of the Lord, that thou die not by our hand: . . . Behold, I will punish them: the young men shall die by the sword; their sons and their daughters shall die by famine: And there shall be no remnant of them: for I will bring evil upon the men of Anathoth, even the year of their visitation" (Jer. 11:21-23).

But Jeremiah's complaint did not end there, and he asked the Lord, just as did Job and the psalmist (Job 21; Ps. 73), the age-old question: "Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously?" (Jer. 12:1). The Lord responded, much as he did to Job, with questions, two enigmatic proverbs: "If thou hast run with the footmen, and they have wearied thee, then how canst thou contend with horses? And if in the land of peace, wherein thou trustedst, they wearied thee, then how wilt thou do in the swelling of Jordan?" (Jer. 12:5).

The answer is clear, though the implications not comforting: for Jeremiah the challenges and trials had just begun.

Called by Thy Name (Jer. 15:10-21)

Jeremiah recounted his reception of the words of the Lord in much the same image as did Ezekiel (Ezek. 3:1-3) and John the Revelator (Rev. 10:9-10): an act of eating. "Thy words were found, and I did eat them; and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart: for I am called by thy name, O Lord God of hosts" (Jer. 15:16). And yet the results were persecution, rebuke (Jer. 15:15), isolation, and loneliness: "I sat not in the assembly of the mockers, nor rejoiced; I sat alone because of thy hand: for thou hast filled me with indignation. Why is my pain perpetual, and my wound incurable, which refuseth to be healed? wilt thou be altogether unto me as a liar, and as waters that fail?" (Jer. 15:17-18).

The Lord responded sharply to the accusation, reminding Jeremiah of the privilege of his station and of his need to repent and be converted to his calling: "Therefore thus saith the Lord, If thou return, then will I bring thee again, and thou shalt stand before me: and if thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth" (Jer. 15:19). Repeating the promise he gave to Jeremiah from the beginning at his call, the Lord reminded him of whom he was serving: "I will make thee unto this people a fenced brasen wall: and they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee: for I am with thee to save thee and to deliver thee, saith the Lord" (Jer. 15:20). Indeed, without the help of the Lord such a calling would be unthinkable.

Heal Me (Jer. 17:14-18)

"Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed; save me, and I shall be saved: for thou art my praise" (Jer. 17:14). When it is read in sequence with the previous lament, this passage reveals a more humble Jeremiah praying in faith for the continued protection and inspiration promised by the Lord. At the same time he prayed for divine justice — a double does: "Let them be confounded that persecute me, but let not me be confounded: let them be dismayed, but let not me be dismayed: bring upon them the day of evil, and destroy them with double destruction" (Jer. 17:18). To this plea there was no divine response.

Forgive Not Their Iniquity (Jer. 18:18-23)

In Jeremiah 18 we learn more about those who were persecuting Jeremiah. Their statement that in spite of what they did to him, "the law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the prophet" (18:18), reveals that they considered the official religion of the land to be in good hands. Jeremiah again pleaded for judgment against his enemies. He reminded the Lord that at one time he had acted as mediator for his people: "Remember that I stood before thee to speak good for them, and to turn away thy wrath from them" (Jer. 18:20). No longer would he plead for those who sought his life: "Yet, Lord, thou knowest all their counsel against me to slay me: forgive not their iniquity, neither blot out their sin from thy sight, but let them be overthrown before thee; deal thus with them in the time of thine anger" (Jer. 18:23). To this plea also came no divine response.

As a Burning Fire (Jer. 20:7-13)

In a lament recorded in Jeremiah 20, we learn of the unwilling human nature of the prophet in submitting himself to the will of the Lord in delivering an unpopular message. At the same time we find a marvelous image of a man of God who could not contain the word of the Lord in his heart: "O Lord, thou hast deceived me, and I was deceived: thou art stronger than I, and hast prevailed: I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me. For since I spake, I cried out, I cried violence and spoil; because the word of the Lord was made a reproach unto me, and a derision, daily. Then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name. But his word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay" (Jer. 20:7-9).

Jeremiah, perhaps comforted by his own admission of weakness, went on to reaffirm his faith and to praise the Lord, who is "with me as a mighty terrible one . . . that triest the righteous, . . . [and] delivered the soul of the poor from the hand of evildoers" (Jer. 20:11-13).

Cursed Be the Day (Jer. 20:14-18)

Another lament recorded in Jeremiah 20 provides a climax to the unit of chapters 1 through 20. In these verses Jeremiah expressed a grief as profound as any in scripture:

Cursed be the day wherein I was born:

let not the day wherein my mother bare me be blessed.

Cursed be the man who brought tidings to my father, saying,

A man child is born unto thee; making him very glad.

And let that man be as the cities which the Lord overthrew,

and repented not:

And let him hear the cry in the morning,

and the shouting at noontide;

Because he slew me not from the womb;

or that my mother might have been my grave,

and her womb to be always great with me.

Wherefore came I forth out of the womb to see labour and sorrow,

that my days should be consumed with shame (Jer. 20:14-18).

The references to the womb are poignant echoes of the glorious foreordained mission of Jeremiah, which was bestowed even before he was in the womb — ironic references to the Lord's call in Jeremiah 1:5. These wretched cries as recorded are unanswered and serve as a solemn reminder of the lifetime of sacrifices that Jeremiah made to serve his God and his fellowmen.

To those of us who have cried out in despair to the Lord in laments like Jeremiah's, the answer of the resurrected Lord to Joseph Smith in a dark moment in Liberty Jail provides a humbling but comforting appreciation that the Lord with whom we are invited to share our sorrows truly understands:

If thou art called to pass through tribulation;

If thou art in perils among false brethren;

If thou art in perils among robbers;

If thou art in perils by land or by sea;

If thou art accused with all manner of false accusations;

If thine enemies fall upon thee;

If they tear thee from the society of thy father and mother and brethren and sisters; . . .

And if thou shouldst be cast into the pit, or into the hands of murderers, and the sentence of death passed upon thee;

If thou be cast into the deep;

If the billowing surge conspire against thee;

If fierce winds become thine enemy;

If the heavens gather blackness, and all the elements combine to hedge up the way;

and above all, if the very jaws of hell shall gape open the mouth wide after thee,

know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good.

The Son of Man hath descended below them all.

Art thou greater than he? (D&C 122:5-8).

In the dark times of self-doubt, loneliness, and despair, Jeremiah could reflect on the moment when the Lord lovingly touched his mouth and said, "Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth" (Jer. 1:9) or on the Lord's promise at his call: "They shall fight against thee; but they shall not prevail against thee; for I am with thee, saith the Lord, to deliver thee" (Jer. 1:19). Perhaps in a quiet moment the Lord spoke to him further words of comfort, as he did to the Prophet Joseph Smith, reminding him that the trials of mortality can only be endured with an eternal perspective:

Therefore, hold on thy way, and the priesthood shall remain with thee;

for their bounds are set, they cannot pass.

Thy days are known, and thy years shall not be numbered less;

therefore, fear not what man can do,

for God shall be with you forever and ever (D&C 122:9).

Notes

David Rolph Seely is assistant professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Hebrew word babel is rendered by translators as "Babel" in the story of the tower but as "Babylon" (from the Greek) throughout the rest of the Bible.
[^2] Note that there are four terms for destruction ("root out," "pull down," "destroy," and "throw down") and only two for restoration ("Build" and "plant"), signifying a double portion of destruction. The prophecies throughout the book reflect the same proportion of destruction, which must precede the restoration.
[^3] The proper name of the Babylonian king is found in its correct form here, as also elsewhere in Jeremiah and Ezekiel. As indicated in the cuneiform sources, his name was Nebuchadrezzar, not -nezzar. The change from r to n may be simply an error in transcription, as the letters in ancient Hebrew are very similar, but recently some have argued that the change to Nebuchadnezzar may be attributed to a deliberate pun on his name. In Babylonian the name Nabu-kudurru-uur means something like "Nabu [a Babylonian god] protect the crown prince!" Changing kudurru to kudanu "mule" (accounting for the -n- in Nebuchadnezzar) renders a name that means "Nabu, protect the mule!" See A. van Selms, "The Name Nebuchadnezzar," in Travels in the World of the Old Testament, ed. M. van Voss, Philo Houwink ten Cate, and N. A. van Uchelen (Assen, Netherlands: Van Gorcum, 1974), pp. 223-29. I thank Paul Y. Hoskisson for bringing this reference to my attention.
[^4] For example, see Ex. 3:20 referring to the plagues; Ex. 34:10; Deut. 34:11; Ps. 106:7 about the deliverance from Egypt; and the same word used by Joshua (Josh. 3:5) about the miraculous events surrounding the entry into the promised land. A form of this same root is found in the well-known passage in Isa. 29:14, "I will proceed to do a marvelous work (Hebrew, hapli') among this people, even a marvelous work and a wonder" (Hebrew, haple' wapele'). In this passage the phrase describes the Lord's activities in the latter-day restoration in terms of the Exodus.
[^5] The normal Hebrew formula is beyad hazaqa ubizroa netuya. The King james translators translated hazaqa as "strong" in the normal formula but as "mighty" in Jeremiah. The Hebrew word is the same in both cases.
[^6] See Lam. 2:4-5 as well, where this image is described in retrospect after the destruction.
[^7] See H. B. Maclean, "Jehoiakim," in The Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, 5 vols., ed. G. A. Buttrick, et al. (Nashville: Abingdon, 1962-76), 2:813-14. The problems of reconstructing the events surrounding his death are further compounded by the passage in 2 Chron. 36:6, which says that Nebuchadnezzar "bound him in fetters" to take him into captivity.
[^8] This is exactly the king of prophet that Samuel the Lamanite told the Nephites they would accept: "But behold, if a man shall come among you and shall say: Do this, and there is no iniquity; do that and ye shall not suffer; yea, he will say: Walk after the pride of your own hearts; yea, walk after the pride of your eyes, and do whatsoever your heart desireth — and if a man shall come among you and say this, ye will receive him, and say that he is a prophet" (Hel. 13:27).
[^9] This particular passage was quoted by Oliver Cowdery between passages of Isaiah in the Messenger and Advocate, Apr. 1835, p. 111. The particular passages of scripture included in Oliver Cowdery's account of Moroni's discourses to Joseph Smith in the Messenger and Advocate have been identified in Kent P. Jackson, "The Appearance of Moroni to Joseph Smith," in Studies in Scripture, Volume Two: The Pearl of Great Price, ed. Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson (Salt Lake City: Randall Book, 1985), pp. 360-62.
[^10] Messenger and Advocate, Apr. 1835, pp. 110-11. A list of these citations, as well as other latter-day commentary on these passages, can be found in Monte S. Nyman, The Words of Jeremiah (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), pp. 83-95.
[^11] The Greek word diatheke is the word used throughout the Septuagint to translate Hebrew berit, "covenant." As an extension of the meaning "covenant," the Greek word also has the meaning of "last will and testament," which was the sense translated by the Latin testamentum, preserved in KJV "testament."
[^12] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), pp. 13-18.
[^13] Ibid., pp. 14-15.
