Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

22

A PROPHET OVER THE NATIONS (JEREMIAH 21-24, 30-31, 46-51)

DAVID ROLPH SEELY

The relationship between the Lord and his people has from the very beginning been defined and regulated by covenant, established first with Adam and his posterity and then after the Flood with Noah and his posterity. At a certain point in time the descendants of Noah, because of their presumption, built the notorious Tower of Babel — the Hebrew word for Babylon [^1]—an act for which they were punished by being scattered throughout the world and having their language confounded. It was after this event that the Lord called Abraham out of the world, from Ur of the Chaldees to the promised land, and made a covenant with him. The promises of the covenant were accompanied by the simple yet all-encompassing obligation, "Be thou perfect" (Gen. 17:1). The accounts of Abraham demonstrate that he understood all of the implications of this injunction and sought to become perfect in every way.

Throughout the rest of the Old Testament, the mercy and grace of the Lord toward his people is remembered in the miraculous events of the Exodus, when the Lord heard the cries of his covenant people in Egypt, delivered them from bondage, met them at Sinai where he established a new covenant with them, and led them into the promised land. The accompanying obligations of the Mosaic covenant were explicitly set forth in detail, both in terms of ethical behavior as well as ritual, in the Law of Moses. The Lord defined the relationship thus: "And I will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you a God" (Ex. 6:7; Jer. 31:33) and explained the accompanying obligations, "Ye shall be holy; for I am holy" (Lev. 11:44; 19:2; 20:26). To the Mosaic covenant were attached blessings and curses: obedience would bring prosperity and protection, whereas disobedience would bring death and destruction. The sacred history of Israel recounts centuries of Israel's struggle to understand, remember, and keep the conditions of the covenant — a struggle that most often ended in apostasy. To regulate the covenant, the Lord sent prophets to his people. Their message was always the same: repent or face the acknowledged consequences. Through the conditions of the covenant, disobedience warranted the justice of God, which meant judgment and destruction. Yet the prophets always reminded the people that ultimately, through God's mercy, restoration and rebuilding would come.

The Lord defined Jeremiah's mission in his call to be prophet when he touched his mouth and said, "Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth. See, I have this day set thee over the nations and over the kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build, and to plant" (Jer. 1:9-10). Thus Jeremiah's message was twofold: judgment and destruction on the one hand [^2] and restoration and rebuilding on the other. And just as his audience was not limited to Israel but extended to "the nations" (see also Jer. 1:5, "I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations"), so his message extended beyond the immediate future to the end of time. The three sections of the book of Jeremiah discussed in this chapter illustrate the full scope of Jeremiah's message: chapters 21 through 24 contain prophecies of the destruction and the scattering of Judah in the immediate future; chapters 30 and 31 contain prophecies of hope and consolation for a future, latter-day, renewal of the covenant, and the gathering and restoration; and chapters 46 through 51 contain oracles directed against Israel's neighbors, some of which are types of the destruction awaiting the world in the last days.

A Prophecy against Zedekiah (Jer. 21:1-10)

During Nebuchadrezzar's [^3] siege of Jerusalem in 587 B.C., King Zedekiah sent two messengers, Pashur and Zephaniah, to Jeremiah with the request that he inquire of the Lord on behalf of the king and all of Judah "if so be that the Lord will deal with us according to all his wondrous works, that he may go up from us" (Jer. 21:2). The phrase "wondrous works" (Hebrew, niple'ot) is used throughout the Old Testament to refer to the "mighty acts" that the Lord performed in the deliverance of Israel from Egypt. [^4] Zedekiah hoped that the Lord God of Israel would deliver his people now through his miraculous power as he had at the time of Moses from the Egyptians and most recently from the Assyrians at the time of Hezekiah (2 Kgs. 18-19; Isa. 36-37). The Lord's reply was grim. Not only would he not aid Judah in her defense (Jer. 21:4) but, he said, "I myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand and with a strong arm, even in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath" (Jer. 21:5). The phrase "mighty hand and a stretched out arm" is another key formula used in reference to the Lord's strength in defeating Pharaoh's army, whose destruction is portrayed as a military encounter during the Exodus (Deut. 4:34; 5:15; 7:19; 11:2; 26:8). [^5] In Jeremiah, though, the adjectives of the formula are switched, "outstretched hand and strong arm" indicating the reversal that has come about through Judah's transgressions. Whereas before the Lord fought for Israel against her enemies, now the Lord will join the enemy and fight against his people. [^6] In addition to this grim tiding, the Lord said through Jeremiah: "He that abideth in this city shall die by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence: but he that goeth out, and falleth to the Chaldeans that besiege you, he shall live, and his life shall be unto him for a prey" (Jer. 21:9). The only chance for survival is surrender, a message for which Jeremiah would be branded a traitor (Jer. 38:2-4).

Prophecies against the Kings of Judah (Jer. 21:11-22:30)

The passage in Jeremiah 21:11 through 22:9 is a call to the kings in the house of David to be faithful to the ethical imperatives of the covenant to ensure social justice: to execute judgment (Jer. 21:12) and righteousness and to "deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor: and do no wrong, do no violence to the stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow, neither shed innocent blood" (Jer. 22:3). If they failed to do this, as they had in the past, then destruction would come. After the destruction, many of the world would pass by Jerusalem, asking, "Wherefore hath the Lord done thus unto this great city? Then they shall answer, Because they have forsaken the covenant of the Lord their God, and worshipped other gods, and served them" (Jer. 22:8-9).

Chapter 22 contains several short prophecies directed against three successive kings of Judah: Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, and Jehoiachin. Each of these kings is judged against the standard of the covenant and is found wanting.

Jeremiah 22:10-12 prophesies the captivity of Shallum, another name for Jehoahaz (1 Chron. 3:15) son of Josiah, which was fulfilled when he was removed from the throne and taken to Egypt by Pharaoh Necho in 609 B.C. (2 Kgs. 23:33-34).

Jeremiah 22:13-19 is directed against Jehoahaz's successor, Jehoiakim, who attempted to justify his unjust reign by the props of a new and magnificent palace instead of judging the cause of the poor and the needy (vv. 13-16). His reward will be an ignominious death and "the burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem" (v. 19). This prophecy is expanded in another prophecy, in which Jeremiah declared, "His dead body shall be cast out in the day to the heat, and in the night to the frost" (Jer. 36:30). The account of his death in 2 Kings 24:6 simply says that he "slept with his fathers." But the situation surrounding his untimely death in the face of the punitive expedition that was shortly to be sent from Babylon because of his revolt against Nebuchadnezzar — a situation that resulted in the siege and capture of Jerusalem and the exile of his son — has led some to suspect that he may have been assassinated. [^7]

Jeremiah 22:20-30 contains an oracle against Coniah, another name for Jehoiachin, son of Jehoiakim. His punishment will be like that of a useless, broken pot, to be cast off by the Lord to join his countrymen in exile to Babylon. This prophecy is accompanied by the promise that his seed would not sit upon the throne of Judah. It was fulfilled when he was replaced by the conquering Babylonians with his uncle Mattaniah, whose name was changed to Zedekiah. Jehoiachin is mentioned as being still alive in Babylon — the king in exile — as late as 562 B.C., when Nebuchadnezzar died (2 Kgs. 25:27-30; Jer. 52:31-34).

A Prophecy of Restoration (Jer. 23)

Jeremiah 23 may be best categorized as a messianic oracle. Verses 1 through 4 pronounce doom on the "pastors" (shepherds) of Israel, a metaphor often referring to Israel's spiritual and political leaders — prophets, priests, and kings (Ezek. 34; John 10). Instead of caring for the sheep, these leaders had scattered them. It would take the Lord, the Good Shepherd, to gather his sheep and "set up shepherds over them which shall feed them" (Jer. 23:4). If applied to the first coming of the Messiah, this prophecy would refer to a spiritual gathering made possible through the Atonement. A completion of its fulfillment is to be found in the Second Coming, when God will "raise unto David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth" (Jer. 23:5). When those days come, "they shall no more say, The Lord liveth, which brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; But, The Lord liveth, which brought up and which led the seed of the house of Israel out of the north country, and from all countries whither I had driven them; and they shall dwell in their own land" (Jer. 23:7-8).

Jeremiah 23:9-40 continues the denunciation of the wicked shepherds, specifying the wickedness of the false prophets and priests. This section provides a key for distinguishing and dealing with false, as opposed to true, prophets. Their sins are grievous: "They commit adultery, and walk in lies: they strengthen also the hands of evildoers, that none doth return from his wickedness" (Jer. 23:14). This description brings to mind Christ's injunction given in the Sermon on the Mount and repeated to the Nephites: "Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits" (Matt. 7:15-16; 3 Ne. 14:15-16). Because these false prophets have come on their own accord, the Lord said, "I have not sent these prophets, yet they ran: I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied" (Jer. 23:21); "I have heard what the prophets said, that prophesy lies in my name, saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamed. How long shall this be in the heart of the prophets that prophesy lies? yea, they are prophets of the deceit of their own heart; Which think to cause my people to forget my name by their dreams which they tell every man to his neighbour, as their fathers have forgotten my name for Baal" (Jer. 23:25-27). Consequently they speak their own words and not the words of the Lord; "they speak a vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord" (Jer. 23:16). They were popular because their message was what the people wanted to hear: "The Lord hath said, Ye shall have peace; and they say unto every one that walketh after the imagination of his own heart, No evil shall come upon you" (Jer. 23:17). [^8] Following such prophets is nothing less than idolatry — attempting to find divine approval for selfish interests — and the Lord accused them of such, characterizing these false prophets as those "which think to cause my people to forget my name . . . as their fathers have forgotten my name for Baal" (Jer. 23:27).

The same image of "one that walketh after the imagination of his own heart" (Jer. 23:17) occurs in the Doctrine and Covenants and is applied to our day. The people of this generation are likewise accused of idolatry: "They seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own god, whose image is in the likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol, which waxeth old and shall perish in Babylon, even Babylon the great, which shall fall" (D&C 1:16; emphasis added).

Two Baskets of Figs (Jer. 24)

After Nebuchadnezzar captured Jerusalem in 597 (2 Kgs. 24:10-16), he took the young king Jehoiachin and many leading citizens into exile in Babylon. Among these were Ezekiel and Daniel. Nebuchadnezzar then replaced Jehoiachin with his father's brother, Mattaniah, changing his name to Zedekiah. In response to those in Jerusalem who continued to believe they had been preserved from total destruction because of their righteousness, the Lord showed Jeremiah the vision of the two baskets of figs. The Lord revealed that the good figs represented the fate of those who had been taken to Babylon, and the bad represented the fate of those who had been left behind. To the good figs in Babylon the Lord spoke of hope: "I will bring them again to this land: and I will build them, and not pull them down; and I will plant them, and not pluck them up. And I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God: for they shall return unto me with their whole heart" (Jer. 24:6-7). The restoration and return to the promised land is phrased in the same language as the original covenant: "They shall be my people, and I will be their God" (Jer. 24:7). The evil figs would be delivered to the kingdoms of the earth and would be consumed by the sword, famine, and pestilence (Jer. 24:8-10). That prophecy was fulfilled in 587 B.C. with the destruction of Jerusalem and the temple and the capture of King Zedekiah (2 Kgs. 25). Lehi, a good fig, was delivered by the Lord from this fate and taken to a new promised land, a land given by covenant.

The Book of Consolation (Jer. 30-31)

Jeremiah's heavy burden of destruction and sorrow is balanced by equally weighty prophecies of restoration and consolation, collected in chapters 30 and 31. Hope is found in the promise of a restoration and renewal of the covenant — a new covenant — and a gathering and return to the promised land. These two chapters can be divided into three sections: chapter 30, prophecy of hope directed to Judah and Israel; 31:1-21, prophecy to Ephraim; 31:22-40, prophecy to Judah and Ephraim.

Chapter 30 looks to a day when Israel and Judah, referred to together with the name of their father Jacob, will be released from the yoke and bonds of their captivity (Jer. 30:3, 8), return to the land of their inheritance (Jer. 30:3), and "serve the Lord their God, and David their king" (Jer. 30:9). The imagery of return and restoration in this chapter is that of healing. The wounds had been caused by the Lord, "For I have wounded thee with the wound of an enemy, with the chastisement of a cruel one, for the multitude of thine iniquity; because thy sins were increased" (Jer. 30:14). Just as the wounds will be healed, so will the relationship be resumed: "Their children also shall be as aforetime, and their congregation shall be established before me" (Jer. 30:20). As in past days, the wrath of the Lord will be reserved for those who oppress his people (Jer. 30:20), and "it shall fall with pain upon the head of the wicked" (Jer. 30:23), who are the enemies of Israel, rather than fall on Israel herself.

The first part of chapter 31 contains a prophecy about the gathering of Israel. Parts of this prophecy are directed specifically to Ephraim, one of the ten tribes that were lost and scattered after the destruction of the kingdom of Israel by the Assyrians in 721 B.C. Clearly this vision is intended for the latter days. Once again, the key words from Jeremiah's call occur (Jer. 1:10): "build," in regard to the "virgin of Israel," an appellation often used for a city, and "plant," referring to the vines of Samaria (Jer. 31:4-5). Oliver Cowdery, in his summary of the things the angel Moroni taught Joseph Smith, quoted Jeremiah 31:6: [^9] "For there shall be a day, that the watchmen upon the mount Ephraim shall cry, Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion unto the Lord our God." The central event of this prophecy is the gathering: "Behold, I will bring them from the north country, and gather them from the coasts of the earth" (Jer. 31:8); and "Hear the word of the Lord, O ye nations, and declare it in the isles afar off, and say, He that scattered Israel will gather him, and keep him, as a shepherd doth his flock" (Jer. 31:10).

A New Covenant

The second half of Jeremiah 31 contains a prophecy directed to Judah and Israel — one of the most significant of all of the prophecies in Jeremiah (see a similar prophecy in Ezek. 11:19; 36:26-27). Several passages from this prophecy, according to Oliver Cowdery, were quoted or paraphrased to Joseph Smith by Moroni. [^10] In Jeremiah 31:28, the Lord recounted the call of Jeremiah and noted that as the destruction had and would occur, so also would the rebuilding: "And it shall come to pass, that like as I have watched over them, to pluck up, and to break down, and to throw down, and to destroy, and to afflict; so will I watch over them, to build, and to plant, saith the Lord" (Jer. 31:28). The final answer to the destruction that comes upon Israel through the breaking of the covenant is the making of a new covenant: "Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto them, saith the Lord" (Jer. 31:31-32).

The fulfillment of this prophecy occurred in stages. First, in the universal sense, this prophecy was fulfilled by Christ. On the eve of his arrest, at the Last Supper, Jesus and his disciples celebrated, through the symbolism of the Passover meal, the miraculous deliverance from the bondage of Egypt and the destruction of Pharaoh's army at the Red Sea — events that are types of the Atonement, which delivers us from the bondage of sin and death. At the end of that Passover meal, when the events leading up to the covenant at Sinai were symbolized and the Passover lamb was eaten, Matthew records: "And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it; For this is my blood of the new testament ['covenant' [^11], which is shed for many for the remission of sins" (Matt. 26:26-28). In the meridian of time, Christ literally fulfilled what had been symbolically celebrated through the law of sacrifice for millennia and meticulously observed through the Mosaic law for centuries. Jesus instructed his disciples that from that day forth the symbols of bread and wine would replace those of blood sacrifice as contained in the Passover. Whereas the blood sacrifice looked forward with faith and hope to the time when Christ would come and accomplish the Atonement, so the sacramental meal would look back. The symbolism of the historical event of the deliverance from Egypt and the miracle at the Red Sea was replaced by the symbolism of the historical event against which the Exodus pales in comparison: the Atonement and the conquest of sin and death. Christ, through his sacrifice, laid the foundation for the new covenant, by which men could implement the gospel in their lives, return again to God, and gain immortality and eternal life. It is from Christ's reference to "the new covenant" of Jeremiah 31:31 in Matthew 26:28 ("the new testament") that we have derived our designation of the "new covenant" as the New Testament, and thus "the old covenant" as the Old Testament.

Joseph Smith, in a letter in 1833, [^12] taught that in a more specific sense the "new covenant" was not completely fulfilled in the meridian of time: "Christ, in the days of His flesh, proposed to make a covenant with them, but they rejected Him and His proposals, and in consequence thereof, they were broken off, and no covenant was made with them at that time. But their unbelief has not rendered the promise of God of none effect: no, for there was another day limited in David, which was the day of His power; and then His people, Israel, should be a willing people;—and He would write His law in their hearts, and print it in their thoughts; their sins and their iniquities He would remember no more." [^13]

Jeremiah described the nature of this new covenant in the language of the Exodus known throughout Jeremiah: "But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; After those days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people" (Jer. 31:33). The "heart" and "inward parts" represent an internalization of the covenant in the souls of those who accept it. Paul discussed the nature of this covenant, written "not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart" (2 Cor. 3:3) and explained that this process of internalization can only occur through the power of the Spirit. The fulfillment of this prophecy is in process with the establishment of the new and everlasting covenant. It is "new" because, as the Lord said, "all old covenants have I caused to be done away in this thing"; and it is "everlasting" because it is "that which was from the beginning" (D&C 22:1).

Oracles against Foreign Nations (Jer. 46-51)

The book of Jeremiah contains prophecies against nine foreign nations in chapters 46 through 51. [^14] These oracles, as in the other major prophets, are grouped together. They appear in no obvious chronological or geographical order: Egypt (chap. 46), Philistia (chap. 47), Moab (chap. 48), Ammon (49:1-6), Edom (49:7-22), Damascus (49:23-27), Kedar (49:28-33), Elam (49:34-39), and Babylon (chaps. 50-51). The oracles follow closely, though not exactly, the order of cities and nations listed in the passage about the cup of wrath in Jeremiah 25:15-38. [^15] They are also connected thematically with the imagery of the prophecy in that passage. [^16] There the Lord told Jeremiah to "take the wine cup of this fury at my hand, and cause all the nations, to whom I send thee, to drink it. And they shall drink, and be moved, and be mad, because of the sword that I will send among them" (Jer. 25:15-16). Jeremiah took the cup and dispensed this judgment and destruction, starting with Jerusalem and then to all the nations of the world (Jer. 25:17-38). In a prophetic sense, the oracles in chapters 46 through 51 fulfill this injunction as Jeremiah pronounced the judgment of God on these nations. Although only two of the oracles have specific dates (Egypt, Jer. 46:2; Elam, Jer. 49:34), many are fulfilled in events recorded from the time just preceding and just following Nebuchadnezzar's destruction of Jerusalem in 587 B.C.

A Prophecy against Egypt (Jer. 46)

Jeremiah 46 is dated to the fourth year of Jehoiakim (605 B.C.) and consists of three poems: [^17] verses 1 through 12, 13 through 24, and 27 through 28, with a short prose section in verses 25 and 26. The Lord's specific agent of destruction is Babylon (Jer. 46:2, 13, 26). The reasons cited for the destruction are the vengeance of the Lord (Jer. 46:10) and the shame of Egypt (Jer. 46:12).

The first poem, Jeremiah 46:1-12, most likely deals with the battle at Carchemish in Syria on the northern Euphrates, where the Egyptians led by Necho II were soundly defeated by the Babylonians led by Nebuchadnezzar in 605 B.C. This battle marked the turning point in the control of the west. With the defeat of Egypt, which was the major opposition, the way was open for Babylonian incursion and conquest. The severity of the Egyptian defeat is described in Jeremiah 46:6. "Let not the swift flee away, nor the mighty man escape; they shall stumble, and fall toward the north by the river Euphrates." That is very much like the description preserved in the Babylonian Chronicle [^18] of the same event: "He [Nebuchadnezzar] defeated them (smashing) them out of existence. As for the remnant of the Egyptian army which had escaped from the defeat so (hastily) that no weapon had touched them, the Babylonian army overtook and defeated them in the district of Hamath, so that not a single man [escaped] to his own country." [^19]

The second poem, Jeremiah 46:13-24, refers to the second stage of Nebuchadnezzar's advance through the west and alludes to the imminent conquest of Egypt itself (see Jer. 43:8-13 for another allusion to the conquest of Egypt). The Babylonian Chronicle records a confrontation on the Egyptian frontier sometime around 601 or 600 B.C. between Nebuchadnezzar and Necho, which ended in a stalemate. [^20] According to the best sources, the Babylonian conquest of Egypt occurred in 568/7 B.C. [^21]

In the prose passage of Jeremiah 46:25-26, the Lord declared that he would punish the Egyptians and their gods, kings, and all that trusted them by delivering them into the hands of the Babylonians. In a sense that is the conclusion to the great contest between the Lord God of Israel and the divine Pharaoh along with his gods and magicians that was begun at the time of Moses. In verse 26 the Lord promised eventual restoration of their nation "as in the days of old." Similar promises of restoration occur in Jeremiah 48:47 in regard to Moab, in Jeremiah 49:6 in regard to Ammon, and in Jeremiah 49:39 in regard to Elam.

The third poem, an oracle addressed to Israel in Jeremiah 46:27-28, is God's assurance that although they would be delivered into the hands of nations that would be destroyed, "I will not make a full end of thee, but correct thee in measure; yet will I not leave thee wholly unpunished" (Jer. 46:28).

Prophecies against Philistia and Moab (Jer. 47-48)

The oracle in Jeremiah 47 is directed against Philistia, Judah's longtime neighbor on the southwestern coast of Palestine. For many years, the Philistines had attempted to expand their territory by conquest of Israel. Their power had been broken by David (2 Sam. 5:17-25), but the individual city states continued. It is not specified who the human agent of God's destruction was to be, but Jeremiah 47:2 says that destruction would come from the north. It is likely that this reference indicates the Babylonians. Any invading army from the east would come to the west along the established roads, thus confronting most of the nations of Palestine from the north. No specific crimes are cited. The reference to the Phoenician cities of Tyre and Sidon in verse 4 may refer to an alliance they made with Philistia in the face of the Babylonian threat. The Babylonian destruction of Philistia for allying itself with Egypt took place in 604/3 B.C., when, according to the Babylonian Chronicle, Ashkelon fell after a long siege. [^22]

The oracle against Moab in Jeremiah 48 is either one long and rather complicated poem or a series of smaller units that have been juxtaposed and in some cases linked by prose portions. It shows similarities with other oracles against Moab but most particularly with the oracle against Moab in Isaiah 15 and 16. Ever since the Exodus, Israel and Moab had been enemies (Num. 22-24). The animosity was undoubtedly heightened in 600-598 B.C. when the Moabites helped the Babylonians put down the rebellion of Jehoiakim as recorded in 2 Kings 24:2. The crimes cited are pride and arrogance (Jer. 48:7, 29-30) and the Moabites' derision of Judah (Jer. 48:26-27). Also, the existence of high places is noted (Jer. 48:35) as well as the defeat and exile of the Moabite god Chemosh (Jer. 48:7, 13). The specific human agent of destruction is not cited but is likely the Babylonians: in 582 and 581, Nebuchadnezzar, in response to further rebellion, invaded Judah again and deported more of its population (Jer. 52:30). Josephus noted that Nebuchadnezzar also invaded Moab and Ammon. [^23] Soon afterward, Moab was further attacked by the neighboring Arab tribes. The oracle against Moab also ends with a promise of restoration (Jer. 48:47).

Prophecies against Ammon, Edom, and Other Nations (Jer. 49)

There had been a longstanding dispute between Israel and Ammon over the territory of Gilead, which was claimed by Israel after defeating Sihon and Og and had been a point of contention ever since the time of Jephthah (Judg. 11) and Saul (1 Sam. 11). The human agent is not specified, and the crime of arrogance may be referred to in Jeremiah 49:4. The exile of the Ammonite god Milkom is also probably mentioned in Jeremiah 49:3 (Hebrew, malkam; KJV "their king" is usually read by modern translations as "Milkom"). The fulfillment of this prophecy presumably occurred along with the fulfillment of the prophecy against her neighbor Moab. Restoration is also promised to Ammon in Jeremiah 49:6.

The oracle against Edom in Jeremiah 49:7-22 shows similarities to the oracle against Edom in Obadiah. No human agent is specified, and the crime cited is pride (Jer. 49:16). As demonstrated in Ezekiel 25:12-14, Psalm 137:7, and Obadiah, Edom fully cooperated with the Babylonians against Judah. Edom was finally destroyed near the end of the sixth century B.C. by incursions of Arab tribes.

In the oracle against Damascus in Jeremiah 49:23-27, the human agent is specified as Babylon, but no specific crime is mentioned. The historical fulfillment is problematic. If it was spoken early in Jeremiah's career, this prophecy could have had fulfillment in 605 B.C. at the Battle of Carchemish, when Egypt was defeated in this region, which would have spelled doom for the cities in the area. It is recorded that Syrian troops assisted the Babylonians against Jehoiakim's revolt sometime around 600 B.C. (2 Kgs. 24:2-4).

Kedar and Hazor are discussed next (Jer. 49:28-33). Kedar is an area east of Ammon and Moab in the Arabian desert. Babylon is mentioned as the human agent of destruction. Although many of the tribes may have been wanderers, there are also indications that the Kedarites lived in villages (Gen. 25:13-16; Isa. 42:11), one of which must have been called Hazor. The fulfillment may be seen in the Babylonian Chronicle, which records that in 599/8 B.C. the Babylonians "scouring the desert . . . took much plunder from the Arabs, their possessions, animals and gods." [^24]

An oracle against Elam concludes Jeremiah 49 (vv. 34-39). Elam was a state to the east of Babylon, in present-day Iran. This oracle's general date is the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah. No human agent is cited, and no specific crime is mentioned. A reconstruction of a fragmented portion of the Babylonian Chronicle [^25] may allude to an invasion of Nebuchadnezzar in 596/5 B.C., which could be a fulfillment of this oracle. A future restoration is promised (Jer. 49:39).

A Prophecy against Babylon (Jer. 50-51)

Throughout Jeremiah, Babylon is portrayed as the instrument in the hand of the Lord, the cup of wrath in his hand by which he has dispensed judgment. But Babylon too would be punished for her crimes. As in the oracle against Egypt, the vengeance of the Lord is cited (Jer. 50:15), and here the list of crimes includes the capture of Judah (Jer. 50:17; 51:49), the destruction of the temple (Jer. 50:28), and the Exile (Jer. 50:33). The defeat and destruction of their false gods and images (Bel and Marduk) is mentioned (Jer. 50:2; 51:44, 47, 52). The historical fulfillment of this prophecy occurred in 539 by Cyrus and the Persians. The city itself was captured but not destroyed by the Persians, nor later yet by Alexander the Great. Babylon's demise was gradual. During the Hellenistic period a city named Seleucia was built nearby, and most of the population moved there. The city of Babylon eventually disappeared. And true to Jeremiah's prediction (Jer. 50:38-40), it remained for many centuries desolate and uninhabited. Its spiritual namesake, Babylon as the world, on the other hand, has grown and prospered throughout the ages.

The destruction of spiritual Babylon — the world — still remains to be fulfilled, making this prophecy a timely one. Much of the imagery of this oracle occurs throughout the book of Revelation. Jeremiah described Babylon: "O thou that dwellest upon many waters, abundant in treasures, thine end is come, and the measure of thy covetousness" (Jer. 51:13). The angel showed John the Revelator a woman as a "great whore that sitteth upon many waters" (Rev. 17:1) and defined the waters as the "peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues" (Rev. 17:15) and the woman as "that great city, which reigneth over the kings of the earth" (Rev. 17:18). Just as in Jeremiah's day "Babylon hath been a golden cup in the Lord's hand, that made all the earth drunken" (Jer. 51:7), so Babylon the harlot in Revelation 17:4 holds in her hand a golden cup "full of abominations and filthiness of her fornication." In the latter days the Lord once again used this image of the destructive influence of Babylon as "the same which has made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication" (D&C 35:11; see also 86:3).

The short prose ending records that Jeremiah sent a copy of this oracle to Babylon with Seraiah, a court official and probably the brother of Baruch, since they are both the sons of Neriah (Jer. 51:59-64). In Babylon Seraiah was to read these words, bind a stone to the book, and throw them into the Euphrates, reciting these words of the Lord: "Thus shall Babylon sink, and shall not rise from the evil that I will bring upon her" (Jer. 51:64). Likewise the angel in the book of Revelation, symbolic of the end of the world, "took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all" (Rev. 18:21).

The history of the covenant people now has gone full cycle: from Babel to Babel, Babylon to Babylon. And the Exile — the end of the story in Jeremiah 52 — aptly provides the setting for a new beginning. As the Lord commanded the patriarch Abraham to leave his land, Ur of the Chaldees, so the Lord at the time of Jeremiah commanded his people to flee Babylon, the land of the Chaldeans: "My people, go ye out of the midst of her, and deliver ye every man his soul from the fierce anger of the Lord" (Jer. 51:45). Their destination is the promised land, a land given by covenant. This same commandment has been given in the latter days — as part of the new and everlasting covenant — to us who are born into the world. And the promised land, by covenant, is Zion. The Lord has commanded: "Go ye out from Babylon. Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord" and "flee unto Zion" (D&C 133:5, 12). "For verily I say, tomorrow all the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, for I am the Lord of Hosts; and I will not spare any that remain in Babylon" (D&C 64:24).

Notes

David Rolph Seely is assistant professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Samuel Noah Kramer, trans., "Lamentation over the Destruction of Ur" and "Lamentation over the Destruction of Sumer and Ur," in Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testament, ed. James B. Pritchard (Princeton: Princeton University, 1969), pp. 455-63, 611-19. [^6]
[^2] Note that there are four terms for destruction ("root out," "pull down," "destroy," and "throw down") and only two for restoration ("Build" and "plant"), signifying a double portion of destruction. The prophecies throughout the book reflect the same proportion of destruction, which must precede the restoration.
[^3] In Lam. 1, 2, and 4, the first word in each successive stanza begins with the successive letter in the Hebrew alphabet. In Lam. 3 each line within the stanza begins with the same letter. Lam. 5 is the exception in that it has twenty-two lines but the initial word of each line is not in alphabetical order—an "alphabetless acrostic."
[^4] Most of the lines are written in bicola with three stresses in the first colon and two in the second, producing a lamenting or "qinah" meter. The "qinah" meter gives a falling sense to Lamentations, distinguishing it from other Hebrew poetry and adding to the mood of the poems. See Hillers, pp. xxx—xxxvii, for discussion of Budde's discovery of "qinah" meter ("Das hebraische Klagelied," Zeitschrift fur die alttestamentliche Wissenschaft 2 [1882]: 1-52) and a survey of other theories concerning Hebrew meter.
[^5] Francis Landy, "Lamentations," in The Literary Guide to the Bible, ed. Robert Alter and Frank Kermode (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University, 1987), p. 332. Landy gives a literary analysis of the book of Lamentations.
[^6] See Lam. 2:4-5 as well, where this image is described in retrospect after the destruction.
[^7] See H. B. Maclean, "Jehoiakim," in The Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, 5 vols., ed. G. A. Buttrick, et al. (Nashville: Abingdon, 1962-76), 2:813-14. The problems of reconstructing the events surrounding his death are further compounded by the passage in 2 Chron. 36:6, which says that Nebuchadnezzar "bound him in fetters" to take him into captivity.
[^8] This is exactly the king of prophet that Samuel the Lamanite told the Nephites they would accept: "But behold, if a man shall come among you and shall say: Do this, and there is no iniquity; do that and ye shall not suffer; yea, he will say: Walk after the pride of your own hearts; yea, walk after the pride of your eyes, and do whatsoever your heart desireth — and if a man shall come among you and say this, ye will receive him, and say that he is a prophet" (Hel. 13:27).
[^9] This particular passage was quoted by Oliver Cowdery between passages of Isaiah in the Messenger and Advocate, Apr. 1835, p. 111. The particular passages of scripture included in Oliver Cowdery's account of Moroni's discourses to Joseph Smith in the Messenger and Advocate have been identified in Kent P. Jackson, "The Appearance of Moroni to Joseph Smith," in Studies in Scripture, Volume Two: The Pearl of Great Price, ed. Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson (Salt Lake City: Randall Book, 1985), pp. 360-62.
[^10] Messenger and Advocate, Apr. 1835, pp. 110-11. A list of these citations, as well as other latter-day commentary on these passages, can be found in Monte S. Nyman, The Words of Jeremiah (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), pp. 83-95.
[^11] The Greek word diatheke is the word used throughout the Septuagint to translate Hebrew berit, "covenant." As an extension of the meaning "covenant," the Greek word also has the meaning of "last will and testament," which was the sense translated by the Latin testamentum, preserved in KJV "testament."
[^12] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), pp. 13-18.
[^13] Ibid., pp. 14-15.
[^14] For an introduction to the Oracles against Foreign Nations, see Chap. 13 of this volume.
[^15] The order of cities and nations in Jeremiah 25:15-38 is Egypt (v. 19); Uz (v. 20); Philistia: Ashkelon, Gaza, Ekron, and Ashdod (v. 20); Edom (v. 21); Moab (v. 21); Ammon (v. 21); Tyre, Sidon (v. 22); Arabia: Dedan, Tema, Buz (vv. 23-24); kings of Zimri (v. 25); Elam (v. 25); Medes (v. 25); Sheshak, which is Babylon (v. 26).
[^16] In the Greek Septuagint the oracles that occur in chapters 46-51 of the Masoretic Text are placed after the passage about the cup of wrath in Jer. 25:13 and in a totally different order from that of the Hebrew tradition. Hebrew versions closely resembling the texts behind both the Masoretic Text and the Septuagint have been found at Qumran, suggesting that the differences are not necessarily due to the translation into Greek. For a complete discussion of this problem, see J. Gerald Janzen, Studies in the Text of Jeremiah (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University, 1973).
[^17] It should be noted that the poetry in this section in particular, as well as the Oracles against Nations as a whole, is regarded by scholars as some of the best in the book of Jeremiah. See John Bright, Jeremiah, Anchor Bible 21 (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1965), pp. 307-8.
[^18] The Babylonian Chronicle is a series of Neo-Babylonian tablets preserving contemporary accounts from 626 B.C., the death of Ashurbanipal, to 539 B.C., the fall of Babylon to the Persians. Unfortunately, the extant tablets cover only the years 626-22, 610-594, 556 and 555-39 B.C. The standard English edition with text, translation, and notes is D. J. Wiseman, Chronicles of Chaldean Kings (London: British Museum, 1961). A more popular version, with translations by Wiseman of passages relevant to Old Testament history, can be found in D. Winton Thomas, Documents from Old Testament Times (New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1961), pp. 75-83.
[^19] Thomas, pp. 78-79; Wiseman, pp. 67-69.
[^20] Wiseman, p. 71.
[^21] James B. Pritchard, ed., Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testament, 3d ed. with Supplement (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University, 1969), p. 308.
[^22] Wiseman, p. 69.
[^23] Antiquities 10.9.7; see Flavius Josephus, Jewish Antiquities, The Loeb Classical Library, trans. Ralph Marcus (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University, 1978), 6:257-61.
[^24] Wiseman, p. 71.
[^25] Wiseman, p. 72.
