Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

23

LAMENTATIONS

JO ANN H. SEELY

The lament, an ancient poetic form found in Sumerian, Akkadian, and Egyptian traditions, records defeat or loss. In the Sumerian laments over ruined cities, the patron god of the city is overwhelmed by other gods and the residents are left helpless. [^1] Judah's lament in Lamentations delineates the desolation of the city of Jerusalem, but it reminds its readers that the Lord still reigns. This is a case not of foreign gods overpowering a weaker deity but of the Lord chastening his own people. Lamentations is Judah's response to the whys of their misery and destruction. Why must we suffer? Why is the Lord turned against us? Why must we wait for deliverance? Why must Israel be in captivity? Why is Zion destroyed? It is a painful explanation to the elect people of how and why they have fallen.

The name "Lamentations" comes from the Greek threnoi, translated from the Hebrew qinot, meaning "laments." In the Hebrew Bible the book of Lamentations is called eka—"How?"—following the practice of using the first word of a book for its title. In English translations the title is often expanded, as it is in the Greek Septuagint and the Latin Vulgate, to ascribe authorship to Jeremiah. The historical accuracy and intensity with which the author wrote concerning the destruction of Jerusalem and the absence of details concerning the end of the Exile suggest that the composition of Lamentations was sometime between the fall of Judah in 587 B.C. and the return from exile in 538 B.C. The descriptions are vivid, as an eyewitness account would be. Many have suggested that Jeremiah wrote Lamentations (as the title reflects), because he fits all the requirements and is known to have written other laments (2 Chron. 35:25). [^2]

Lamentations is written in acrostics, that is, it is organized by starting each stanza or line with a successive letter of the Hebrew alphabet — a feature unfortunately lost in translation. [^3] The acrostic form does not distract from the beauty of the poems but adds a sense of completeness, as if the poet had covered all that needed to be said from beginning to end. [^4]

There Is No Comfort for Zion (Lam. 1-2)

The initial word "how" of three of the poems in Lamentations poses unanswerable questions and expresses the utter inability of the poet to articulate the agonies that had befallen Jerusalem: "How doth the city sit solitary . . . how is she become as a widow! . . . how is she become tributary!" (Lam. 1:1). It expresses the afflicted's disbelief: "How hath Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud in his anger" (Lam. 2:1). In chapter 1 the poet personifies the city of Zion as a widow, a pitiful woman in pain. As frequently noted in the Bible, widows are the symbol of the distressed and disenfranchised element of society who are bereft of protectors. Israel the bride of the Lord has now become a widow, as the Lord has withdrawn and even become her afflicter (Lam. 1:5). Once great among the nations, Zion now sits alone weeping. She has been deserted by all her lovers, friends, and the Lord: "There is none to comfort her" (Lam. 1:17). This theme is repeated throughout the lament (Lam. 1:2, 9, 16, 17, 21): her streets are empty during the appointed feasts (Lam. 1:4), and "her children are gone into captivity" (Lam. 1:5). Zion the weeping woman is a tragic figure; even death would bring her solace.

How will Judah preserve faith in God when they have been conquered? The Lord has not been defeated by the gods of Babylon; rather, it was the Lord who destroyed Jerusalem. Lamentations 2:1-9a delineates in detail the destruction caused by the Lord: leveled strongholds (vv. 2, 5); ruined temple, altar, and holy places (vv. 6-7); razed walls and gates (vv. 8, 9a). Verse 14 suggests the cause of this calamity: "Thy prophets have seen vain and foolish things for thee: they have not discovered thine iniquity, to turn away thy captivity, but have seen for thee false burdens and causes of banishment." The people have caused their own plight through their disobedience and through listening to pleasing but false prophets. The destruction was in fulfillment of prophecy: "The Lord hath done that which he had devised; he hath fulfilled his word that he had commanded in the days of old: he hath thrown down, and hath not pitied: and he hath caused thine enemy to rejoice over thee" (Lam. 2:17). Israel has seen the fruition of her works; the curses of the covenant have been confirmed (see Deut. 28:15-68).

A Personal Lament and Prayer (Lam. 3)

Lamentations is not only a personification but a personalization of the suffering the poet is trying to convey. It is a first-person experience of a survivor. We can feel with him and with what he has endured. In Lamentations 3, between his laments in chapters 1 and 2 and 4 and 5, the poet has placed his message. The Lord "doth not afflict willingly nor grieve the children of men" (Lam. 3:33); "though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion according to the multitude of his mercies" (Lam. 3:32). The poem moves from the personal lament of the first verses to the expression of hope for society.

"This I recall to my mind, therefore have I hope," wrote the man of sorrow (Lam. 3:21). Hope emerges when one recognizes that the Lord will not only fulfill what he was "devised" but also bring to pass what he promised long ago. The Lord promised Abraham: "I will make nations of thee" (Gen. 17:6); "I will give unto thee . . . all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession" (Gen. 17:8); and "in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed" (Gen. 12:3). Covenant Israel will not be forgotten, but they must be patient. "It is of the Lord's mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not" (Lam. 3:22). And in that compassion, he has offered them the opportunity for repentance. "It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord" (Lam. 3:26). Zion has felt the depths of despair, but she will yet see the salvation of her Savior.

The final verses of chapter 3 contain a familiar prayer—calling out from the "low dungeon" (v. 55), reminiscent of Jonah calling from the belly of the fish (Jonah 2:1-10) or the psalmist calling from the pit of hell for salvation (Ps. 18:5, 6; 88:3-12). The Lord responds, "Fear not" (Lam. 3:57), and the supplication continues that he be Israel's redeemer and judge. "O Lord, thou hast pleaded the causes of my soul; thou hast redeemed my life. O Lord, thou hast seen my wrong: judge thou my cause" (Lam. 3:58-59).

The Suffering of Zion's People (Lam. 4-5)

In the fourth chapter of Lamentations, the "dominant figure of speech is comparison," [^5] illuminating the disparity between past and present. The precious sons of Zion who were once fine gold are now earthen pitchers (Lam. 4:2), the rich are heaped on dunghills (Lam. 4:5), and Nazarites whiter than milk now are blacker than coal (Lam. 4:7, 8). The severity of Israel's punishment is worse than that of Sodom: "For the punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of my people is greater than the punishment of the sin of Sodom, that was overthrown as in a moment and no hand stayed on her" (Lam. 4:6). Israel must endure misery and captivity to atone for her sins.

A vivid image concerns the prophets and priests—symbols of Judah's uniqueness. Prophets, the champions of the poor, "have shed the blood of the just" (Lam. 4:13). Priests, the guardians of purity and cleanliness, are unclean and wandering to derisive shouts of defilement (Lam. 4:15). The picture is completed in verse 20 with the king—"the breath of out nostrils, the anointed of the Lord"—taken and cast into the pits of the enemy.

The final lament (chap. 5) begins with an appeal: "Remember O Lord what is come upon us" (Lam. 5:1), followed by a recitation of the terrible state of Zion. They are as orphans, widows, and servants; they suffer hunger, the women are ravished, the princes are hanged. "The crown is fallen from our head: woe unto us, that we have sinned!" (Lam. 5:16). Judah has brought tribulation upon herself; she has lost the blessings of the Lord's elect people. The poem concludes with an entreaty to the Lord: "Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned; renew our days as of old" (Lam. 5:21). The poet recognized that Judah was dependent upon the Lord's mercy to repent and regain her status.

Through painful images and poignant words, the book of Lamentations poetically expresses the grief of a people in a sorrowful state. The woeful account recalls in different voices the various aspects of what has occurred. The grisly details of the terrible destruction of Jerusalem and the fate of the king, prophets, priests, and people are recorded. Lamentations illuminates the relationship of the Lord with his people. "And I myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand and with a strong arm, even in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath" (Jer. 21:5). The Lord's hand in the devastation is a reminder of disobedience and the need for repentance.

The children of Zion must have faith that as they have experienced justice and destruction, so they will also experience mercy and restoration. The Lord has not forsaken his children but has given them the chance to return: "I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah. . . . I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more" (Jer. 31:31, 34). The poet concluded: "Wherefore dost thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long time?" (Lam. 5:20). Judah must believe that their defeat is a sign that the Lord has not forgotten them; now their faith is required to remember him: "Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord. Let us lift up our heart with our hand unto God in the heavens" (Lam. 3:40-41).

Notes

Jo Ann H. Seely is a part-time instructor in ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

. Lamentations is one of the Megillot—five short scrolls read at different Jewish festivals. It is read on the ninth of Ab, commemorating the destruction of the temple. See Delbert R. Hillers, Lamentations, Anchor Bible 7A (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1982), pp. xl-xli, for comments concerning liturgical use of Lamentations. Christian Bibles follow the Septuagint and the Vulgate in placing it after Jeremiah.

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed. rev., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1957), 1:245.
[^2] For more discussion on missing scripture, see Robert A. Cloward, "Lost Scripture," in The Encyclopedia of Mormonism, ed. Daniel H. Ludlow (New York: Macmillan, 1992), pp. 845-46.
[^3] As was the case with his contemporary, Jeremiah (Jer. 38:2-4). See also Hugh Nibley, Since Cumorah, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co. and the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 1988), pp. 276-77.
[^4] For more on Lehi's ministry, see S. Kent Brown, "Lehi's Personal Record: Quest for a Missing Source," BYU Studies, Winter 1984, pp. 19-42; and chaps. 3, 4, 6, 8, and 9 in Kent P. Jackson, ed., Studies in Scripture, Volume Seven: 1 Nephi to Alma 29 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1987).
[^5] The "Allegory" and "Thanksgiving Hymn" of Zenos being notable exceptions (Jacob 5; Alma 33:3-15). In these passages, Zenos used typology and poetic style very similar to those of other biblical prophets.
