Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

24

OLD TESTAMENT PROPHETS IN THE BOOK OF MORMON (LEHI, ZENOCK, NEUM, ZENOS, EZIAS)

TERRY B. BALL

As a preface to a revelation in 1832, the Prophet Joseph Smith recorded, "From sundry revelations which had been received, it was apparent that many important points touching the salvation of man had been taken from the Bible, or lost before it was compiled." [^1] Nearly two and one-half millennia earlier an angel of the Lord bore similar witness. This messenger from God explained to the prophet Nephi that the covenants and prophecies that would be contained in the latter-day Bible would be fewer than those then available on the plates of brass to the Book of Mormon peoples (1 Ne. 13:23). The angel further warned that there would be those who, in order to "pervert the right ways of the Lord," would take away from the Bible "many parts which are plain and most precious; and also many covenants of the Lord" (1 Ne. 13:26-27). [^2]

Although the amount of scripture missing or removed from the Bible cannot be known, the Book of Mormon is helpful in restoring the names and some teachings of several prophets whose writings have not been preserved in the Old Testament. These prophets include Lehi, Zenock, Neum, Zenos, and Ezias. All of these deserve recognition as Old Testament prophets. They prophesied in Old Testament lands, during Old Testament times, to Old Testament peoples, and about Old Testament themes, especially the Messiah and his covenant people.

Lehi

Lehi is the first of these prophets to be mentioned in the Book of Mormon. In an abridgment of his father's record, Nephi wrote that around 600 B.C. "many prophets" came to warn of the impending destruction that awaited the people of Jerusalem if they did not repent (1 Ne. 1:4). The Old Testament indicates that among these prophets were men such as Jeremiah (e.g., Jer. 5-9), Zephaniah (Zeph. 1:3-6), and Habakkuk (Hab. 1:5-9).

The warnings of the prophets moved Lehi to fervent prayer on behalf of the people. His petition was answered with a powerful revelation in which "there came a pillar of fire and dwelt upon a rock before him; and he saw and heard much" (1 Ne. 1:5-6). In a subsequent vision, Lehi "saw God sitting upon his throne," and was given a prophetic book by "one" who had descended "out of the midst of heaven" and whose "luster was above that of the sun at noon-day" (1 Ne. 1:8-11). The message of the book echoed the warnings of the prophets that Lehi had heard: "And he read, saying: Wo, Wo, unto Jerusalem, for I have seen thine abominations! Yea, and many things did my father read concerning Jerusalem—that it should be destroyed, and the inhabitants thereof; many should perish by the sword, and many should be carried away captive into Babylon" (1 Ne. 1:13).

After receiving the vision, Lehi "went forth among the people, and began to prophesy and to declare unto them concerning the things which he had both seen and heard" (1 Ne. 1:18). Like his contemporaries, Lehi testified of the destruction of Jerusalem, the wickedness of the people, and of the coming of the Messiah to redeem the world. Lehi's message of doom was likely a threat to the tenuous morale and political stability of the time, and the people resented being reminded of their iniquities. [^3] Consequently, the Jews responded to Lehi as they did to other prophets of his time. They "did mock him because of the things which he testified of them," and they "sought his life, that they might take it away" (1 Ne. 1:19, 20).

Lehi's tenure as a prophet in Judah proved to be short lived. Before the people could harm him, he was instructed by the Lord to "take his family and depart into the wilderness," eventually to be led to the new promised land on the American continent (1 Ne. 2:2). [^4]

Zenock, Neum, Zenos, and Ezias

While listing prophets who had testified of the Messiah, Nephi introduced the names of three other pre-Exilic prophets: Zenock, Neum, and Zenos (1 Ne. 19:10). Later, Nephi, son of Helaman, added the name of Ezias to the list (Hel. 8:20). Although these prophets are not mentioned in the Bible, their teachings and prophecies were apparently included on the plates of brass (1 Ne. 19:21).

The number of years by which these men predated Lehi cannot be determined. Nephi, son of Helaman, listed Zenock, Zenos, and Ezias as prophets who had testified since the days of Abraham (ca. 1900 B.C.), but he also spoke of prophets who foretold of Christ "a great many thousand years before his coming" (Hel. 8:19-20). Mormon seems to imply that Zenock and Zenos were both descendants of Joseph and ancestors to the Book of Mormon peoples, which would place them later than ca. 1600 B.C. (3 Ne. 10:16-17).

The prophecies of these men are, for the most part, reported in plain and simple language, more resembling the Book of Mormon prophets than the biblical prophets, who preferred to couch their messages in poetic imagery. [^5] Whether Zenock, Neum, Zenos, and Ezias themselves actually delivered their messages in such plain language, or their teachings were interpreted into simpler rhetoric by the Book of Mormon authors who cited them, cannot be ascertained.

Zenock

The teachings of Zenock are referred to five times in the Book of Mormon. In each case, his message centers on the Messiah. Zenock taught that the Son of God would come to redeem his people (Alma 34:7; Hel. 8:18-20). He spoke of the Lord's anger with the covenant people for their refusal to understand the mercies which had been bestowed upon them because of the Son (Alma 33:14-17). He prophesied that the Savior would be crucified (1 Ne. 19:10) and that great destruction would accompany his death (3 Ne. 10:14-16). Both Mormon and Nephi, son of Helaman, mentioned that Zenock was martyred. Alma explained why and how to the Zoramites: "Because the people would not understand his words they stoned him to death" (Alma 33:17).

Neum

Neum, also a messianic prophet, finds mention only once in the Book of Mormon. As Nephi reviewed the teachings of prophets who foretold the mission and message of the Messiah, he explained that the Savior would come "to be crucified, according to the words of Neum" (1 Ne. 19:10). Thus Neum deserves to be classified with the prophets Jacob referred to when he taught that all the holy prophets which were before the Nephites knew of Christ and "had a hope of his glory" (Jacob 4:4).

Zenos

Elder Bruce R. McConkie called Zenos "one of the greatest prophets in Israel." [^6] Support for Elder McConkie's statement can be found in the fact that next to Isaiah, Zenos is the most quoted Old Testament prophet in the Book of Mormon. In addition to several brief references, there are two long quotations of Zenos' teachings found in the Nephite text.

In an effort to help his brethren understand the responsibility and future of the covenant people, the prophet Jacob quoted what is often referred to as Zenos' allegory of the olive tree (Jacob 5). Constituting the longest single chapter in the Book of Mormon, [^7] this allegory chronicles the apostasy of Israel, the subsequent scattering, the Gentiles' adoption into the covenant people, the latter-day gathering of Israel, the millennial reign of the Messiah, and the end of the mortal world. [^8] The second longest quotation from Zenos was offered by Alma as he taught the more humble Zoramites about when and where to pray (Alma 33:3-15). In this passage Zenos used poetic style reminiscent of the biblical psalmist to praise God for hearing his prayers wherever and whenever he cried unto him in "afflictions" and "sincerity." He further rejoiced in the mercy and protection that the answers to those prayers afforded him and the recognition that judgment had been turned away from him because of the Son of God (see also Alma 34:7).

In addition to these lengthy quotations, Nephi, son of Lehi, referred to Zenos' prophecies concerning the burial of the Messiah in a sepulchre and the three days of darkness that would accompany his death (1 Ne. 19:10-17). Mormon wrote to remind future Book of Mormon readers that Zenos had also prophesied of the destruction that took place on the earth at the death of the Savior (3 Ne. 10:14-17). Nephi, son of Helaman, listed Zenos as yet another Old Testament prophet who was slain for his testimony of the coming Messiah (Hel. 8:19).

Ezias

Like Neum, the teachings of the prophet Ezias are referred to only once in the Book of Mormon. Little can be known of his life, but Nephi, son of Helaman, taught that the message of Ezias was like that of other prophets who foretold the Savior's coming "that even redemption should come unto them" (Hel. 8:18-20).

Recognition

Nephi son of Lehi was instructed by an angel that in the latter days the Book of Mormon would help establish the truth of the biblical books "and shall make known the plain and precious things which have been taken away from them; and shall make known to all kindreds, tongues, and people, that the Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal Father, and the Savior of the world; and that all men must come unto him, or they cannot be saved" (1 Ne. 13:40). The prophecies of Lehi, Zenock, Neum, Zenos, and Ezias preserved in the Book of Mormon help accomplish its divine mission. For their teachings to the Old Testament peoples and their willingness to surrender their lives to and for the Messiah and his covenant people, each of these men deserves recognition among the great Old Testament prophets.

Notes

Terry B. Ball is assistant professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Compare Obad. 1:1-4 with Jer. 49:14-16, and Obad. 1:5-6 with Jer. 49:9-10.
[^2] It is likely that Jeremiah, Lehi, Obadiah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, and Huldah (2 Kgs. 22:11-20) were all contemporary prophets.
[^3] The intention of the difficult Hebrew word here, translated "saviours" in the KJV, is not clear. Some translations follow the ancient Greek Septuagint (3d century B.C.) and read it as a passive participle, "saved ones," i.e., musaim, which seems to make good sense in this context. But "saviors" (or "deliverers") also works well, since those who are saved out of the world then have the calling to stand as deliverers for others. Joseph Smith used the term "saviors on Mount Zion," though not in the context of Obadiah, to refer to "the remnant which was left" — "the 'ministers of our God'" — who would in turn bless the lives of others; Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, The Words of Joseph Smith (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), pp. 73-74. Later he used the term consistently with specific reference to proxy work for the dead; ibid., pp. 77, 318, and 368; see also Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), p. 223.
[^4] Ezra Taft Benson, "Beware of Pride," Ensign, May 1989, pp. 4-6.
[^5] The "Allegory" and "Thanksgiving Hymn" of Zenos being notable exceptions (Jacob 5; Alma 33:3-15). In these passages, Zenos used typology and poetic style very similar to those of other biblical prophets.
[^6] Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986), p. 588. See also "The Doctrinal Restoration," in The Joseph Smith Translation: The Restoration of Plain and Precious Things, ed. M. S. Nyman and R. L. Millet (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1985), p. 17.
[^7] Daniel H. Ludlow, "Zenos," in Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism, pp. 1623-24.
[^8] See Kent P. Jackson, "Nourished by the Good Word of God," in Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Volume Seven, pp. 186-95; Paul Y. Hoskisson, "Explicating the Mystery of the Rejected Foundation Stone: The Allegory of the Olive Tree," BYU Studies, Summer 1990, pp. 77-87. See also L. Gary Lambert, "The Allegory of Zenos," in Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism, pp. 31-32.
