Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

25

THE BOOK OF OBADIAH

DARRELL L. MATTHEWS

The book of Obadiah is the shortest book of the Old Testament. It consists of one chapter of only twenty-one verses. The greater part of the book is a warning to Edom that the wrath of God will come upon its people for their participation in destroying Jerusalem. Much about the book remains uncertain. We do not possess any biographical information about the prophet Obadiah, and there is no clear historical information on exactly when to date the book. And because the name Obadiah itself means "servant of the Lord," some have suggested that it is a title instead of a name. Since other individuals with this name are attested in the Bible, however, there is no reason to reject it as the prophet's actual name.

The date of the book has also been debated, with proposals ranging from 850 B.C. to about 200 B.C. The main criteria for dating this book are the mention of the destruction of Jerusalem and the similarity of several verses to passages in Jeremiah. [^1] Undoubtedly the destruction mentioned is the 587 B.C. fall of Jerusalem at the hands of the Babylonians during the time of King Zedekiah and the prophet Jeremiah. There is no mention of the Exile in Babylonia.

A few verses in this book have close parallels in the book of Jeremiah. If this book was written soon after the destruction of Jerusalem, Obadiah and Jeremiah would have been contemporary prophets and likely would have known each other. We know from the Book of Mormon that there were many prophets during the time immediately preceding the fall of Jerusalem (1 Ne. 1:4), one of whom was Lehi. [^2]

As already mentioned, Obadiah's vision consists mainly of a warning to the Edomites on account of their participation in the destruction of Jerusalem. The Edomites were neighbors to Judah and lived in the area south of the Dead Sea. We are told that they were the descendants of Esau, the brother of Jacob (Gen. 36:1; 1 Chron. 1:35-43) and were therefore blood relatives of the Israelites. During the early part of Israel's existence, it appears that there were peaceful relations between the two nations, but with time hostilities developed, especially after David and his army attacked Edom (2 Sam. 8:13-14).

In Obadiah's revelation, the Edomites were told that they were "greatly despised" (Obad. 1:2). In their pride they believed that they were secure and that no one would harm them. This false security was about to end. In verse 5 we learn that their destruction would be complete. They were told that if a robber were to come he would only take until he had enough. If the grapegatherers came, they would always leave a few grapes for the poor. But when the judgment of the Lord comes it will be complete, and nothing of the Edomites would remain to be salvaged. By the second century B.C. there was no longer an Edomite state.

Beginning in verse 10 we are told why this judgment would come upon Edom. They had betrayed their brothers of the house of Israel and thus would "be cut off for ever." Apparently they had assisted the Babylonians in carrying away the captives of Jerusalem and destroying the city. The authors of Psalm 137 and Lamentations both wrote about the involvement of the Edomites in the downfall of Jerusalem (Ps. 137:7; Lam. 4:21-22). Verses 12 through 14 of Obadiah contain the Lord's witness against the Edomites. We are told that they had rejoiced over their brother Judah's destruction and took great pride in their participation. Even worse, they attacked those who tried to escape. As the Lord stated: "Neither shouldest thou have stood in the crossway, to cut off those of his that did escape; neither shouldest thou have delivered up those of his that did remain in the day of distress" (Obad. 1:14). God's judgment would be decisive. The Edomites would be treated as they treated Judah. They would be destroyed and carried captive. The Lord said, "Thy reward shall return upon thine own head" (Obad. 1:15).

The last five verses of Obadiah prophesy that the house of Israel will once again prevail and gain possession of the land of its inheritance. It will be as if the house of Jacob were a fire and Esau were stubble. Esau would be burned, and Jacob would be restored to its possession (Obad. 1:18-20). Deliverance will be in Zion (Obad. 1:17), where a righteous remnant [^3] "shall come up on mount Zion to judge the mount of Esau." And "the kingdom shall be the Lord's" (Obad. 1:21).

From this book we learn important lessons. Among the most significant is that pride is a destructive element that should be eliminated from our lives. President Ezra Taft Benson emphasized that truth. [^4] Pride leads to the destruction and downfall of nations, as both the Bible and the Book of Mormon testify. The Edomites were an example of this.

God watches over his people and will avenge them of their wrongs. That does not mean that his people will not have trials and problems; in fact, it often seems to mean the opposite. But in the Lord's justice — and in his due time — all will receive what they deserve, whether good or bad, and God's plan will prevail.

Notes

Darrell L. Matthews is a librarian at the Eisenhower Library at Johns Hopkins University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Historical Introduction 1:1-3 6:1a 1:4 The "historical introduction" usually contains short introductory remarks providing such background details as the time, place, and historical setting of the prophetic call. The "historical introduction" to Ezekiel's call provides not merely the year, but also the day and month of the vision: "Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year, in the fourth month, in the fifth day of the month, as I was among the captives by the river Chebar, that the heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God. In the fifth day of the month, which was the fifth year of king Jehoiachin's captivity, the word of the Lord came expressly unto Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans by the river Chebar; and the hand of the Lord was there upon him" (Ezek. 1:1-3). Similar dating is to be found in Ezekiel 3:16; 8:1; 20:1; 24:1; 26:1; 29:1, 17; 30:20; 31:1; 32:1; 32:17; 33:21; 40:1 (cf. Hag. 1:1; 2:1, 20). [^2] This chart, and some of the subsequent discussion, is based on the perceptive study by Blake T. Ostler, "The Throne-Theophany and Prophetic Commission in 1 Nephi: A Form-Critical Analysis," BYU Studies, Fall 1986, p. 72, though it diverges from that of Ostler at several points. I have eliminated one of the features given by Ostler in his chart, the "objection," which follows the "commission" in Isa. 6 but is absent from both the calls of Lehi and Ezekiel. Similarly, I have not included Jeremiah on this chart, because it represents an "auditory" rather than a "thronetheophany" type of prophetic commission; cf. Stephen D. Ricks, "The Narrative Call Pattern in the Prophetic Commission of Enoch (Moses 6)," BYU Studies, Fall 1986, pp. 97-105.
[^2] Divine Confrontation 1:4-28a 6:1b-4 1:6a In the "divine confrontation" either God, an angel, or some other manifestation of the divine appears to the individual. The "divine confrontation" (Ezek. 1:4-28a) unfolds in a manner unique in scripture, through a symbolic vision of the chariot with four wheels and of "the likeness of the glory of the Lord." This highly ornate, difficult, and puzzling passage has probably engendered more commentary than any other chapter in the Old Testament and has spawned a whole genre of mystical literature in later Judaism known as merkavah (chariot) mysticism. [^3] See Moshe Greenberg's detailed discussion of dates in Ezekiel in Ezekiel 1-20, Anchor Bible 22 (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1983), pp. 7-11.
[^3] Reaction 1:28b 6:5 1:6b-7 In the "reaction" section the prophet reacts to his confrontation with the divine through words or actions reflecting awe, fear, or unworthiness. Thus, following his vision, Ezekiel reports that "when I saw it, I fell upon my face, and I heard a voice of one that spake" (Ezek. 1:28b). Cf. David J. Halperin, The Faces of the Chariot: Early Jewish Responses to Ezekiel's Vision (Tubingen: Mohr, 1988).
[^4] Throne-Theophany 1:20-26a 6:1b-4 1:8 In the course of the "divine confrontation," the prophet has a "throne-theophany" vision in which he sees God seated on his throne. In Ezekiel, the image of God seated on his throne is less direct than it is in the visions of Lehi and Isaiah: "above the firmament" is "the likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone: and upon the likeness of the throne was the likeness as the appearance of a man" (Ezek. 1:26). [^4] This element distinguishes the "throne-theophany" prophetic commission from the primarily auditory commissions, e.g., Jer. 1:4-10.
