Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

28

THE LORD IS THERE (EZEKIEL 37-48)

KENT P. JACKSON

When news came to Ezekiel in Mesopotamia that Jerusalem had fallen (Ezek. 33:21), the Jews who were with him in exile should finally have realized "that a prophet hath been among them" (Ezek. 33:33). For years he had foreseen Jerusalem's destruction, and now that it had taken place, the focus of his revelations naturally turned to other things. Thus, from chapter 34 to the end of his book, Ezekiel's message shifted to a focus on the latter days, emphasizing things that were far into the future from his own time. These include the restoration of the house of Israel, the reunion of the kingdoms of Israel and Judah, the efforts of the ungodly in their opposition to the Lord's people and the Lord's work, the destruction of the wicked prior to Christ's coming, and his glorious reign as Israel's millennial king. [^1]

The last chapters of Ezekiel are among the most symbolic, dramatic, and intriguing in all of scripture. As a result, unfortunately, they have often been misused to create doctrinal and historical mischief. All Latter-day Saints should realize that no prophecy in the Old Testament can be fully understood independently of modern revelation. A careful application of this principle is good insurance against misinterpretation. Modern revelation provides the perspective and the context that are necessary for understanding the revelations of the past, making it an indispensable tool for which we will always be thankful. [^2] We should have this ever in mind as we explore Ezekiel's prophecies of things yet to come.

Bones and Sticks (Ezek. 37)

Ezekiel 37 records two highly symbolic revelations, each of which describes in powerful images the restoration of the house of Israel. Although that is their central focus, they also teach other things that are of significant value to latter-day readers.

At the beginning of chapter 37, Ezekiel was shown a vision of a valley full of dry bones. In response to the Lord's command, he prophesied to the bones that they would come back to life. With a rattling sound "the bones came together, bone to his bone" (Ezek. 37:7). Tendons, flesh, and skin covered the reassembled bodies in due course, and "breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding great army" (Ezek. 37:10).

As is common in Ezekiel's revelations, the symbolic activity or vision is followed by a clear interpretation. "These bones are the whole house of Israel," the Lord said. The metaphor of scattered bones well describes Israel's pitiful condition: they had been destroyed as a nation, their temple and holy city lay in ruins, thousands of their number had been killed in the Babylonian invasion (and earlier invasions as well), and their Davidic monarch and thousands of their countrymen had been taken into exile. They lamented, "our bones are dried, and our hope is lost: we are cut off for our parts" (Ezek. 37:11).

Ezekiel's vision of the dry bones announced to ancient and modern Israel that their scattering would not be forever. The Lord would bring them out of their graves, assemble their scattered parts, give them life, and reestablish them in their own land (Ezek. 37:12-14). The image of resurrection in this passage shows that though the house of Israel were dead, it would be restored again—to life and to a renewed covenant with God.

The following section of the chapter, Ezekiel's vision of the uniting of the two sticks (Ezek. 37:15-28), is one of the Bible's best-known prophecies for Latter-day Saints. But most are aware only of its secondary message, the joining of scriptural records, and not of the primary focus of the revelation: the restoration of the house of Israel with Christ as king.

As the revelation began, the Lord commanded Ezekiel to take in hand two "sticks." The Hebrew word translated "stick," 'es,Notes

has as its primary meanings "tree" and "wood." [^3] The most likely meaning in this context is a piece of wood, a board. One well-known interpretation in the Church proposes that Ezekiel envisioned a writing board called a "diptych," which consisted of two pieces of wood hinged together to fold like the covers of a book. The inside surfaces of the boards were coated with wax, providing a convenient and reusable writing medium. [^4] Although this explanation is not certain, it is reasonable and could well approximate what Ezekiel saw. [^5] In any case, the boards in the revelation were symbols meant to represent greater things, and thus their exact nature is not as significant as the message conveyed through them.

Ezekiel was commanded to write on the first board, "Belonging to Judah and the children of Israel his companions." On the second he was commanded to write, "Belonging to Joseph—the stick of Ephraim—and all the house of Israel his companions" (Ezek. 37:16, my translations). These are phrases of identification that were very commonly used in ancient Israel to designate ownership. The message is clear: one board belonged to Judah and the other to Joseph.

As the revelation continued, Ezekiel was instructed to place the two boards together in one: "and they shall become one in thine hand" (Ezek. 37:17). This revelation is one of several in which the Lord commanded Ezekiel to engage in highly symbolic actions. [^6] As "visual aids," they were meant to convey messages of importance to the house of Israel, and they were almost always followed by explanations of their purpose and meaning. In this case the explanation follows, in verses 18 through 28. When we add to the material provided in those verses some significant things that we learn through modern revelation, we gain a clear understanding of the truths Ezekiel taught by means of the two "sticks."

As is apparent in Ezekiel 37:21-27, the central message of Ezekiel's revelation is the restoration of the house of Israel. For Latter-day Saints the word restoration usually evokes thoughts of Joseph Smith and the restoration of lost truth and authority in the latter days. But the restoration, in its greatest sense, involves much more than that. As Ezekiel reported, it includes the gathering of the dispersed of Israel (Ezek. 37:21), their reestablishment in promised lands (Ezek. 37:21-22, 25), the restoration of Judah and Israel into one nation (Ezek. 37:22), the restoration of their status as a worthy covenant people before the Lord (Ezek. 37:23-24, 26-28), and the restoration of the Lord himself to his rightful position as Israel's divine king (Ezek. 37:22, 24-25). These constitute the central focus of Ezekiel 37 and of many other important prophecies as well. For all of these the Lord provided a sign: the bringing together of the two inscribed pieces of wood—the "stick of Judah," and the "stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim" (Ezek. 37:19).

Our distinctive Latter-day Saint point of view regarding Ezekiel's sticks came in a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith in August 1830, in which the Lord spoke of Moroni, "whom I have sent unto you to reveal the Book of Mormon, containing the fulness of my everlasting gospel, to whom I have committed the keys of the record of the stick of Ephraim" (D&C 27:5). Ezekiel's visionary stick of Joseph in Ephraim's hand thus represents Joseph's scriptural record, the Book of Mormon. It follows therefore that Judah's stick represents the scriptural record of Judah, the Bible.

Ezekiel was not the only prophet who knew of the coming together of the two scriptural records. Almost a thousand years earlier, ancient Joseph received a revelation in which he learned of the joining of the record of his descendants with that of the tribe of Judah. That would be done under the ministry of the great latter-day seer, Joseph Smith, who would be an instrument in the Lord's hand to bring to pass the restoration of Israel. Lehi, who found this revelation on the plates of brass, considered it to be significant enough to give it special emphasis for his family, and Nephi recorded it on his small plates (2 Ne. 3:4-24). The Lord told ancient Joseph: "Wherefore the fruit of thy loins shall write, and the fruit of the loins of Judah shall write; and that which shall be written by the fruit of thy loins, and also that which shall be written by the fruit of the loins of Judah, shall grow together unto the confounding of false doctrines, and laying down of contentions, and establishing peace among the fruit of thy loins, and bringing them to a knowledge of their fathers in the latter days; and also to the knowledge of my covenants, saith the Lord" (JST Gen. 50:31; 2 Ne. 3:12; emphasis added; see also 1 Ne. 13:41).

The coming together of the two records is thus a central event in the restoration of the house of Israel. Indeed, it is an essential ingredient in the Lord's latter-day work, for the gospel message thus produced will confound false doctrine, lay down contentions, establish peace between the two estranged halves of the house of Israel, and bring them to a knowledge of God's covenants (cf. Ezek. 37:22-23, 26-27). [^7] It is no wonder, then, that Ezekiel would view the bringing together of the two records, the sticks of Joseph and Judah, as being the very symbol of the restoration of Israel.

Other prophets also foretold this event as the sign of Israel's restoration. The Savior himself did when he ministered to the children of Lehi following his resurrection. While teaching them of the restoration of Israel, he spoke of the coming forth of their record, the Book of Mormon. He called it a sign: "I give unto you a sign, that ye may know the time when these things shall be about to take place—that I shall gather in, from their long dispersion, my people, O house of Israel, and shall establish again among them my Zion" (3 Ne. 21:1). The sign would be the coming forth of their record, by which both they and the Gentiles would know that they are "a remnant of the house of Jacob" (3 Ne. 21:2; see also vv. 3-6). "And when these things come to pass that thy seed shall begin to know these thing—it shall be a sign unto them, that they may know that the work of the Father hath already commenced unto the fulfilling of the covenant which he hath made unto the people who are of the house of Israel" (3 Ne. 21:7).

Mormon, who compiled the record of Joseph, also saw its publication as a sign of Israel's restoration: "When the Lord shall see fit, in his wisdom, that these sayings shall come unto the Gentiles according to his word, then ye may know that the covenant which the Father hath made with the children of Israel, concerning their restoration to the lands of their inheritance, is already beginning to be fulfilled" (3 Ne. 29:1; see also vv. 2-9). Because the Bible was already known when the Book of Mormon was first published in 1830, the appearance of the Book of Mormon was, in effect, the coming together of the two records—the sign that the reunion of the branches of the house of Israel and their reestablishment in the covenants would soon take place. [^8]

The latter-day restoration of the house of Israel, according to Ezekiel, would involve not only the gathering of the dispersed to their promised land (Ezek. 37:21, 25), but it would also entail the reunification of the two rival nations, Israel and Judah (Ezek. 37:22). The united monarchy of David and Solomon split into two separate countries shortly after Solomon's death (1 Kgs. 12), with the northern ten tribes as the kingdom of Israel and the tribes of Judah and Benjamin as the kingdom of Judah. Since that time they had been rival kingdoms with separate histories, separate ruling families, and separate destinies. Israel—which was frequently called "Joseph" or "Ephraim" [^9]—was destroyed by the Assyrians a century and a half before Ezekiel received this revelation. Most of its people who survived the warfare were deported to other parts of the Assyrian empire (2 Kgs. 17:1-24), from which their descendants now have lost their identity and have become assimilated into the nations of the world. By the time of this revelation, Judah had been beaten by the Babylonians. Its capital city, Jerusalem, lay in ruins, and much of its population (including Ezekiel) had been deported to Mesopotamia or had been scattered or directed elsewhere (including Lehi).

Under these circumstances, Ezekiel's revelation of the reunification of Israel and Judah was remarkable. Like the two inscribed boards, they would be brought together again and would become "one nation . . . , and they shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms any more at all" (Ezek. 37:22).

This is a prophecy of greatest importance that still has not been fulfilled. But we know who the two nations are today, and we know what must be done before they will be brought together. Judah consists of the Jews, who are scattered in most of the nations of the earth. Aside from the very few who have accepted the gospel, they are still outside the covenants which the Lord established with their fathers in biblical times. Israel is The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the vast majority of whose members belong, either by birth or by adoption, to the chief northern tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh. [^10] The prophesied reunification of the two groups will come when the descendants of Judah accept the covenants of the gospel of Jesus Christ and join with their brothers and sisters of Israel in the Lord's Church. It appears that the complete fulfillment of this prophecy will not be seen until after Christ's second coming.

Ezekiel's prophecy of the restoration of Israel's kingship is also remarkable. As in chapter 34, he used the name David for the messianic ruler: "And David my servant shall be king over them; and they all shall have one shepherd. . . . And my servant David shall be their prince for ever" (Ezek. 37:24-25). Jesus Christ is the latter-day "David," the "King," the "Shepherd," and the "Prince" of Israel. In the Millennium, the time in which all of Ezekiel's promises will find their ultimate realization, he "will reign personally upon the earth," as Joseph Smith prophesied (A of F 10). As I have explained elsewhere (see the discussion at Ezek. 34:23-24 in Chap. 27 of this volume), we need not look to anyone else but Christ as Israel's millennial king, because the scriptures clearly identify him in that role.

The restored Israelite nation, in its several millennial locations, will be Zion, a community of faithful individuals who have overcome sin and have joined the Lord in covenants. They will be those, as Moroni wrote, "whose garments are white through the blood of the Lamb . . . ,for they have been washed in the blood of the Lamb; and they are they who were scattered and gathered in from the four quarters of the earth, and from the north countries, [^11] and are partakers of the fulfilling of the covenant which God made with their father, Abraham" (Ether 13:10-11). When the covenant is renewed and the relationship restored between Jehovah and his people, it will be "a covenant of peace . . . an everlasting covenant" (Ezek. 37:26). And again the Lord will affirm, "I will be their God, and they shall be my people" (Ezek. 37:27; see also v. 23).

Apocalyptic Revelation

There are several sections of the scriptures in which visions are presented in a highly symbolic revelatory style called "apocalyptic." [^12] An understanding of this kind of writing will enhance our study of the remainder of the book of Ezekiel. Apocalyptic vision is the mode of revelation in which the observer is withdrawn from the earthly sphere with its normal circumstances of time and space and is moved, as it were, into the realm of the divine. In this realm he sees things no longer from an earthly perspective but from the perspective of the visionary sphere. Most often what he sees there cannot be described in earthly terms and can only be characterized with the use of vivid, dramatic symbols, most of which transcend our understanding of "normal" space, logic, time, and the rules of science as we understand them. Ezekiel's visions in chapters 1 and 10 are excellent examples of this, as are Daniel's revelations in chapters 7 through 12. [^13]

Apocalyptic vision is characterized by what is called "dualism"—the idea of the universal struggle between the forces of evil and good. In the here-and-now the forces of evil usually prevail. But there will be an end-of-the-world time in which the forces of good, God and his chosen Saints, will triumph over the forces of evil, Satan and his hosts. The victory of right over wrong will not take place as a result of the natural flow of history. Instead, there will be a dramatic break with the past, as God and his forces will stop the course of history to defeat the powers of darkness and bring the world into the final age of peace and glory. God's ultimate victory is sure; it is predetermined.

This kind of revelation is highly typological—it abounds in vivid symbols, or "types." The types frequently are patterns that represent more than one specific thing; often they represent whole categories. [^14] Apocalyptic prophecies are "fulfilled" whenever the categories that are depicted exist. In other words, they can be "fulfilled" more than once and with different individuals or nations involved. At the same time, however, they point to a grand and ultimate fulfillment, on a universal scale, in a last-days setting.

The symbolism in apocalyptic vision is thus much different from metaphor, the literary imagery that is used so abundantly throughout the Old Testament. Metaphor is meant to be understood. For the most part it is easily comprehended by those who are familiar with the culture, history, language, geography, and social circumstances in which the scripture arose. [^15] Apocalyptic vision, in striking contrast, is meant to be understood fully only with the help of other revelation. The vision usually requires an angelic interpreter or a companion revelation to unlock its meaning. [^16] Joseph Smith taught this principle:

When the prophets speak of seeing beasts in their visions, they saw the images—types to represent certain things. And at the same time they received the interpretation as to what those images or types were designed to represent. I make this broad declaration, that where God ever gives a vision of an image, or beast, or figure of any kind, he always holds himself responsible to give a revelation or interpretation of the meaning thereof, otherwise we are not responsible or accountable for our belief in it. Don't be afraid of being damned for not knowing the meaning of a vision or figure where God had not given a revelation or interpretation on the subject. [^17]

Nephi was accompanied through the symbolic world of the vision of the tree of life by a heavenly messenger, who translated its symbols for him (1 Ne. 8-14). Modern readers can understand its meaning because of the interpretation the messenger provided. In several other apocalyptic visions, however, the Lord has not yet seen fit to provide an interpretation in the scriptures. Thus we must read them with caution and recognize that we will not fully understand them until the Lord makes their meaning known.

Gog's Invasion of Israel (Ezek. 38-39)

Ezekiel 38 and 39 contain a vision that exhibits some important traits of apocalyptic revelation. [^18] The vision depicts an invasion of "Israel" by a foreign power called "Gog" of the land of "Magog," the "chief prince of Meshech and Tubal" (Ezek. 38:1). Gog and his forces will attack the "mountains of Israel," whose people will have been "brought forth out of the nations" and will be dwelling safely (Ezek. 38:7-8). Like "a cloud to cover the land," he and his allies—"a great company, and a mighty army"—will advance on the Lord's people (Ezek. 38:15-16). But the Lord will not allow them to succeed. With earthquake, sword, pestilence, blood, rain, hailstones, fire, and brimstone the Lord will intervene to stop Gog's attack; he and his armies will be slaughtered (Ezek. 38:19-39:8). So massive will be Gog's armies and so thorough their defeat that for seven years the people of Israel will gather the weapons of their defeated enemies and use them for fuel. Their corpses will be so abundant that it will take seven months to bury them. Even after that, individuals will be employed to go through the land to find the bodies not yet buried (Ezek. 39:9-16). Next is depicted a huge feast, in which the birds and the animals will gorge themselves on the blood and flesh of the slain (Ezek. 39:17-20; see also D&C 29:20) [^19]

Apocalyptic elements are readily apparent in this vision, suggesting that it is an apocalyptic scene and not necessarily a literal transcript of one specific future event. The latter-day setting of the prophecy seems clear. The Lord's people are called "Israel," and they have been "gathered out of many people" and "brought forth out of the nations" (Ezek. 38:8). It seems likely that Israel here does not represent a latter-day political entity, country, or geographical location, but the Lord's people, wherever they may be found. As President Spencer W. Kimball taught, "the gathering of Israel consists of joining the true church and their coming to a knowledge of the true God." [^20] Israel thus represents the Lord's Saints, the members of his Church who have gathered to the covenants of his gospel throughout the nations of the world.

In the symbolic vision, Gog, coming with vast armies from distant unknown lands, sets as his goal the devastation and plunder of the Lord's people. In apocalyptic fashion, the figure "Gog" here probably does not represent a real person or nation who will attack the Saints with military force. Instead, he and his hosts seem to represent the powers of evil that are arrayed against the Saints, manifested in a variety of ways, places, and times. Satan is the very embodiment of this evil and the archenemy of the Lord and his followers. As the vision depicts, the forces of evil will not be allowed to prevail. With a mighty act so characteristic of apocalyptic scenes, the Lord himself will intervene to put an end to evil and its consequences.

When will this prophecy he "fulfilled"? As stated above, this kind of apocalyptic typology often represents entire categories rather than specific individuals or events. But there are enough close parallels between this prophecy and others (both apocalyptic and predictive), that the time-frame for its fulfillment seems apparent.

In the period in which we now live, the gathering of the house of Israel and the establishment of Zion have commenced. Satan's forces, in a variety of manifestations, are engaged in relentless battle against Israel, that is, against individual Saints and the Church collectively. As other scriptures teach us, their efforts will increase in intensity as the coming of Christ draws near (see 1 Ne. 14:11-14). Like the hosts of Gog, however, they will not succeed in their efforts to destroy the Lord's Church. Instead, all forms of wickedness will be wiped from the earth in preparation for the Savior's coming in glory, which will usher in a thousand-year era of millennial peace.

The Book of Mormon prophet Nephi recorded a revelation similar to that of Ezekiel, in which he described this same effort of Satan and his followers to destroy the Saints (1 Ne. 14:11-17). Whereas Ezekiel used the image of a mysterious "Gog" from the land of "Magog," Nephi chose the image of a "great whore"—"the mother of abominations," "the mother of harlots"—to represent the same things that Ezekiel foretold. As Nephi described it, the Church will be found "upon all the face of the earth" (1 Ne. 14:12). The forces of evil will muster their resources "among all the nations of the Gentiles" in order to "fight against the Lamb of God" (1 Ne. 14:13). But "the power of the Lamb of God" will descend on the Saints throughout the world, and they will be "armed with righteousness and with the power of God in great glory" (1 Ne. 14:14). In his wrath, the Lord will punish the enemies of his people by subjecting them to "wars and rumors of wars among all the nations and kindreds of the earth" (1 Ne. 14:15; see also v. 16). Nephi's vision in 1 Nephi 14 is thus an additional witness for what Ezekiel foretold, but more importantly, it enables us to understand Ezekiel's message. Additional insight from modern revelation is provided in a passage in the Doctrine and Covenants describing the destruction of the wicked: "And the great and abominable church, which is the whore of all the earth, shall be cast down by devouring fire, according as it is spoken by the mouth of Ezekiel the prophet, who spoke of these things, which have not come to pass but surely must, as I live, for abominations shall not reign" (D&C 29:21). [^21]

Almost all Old Testament prophecy focuses on these latter-day events: the restoration of the house of Israel, the destruction of wickedness, the coming of the Lord, and the Millennium. It should not surprise us, then, if these are the very themes alluded to by Ezekiel in the important apocalyptic scene recorded in Ezekiel 38 and 39. The emphasis is on the efforts of the adversary to overcome the Saints, followed by his destruction and the end of his evil works when the Lord intervenes to save his people. Ezekiel's conclusion bears testimony to these truths: "Now will I bring again the captivity [^22] of Jacob, and have mercy on the whole house of Israel. . . . I have gathered them unto their own land, and have left none of them any more [in captivity]. Neither will I hide my face any more from them: for I have poured out my spirit upon the house of Israel, saith the Lord God" (Ezek. 39:25-29). [^23]

The Envisioned Temple and Its Surroundings (Ezek. 40-48)

The last nine chapters of the book of Ezekiel record another great apocalyptic vision. In it are depicted, among other things, a temple with its priesthood and sacrifices, the division of the land among the tribes, and the dimensions of the land and the city.

This vision, received in the twenty-fifth year of Ezekiel's exile, or 573 B.C., is like nothing else in the Old Testament. Its apocalyptic nature is evident. As we learn from the introductory verses, Ezekiel was transported "in the visions of God" from Babylonia to a "very high mountain" which overlooked Jerusalem and its temple to the south (Ezek. 40:2). There he was met by a man whose appearance was like bronze, [^24] who accompanied him and guided him through the vision. These elements of the revelation—transported in vision, placed on a very high mountain, nonexistent mountain north of the temple, strange angelic guide—are recognizable characteristics of apocalyptic literature. As discussed earlier, apocalyptic vision is characterized by the use of vivid symbolic scenes that can only be understood fully with the help of additional revealed information. It seems that much more needs to be made known concerning this vision before all of its symbols can be understood. Still, its general message of a renewed house of Israel in a renewed promised land is clear.

In the vision, Ezekiel's guide gave the prophet a detailed tour of a temple in Jerusalem, including all its surrounding structures. The guide carried with him a measuring stick with which precise measurements were provided throughout the vision (cf. Rev. 21:9-10, 15-17). [^25] The first part of the temple complex observed and measured was the area from the east gate to the outer court. After that, Ezekiel and his guide saw the outer court, the north and south gates, the gates to the inner court, rooms for the preparation of sacrifices, rooms for the priests, and the temple itself (Ezek. 40:5-42:20).

Ezekiel was next brought to the gate facing east, from which he saw the glory of God approaching the temple. With radiant light and the roar of rushing waters, the glory of the Lord entered through the gate where the prophet stood and filled the Lord's house with its splendor (Ezek. 43:1-5; 44:4). Almost two decades earlier Ezekiel had experienced a similar apocalyptic vision in which he saw God's glory depart (Ezek. 9:3; 10:18-19; 11:22-23). In that earlier vision an angelic guide showed him the temple in its time of wickedness (Ezek. 8-11). In graphic detail he saw symbolic figures and actions that represented its apostasy and the evil works that were done in it. Now, years later and after the destruction of the temple and the exile of the Jews, he saw in striking symbols a vision of the temple in a purified state. Whereas Ezekiel's first temple vision represented all that was corrupt and degenerate about Israel's relationship with God, his later visionary temple represents all that will be holy and glorious about that relationship when the house of Israel is purified.

The next stop in Ezekiel's visionary tour was at the altar, where he was given instructions for the direction of the priests in their sacrifices (Ezek. 43:13-27). In chapter 44 he learned of the roles of the priests and the Levites in the temple. Of these, only the "sons of Zadok" would be allowed to enter the sanctuary (Ezek. 44:15-16). [^26] Through their actions and their appearance, they would teach the Lord's people the difference between the "holy" and the "profane" and "the unclean and the clean" (Ezek. 44:23). Ezekiel was shown the division of the land and the sacred precinct that would result from it. The priests and the Levites would each receive an inheritance 25,000 cubits long and 10,000 cubits wide. The sanctuary would be located in the priests' portion. The property of the city, which would belong to the whole house of Israel, would be 25,000 cubits by, 5,000 cubits. Adjacent to these portions would be the property of the prince (Ezek. 45:1-12). [^27] Ezekiel found out more about these special allotments at a later stage in his vision (Ezek. 48:8-22).

Ezekiel next learned, in some detail, of the offerings and holy days that would be observed in the temple. Everything was to be administered according to a prescribed plan (Ezek. 45:13-46:23).

A new scene of the vision opened as Ezekiel's guide took him to the entrance of the temple, from which he saw water flowing from under the threshold toward the east. He and his guide followed the flow of water and measured its depth along the way. A thousand cubits from the source it was ankle deep. A thousand cubits farther it was knee deep. After another thousand it was up to his waist, and after another it was a river, deep enough to swim in (Ezek. 47:1-5). The water continued its flow to the Dead Sea, which became a freshwater lake on contact with the river from the temple. Ezekiel saw that swarms of living things would live wherever the river flowed, and varieties of fish would inhabit the lake which had once been hostile to life (Ezek. 47:6-10). Fruit trees of all kinds would adorn the banks of the river. "Their leaves will not wither, nor will their fruit fail. Every month they will bear, because the water from the sanctuary flows to them. Their fruit will serve for food and their leaves for healing" (Ezek. 47:12, NIV [^28]).

The next part of Ezekiel's vision focuses on the division of the land among the tribes (Ezek. 47:13-48:29). All thirteen of the tribes are mentioned, and each would receive an inheritance. [^29] The list includes Levi, which in Old Testament times did not receive a tribal allotment but was settled in special cities throughout the territories of the other tribes. Even non-Israelites would receive an inheritance. Those who would dwell among the children of Israel would be considered as native-born Israelites and would receive an inheritance among them (Ezek. 47:21-23).

In the last segment of the vision, Ezekiel learned the names of the gates of the holy city. On each of the four sides of the city—which would be 4,500 cubits square—there would be three gates, each one named for one of the tribes (Ezek. 48:30-34). In this case Ephraim and Manasseh are not mentioned, but one gate is named Joseph and one is named Levi.

A Millennial Temple in Jerusalem

It appears that Ezekiel's vision represents the millennial condition of the house of Israel, in which they will enjoy the blessings of their promised land, their holy city, and their temple. The centerpiece of the vision is a house of God that will be built at some future time. Some have suggested that Ezekiel foresaw Jews in Palestine building a temple independently of the Church and without a knowledge of the gospel of Jesus Christ. If they did, it would not be in fulfillment of divine prophecy (Ezekiel's or anyone else's), for the Lord's house is a house of order, and the keys of temple building are found only in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (D&C 110:13-16). [^30] If there is to be a true temple built by members of the house of Judah someday, it will not be a temple of Judaism but of Mormonism, built by Jewish Latter-day Saints to the glory of their Savior, Jesus Christ. [^31]

As in other apocalyptic visions, the symbols often are not meant to portray literally the events, people, or things, but to characterize or idealize them. It seems that such is the case with this vision. It depicts the future glories of Israel's restoration in the most idealized images. Everything about the millennial day—including the land, the city, and the temple—would exceed by far the best of what had existed in earlier times. But the vision was limited by the level of doctrinal understanding of its readers, who were still under the Law of Moses without a comprehension of the gospel of Christ and still rejected the words of living prophets, as is so evident in the book of Ezekiel. Thus the vision showed a temple of the Law of Moses, patterned after the temples of ancient Israel. Officiating in it was the Aaronic priesthood, as in biblical times (Ezek. 43:13-27; 44:10-31), and burnt offerings, sin offerings, and fellowship ("peace") offerings are depicted (Ezek. 43:18-27). [^32]

But the scriptures make it clear that the Law of Moses and its sacrifices by the shedding of blood were ended with the atonement of Christ (Alma 34:13-14; Heb. 10:18). Given this fact, it seems unlikely that a temple for the performance of Mosaic animal offerings will ever again be built, especially during the Millennium, when there will be no death. Future temples, both before and after the Second Coming, will presumably be similar to those with which we are familiar in the Church now, in which ordinances of the Melchizedek Priesthood will be performed for the living and the dead. Joseph Smith taught that to make the Restoration complete, "all things had under the Authority of the Priesthood at any former period shall be had again." He included the restoration of sacrifice in his discussion, though not of those sacrifices that were revealed with the Law of Moses. [^33] Given the clear message from the scriptures that animal sacrifice ended with Christ (Alma 34:13-14), perhaps we can view the sacrifice of which the Prophet spoke as a short-term or one-time event in fulfillment of Malachi 3:3 and 4, to signal that the Levites are again in the covenant and have assumed their rightful priesthood function in the house of Israel. [^34]

Ezekiel's vision portrayed the future temple by means of familiar Old Testament temple images because his readers would not have recognized or comprehended a temple like ours today. The Lord communicates with people in their own language and according to their level of understanding (D&C 1:24). In this vision he taught ancient Jews transcendent millennial things by using images drawn from their own time and experience. The design, purpose, and ordinances of modern temples would have made no sense to them (just as they make no sense to Jews and other Christians today). The real millennial temple will be much different from its visionary symbol—more glorious and with a more profound purpose. In it, worthy Saints will enter into covenants and participate in sacred ordinances—all designed to help them prepare to enter the presence of God in the highest degree of glory.

Who will build this temple? When? And where will it stand? Because Ezekiel's immediate ministry was to Jews recently exiled from their homeland, who had experienced the destruction of their kingdom, their city, and their temple, it is likely that the scene he witnessed has its focus in the restoration of Judah and Jerusalem. As other passages of scripture teach, a temple will yet be built in that city. Whether or not it will stand on the same spot as the ancient temples is not important. What is important, however, is that one day the inhabitants of Jerusalem will again be worthy to have a house of God in their midst. Ezekiel's images suggest that it will be built in a day when Israel is gathered and its people sanctified—conditions which can only follow the time when they will lay aside the false religions and traditions of their ancestors and join the Church of Jesus Christ through baptismal covenants. It appears that for the people there in general, it will be only after the Second Coming that those conditions will exist. Those who will participate in its construction will be the Saints of God who will reside in that area—Jews who will have gathered again to the covenants, Arabs who will have likewise joined the Lord's Church, and others who will dwell among them.

"The Lord Is There"

Other symbols in Ezekiel's vision convey additional insights. The scene of the division of the land depicts the restoration of all the tribes of Israel to allotted territory in Palestine (Ezek. 47:13-48:29). Modern revelation explains, however, that whereas Judah will one day be restored in righteousness to the Holy Land, the descendants of Manasseh and Ephraim will receive their inheritance in the New World (see 3 Ne. 15:13; 16:16; 21:22; Ether 13:8). And it is not unlikely that diverse parts of the world will be provided as gathering places for others of the covenant people. Perhaps Ezekiel's symbolic division of the land represents a future presence for members of all the tribes in their ancestral homeland. Or perhaps it represents all the millennial gathering places worldwide in which faithful covenant people will dwell. In that millennial day when all the world is Zion, the location and extent of one's real estate is likely to be of minor interest. And perhaps prophecies of gathering to promised lands have more to do with gathering to covenants than with geographical matters.

The vision depicts a river of water flowing from beneath the temple and bringing life to everything it touches (Ezek. 47:1-12). Similar scenes are found in Joel 3:18, Zechariah 14:8, and Revelation 22:1. In the apocalyptic contexts of all three of three of these passages, the symbolic waters seem to convey the idea of truth, life, and healing emanating from the Lord's house to fill the world. "Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst," Jesus said, "but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well springing up into everlasting life" (John 4:14). In the Millennium, Isaiah wrote, "the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea" (Isa. 11:9). Truth and eternal life will flow freely in that day, and a literal transformation of the planet will take place as well: the parched places will become green, the deserts will blossom as a rose (Isa. 35:1-7), and "the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory" (A of F 10).

In Ezekiel's earlier vision he witnessed the glory of the Lord leaving the temple, which had become unworthy of the divine presence (Ezek. 10:18-19; 11:22-23). In this vision of millennial things he saw it return, this time to usher in a thousand years of Christ's reign (Ezek. 43:1-5; 44:4). Holiness and glory will be the watchwords in that day, for they will fill the earth and characterize all that is done in it. As Zechariah foretold, even the pots and pans and the bells on the horses will be inscribed with "Holiness unto the Lord" (Zech. 14:20-21), just as our temples are today. "For the Lord shall be in their midst, and his glory shall be upon them, and he will be their king and their lawgiver" (D&C 45:59). We look forward with anticipation to the glorious Millennium and hope to be worthy to be citizens of Zion then, when Christ's presence will sanctify the earth and those who will be privileged to dwell on it. That will be the day in which Jerusalem will at last become a Holy City—so appropriately renamed in Ezekiel's vision: "The Lord is there" (Ezek. 48:35).

Notes

Kent P. Jackson is professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Apocalyptic literature does not concern itself with the problem between agency and predestination. Both are believed to be simultaneously operating causes. Men are free to act, but so is God. He has foreordained the order of things and they will come out as he has determined, but he acts in harmony with the principle of free will.
[^2] One puzzle concerning its transmission is that Dan. 1:1-2:4a and 8:1-12:13 are preserved in Hebrew, whereas the rest is inexplicably in Aramaic.
[^3] Darius I Hystaspes (see Ezra 4:5, 24; 6:14-15; Hag. 1) gained the throne of the Persian empire in 522 B.C., some years after Cyrus conquered Babylon in 539 B.C. Scholars who date the book of Daniel late believe, based on some historical sources, that it was Nabonidus, not Nebuchadnezzar, who went insane, as described in Dan. 4. See Georges Roux, Ancient Iraq, 2d ed. (Harmondsworth, England: Penguin, 1980), p. 352.
[^4] For brief surveys of the dating arguments, see W. S. LaSor, D. A. Hubbard, and F. W. Bush, Old Testament Survey (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1982), pp. 662-68; and A. E. Hill and J. H. Walton, A Survey of the Old Testament (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan, 1991), pp. 349-51.
[^5] Dan. 1:1 states that Daniel was taken with exiles in Jehoiakim's third year, after Nebuchadnezzar besieged Jerusalem. The date would be ca. 606 B.C. No known siege or deportation took place that year, but it is known that Nebuchadnezzar, who did not become king until a year later, conducted a campaign to the west at that time. Whether it took him as far to the south as Jerusalem is not known. If the date in Dan. 1:1 was a later, inaccurate addition to the text, then it is more likely that Daniel was taken with the first wave of exiles in 597 B.C., when Ezekiel, King Jehoiachin, and many others were deported. See LaSor, Hubbard, and Bush, p. 662 and n. 7.
[^6] The Hebrew word here does not derive from 'hb or dwd, the usual verbs expressing deep affection. It is hamudot, meaning "highly desired."
[^7] Spencer W. Kimball, in Conference Report, Apr. 1976, p. 10; see also pp. 9-12; D&C 65:2, 5-6. For additional interpretation of the dream, see Kent P. Jackson, "May the Kingdom of God Roll Forth," in Studies in Scripture, Volume One: The Doctrine and Covenants, ed. Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson (Salt Lake City: Randall Book, 1984), pp. 251-57.
[^8] The translators of the KJV identified the one "like the Son of God" (Dan. 3:25) with Christ, as shown by the capital letter on "Son" (Hebrew and Aramaic have no capital letters). More likely, it was an angel, because the Aramaic term, bar-'elahin, was used commonly in ancient literature for subordinate gods, angelic beings, members of the heavenly council, etc.
[^9] Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, eds., The Words of Joseph Smith (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), p. 186.
[^10] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), pp. 287-94.
[^11] Discourse of 8 Apr. 1843, recorded by William Clayton; Ehat and Cook, p. 185; punctuation and spelling modernized. Also found in Smith, p. 291.
[^12] Smith, p. 289.
[^13] Smith, p. 157. For an extended explanation of this event, see Bruce R. McConkie, The Millennial Messiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1982), beginning at p. 578.
[^14] For example, the scenes depicted in the tree of life vision did not represent a specific event in the experience of Lehi's family but a lifelong process by which they chose to follow either God or the ways of the world.
[^15] As Nephi wrote, the Jews could understand the writings of their prophets because they were intimately familiar with these things (2 Ne. 25:5-6). See Kent P. Jackson, "Nephi and Isaiah," in Studies in Scripture, Volume Seven: 1 Nephi to Alma 29, ed. Kent P. Jackson (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1987), pp. 134-39.
[^16] An example of the latter is D&C 77, which interprets passages from John's revelation.
[^17] Discourse of 8 April 1843, recorded by William Clayton; Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, eds., The Words of Joseph Smith (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), p. 185; punctuation and spelling modernized. Also in Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), p. 291.
[^18] Scholars generally see Ezek. 38-48 as not fully developed apocalyptic literature, which they feel is best manifested in documents from the second century B.C. Instead, Ezek. 38-48 is called "proto-Apocalyptic," or "the 'stuff' from which apocalyptic is made." See Russell, pp. 88-91.
[^19] The destruction of the wicked is depicted as a sacrificial feast also in Isa. 34:5-8 and Zeph. 1:7.
[^20] Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984), pp. 439-40.
[^21] Footnotes at D&C 29:20-21 identify Ezek. 38-39 as the Ezekiel prophecy referred to in the D&C passage. Though the wording is not identical, the identification is most likely correct, as it is the closest thing in Ezekiel to the content of D&C 29:21. If this is the case, then Gog's battle against Israel is the same thing as the great whore's battle against the Saints in 1 Ne. 14.
[^22] The Hebrew that underlies the KJV phrase "bring again the captivity" means either "bring back from captivity" or "restore the fortunes."
[^23] John used the names "Gog" and "Magog" in his apocalyptic prophecy of the great battle at the end of the Millennium. In Rev. 20:7-10, "Gog and Magog" are used to personify those whom Satan will induce to rebel against God in his final effort to derail God's work. They attack Zion, but God intervenes with fire from heaven that devours them. Satan is then "cast into the lake of fire and brimstone" (cf.Jacob 5:76-77). These are typical apocalyptic images that reflect the vocabulary of Ezekiel's vision.
[^24] KJV "brass"; more accurately, bronze.
[^25] See Ezek. 40:5 and fn. 5c in the LDS Bible for an explanation of the "long cubits" used in this vision.
[^26] Zadok was the high priest during the reign of King David. The lineage of Israel's legitimate high priests descended from his line, through which John the Baptist came into the world.
[^27] For a drawing of these divisions, see Zimmerli, p. 535.
[^28] New International Version.
[^29] For a map, see Zimmerli, p. 537.
[^30] 30. Elder Bruce R. McConkie taught: "There is only one place under the whole heavens where the keys of temple building are found. There is only one people who know how to build temples and what to do in them when they are completed. That people is the Latter-day Saints" Millennial Messiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1982), p. 279.
[^31] 31. See ibid., pp. 279-80.
[^32] 32. Of these, it appears that only burnt offerings predate the Law of Moses. Sin offerings and fellowship were part of the Mosaic system.
[^33] 33. Ehat and Cook, p. 42; see also pp. 43-44.
[^34] 34. See also Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols., sel. Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 3:93-94; Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), p. 666; The Mortal Messiah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979-81), 1:128.
