Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

30

THE RETURN FROM EXILE (EZRA 1-6)

ANDREW C. SKINNER

The book of Ezra is a historical work that continues the narrative of 2 Chronicles. That is apparent when one notices that the last two verses of 2 Chronicles are repeated almost word for word in the first two and one-half verses of Ezra. The book covers the period from 538 B.C. (Cyrus's Edict of Liberation) to approximately 458 B.C. (Ezra's commission). It tells the story of the beginnings of Judah's return from exile, chapters 1 through 6, and the career of the priest/scribe Ezra, whose memoirs are contained in chapters 7 through 10.

Cyrus the Great

The destruction of Jerusalem (587 B.C.) and the Babylonian exile (587-538 B.C.) were times of great sorrow for the kingdom of Judah, but the Lord had said that his city and his people would not be forgotten. He would raise up a deliverer to bring down Babylon and cause Jerusalem, along with the holy temple, to be rebuilt. That deliverer would be an instrument in God's hands, and his name would be Cyrus: "Thus saith the Lord, thy redeemer, . . . I am the Lord that maketh all things; . . . that saith to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be inhabited; and to the cities of Judah, Ye shall be built, and I will raise up the decayed places thereof: that saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built; and to the temple, Thy foundation shall be laid" (Isa. 44:24, 26, 28).

Cyrus emerged in history around 559 B.C. as ruler of the province Anshan in Elam, east of Mesopotamia, succeeding his father, Cambyses I. Sometime between 559 B.C. and 549 B.C. he overthrew Astyages, king of the Medes, and established himself as master of the Median kingdom, which in due time included Persia (modern Iran), northern Assyria, and part of Asia Minor. With power and care Cyrus began organizing an empire that lasted two hundred years, until Alexander the Great, [^1] and became the greatest the world had yet seen. [^2] In 539 B.C. Cyrus moved against Babylon and in dramatic fashion conquered it, "without any battle." [^3] His historical record, the Cyrus Cylinder, makes it clear that he was seen as a liberator, for when he advanced to the city its gates were opened to him and the entire population "bowed to him and kissed his feet" and "greeted him as a master through whose help they had come [again] to life from death." [^4] Cyrus himself claimed to have followed an enlightened policy toward conquered or subjugated peoples. He said he abolished forced labor, improved housing conditions, and enjoyed the affection of the populace as a benevolent despot. This favorable view of Cyrus, though written as propaganda for the time, is not unjustified.

Apparently Cyrus understood the futility of trying to compel loyalty through violence and terror. He stated, "I did not allow anybody to terrorize [any place]." [^5] Compared with other conquerors in ancient times, especially the Assyrians and Babylonians, Cyrus was extraordinarily humane and benevolent. Undoubtedly that was so because God had chosen him as an instrument to help bring about divine purposes, even though Cyrus did not cease to honor the deities of other nations. In the only Old Testament passage where the term "messiah" or "anointed one" is used to refer to a non-Israelite, the relationship between the Lord and Cyrus is described. According to Isaiah, Cyrus's success was a product of Jehovah's design: "Thus saith the Lord to his anointed [Hebrew, masiah or messiah], to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him; and I will loose the loins of kings, to open before him the two leaved gates; and the gates shall not be shut; I will go before thee, and make the crooked places straight: I will break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron: And I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of secret places, that thou mayest know that I, the Lord, which call thee by thy name, am the God of Israel" (Isa. 45:1-3). [^6]

In the first century A.D., Jewish historian Flavius Josephus indicated that Isaiah's prophecies themselves had a great effect on Cyrus once he entered Babylon and was shown the sacred writings. In fact, Josephus portrayed the comments of Cyrus as a response motivated by the Lord's declarations in scripture:

For he [the Lord] stirred up the mind of Cyrus, and made him write this throughout all Asia:—"Thus saith Cyrus the King: Since God Almighty hath appointed me to be king of the habitable earth, I believe that he is that God which the nation of the Israelites worship; for indeed he foretold my name by the prophets, and that I should build him a house at Jerusalem, in the country of Judea." This was known to Cyrus by his reading the book which Isaiah left behind him of his prophecies; for this prophet said that God had spoken thus to him in a secret vision: "My will is, that Cyrus, whom I have appointed to be king over many and great nations, send back my people to their own land, and build my temple." This was foretold by Isaiah one hundred and forty years before the temple was demolished. Accordingly, when Cyrus read this, and admired the Divine power, an earnest desire and ambition seized upon him to fulfil what was so written. [^7]

Even though some have pointed out that Cyrus's acceptance of Jehovah's message was simply a reflection of his pantheistic approach to religion, it is still his receptivity to the idea of Judah's freedom and restoration that needs to be emphasized and remembered. President Ezra Taft Benson said, "God, the Father of us all, uses the men of the earth, especially good men, to accomplish his purposes." [^8]

The Return

It is against the foregoing historical and theological background that the opening verses of the book of Ezra are to be understood. In Cyrus's first year as king of Babylon (538 B.C.), the Lord indeed "stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation" (Ezra 1:1), a proclamation which has come to be known as the Edict of Liberation. The edict is preserved in the book of Ezra in two versions. One (Ezra 1:2-4) is written in Hebrew, the traditional biblical language of Israel and Judah. The other (Ezra 6:3-5) is written in Aramaic, the diplomatic language of the Persian Empire, which gradually became the common tongue of the Jewish people during the post-exilic period. [^9]

Hebrew Version Aramaic Version

Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, In the first year of Cyrus the king

The Lord God of heaven hath given the same Cyrus the king made a

me all the kingdoms of the earth; decree concerning the house of

and he hath charged me to build God at Jerusalem, Let the house

him an house at Jerusalem, which be builded, the place where they

is in Judah. Who is there among offered sacrifices, and let the

you of all his people? his God be foundations thereof be strongly laid;

with him, and let him go up to the height thereof threescore cubits,

Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and and the breadth thereof threescore

build the house of the Lord God of cubits; With three rows of great

Israel, (he is the God,) which is in stones, and a row of new timber: and

Jerusalem. And whosoever remaineth let the expenses be given out of the

in any place where he sojourneth, let king's house: And also let the golden

the men of his place help him with and silver vessels of the house of God,

silver, and with gold, and with goods, which Nebuchadnezzar took forth out

and with beasts, beside the freewill of the temple which is at Jerusalem,

offering for the house of God that is and brought unto Babylon, be

in Jerusalem (Ezra 1:2-4). restored, and brought again unto

the temple which is at Jerusalem,

every one to his place, and place

them in the house of God (Ezra

6:3-5).

Although there has been some discussion as to which version of the edict represents the original document and which is a translation, the historicity of Cyrus's decree is beyond doubt. The very fact that the edict is preserved in two versions speaks for its authenticity. It is probable that the Hebrew text (Ezra 1:2-4) represents the oral proclamation of the decree and the Aramaic text (Ezra 6:3-5) the official written decree. The edict is also substantiated by an independent source, the Cyrus Cylinder itself. In one passage of the Cylinder, Cyrus declared: "I returned to [these] sacred cities on the other side of the Tigris, the sanctuaries of which have been ruins for a long time, the images which [used] to live therein and established for them permanent sanctuaries. I [also] gathered all their [former] inhabitants and returned [to them] their habitations." [^10]

To head up the return from exile, Cyrus appointed a leader named Sheshbazzar to be governor (Ezra 5:14). We know little else about him except that he was "the prince of Judah" (Ezra 1:8). His name is almost immediately replaced in the biblical text by that of Zerubbabel, who is identified in Haggai 2:2 as the governor of Judah and leader of the returning expedition.

Some commentators believe that the two names identify the same person. [^11] Others hold that Sheshbazzar and Zerubbabel are two separate individuals, that Sheshbazzar is better identified with Shenazar (1 Chron. 3:18), the son of Jehoiachin (Jeconiah) and uncle of Zerubbabel (1 Chron. 3:19), and that Sheshbazzar, being older, was simply succeeded by the younger Zerubbabel at this crucial juncture. [^12]

As Judah prepared to return home, the times would have been stressful and would have taken their toll emotionally and physically on everyone. The Jewish governor appointed by Cyrus would have been made responsible for overseeing the preparations and the journey, as well as the activities of the people once they reached their destination. The governor of the Jews was subordinate to the great governor or "satrap" who ruled over the district west of the Euphrates and who was responsible to the Persian emperor himself. Tatnai was such a satrap (Ezra 5:3, 6; 6:6, 13).

Zerubbabel, like Sheshbazzar before him, was chosen governor of the return because of his lineage and ability. He was a grandson of Jehoiachin, the king of Judah who had been taken into captivity in Babylon in 597 B.C. Zerubbabel was raised in the Chaldean capital and was of the royal Davidic line. He was also an ancestor of Jesus Christ ("Zorobabel" of Matt. 1:12-13 is the Greek form of the name) and was favorably regarded as Jehovah's servant by Haggai, the prophet of the second temple, which sometimes is also called Zerubbabel's temple.

A New Day—A New Culture

The preparations made by the returning exiles, with their collections of gold and silver temple vessels, is reminiscent of an earlier day when the children of Israel gathered together the precious items of Egypt (Ex. 12:35-36) as they made ready to embark upon their exodus. But here the parallel ends. This was a new day, and unlike the Israelites at the time of the Exodus, most of the expatriated Jews living in Babylon in 538 B.C. chose not to return to the lands of their inheritance. Years later the Talmudic rabbis wrote, "Many cities which were conquered by the Israelites who came up from Egypt were not reconquered by those who came up from Babylon." [^13] As to the reasons why, W. F. Albright commented, "In the first place, the latter were in general becoming well established in their new homes, as vividly illustrated by Egyptian papyri beginning in the year 495 and by Babylonian contract tablets dating from various periods (but sporadic and often uncertain until 437 B.C., when Jewish names become abundant in the Nippur documents). In the second place, the journey was dangerous and expensive, while conditions in Judah were certainly very unsatisfactory." [^14]

Much of Judah had been absorbed into the Babylonian way of life. Even the Babylonian name of the Jewish leader, Zerubbabel (Zer-Babili, "Offspring of Babylon"), reflects the degree to which Jewish life had been affected by Babylonian culture. As exiles gradually returned over the next century and more, beginning in Zerubbabel's day, they took back new ideas, culturally and religiously, to the land from which they or their ancestors had been deported. New institutions, new religious leaders, and a different religious orientation grew up in Babylon and gradually were brought to Palestine. In Babylon the religion of Israel began the transformation into what we recognize as Judaism. A summary of the most important developments that began there during this period would include the following:

Chapter 2 of Ezra presents the principal list of each clan that returned from Babylon with Zerubbabel and other leaders of the Exile (Ezra 2:2). A parallel list is found in Nehemiah 7:7-63. This appears to be a genealogical register, the significance of which lies in its arrangement. Names are organized into two basic categories. The first is laymen according to family (Ezra 2:3-20) and city (Ezra 2:21-35). The second category is far more important and detailed; it is those names associated with the temple: priests (Ezra 2:36-39), Levites (Ezra 2:40), singers (Ezra 2:41), porters (Ezra 2:42), Nethinim—literally "given ones" or "dedicated ones" to the temple (Ezra 2:43-54), and sons of Solomon's servants (Ezra 2:55-58). Each of the clans in these classes of temple ministrants is relatively small in number compared with those of the laymen. But it was important for the author to be more exact in accounting for those groups who could function in a new temple. Thus chapter 2, besides being a genealogical survey, is really a foreshadowing of a primary aim of the returning exiles—the reconstruction of the temple—and also a disclosure of the centrality of the temple for the religious and theological system of the returning exiles. [^15]

Related to the general category of temple ministrants is a group of individuals who claimed to be priesthood holders and thus eligible to participate in temple rites but whose genealogy could not be certified (Ezra 2:59-63). This group is discussed here in the genealogical register because of the danger they posed in possibly contaminating the temple and desecrating its prescribed rites. We are reminded that the Lord's kingdom is one of order and that all things associated with God's temples are to be done with exactness and propriety. Thus uncertified priests of Zerubbabel's day were forbidden to partake of "the most holy things" (Ezra 2:63)—special portions of food reserved for the male descendants of Aaron (Lev. 2:3; 7:31-33). It seems their exclusion was not intended to be permanent but only until a divine decision could be received through the use of Urim and Thummim. [^16]

Building the Temple

Some time after the exiles were resettled in Palestine, they gathered together at Jerusalem under the direction of Zerubbabel, their political leader, and Jeshua, the Aaronic high priest and religious leader of the community (Hag. 1:1). They first built an altar and resumed the offering of sacrifices to reinstate the official worship of Jehovah in Jerusalem and to prepare for the building of the temple (Ezra 3:2-6). The altar could exist legally without the temple and was greatly needed for the rehabilitation of the people and the religious system that was centered around the house of the Lord. Not until the second year of their repatriation did the former exiles begin actual construction on the temple, because of the preparations that had to be made (Ezra 3:7-8).

The shouting, singing, and praising that accompanied the completion of the temple foundation were in harmony with Davidic custom (1 Chron. 25) and must have been a joyous occasion for the younger sector of the population. Yet mingled with the sounds of happiness were sounds of sadness; for there were in Jerusalem in that day some older men—"many of the priests and Levites and chief of the fathers" (Ezra 3:12)—who had seen the first temple, which had been built by Solomon, and who now wept and wailed over the inferiority of this new house (Ezra 3:11-13; see also Hag. 2:3). Josephus wrote that they exhibited great grief as they saw how far they had sunk materially. [^17] Undoubtedly the occasion accentuated some of the same sentiments expressed in Psalm 137:1, "Yea, we wept, when we remembered Zion."

Apparently it was not long after construction had commenced that work on the new temple was interrupted by the Samaritans, who wanted to participate with the Jews in rebuilding the house of the Lord (Ezra 4:1-4). [^18] Under the direction of Zerubbabel and Jeshua, the returned exiles refused to allow Samaritan participation, whereupon the Samaritans took revenge and hindered the work of building. They also hired advocates to lobby against Judah at the court of Cyrus (who died in 529 B.C.) and the king who succeeded him (see Ezra 4:4-6). The phrase used in Ezra 4:4, which says the Samaritans "weakened the hands" of Judah, reflects a Hebrew idiom which means to cause someone to lose heart and become discouraged. The phrase was used in a nonbiblical source, a Hebrew ostracon from Lachish, in which a prophet was accused of lowering the morale of the country at a critical moment. [^19] Thus, in their spiritually and emotionally weak state, the Jews, having little resolve, allowed harassment from the Samaritans to hinder their work on the new temple for several years.

Ezra 4:6-23 is apparently out of place in its present location in the book. It refers to a later attempt to rebuild the city and its walls. One fear of Judah's opponents was that if Jerusalem were rebuilt, its inhabitants would rebel and cease paying tribute to the Persian treasury (Ezra 4:13-16). When an investigation was conducted into the Persian archives, it was determined that Jerusalem had been a rebellious city in times past. Thus the decision was made not to allow the Jews to rebuild (Ezra 4:23). This event probably took place at least fifty years after the event described in Ezra 4:1-5, perhaps during the reign of Xerxes I (485-65 B.C.). [^20] The prohibition against rebuilding the walls of Jerusalem was not lifted until the time of Nehemiah's first mission to Jerusalem in 445 B.C. (see Neh. 2).

Work on the house of the Lord remained dormant for seventeen years, until the second year (520 B.C.) of the reign of a new ruler—the second in succession after Cyrus—King Darius I of Persia. In that year, two of the great post-Exilic prophets, Haggai and Zechariah, rose up and provided the inspiration needed to get construction going again (Ezra 5:1-2). [^21] More attempts were made to obstruct progress on the temple by Tatnai, the general governor over the region west of the Euphrates under whose jurisdiction the Jews fell, and by leaders of Samaria. This time, however, the resolve of the people was strong and work did not cease, because they heeded the prophetic counsel: "Be strong, all ye people of the land, saith the Lord, and work: for I am with you, saith the Lord of hosts" (Hag. 2:4). In fact, so tenacious and bold had the people become that when Tatnai the governor asked to know who had authorized the commencement of construction and who were the leaders of the project, the elders answered, "We are the servants of the God of heaven and earth, and build the house that was builded these many years ago, which a great king of Israel builded and set up" (Ezra 5:11). Furthermore, the people of Judah requested that a search be made of the Persian archives to find the original decree issued by Cyrus that gave them legal right to build the temple. When the document was found, King Darius issued another proclamation not only to permit the continuation of construction but also to assist financially. All this was made effective by penalty of death for those who tried to alter the king's declaration. So work on the Lord's house continued until the second temple was finally finished in 515 B.C.

Those who had returned from Babylon to the now desolate, but once holy, city of Jerusalem observed the dedication of the new temple with joy. The priesthood holders who attended were seated in their proper divisions and courses much like the arrangement followed in solemn assemblies today, as one supposes (Ezra 6:15-22). Though inferior to Solomon's temple, the dedicated second temple meant that God would again personally come to Jerusalem to reveal his will. [^22]

Some Lessons

The story of the rebuilding of the temple in the post-Exilic period (from 538 B.C. on) provides Latter-day Saints with some valuable lessons. We come to understand just how effective a weapon discouragement can be to material and spiritual progress. The work of the Lord is greatly hampered by attitudes of discouragement, but listening to our prophets can change people's attitudes and they, in turn, can change life's circumstances. Indeed, one of the great lessons of this episode is that the prophetic voice of encouragement is just as valuable as the prophetic voice of warning. Heeding the prophets produces prosperity: "Then rose up Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and began to build the house of God which is at Jerusalem: and with them were the prophets of God helping them. . . . And the elders of the Jews builded, and they prospered through the prophesying of Haggai the prophet and Zechariah the son of Iddo. And they builded, and finished it, according to the commandment of the God of Israel, and according to the commandment of Cyrus, and Darius, and Artaxerxes king of Persia" (Ezra 5:2; 6:14).

Another lesson for our day concerns the challenges to temple-building the returning exiles had to overcome. As seen by the people then, and as we know from recent experience, the adversary will go to great lengths and use any obstacle to keep temples from being built. The Lord's chosen people of every temple-building dispensation will always find it necessary to have faith and go to work (see Hag. 2:4).

History of the post-Exilic period begins with the book of Ezra, a fact obscured by its order of placement in English translations of the Bible. Ezra and Nehemiah are actually the last two historical books of the Old Testament. Zechariah and Haggai were among the prophets of the period and were among the last to have served Judah. We know only of Malachi and perhaps Joel who came after them. The books of Ezra and Nehemiah originally circulated as one book and told the story of Judah's history from the return to Jerusalem to the end of Nehemiah's second term as governor (538 B.C. to about 400 B.C.).

The era discussed in Ezra 1 through 6 witnessed profound changes for the remnant of Judah that returned to Jerusalem. Culturally these changes are evidenced by the fact that a large portion of Ezra (Ezra 4:8-6:18; 7:12-26) is preserved in Aramaic rather than Hebrew, which reflects the new cultural milieu out of which Judah came in 538 B.C. But the greatest changes were religious. Much of Israel was gone; only Judah remained. Prophecies of doom and destruction made before the Exile had been fulfilled. It had taken the disaster of the captivity and the destruction of Solomon's temple to humble a nation and awaken it to its responsibilities and transgressions. But out of that awakening something significant had come. Repentance had occurred, the temple had been rebuilt, and the Jews now had a second chance to live as the Lord's covenant people. They had the holy city Jerusalem, the leadership of a descendant of David, [^23] and divine guidance through prophets. The task of the returned exiles would be to live in such a way that they could enjoy those blessings forever.

Notes

Andrew C. Skinner is assistant professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] In contrast to such other prophets as Isaiah, Ezekiel, Jeremiah, and even Zechariah, the parentage of Haggai is nowhere mentioned. Haggai's name in Hebrew means "Festive," and some postulate that it was given to him because he was born on a feast day. The birth of a child on such a day was considered a good omen that deserved to be preserved in a child's name. (A name of this type is Shabbethai [Ezra 10:15], meaning "born on the sabbath.") See the discussion in D. Winton Thomas, "Haggai: Introduction," in The Interpreter's Bible, 12 vols., ed. G. A. Buttrick, et al. (Nashville: Abingdon, 1952-57), 6:1037.
[^2] For Zerubbabel's genealogy, see "Zerubbabel," Bible Dictionary, LDS Bible. Joshua (the Hebrew form, because the book of Haggai is written in Hebrew) is called Jeshua (Aramaic) in the book of Ezra (much of which is in Aramaic).
[^3] See the discussion of Christ as the millennial king "David" in Chap. 27 of this volume.
[^4] Additional insights on Haggai and his times can be found in W. S. LaSor, D. A. Hubbard, and F. W. Bush, Old Testament Survey (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1982), pp. 480-88, 648-49; and John Bright, A History of Israel, 3d ed. (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1981), pp. 360-72. The most detailed and scholarly of recent commentaries available is C. L. Myers and E. M. Myers, Haggai; Zechariah 1-8, Anchor Bible 25B (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1987).
[^5] Aramaic began to replace Hebrew as the common language of the people. This process was completed during the post-Exilic period and contributed to the growing power of the scribes, who could read the sacred texts in Hebrew. Pritchard, pp. 315-16.
[^6] The Cyrus Cylinder, a clay barrel inscribed with the story of the king's conquest of Babylon, attributes the success of Cyrus to his having been chosen by the god Marduk, the chief god of the Babylonian pantheon. Cyrus may have bee a polytheist, but it should be remembered that the Cyrus Cylinder was written as propaganda for the Babylonians and was probably the product of a Babylonian priest/scribe.
[^7] Flavius Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews, 11.1.1-2, in Josephus: Complete Works, trans. William Whiston (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Kregel, 1960), p. 228.
[^8] Ezra Taft Benson, "Civic Standards for the Faithful Saints," Ensign, July 1972, p. 59.
[^9] See the discussion in Bernhard W. Anderson, Understanding the Old Testament, 4th ed. (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1986), pp. 508-9.
[^10] Pritchard, pp. 315-16.
[^11] See "Zerubbabel," Bible Dictionary, LDS Bible.
[^12] See Anderson, p. 509; William F. Albright, The Biblical Period from Abraham to Ezra (New York: Harper and Row, 1963), p. 87.
[^13] Babylonian Talmud: Seder Kodashim, Hullin, 1.7a.
[^14] Albright, p. 87.
[^15] See also Robert H. Pfeiffer, Introduction to the Old Testament (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1941), pp. 822, 836.
[^16] The Talmudic rabbis considered the exclusion mentioned in verse 63 to be in effect until the dead were resurrected or "until Elijah comes" in connection with the Messiah, when all difficult theological questions would be settled. Tosephta Sota 13.1; Sota 486; Ketuboth 24b; Shebuoth 16a.
[^17] Josephus, Antiquities, 11.4.2.
[^18] See "Samaritans," Bible Dictionary, LDS Bible. See also Stephen D. Ricks, "No Prophet Is Accepted in His Own Country," in Studies in Scripture, Volume Five: The Gospels, ed. Kent P. Jackson and Robert L. Millet (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986), pp. 204-8.
[^19] As proposed in Jacob M. Myers, Ezra-Nehemiah, Anchor Bible 14 (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1965), p. 34. See also Jer. 38:3-4.
[^20] See the discussion in Raymond A. Bowman's exegesis of the book of Ezra in The Interpreter's Bible, 12 vols., ed. G. A. Buttrick, et al. (Nashville: Abingdon, 1952-57), 3:597.
[^21] See my discussion on Haggai in Chap. 31 of this volume.
[^22] James E. Talmage, The House of the Lord (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1968), pp. 42-43.
[^23] Zerubbabel, though heir to the throne of David, is never called "king" in the Bible. It is likely that the Persians were not open to the idea of the reestablishment of Judah's Davidic monarchy.
