Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

31

THE BOOK OF HAGGAI

ANDREW C. SKINNER

Though not regarded with the great or well-known prophets such as Isaiah, Ezekiel, and Jeremiah, Haggai was an important prophet who performed valuable service in the Lord's kingdom. Along with Zechariah, he motivated the former Jewish exiles of Babylon to renew and redouble their efforts to start again building the second temple in Jerusalem after a long period of difficulty. His exhortations prepared the way for the Spirit of the Lord to stir the souls of the people (Hag. 1:13-14). Haggai worked to alleviate discouragement and restore faith in Jehovah, which led to the great accomplishment of 515 B.C.: the completion of a new house of the Lord.

After Cyrus conquered Babylon (539 B.C.) and became virtual master of the Near East, he issued a decree allowing the Jewish captives to return to their homeland. He also encouraged the rebuilding of the temple at Jerusalem and offered financial assistance (Ezra 1:1-4). By 520 B.C., however, all construction had ceased, little progress on the temple had been made, and all resolve had disappeared because of harassment by the Samaritans, who felt slighted after their offer to help with the building had been refused (Ezra 4:1-5).

Adding to the discouragement of the returning exiles was the desolate condition of the land of Judah and their own material poverty. This, plus the inescapable conclusion that the new temple would be far inferior to the old one, even when only the foundation of the new had been laid, caused many old leaders of the group (priests, Levites, and chiefs of the fathers) to weep as they remembered the comparative splendor of the first house of the Lord (Ezra 3:12; cf. Hag. 2:3). Continuing opposition from the Samaritans and other adversaries brought the morale of the repatriated exiles to a low ebb, and they began to say that the time to rebuild the temple had not yet come (Hag. 1:2). At this point the prophet Haggai entered onto the stage of post-Exilic history.

We know very little about Haggai. He is mentioned only in this short book (two chapters) that bears his name and in Ezra 5:1 and 6:14. His book is to be read in conjunction with Ezra 5 and 6. Haggai and Zechariah are the earliest known prophets of the post-Exilic restoration of Judah. It is generally assumed that Haggai was among the main contingent of returning exiles to come out of captivity after Cyrus issued his edict (538 B.C.). If that is the case, he probably witnessed the initial attempts to rebuild the temple and the subsequent hiatus caused by Samaritan and official Persian opposition. [^1]

Some suggest that Haggai was an old man at the time of his preaching, owing to Haggai 2:3, which may indicate that the prophet had seen the splendor of the first temple. Others believe Haggai was a priest, based on Haggai 2:10-14. Such inferences are hazardous. What is known is that Haggai 2:10-14. Such inferences are hazardous. What is known is that Haggai's recorded activity as a prophet was of short duration. All his messages that we know about were delivered over four months in 520 B.C., the second year of the reign of Darius I of Persia.

The Message

In 520 B.C. on the first day of the sixth month (corresponding to our August-September), Haggai presented the word of the Lord to the two leaders of the Jewish community: Zerubbabel, the governor, who was heir to the throne of David, and Joshua (Jeshua), the high priest. [^2] It was blunt: "Go up to the temple mount and finish construction on the house of the Lord!"

Material concerns and discouragement because of opposition were the two considerations with which the Lord dealt through his servant Haggai. He exhorted the people to consider their ways. Progress and prosperity were tied to the temple. Haggai asked if it was right for the people to be concerned with paneling their own houses ("ceiled houses") while the Lord's house remained in ruins (Hag. 1:4). He pointed out that material well-being was indeed elusive, just as it seemed to be, because the temple had been neglected (Hag. 1:6, 9-10). Even the occurrence of drought and famine was related to the temple. The Lord said that he had "called for a drought upon the land" (Hag. 1:11). The Hebrew word for "drought" is horeb, whereas the word for "waste" or "ruin," the condition of the temple as described in Haggai 1:9, is hareb. The play on words is intentional and inextricably links the temple to Judah's well-being. As long as the temple lay in ruins, the drought would continue (Hag. 1:10-11).

The Lord's message began to have its desired effect. Once the fear of the Lord (Hag. 1:12) began to replace the fear of men, the Spirit worked powerfully on the people, and "they came and did work in the house of the Lord of hosts, their God" (Hag. 1:14). We learn from the book of Ezra that Haggai's preaching was successful (see Ezra 5:1-6:15). Within five years the Jews finished the construction of what is called the second temple, or Zerubbabel's temple.

Haggai delivered another prophetic message on the twenty-first day of the seventh month (corresponding to our September-October). It began by exhorting the people to continue to be strong, faithful, and hardworking on the temple. He recalled the covenant made with the Lord at the time of the Exodus and concluded with a prophecy of a glorious future temple: "I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come: and I will fill this house with glory, saith the Lord of hosts. . . . The glory of this latter house shall be greater than of the former, saith the Lord of hosts: and in this place will I give peace, saith the Lord of hosts" (Hag. 2:7, 9). As beautiful as Solomon's temple had been-with which the humble, new second temple was compared—neither of them would be as glorious as a yet-future temple that would exist in the day when the Lord would "give peace" to his holy city. In that millennial day, the house of the Lord will be filled with glory, because the Lord himself will be there.

Haggai's final recorded messages were delivered on the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month (corresponding to our November-December). He taught the people an important lesson about the holiness of the temple. Under Mosaic law, as the people with whom Haggai spoke acknowledged, something unholy cannot be made holy merely by touching something that is holy (Hag. 2:12). But something ritually unclean would spread that uncleanliness by simple contact. So it was with the remnant of Judah in Haggai's day. Mere contact with or construction of the holy temple would not make the nation holy. In fact, an unholy or unclean people would defile or desecrate sacred ordinances as well as the Lord's sacred house. Sanctity and purity start with individual lives and individual worthiness; holiness works from the inside out, not from the outside in. Haggai exhorted the people to consider their status and their behavior as though it were the time before the temple foundation had ever been laid, as though it were a brand new era, a new day, or a time of planting—a time before the fruit is already set—so that they could make renewed commitments that would bring them the Lord's blessing from that very day onward (Hag. 2:19).

The book ends, significantly, with a prophecy in which the name Zerubbabel is used in a messianic context (Hag. 2:21-23). Its fulfillment, to be sure, would not be in Zerubbabel himself but in Jesus Christ, who would descend of his lineage more than five hundred years later (see Matt. 1:12) and who will rule as Israel's king in the Millennium. Ezekiel (37:21-25) had earlier referred to the millennial king by the name of his ancestor David, whom the Jews considered to be the very model of divinely appointed kingship. Now Haggai referred to the millennial Messiah by the name of another ancestor, Zerubbabel. Just as Zerubbabel presided over the returned exiles of Judah and their restoration to their promised land, so also—but on a much grander scale—will Christ preside over all the restored house of Israel in the Millennium. [^3]

Though it is true that Haggai is classified as one of the Minor Prophets, his messages were of great value to post-Exilic Judah. With his help the temple was built and became the center of religious life for that remnant of Israel whom we call the Jews.

There is no more timely message for our own day than the one delivered by Haggai. Real progress and prosperity are connected with the house of the Lord. But not only do we need to build and attend temples, we need to live holy lives. As Haggai counseled: "Yet now be strong . . . and work" (Hag. 2:4). [^4]

Notes

Andrew C. Skinner is assistant professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Sidney B. Sperry, The Voice of Israel's Prophets (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1952), p. 403.
[^2] D. Guthrie, The New Bible Commentary (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1970), p. 786. The term quintessence was used by ancient philosophers to denote that divine substance latent in all things. Thus, the idea expressed is that of essential nature in its refined and exact form.
[^3] Some have suggested that there are allusions to, if not exact borrowings from, Exodus, Leviticus, Deuteronomy, Chronicles, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Hosea, Amos, and Micah. For an analysis, see Guthrie, p. 786.
[^4] Nearly all of the Jewish writings after the Babylonian captivity, including those of the later prophets, contain Aramaic words and idioms. Zechariah carefully avoided these, and in so doing, tied his prophecies closely to the earlier prophetic traditions.
