Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

32

THE BOOK OF ZECHARIAH

RICHARD D. DRAPER

Little is known about Zechariah. His grandfather was presumably the Iddo who was the head of a priestly family that came out of Babylon with Zerubbabel the governor and Joshua (called Jeshua in Ezra 3-5) the high priest about 537 B.C. (Ezra 5:1, 6:14; Neh. 12:4, 16). If that is the case, then Zechariah was both priest and prophet. He was called to declare God's word and assist Haggai around 520 B.C. in motivating the Jews to rebuild the temple. The visions recorded in Zechariah 1 through 8 are contemporary with the events described in Haggai 1 and 2 and Ezra 5 and 6, whereas those of Zechariah 9 through 14 perhaps come afterward.

The prophet's name means "Jehovah remembers," a fitting appellation for the one through whom these prophecies came. [^1] The content of his writings reveals that Jehovah's word is ever before his eyes and that his purposes cannot be frustrated.

The prophecies of Zechariah have been described as the quintessence of prophetic utterance. [^2] Though that may be a bit of an overstatement, it still accurately portrays the majesty of Zechariah's visions as well as his excellent acquaintance with the writings of the Israelite prophets since the time of Moses. [^3] Indeed, the pure Hebrew, free from any taint of Aramaic, echoes the language of his prophetic ancestors and underscores his direct prophetic succession. [^4]

Yet of all the Minor Prophets, Zechariah is perhaps the most difficult to read. Following in the footsteps of Ezekiel and Daniel, he couched much of his teaching in apocalyptic style, thereby hiding his message in dramatic symbols (see "Apocalyptic Revelation" in Chap. 28 of this volume). [^5] Out of that style has grown one major question that confronts any careful reader of this book: are the images Zechariah used reflections on his own day, or are they types of later events? When he described the activities of the high priest Joshua, was he referring to his contemporary, or to a latter-day counterpart, or to both? History would suggest that Zechariah was using objects and people from his own day as types to represent millennial counterparts. [^6] But though there are problems with understanding the writing, the broad outline of his message is plain and the breadth of his vision, clear.

The Eight Visions (Zech. 1-6)

Early in 520 B.C. Zechariah received a series of visions all on the same night. The first three focus on Zion and the glory that the Lord intends to bring to her. The next five focus on the work of the Messiah as the Priest-King and the steps he will take to bring about the promised glory. The most important of these steps are the gathering and purging of Israel from sin, the Savior's mediating her cause with God, and finally Christ's presidency over the final confrontation between the forces of good and evil. Satan will be totally overthrown, God's wrath appeased, and his kingdom established on the earth.

The First Vision:The Outriders (Zech. 1:7-17)

In vision, the prophet saw four riders who had been observing conditions on the earth. [^7] They found all at peace. Therefore, Judah had no excuse for not building the temple, a major step in the establishment of Zion. The Lord promised the Jews protection and abundance if they would begin building the temple, and he commanded them to build the city as well. Zechariah proclaimed the promised blessings which would come from doing the Lord's will.

The Second Vision:The End of Gentile Supremacy (Zech. 1:18-21)

The prophet was shown four horns, symbols of powers that had participated in the scattering of Israel. It is probable that the prophet did not have four actual kingdoms in mind. Rather, he was alluding to those forces that did and would prevail against God's people from every quarter.

Along with these, he saw four craftsmen who had the capacity to terrify the great powers because of their ability to destroy them. The figure of craftsmen may suggest that the conquest over the scattering powers would be by peaceful means, growing out of the efforts of God's people to engage in the work of temple building. [^8]

The Third Vision:The Foreshadowing of the Future City (Zech. 2:1-13)

In the next vision, the prophet saw a young man who set out to measure the dimensions of the holy city. He was stopped for two reasons: first, because the future Zion, here symbolized by the center city of Jerusalem, was to be contained not in one city but many; and second, because her strength would be beyond measurement, it being the glory of God. Before Zion can come, however, Judah must break free from the spiritual bonds of Babylon (see D&C 45:66-70; 115:6; 133:14). Only then will the nations become one with her and Jehovah dwell in her.

The Fourth Vision:The Coming of the Priest-King Mediator (Zech. 3:1-10)

Having seen the power and beauty of the future kingdom, Zechariah turned to the means by which it would come to pass. He saw the high priest, Joshua, standing before an angel of the Lord. [^9] Joshua was cleansed of sin and given the priestly robe and miter with the promise that the Lord would be with him. His ordination became a type of that of a future high priest called the Branch. The term was sometimes used in a technical sense by the prophets to designate Christ in his role as the millennial Davidic King (Isa. 4:2-6; Jer. 23:3-6; 33:14-26). [^10] To the Branch would rightly belong not only the keys of kingship, but also the keys of priesthood, as associated with the temple. [^11] This description make it clear that the Priest-King referred to is none other than the Savior himself (see Jer. 23:5-6; 33:15-16).

At the time of this Priest-King, the kingdom of God, symbolized by a stone being watched over with care, would have all iniquity removed from it. [^12]

The Fifth Vision:The Lamp-Stand and the Olive Trees (Zech. 4:1-14)

In the next vision, the prophet saw a lamp-stand positioned between two olive trees. The trees supplied the oil, which the lamp burned. It seems likely that the lamp symbolizes Israel, the oil the Holy Spirit, and the light the Savior, which Israel is to hold up to all the world. Though the text seems to be imperfectly preserved and is, therefore, difficult to read, it appears that the imagery of the olive trees was picked up by John in his revelation and interpreted as the two prophets raised up in the last days to prophesy to Judah (see Rev. 11:3-4; D&C 77:15). [^13]

Just as with Joshua in the previous vision (Zech. 3:5-8), now Zerubbabel, the Davidic ruler, becomes a type of Christ, the true King of Israel (Zech. 4:6-10).

The Sixth and Seventh Visions:The Flying Scroll and the Barrel (Zech. 5:1-11)

These visions are closely related. In the sixth vision, Zechariah saw a flying scroll, which seems to represent the judgment of the Lord upon those who break his law (Zech. 5:3). The idea expressed by the vision is that Israel must be purged from sin. Only through judgment upon that house would this be possible (note D&C 112:24-26). Next, the prophet saw a barrel [^14] with a heavy, leaden lid. Inside the barrel was a woman of filthiness. She was taken away to Shinar, Babylon, the symbolic seat of apostasy. In this way, the prophet illustrated that Judah must and would become rid of the evil of apostasy forevermore.

The Eighth Vision:The Universal Sovereignty of the Lord (Zech. 6:1-15)

In this vision the prophet saw symbolic representations of the servants of the Lord subduing the nations in all corners of the earth (Zech. 6:1-8). Then came the command to crown Joshua in similitude of the future crowning of the Branch, the millennial High Priest, the great temple builder, the Savior who would establish Zion and then come in his glory. With this act, the first series of visions is brought to a dramatic close.

Zechariah's visions use images and individuals from his own time to point to the latter days. They teach us that the earth must be cleansed of all unrighteousness (Zech. 1:18-21; 5:1-11; 6:1-8), that Zion will be established and its temple built (Zech. 1:7-17; 2:1-13), and that Christ will rule as both Priest (symbolized by the high priest, Joshua; Zech. 3:6-8; 6:11-13) and King (symbolized by the Davidic heir, Zerubbabel; Zech. 4:6-8). He shall "rule upon his throne; and he shall be a priest upon his throne; and the counsel of peace shall be between them both" (Zech. 6:13).

Mercy, Truth, Justice in Zion (Zech. 7-8)

In response to a question about fasting, the Lord instructed Zechariah to teach the Jews the true principles that underlie a righteous fast: "Execute true judgment [i.e., justice [^15], and shew mercy and compassions every man to his brother" (Zech. 7:9). "Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbour; execute the judgment [justice] of truth and peace in your gates. And let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbour" (Zech. 8:16-17). The Lord, through earlier prophets, had taught these things clearly to Israel (Zech. 7:7), "but they refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they should not hear" (Zech. 7:11). Thus they were scattered, and their land was made desolate (Zech. 7:14).

As with many other Old Testament passages, a prophecy of hope follows the discussion of God's punishment against his rebellious children. God would not forsake his people forever. There would be a restoration to the promised land and a reconstruction of the holy city. Its streets would again be filled with old men, old women, and boys and girls (Zech. 8:1-8). God would be in their midst (Zech. 8:3), which would prompt people from other nations to seek them out and worship the Lord among them (Zech. 8:22-23). In that day, said the Lord, "they shall be my people, and I will be their God, in truth and in righteousness" (Zech. 8:8).

Zechariah lived in a day in which exiled Jews were returning to reestablish their city and their community. But the restoration of Israel that he saw was that of the latter days, and the holy city that he envisioned was that of the Millennium, in which the Lord himself, the "king over all the earth" (Zech. 4:9), "will be the glory in the midst of her" (Zech. 2:5).

The Worldwide Rule of Zion's King (Zech. 9-14)

The visions discussed above were not the last of those seen by Zechariah. The second portion of his book records further details concerning the coming of the Messiah. Looking to a future day, the prophet saw judgment poured out against those who would fight against the Lord's chosen people (Zech. 9:1-8), and the witnessed the coming of Zion's king (Zech. 9:9-17). Before that day, however, he saw that Israel must be gathered. Using the symbols of shepherding, he envisioned the summons of scattered Israel (Zech. 10:1-12) and the wail of the shepherds, Israel's leaders, as they realize that they were greatly responsible for her loss (Zech. 11:1-3). Finally would come the purification of Jerusalem (Zech. 12:1-14), the cleansing of her lands of false prophecy (Zech. 13:1-6), and the separation of the wicked from the righteous (Zech. 13:7-9). Zechariah concluded his prophecy with the glorious vision of the coming of the Lord, who will rout his foes and dwell in glory within the holy city (Zech. 14:1-21). "In that day," he wrote, even the bells on the horses and the mundane pots and pans of Jerusalem would be consecrated to the Lord's service (Zech. 14:20-21). And all of God's children will be invited to the millennial feast (Zech. 14:16, 21).

Some Specific Prophecies of the Coming Messiah

In the breadth of his vision, the prophet alluded to events associated with both the first and the second comings of the Messiah. It seems well to conclude this discussion with specific mention of two of the former and one of the latter.

In chapter 9 Zechariah taught of the coming of the great king, not in glory with armies, but meek and humble, riding on a donkey colt, a symbol of royalty but expressing the Lord's essential peaceableness. [^16] This prophecy clearly describes the first coming of the Lord as a man of peace and blessing and foreshadows his triumphal entry into Jerusalem, which many of his followers saw as a fulfillment of this prophecy (see Matt. 21:4-5; John 12:14-16). [^17] But the fulfillment was not complete with that event alone, because the larger context of the passage is millennial (see Zech. 9:10). Like many messianic prophecies in the Old Testament, this one foresees both Christ's first and second comings.

In chapter 11 Zechariah presented the allegory of the good shepherd who tries to save the sheep but because of opposition cannot do it. Finally, he quits in anger, breaks his two staves, and demands his wages. He is paid the sum of thirty pieces of silver. These he throws down before the potter inside the Lord's house, in testimony before Jehovah of his wrongs and rejection. This allegory reflects the rejection of the true shepherd who was sold for thirty pieces of silver and delivered over to false brethren. This betrayer's ransom later bought a potter's field (Matt. 27:7-10).

Looking to the Second Coming, the prophet described the participation of the great King in a battle for the holy city (Zech. 12:1-4; 14:1-5). As nations mount against the covenant people, the Lord himself will intervene. He shall stand upon the Mount of Olives, which shall be split in two. His people shall rush to him in the newly formed valley and there learn his true identity. Amid tears of sorrow and rejoicing, they will acknowledge him as their Lord and King (cf. D&C 45:48-53; 133:20, 35). At that time he will subdue all enemies, and the earth shall rest under his divine power. Little wonder Zechariah rejoiced in the testimony of his King and worked so diligently to bring his people to him.

Notes

Richard D. Draper is assistant professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] For a good summary of the arguments, see Douglas Stuart, Hosea-Jonah, Word Biblical Commentary, vol. 31 (Waco, Texas: Word, 1987), pp. 224-26. See his bibliography, pp. 222-24.
[^2] See Andrew E. Hill, The Book of Malachi: Its Place in Post-Exilic Chronology Linguistically Reconsidered. Unpublished dissertation, University of Michigan, 1981.
[^3] Linguists are certainly aware of factors that could confuse the dating process, such as the deliberate use of older language (as with the use of "thee" and "thou" in Latter-day Saint prayers) and the possibility that Joel could have been written centuries earlier and then "translated" into a more modern dialect of Hebrew at a later date.
[^4] These terms perhaps represent different stages in the metamorphosis of one kind of insect.
[^5] For a discussion of Moroni's appearance and the scriptures he quoted, see Kent P. Jackson, "The Appearance of Moroni to Joseph Smith," in Studies in Scripture, Volume Two: The Pearl of Great Price, ed. Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson (Salt Lake City: Randall Book, 1985), pp. 339-66. See also Kent P. Jackson, "Moroni's Message to Joseph Smith," Ensign, Aug. 1990, pp. 13-16.
[^6] The KJV translation "plead with them" seems too weak a rendering of the Hebrew spt, in this particular construction. Some other translations have "enter into judgment" (New International Version; New Revised Standard Version) and "bring to judgement" (Revised English Bible).
[^7] A belief from the Middle Ages, without the support of scripture, sees Jerusalem's Kidron Valley as the Valley of Jehoshaphat and anticipates that the resurrection will begin there. Thus for centuries it has served as a favorite burial ground for Jews, Muslims, and Christians. See Cecil Roth, ed., Encyclopedia Judaica, 17 vols. (Jerusalem: Keter, 1971), 9:1327-28.
[^8] Guthrie, p. 790.
[^9] The name Joshua (Jeshua in Aramaic) is based on the Hebrew verb for "save" and means "Jehovah is salvation." The Greek equivalent is transliterated as "Jesus."
[^10] Note Guthrie, p. 791.
[^11] See Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed. rev., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1973), 6:253. See also Isa. 11:10; D&C 113:5-6.
[^12] The stone reminds us of Dan. 2:34 and D&C 65:2; the seven eyes upon the stone (Israel) suggest the idea that all heaven is concerned and watching over it. The angels shall assist in the work of cleansing her. See Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), p. 159.
[^13] Sperry, pp. 414-15; Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991), pp. 119-21.
[^14] An ephah is a unit of measure, equivalent to one-half bushel or twenty-two liters.
[^15] The Hebrew word mispat, translated as "judgment" in the KJV, is more accurately rendered "justice."
[^16] See The Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, 5 vols., ed. G. A. Buttrick, et al. (Nashville: Abingdon, 1962-76), 1:260.
[^17] See Joseph F. McConkie, "Triumphal Entry and a Day of Debate," in Kent P. Jackson and Robert L. Millet, eds., Studies in Scripture, Volume Five: The Gospels (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986), pp. 374-75.
