Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

33

THE BOOK OF JOEL

KENT P. JACKSON

The words preserved in the book of Joel give us no information about when the book was written. Its opening verses lack the customary reference to the ruling monarch, and its content provides no information about Joel's time. Given these difficulties, commentators have dated the book anywhere from the ninth to the fifth centuries B.C. [^1] Recently, some scholars have turned to linguistic clues to establish the book's date. Over time, language undergo change, as readers of the King James Version are aware. Some studies suggest that the dialect of Hebrew preserved in Joel is consistent with that of other documents from early in the post-Exilic period: Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi. [^2] If this is the case, Joel can then be dated to around 500 B.C., making it one of the latest of the prophetic books. [^3] That is the conclusion accepted in this study.

The book of Joel seems to be completely removed from the context of the time and place in which it was written. This absence of contemporary references certainly seems to be deliberate; it is as though Joel wanted us to leave behind all thoughts of the here and now and join him in his visions of the future. And the future is clearly the book's focus. I believe that aside from the names of Joel and his father in Joel 1:1, every word in the book refers to the latter days—from the time of the Prophet Joseph Smith into the Millennium. Joel's apocalyptic style makes his fundamental message very clear: in a dramatic way, God will bring judgment upon the world, destroying evil and blessing the righteous with millennial peace and happiness (see "Apocalyptic Revelation" in Chap. 28 of this volume).

A Day of Darkness and Gloominess (Joel 1:1-2:27)

As is typical in apocalyptic prophecy, vivid symbolic images are used to convey the Lord's message of great future events. Joel is best known for his image of a destructive army of insects that would invade the land. The waves of destroyers would leave nothing in their path: "That which the palmerworm hath left hath the locust eaten; and that which the locust hath left hath the cankerworm eaten; and that which the cankerworm hath left hath the caterpiller eaten" (Joel 1:4). While the precise meaning of the obscure insect vocabulary is not known, [^4] the message is nonetheless quite clear: "If one doesn't get you, the next one will." As Joel's metaphor continues, the plague of insects becomes "a nation, . . . strong, and without number," with "the cheek teeth of a great lion" (Joel 1:6). They strip the bark off trees, dry up the vines, and wither "all the trees of the field" (Joel 1:7, 12). Seeds rot, grain withers, herds and flocks are decimated, and the rivers are dried up (Joel 1:17-20). In the destructive march of this unprecedented horde, fire devours all that it touches. Though the land was "as the garden of Eden before them," behind them it is "a desolate wilderness" (Joel 2:2-3). They look like horses, gallop like horse-warriors, sound like crackling fire, climb walls like men, never break ranks, and are immune to the weapons of those whom they attack. At their approach, the earth quakes, the heavens tremble, the sun and the moon become dark, and the stars cease to shine (Joel 2:4-10). Indeed, when they come, it is "a day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds and of thick darkness" (Joel 2:2).

"Alas for the day! for the day of the Lord is at hand, and as a destruction from the Almighty shall it come" (Joel 1:15). "Let all the inhabitants of the land tremble: for the day of the Lord cometh, for it is nigh at hand" (Joel 2:1). "The Lord shall utter his voice before his army: for his camp is very great: for he is strong that executeth his word: for the day of the Lord is great and very terrible; and who can abide it?" (Joel 2:11).

It should be clear by this point that Joel was describing neither bugs nor people with lion teeth. His words were meant to convey the awesome power, terror, and despair that will accompany the day of the Lord, that day in which the Lord will return to earth to bring judgment upon the wicked and peace to the righteous. The vivid images seem to represent the destruction that the Lord will unleash to cleanse the world. The tone of fear and doom suggests that the message was addressed primarily to those who need to change their lives.

As is typical in Old Testament prophecy, the words of despair are followed by words of hope, in this case an invitation to repent: "Turn ye even to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning: and rend your heart, and not your garments, and repent, and turn unto the Lord your God; for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and he will turn away the evil from you" (JST Joel 2:12-13). In due time, the house of Israel will indeed accept the Lord's invitation and come unto Christ. Then he will have compassion on them and restore their fortunes: those who oppress them will be removed, the fertility of the land will be restored, the storehouses will overflow with plenty, and the devastation of the locust, the cankerworm, the caterpiller, and the palmerworm will be undone. The Lord's covenant people will praise his name, "and ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am the Lord your God, and none else: and my people shall never be ashamed" (Joel 2:15-27).

Wonders in Heaven and Earth (Joel 2:28-32)

When Moroni appeared to Joseph Smith during the night of 21-22 September 1823, he introduced the young Prophet to his mission by teaching him from the scriptures. [^5] Among the passages that Moroni quoted was Joel 2:28-32, which begins with the following revelation: "And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions: and also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit" (Joel 2:28-29). Moroni told Joseph Smith that this revelation "was not yet fulfilled, but was soon to be" (JS-H 1:41). The Millennium will be the greatest era of fulfillment, since it will be the day in which "the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea" (Isa. 11:9). But spiritual experiences are had among the Lord's Saints today, and it may be that the time of outpouring, which Moroni said "was soon to be," has now arrived. Perhaps it began on that same night, as the heavens were opened and the systematic restoration of sacred things commenced. Since that time, even greater things have been revealed.

What are the spiritual blessings of which Joel prophesied? Most often when we think of such things, we envision such miraculous events as visions, healings, and speaking in tongues. Though these are tremendous manifestations, the blessings of which Joel spoke are not restricted to these. Perhaps the greatest fulfillment of these words is in the quiet witness that faithful Saints receive in answer to their humble prayers concerning the truthfulness of the gospel and the divine mission of the Church. The most powerful manifestation of the Spirit today is the personal revelation that we call a testimony, which is granted freely by the Lord to the sons, daughters, old and young, servants and handmaids of the Church. God's Spirit is at work among the Latter-day Saints as they quietly "prophesy"—enjoy personal revelation in their lives—"dream dreams," "see visions," and otherwise enjoy the blessings of the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Moroni also quoted the rest of chapter 2, which foretells a time in which will be seen "blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and the terrible day of the Lord come" (Joel 2:30-31). The scriptures testify that we will witness terrifying things as the earth is being cleansed for the coming of Christ (see also Matt. 24:29; D&C 29:14-21; 45:40-42; 88:88-91; JS-M 1:33). While the precise nature of these cosmic calamities is unclear, it seems safe to say that they have not yet happened, but that we will recognize them when they do. In any case, as Joel reminded us, those who "call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered" and will find safety among the Lord's Saints in Zion (Joel 2:32).

In the Valley of Judgment and Decision (Joel 3:1-16)

Joel foretold, in dramatic words, the Lord's day of reckoning against the nations of the world. He would gather them together and enter into judgment against them, contending with the oppressors on behalf of his covenant people (Joel 3:1-2). [^6] The offenders would receive according to the evil that they had done, for the Lord would "return your recompence upon your own head," he warned them (Joel 3:3-8). In this symbolic scene, the nations would be roused to action. They would be called to convert their plowshares into swords and their pruning hooks into spears (Joel 3:10), in striking contrast to millennial circumstances (Isa. 2:4). They would be brought to one place, and the Lord would judge them all together (Joel 3:12).

In Joel's apocalyptic description, the place of God's reckoning is called "the valley of Jehoshaphat," a symbolic name meaning "the Lord judges" (Joel 3:2). Later, the site is called "the valley of decision" (Joel 3:14). The names have no geographical significance but punctuate the imagery by emphasizing the nature of the event. [^7] Medieval tradition equates this scene with the final judgment, but it is clearly meant to be understood in a different context. Jehovah's great act of judgment against the world will be at the time of his second coming, when the earth will be cleansed of all that is corrupt in it. It appears that this cleansing will result from upheaval in the forces of nature, from manmade calamities, particularly warfare, and from the burning of the earth that will attend the Lord's coming in his glory. In Joel's visionary scene, the nations are gathered together for war, but it does not appear that they fight—either against each other or against the Lord's Saints, who are not mentioned. Instead, it is the Lord alone who contends against the world. "Put ye in the sickle," Joel wrote, "for the harvest is ripe." He invites them to trample down the grapes in the overflowing winepress, "for their wickedness is great" (Joel 3:13). As was revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith, when Christ returns he will be "red in his apparel, and his garments like him that treadeth in the wine-vat. . . . And his voice shall be heard: I have trodden the wine-press alone, and have brought judgment upon all people; and none were with me; and I have trampled them in my fury, and I did tread upon them in mine anger, and their blood have I sprinkled upon my garments, and stained all my raiment; for this was the day of vengeance which was in my heart" (D&C 133:48, 50-51).

The Lord Dwelleth in Zion (Joel 3:17-21)

As in all circumstances in which the nations rage against God's work, the Lord is the hope and the strength of his covenant people (Joel 3:16). Joel ends, like most of the prophetic books, with a lovely promise of millennial hope and blessing. In that day, Jerusalem will again be a "holy city"; none but the sanctified will be found there. The earth will be renewed to a level of fertility not experienced since the Fall (see A of F 10), which Joel describes poetically as the mountains dripping with new wine, the hills flowing with milk, and water coming forth from the house of the Lord to nourish the earth both physically and spiritually (Joel 3:18). When Christ reigns as king, all the world will be his domain. The nations will cease to be, and the Lord's covenant Saints will dwell in his presence (Joel 3:19-21).

Notes

Kent P. Jackson is professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] It is doubtful that the Lord was referring to any other people. For those living in the last days, the writings of Malachi have been preserved in the Bible. The essential purity of the biblical text of Malachi is attested in the Book of Mormon by Joseph Smith's translation of the Savior's quotations, which uses the same language as that in the KJV. It would seem, therefore, that the Savior intended his transmission of the text to be for the Nephites. The preservation of Malachi's text in two sets of scriptures, like that of Isaiah, underscores its importance.
[^2] For discussion, see Kent P. Jackson, "The Appearance of Moroni to Joseph Smith," in Studies in Scripture, Volume Two: The Pearl of Great Price, ed. Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson (Salt Lake City: Randall Book, 1985), pp. 361-62.
[^3] For a discussion of the dating of the ministry of Malachi, see R. K. Harrison, Introduction to the Old Testament (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1969), pp. 960-61.
[^4] For discussion, see D. Guthrie, The New Bible Commentary (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1970), p. 806.
[^5] The Arabs were successful in taking over Edom by the fifth century and even began to mingle with those who had fled into southern Palestine. Eventually a new people, called the Nabateans, gained control of Edom. See Guthrie, p. 806.
[^6] Jehovah had specifically forbidden the practice for this very reason (see Ex. 34:15-16; Deut. 7:3-4), and the history of Israel had proved his wisdom (e.g., 1 Kgs. 11:1-11).
[^7] See the discussion by Jackson, "The Appearance of Moroni," pp. 348-50, and "Teaching from the Words of the Prophets," in Studies in Scripture, Volume Eight: Alma 30 to Moroni, ed. Kent P. Jackson (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988), pp. 198-201.
