Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

36

THE BOOK OF ESTHER

ROGER R. KELLER

The book of Esther is either deeply revered or virtually disregarded. It is one book of the Bible toward which one finds little neutrality. On the one hand, it has been said that there are more extant manuscripts of Esther among the Jews than of any other book of the Old Testament; and Maimonides, the great medieval Jewish philosopher (A.D. 1135-1204), ranked Esther just after the Pentateuch in value. [^1] On the other hand, it is the only Old Testament book that was not found among the Dead Sea Scrolls; and Martin Luther, the Protestant Reformer, suggested that there would be no loss if Esther did not exist. [^2] Thus, our task is to determine whether Esther has a message that can address the needs of Latter-day Saints.

Summary of Esther

Esther is set in ancient Persia during the reign of Ahasuerus, commonly identified with Xerxes I, who reigned 486 through 465 B.C. [^3] The book of Esther begins with Ahasuerus giving a great banquet for dignitaries from across his empire. In a drunken stupor he ordered the beautiful Queen Vashti to dance for his guests. She refused and was deposed (Esth. 1:1-22), thereby opening the way for Esther, a beautiful Jewish girl, ultimately to be chosen as the new queen (Esth. 2:15-18). On the advice of her uncle, Mordecai, she had hidden her Jewish identity (Esth. 2:10).

After Esther became queen, Mordecai uncovered a plot to assassinate the king and warned him through Esther. Although Mordecai received no reward at that time, his action was recorded in the official annals (Esth. 2:19-23). Some time after that, Haman, an Amalekite, became prime minister, and Mordecai refused to bow before him as was the traditional practice, thereby infuriating Haman. Haman decided to exterminate Mordecai, as well as all Jews, and persuaded Ahasuerus to issue an edict permitting the destruction of those who did not abide by the laws of the realm (Esth. 3:1-15).

Learning of the threat to the Jews, Mordecai persuaded Esther to intercede on behalf of her people, even though it could mean the loss of her own life. Esther agreed but asked the Jews to fast with her for three days before she entered the king's presence uninvited, an act for which she could be summarily executed (Esth. 4:1-17). Upon entering the king's presence, she was graciously received and told she could have whatever she wanted (Esth. 5:1-3). In response, she invited the king and Haman to dinner. When the king at dinner again offered her whatever she wanted, all she did was invite Haman and the king to return the next night (Esth. 4:4-8).

Flushed with his apparent importance, Haman determined to hang Mordecai, who had once again refused to bow to him as Haman passed through the palace gate (Esth. 5:9-14). Meanwhile, the king was unable to sleep and ordered passages from the royal records read to him. The account of Mordecai's discovery of the assassination plot was read, and the king realized he had never rewarded him. He called Haman, who had been waiting outside to request Mordecai's execution. Ahasuerus asked Haman how one who had done a great favor for the king should be rewarded, and Haman, assuming he was the one worthy of such favor, suggested that such a person should be given royal robes, royal jewelry, and the king's own horse, and led through the streets by a high government official who would proclaim that this was the way in which the king honored faithful servants. Haman was immediately commanded to do this for Mordecai (Esth. 6:1-13).

That night at dinner, Esther revealed the plot against the Jews and Haman's part in it. The king, angered, left the room, and upon his return found Haman groveling before the queen, perhaps even touching her, and immediately ordered Haman hanged on the very gallows he had built for Mordecai (Esth. 6:14-7:10). Because he could not reverse the royal edict permitting the persecution of the Jews, the king issued another edict permitting the Jews to defend themselves (Esth. 8:1-17). On the 14th and 15th of Adar (the last month of the Jewish calendar), the Jews killed as many as seventy-five thousand Persians in response to attacks (Esth. 9:1-19). This caused a great celebration, which is still observed today, known as Purim (Esth. 9:20-32). The book of Esther ends with a final note on the greatness of Mordecai and the work that he did for his people (Esth. 10:1-3).

Historicity and Authorship

There is a broad range of opinion concerning the historicity of the book of Esther. Some scholars believe there is no historical basis at all but that the book is a fable encouraging faithfulness during persecution. [^4] Others hold that the book is wholly historical; still others suggest that it has a historical core. Arguments for historicity center on the author's knowledge of Persia and its practices. For example, the empire of Xerxes I did stretch from Ethiopia to India, as indicated in Esther 1:1. The author had clear knowledge of the palace at Susa and of Xerxes' lavish parties, extravagant promises, and nasty temper. He also clearly portrayed the Persian government, as well as using a number of Persian and Aramaic words. [^5]

The most serious argument against historicity is that no other record mentions either Vashti or Esther as a queen of Xerxes I. The queen mentioned by Herodotus is Amestris. Other arguments include doubt that the king would host a 180-day feast, that Vashti would refuse to dance, that a non-Persian (Haman) could be prime minister, that permission would be given a year in advance to attack the Jews, and that the king would permit his own people to be wiped out by foreigners. Amestris was undoubtedly not the only queen Xerxes had, because he had an extensive harem. Also, the king could not have entertained all his officials at once, and possibly the officials were rotated periodically. Vashti could have refused to dance and suffered the consequences. There is much evidence that many foreigners occupied high places, not only in Persia but in other kingdoms, not the least of whom was Joseph in Egypt. [^6] Further, kings have been known to be brutal to their own people many times, and it is perfectly possible that Xerxes issued an edict a year ahead that would have prepared the machinery for a massive pogrom. In addition, the name Mordecai is well attested; a tablet from the time of Xerxes refers to one Marduka (Mordecai), an accountant, who was a member of an inspection team at Susa. [^7] Given the above, it is possible that Esther may have a strong historical base.

The author of Esther is unknown but was probably a Persian Jew. [^8] There is no agreement among Bible scholars concerning the date of authorship. Obviously, since Esther 10:1-3 implies that the Persian king was dead, the book could not have been written before 465 B.C. The language of the Hebrew text appears to be of the same general time period as that of Chronicles, Ecclesiastes, and Daniel. [^9] The absence of Greek words would point to a date before 300 B.C., by which time the Persian empire had been overthrown by the Greeks and the hellenization of the Near East was underway. Together, these factors seem to suggest a date of composition somewhere near 400 B.C.

Purpose

The prime difficulty in explaining Esther is that nowhere in the text is God mentioned. Moreover, there is an aura of revenge surrounding the book, and none of the characters is especially admirable. Yet there is still an overriding sense of the providence of God that preserves his people, even when they are less than lovely: it was no accident that Vashti was deposed, any more than it was an accident that Esther succeeded her, that Mordecai discovered the plot against the king, that the king graciously received Esther when she entered the throne room uninvited, that the king could not sleep, and that the story of Mordecai was read. Mordecai implied that even if Esther did not approach the king, things would still work out because of divine providence (Esth. 4:14). Thus on every page, despite the fact that God is not mentioned, he seems to be at work.

The book of Esther explains the origin of the Jewish feast Purim, the celebration that arises from the Jews' victory in Persia. Attempts to find an explanation for Purim other than this have provided no clear alternative.

This book causes its readers to consider the ways of God. God works in the midst of his children, often behind the scenes, to bring about their well-being. Sometimes he does this even when their behavior and motives are less than honorable.

It is clear that to a persecuted people, this book provided great strength. Like the book of Daniel, it taught the Jews that they could be steadfast in living their religion, despite exile or persecution. The Jews throughout their history have suffered persecution, and the message of Esther that they once came out victorious over their enemies gave courage to a people under siege. Perhaps only those who have experienced persecution can appreciate the power of this narrative. [^10]

Notes

Roger R. Keller is associate professor of Church history and doctrine at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Job's Complaint (chap. 3) Dialogue with Eliphaz (chaps. 15-17) Dialogue with Eliphaz (chaps. 22-24) The Lord's Challenge (38:1-40:2) The Lord's Challenge (40:6-41:34) Agamemnon, in The Oresteia, trans. Robert Fagles (New York: Viking, 1975), p. 112.
[^2] Dialogue with Eliphaz (chaps. 4-7) Dialogue with Bildad (chaps. 18-19) Dialogue with Bildad (chaps. 25-27) Job's Response (40:3-5) Job's Response (42:1-6) Biblical theophanies often are accompanied by storms. See, for example, Ex. 19:16-20 and Ezek. 1:2-4. Both Marvin H. Pope, Job, Anchor Bible 15 (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1973), p. 290 n., and John E. Hartley, The Book of Job, New International Commentary on the Old Testament (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1988), p. 490 n., cite many more references.
[^3] Dialogue with Bildad (chaps. 8-10) Dialogue with Zophar (chaps. 20-21) Hymn to Wisdom (chap. 28) It is generally identified with either Edom to the southeast of Palestine or the Hauran to the north. See E. Dhorme, A Commentary on the Book of Job, trans. Harold Knight (London: Thomas Nelson and Sons, 1926; trans. and rpt., 1967), pp. xxi-xxiv; Hartley, pp. 65-66; Pope, pp. 3-5.
[^4] Dialogue with Zophar (chaps. 11-14) Job's Survey of his Case (chaps. 29-31) Dhorme, p. xv.
[^5] Dhorme, pp. vii-xii; Hartley, p. 3; Pope, pp. xlii-xliii.
[^6] For a standard introduction, see Bernhard Anderson, Understanding the Old Testament, 4th ed. (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1986), pp. 588-601.
[^7] See, for example, in J. B. Pritchard, Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testament, 3d ed. with Supplement (Princeton: Princeton University, 1969): "Dispute over Suicide" (Egyptian; pp. 405-7), "I Will Praise the Lord of Wisdom" (Babylonian; pp. 434-37), and "A Dialogue about Human Misery" (Babylonian; pp. 438-40).
[^8] For many readers these are the most fabulous and therefore troubling aspects of the text. It has recently occurred to me, however, that even these incidents might well reflect truths. The wager scene bears some resemblance to the council in heaven, wherein God determined to give Satan leave to tempt and try us, while the doubling of Job's prosperity at the end reminds us that God loves to bless his faithful servants and that he can do so in this life. I discuss these ideas more fully at the end of this essay.
[^9] I am not persuaded by Keith Meservy's point of view that an allusion by the Lord to a fictional Job would constitute a cruel mockery of Joseph Smith's nonfictional suffering. The Lord's purpose here is simply to remind the Prophet that things could be worse, not to verify Job's existence. See Keith A. Meservy, "Job: 'Yet Will I Trust in Him,'" Sixth Annual Sperry Symposium, January 1978; as cited in Old Testament Student Manual: 1 Kings-Malachi (Salt Lake City: Church Educational System, 1981), p. 29.
[^10] "Job, Book of," Bible Dictionary, LDS Bible.
