Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

37

THE BOOK OF JOB

JOHN S. TANNER

The Greek dramatist Aeschylus observed anciently that God "lays it down as law that we must suffer, suffer into truth." [^1] Like a figure out of Greek tragedy, the biblical Job suffers into truth. The truth costs him his possessions, family, friends, health, everything: "Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I return thither" (Job 1:21). Bereft of all, he tragically exclaims: "Man that is born of woman is of few days, and full of trouble" (Job 14:1). Yet Job's wisdom eventually exceeds even the tragic hero's dark insight that the world confronts us with inexplicable pain. For Job learns to hear God's voice, even in the whirlwind.

In a double sense, Job may be said to learn wisdom from the whirlwind. Job is taught first by the winds of adversity. A great wind collapses the roof of the eldest son's house (Job 1:19), crushing all Job's children. This disaster culminates a series of external calamities that lead Job to question why humans endure seemingly senseless suffering. Hence a literal desert storm hurls Job into a spiritual maelstrom. By corollary, Job's inquiry is ended by a whirlwind. The Lord reminds Job "out of the whirlwind" that human life is compassed about by unfathomable mysteries (Job 38:1). [^2] Thus Job learns wisdom from the winds of affliction and of revelation. What Job and we learn from these whirlwinds is the topic of this essay.

Job the Man and the Text

Nothing is known about the man Job apart from the slender information contained in the first few verses of the book of Job. These explain only that Job was a righteous rich man from the land of Uz, which tells us even less than one may suppose, for Uz has not been identified with certainty. [^3] Further, the text makes no reference to Job's genealogy, as is typical of biblical narratives treating the patriarchs, nor to the time when Job lived, as is the pattern with prophetic literature in the Old Testament. As a result, the Babylonian Talmud and the later Jewish sage Maimonides speculated that the book of Job is a parable. [^4]

Clearly, the book of Job makes much slighter claims to be history than is characteristic of Old Testament books in general. Owing to this historical vagueness, there was anciently some disagreement about where the book of Job was to be located in the canon. This controversy is still reflected in differing placements of the book in various versions of the Bible. Yet despite Job's vague historical identification and in spite of the assault he levels against conventional notions of retributive justice, the book of Job has always been accepted as canonical. [^5]

Modern scholars classify the book of Job as "wisdom literature," in concert with Proverbs and Ecclesiastes in the Bible and with Ecclesiasticus (also called the "Wisdom of Jesus Ben Sirach") in the Apocrypha. [^6] Unlike prophetic and historical biblical texts, wisdom texts are less concerned with the unfolding history of a covenant people through time than they are with the timeless truths of the individual's relationship to moral and religious principles. Wisdom literature, moreover, belongs to an international movement; Egyptian and Babylonian sages also composed prudential maxims (such as Proverbs) and skeptical reflections on life (such as Ecclesiastes). There also exist Babylonian and Egyptian dialogues about suicide and divine justice similar to those in Job. [^7]

Though most modern scholars regard the man Job as legendary, Job is mentioned twice in the Bible outside the book of Job and once again in the Doctrine and Covenants. Ezekiel listed Job together with Noah and Daniel as one of three worthies for whose sake the Lord would still not refrain from smiting the rebellious house of Israel with famine and plague (Ezek. 14:14, 20). In the New Testament, James praised the "patience of Job" (James 5:11)—though "patience" (which the King James translators likely used because it comes from the Latin "to suffer") might be better translated in modern English as "steadfastness" or "endurance." Certainly Job as we see him in the text is anything but passive and uncomplaining; indeed, his complaints compose most of the book. Lastly, modern scripture refers to Job when the Lord reminded Joseph Smith as he languished in Liberty Jail: "Thou art not yet as Job; thy friends do not contend against thee, neither charge thee with transgression, as they did Job" (D&C 121:10).

Together, these additional scriptural citations confirm important aspects of the book of Job. They portray Job as a blameless, long-suffering man, wrongfully accused by his friends when calamity befalls him. They are silent, we might note, about the problematical wager scene and about the neat restoration of Job's prosperity. [^8] Do these allusions prove Job's story is more than a fable, that the book is historical? Not necessarily. It is possible to allude to Job's trials without intending to confirm their historicity—as one might speak of the beauty of Adonis or the folly of King Lear without intending to verify the reality of these figures. [^9] Still, these scriptural allusions add plausibility to the thesis that Job was, as I believe, a real man—one who, though conspicuously upright, fell into great misfortune.

Whatever Job's actual experiences may have been, the book of Job clearly confers a literary shape upon them. Indeed, the book's symmetrical patterning is hard to miss. Broadly speaking, the book of Job comprises four major parts: a prose prologue, three cycles of poetic dialogues between Job and his comforters, the theophany (also poetry), and a prose epilogue. The central dialogues, moreover, observe further symmetries as Job responds to each of his three comforters individually and in the same order. The following outline of the book can profitably be used as a study tool to save the reader from becoming lost in verse-by-verse reading.

I. Prologue [prose], chaps. 1-2

II. Dialogues with the Comforters [poetry], chaps. 3-37

A. First Cycle of Speeches (chaps. 3-14)

a. Eliphaz (chaps. 4-5)

b. Job (chaps. 6-7)

a. Bildad (chap. 8)

b. Job (chaps. 9-10)

a. Zophar (chap. 11)

b. Job (chaps. 12-14)

B. Second Cycle of Speeches (chaps. 15-21)

a. Eliphaz (chap. 15)

b. Job (chaps. 16-17)

a. Bildad (chap. 18)

b. Job (chap. 19)

a. Zophar (chap. 20)

b. Job (chap. 21)

C. Third Cycle of Speeches (chaps. 22-32)

a. Eliphaz (chap. 22)

b. Job (chaps. 23-24)

a. Bildad (chap. 25)

b. Job (chaps. 26-27)

D. Speeches of Elihu (chaps. 32-37)

III. Theophany [poetry], 38:1-42:6

A. First Exchange (38:1-40:5)

B. Second Exchange (40:6-42:6)

IV. Epilogue [prose], 42:7-17

A. The Lord Rebukes the Comforters (42:7-9)

B. The Lord Blesses Job (42:10-17)

The text's literary patterning does not, of course, disprove the historicity of Job any more than Julius Caesar must be dismissed as fictional because he is the subject of a play. Furthermore, whether the book of Job is story or history, its message is still true in a deeper sense. For in every age, if not every life, Job's predicament is reenacted in events all too monstrously real. Good people suffer every day and for no discernible reason.

Wisdom about Retribution

Because scripture ordinarily correlates suffering with sin and righteousness with reward, that scriptural axiom, traditionally labeled the doctrine of "retributive justice," is debated many times between Job and his comforters. Each of Job's three comforters presumes that if Job were righteous, he would not have suffered such terrible affliction. It follows, according to their false moral arithmetic, that Job must be sinful. Eliphaz declares that if Job were blameless he need not fear either famine or death by the sword, for the righteous shall surely die of old age, with full barns and a great posterity (see Job 5:19-27). Bildad avers, "If thou wert pure and upright; surely now he [God] would awake for thee, and make the habitation of the righteous prosperous" (Job 8:6). While Zophar, confident that Job's suffering attests to unworthiness, observes: "God exacteth of thee less than thine iniquity deserveth" (Job 11:6). But Job has heard all this before: "Who knoweth not such things as these?" (Job 12:3).

The comforters' rigid view of retribution has been the party line among uninspired dogmatists from Job's day to ours. That it is a common error owes to its origin in partial truth. The comforters might have derived their arguments, in part, from mistaken readings of such prophets as Isaiah, Jeremiah, Hosea, and Amos—all of whom threaten the people with doom because of wickedness. Equally, the comforters' counsel might have been extrapolated from such statements about rewards and retribution as this in Deuteronomy: "Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse; A blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the Lord your God, which I command you this day: And a curse, if ye will not obey the commandments of the Lord your God, but turn aside out of the way which I command you this day, to go after other gods, which ye have not known" (Deut. 11:26-28). Similarly, the comforters' doctrine of retribution resembles teachings set forth in Latter-day Saint scripture. For example, like Deuteronomy, the Book of Mormon insists that the history of the promised land is balanced on a fulcrum of divine punishments and rewards according to the obedience or rebellion of the people (e.g., Alma 9:14; 38:1). Likewise, the Doctrine and Covenants confirms a correlation between blessings and obedience on the one hand, and punishment and transgression on the other. For example, "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say" (D&C 82:10), and "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven . . . upon which all blessings are predicated" (D&C 130:20).

So how can we understand Job's predicament in the light of these scriptures seeming to verify a doctrine of retribution? Were Job's comforters right? Is there a flat contradiction between Job's example and the scriptural doctrine of retribution? I think not. Rather, I believe Job's example can help us understand the true correlation between suffering and sin, in the following ways:

First and foremost, Job's example makes clear that though sometimes suffering is a sign of punishment, it is not so always. Though the book of Job "does not entirely answer the question as to why Job (or any human) might suffer . . . it does make it clear that affliction is not necessarily evidence that one has sinned." [^10] That is a great comfort, especially for the many blameless souls who accuse themselves when tragedy befalls them. When an infant is born with birth defects or a loved one is killed in an auto accident, when cancer strikes or a job is lost—our immediate response often is, "What have I done to deserve this?" Job implies that there can be "no-fault" tragedy. This is a truth that pious, well-intentioned religionists have been ever prone to forget. Jesus had to remind those in his day of this lesson on more than one occasion (Luke 13:1-5; John 9:1-3). So, too, did Joseph Smith. The Prophet taught the Saints "that it is an unhallowed principle to say that such and such have transgressed because they have been preyed upon by disease or death, for all flesh is subject to death; and the Savior has said, 'Judge not, lest ye be judged.'" [^11] The Old Testament underscores this same point through the unforgettable story of Job.

Second, Job's example warns us against trying to reason backwards from peoples' external circumstances to the condition of their souls. To do so traps us in an "if/then" fallacy, called in logic "affirming the consequent." "If/then" sequences are not reversible: If A then B does not permit the reverse conclusion B therefore A. If a man is a millionaire then he may live in a mansion on the hill. But if a man lives in a mansion, he is not necessarily a millionaire (he could be simply in debt). Or, to apply the same logic to Job: if a man is wicked, then he may suffer. But if a man suffers, he is not necessarily wicked. Sinfulness will ultimately result in suffering, but suffering does not necessarily imply sinfulness. The same holds true for the corollary: virtue may result in prosperity, but prosperity does not necessarily imply virtue. One cannot reason backwards from the fact of prosperity or suffering to the state of the soul, as Job's comforters try to do.

Job's example reminds us that neither prosperity nor suffering can be easily or routinely interpreted. In fact, suffering may be the blessing and prosperity the trial. Prosperity may test the faith of individuals as well as of nations, whereas suffering may ready them for salvation. Francis Bacon observed in his essay "Of Adversity": "Prosperity is the blessing of the Old Testament; Adversity is the blessing of the New."

And third, Job's example should caution us not to extrapolate from covenants made to whole peoples automatic promises of individual "success." Individuals often live out personal tragedies quite apart from the general prosperity and happiness of the larger community. The book of Job tells of the plight of a particular individual, not an entire covenant people. That is significant. Old Testament and Book of Mormon promises cited above, by contrast, pertain to an entire covenant community. Likewise, the Doctrine and Covenants promise that the Lord is bound refers specifically to the plural "ye." We should not speak glibly of our individual acts "binding the Lord" nor convey the impression that we hold the Lord of the universe to do our bidding. The nature of a covenant is that the Lord binds himself. He, not we, sets the terms, and he fulfills them in his own time and way.

If we look carefully at the Bible or the Book of Mormon or modern Church history, we can find many instances of good individuals who, like Job, suffer. To cite a few Book of Mormon examples, think of the martyred women and children who were burned before the eyes of Alma and Amulek, or of the wives and children in Moroni's day who were forced to feed upon the flesh of their husbands and fathers (Alma 14:7-11; Moro. 9:7-8). Complicating the comforters' simplistic view of retribution is that sometimes "the Lord suffereth the righteous to be slain that his justice and judgment may come upon the wicked" (Alma 60:13; cf. 14:11).

Job's example, then, corrects simplistic misapplication of the doctrine of retribution. It reminds us that the Lord's plan of rewards and punishment does not guarantee that only the wicked suffer while the righteous are insulated from adversity, if not positively assured material rewards in this life. As Christians, we need not look only to Job to refute these oversimplifications. The supreme refutation is Christ, who, though blameless, suffered more than has any man. The mortal Messiah intimately knew pain, hunger, thirst, fatigue, betrayal, and agonizing death (see Mosiah 3:7). If the Lord, who was perfect, had to endure such affliction, should we, who are imperfect, expect to be spared from it? As the Lord himself gently reminded the Prophet Joseph Smith, are we greater than He? (D&C 122:8). The only reward for righteousness that the Lord holds out unfailingly to individuals is "peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come" (D&C 59:23)—and even this peace must be found amid persecutions, not in their absence (see John 14:27; 15:20).

Wisdom about Relationships

The whirlwind reveals valuable wisdom about human relationships—to God in our adversity and to others in theirs. Rather than an explanation of suffering, the book of Job supplies, as the apostle James said, an "example of suffering affliction" (James 5:10). Job's example instructs us in how to "suffer suffering," [^12] rather than in the reason for it. From the book of Job we gain no definitive answers to the philosophical problem of evil. In fact, the Lord never supplies Job with an explanation for his afflictions, much less for suffering in general. But Job's deepest need, as ours, is not for reasons but for revelation, not for theological precepts but for the divine presence. His crisis is spiritual. [^13] His deepest anguish springs from his feeling of godforsakenness, which can be relieved only by the witness, borne on the whirlwind, that God has not forsaken him.

The Bible clearly focuses on Job's relationship with God and the comforters rather than on his physical suffering. Only a very few (albeit vivid) verses are devoted to a description of Job's physical pain, which he endures in silence. When, after abiding seven days and seven nights in complete silence, Job finally cries out, he complains not of boils but of betrayal (Job 3:20). However difficult to bear, his physical pain is most embittering for what it seems to him to betoken: a violated relationship. Job's relationship to God remains at issue throughout the ensuing dialogues, which make no further reference to his personal losses or boils.

Also at issue is Job's relation to his dogmatic comforters and their glib explanations about why he suffers. Job rejects their pious counsel that he accept his calamities as punishment for sin. To do so would force him to live a lie. He would have to confess that he feels deserving of his affliction—which he does not, and should not, feel. Instead, Job stoutly maintains that weighed in the balance-scales of justice—one of his favorite images (Job 6:2; 31:6)—his suffering is disproportionate to any sin that could be laid to his charge.

Repeatedly, he cries out for an encounter with the Lord. He begs God to come into the dock so he might prove his own innocence: "Oh that I knew where I might find him! that I might come even to his seat! I would order my cause before him, and fill my mouth with arguments" (Job 23:3-4; see also 16:21; 31:35). In a shocking blend of effrontery and faith, Job intends to argue his case before God, though the Lord slay him for it (Job 13:13-16). Yet he trusts God, who, Job affirms, "shall be my salvation: for an hypocrite shall not come before him." Surely, the Lord of truth would not want him to accede to his comforters' doctrine, feigning to comprehend suffering that he cannot fathom.

We sense Job's powerful integrity and genuine depth of feelings for God, qualities seemingly absent from his coldly correct friends. Yet we also sense a measure of pride and even arrogance, that he, Job, a mere man, should think himself sufficient to prosecute a case against God. No wonder Job stands condemned by the Lord in the final chapters as one "that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge." "Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct him?" the Lord demands, "he that reproveth God, let him answer" (Job 38:2; 40:2). Humbled by the voice from the whirlwind, Job repents: "Behold, I am vile; what shall I answer thee? I will lay mine hand upon my mouth"; "therefore have I uttered that I understood not; things too wonderful for me, which I knew not" (Job 40:4; 42:3).

But Job is not only condemned by the Lord but also approved. His comforters, by contrast, are only condemned. Of Job's dogmatic comforters, so sure that they can read the Lord's hidden purposes in their friend's suffering, the Lord says: "My wrath is kindled against thee [Eliphaz], and against thy two friends: for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job hath" (Job 42:7). How has Job spoken the thing that is right? A narrow answer would point only to Job's speeches of repentance. But I wonder if Job also speaks that which is right throughout. He refuses to pretend he understood what he could not comprehend, yet he continues to look to the Lord, not to his friends, for answers. Job kept his integrity. He fought for answers from God himself. His relationship to God is more right than is that of his friends because it is more honest, searching, open to revelation. And how have the comforters not spoken that which is right? Many of their arguments that God punishes the wicked and blesses the faithful seem pious, even formally correct. Moreover, they think they are defending God's ways. But perhaps they are really defending an idol—their own tidy, programmatic view of God's ways.

From the Lord's condemnation of Job's condemnation of Job's comforters, we can learn much about how to comfort those suffering crises of faith. We learn that it is not enough to have all the "right" answers. We must also speak the truth in love, as Elder Russell M. Nelson has counseled. [^14] With good cause Job complains to Eliphaz: "To him that is afflicted pity should be shewed from his friend" (Job 6:14; see also 19:21). We learn that we risk divine displeasure when we cease to truly comfort and start to accuse. The Prophet Joseph Smith warned the Saints that they should "judge not." On another occasion he taught that those who accuse place "themselves in the seat of Satan." [^15] Significantly, the word devil derives from the Greek diabolos, meaning "slanderer, accuser." From the failure of Job's comforters, we further learn that the only abiding comfort must come from the Comforter. For Job, and those like him, the real problem is spiritual, not intellectual; the solution must also be spiritual. Job does not need a carefully argued treatise solving "the problem of evil." He needs a renewed witness that God has not forsaken him or ceased to be a God of justice.

Wisdom about Revelation

The witness that Job needs can only come from personal revelation. The comforters' inability to reason Job out of his anguish provides a striking illustration of the impotence of unaided human wisdom to resolve Job's anguish. Let no one mistake that the comforters' counsels, though perhaps derived from scripture, are really the product of their own wisdom. Eliphaz proudly discloses the source of his knowledge and in doing so seems to speak for all the comforters: "Lo this, we have searched it, so it is; hear it, and know thou it [is] for thy good" (Job 5:27). They claim no revelation about Job's particular predicament, nor do they know God's specific intentions.

We should take heed from this. For sometimes we, like the comforters, may be tempted to offer our rationalizations about the Lord's purposes in allowing tragedies, as if they were gospel truth. If we do not know by revelation that someone's daughter died because she was needed in heaven more than here, that someone's son is born deformed so he himself could learn to be more compassionate, that God allowed a terrible war to devastate a nation in order that our missionaries could enter the country, etc., we should be reticent to promote our reasoning as the Lord's hidden will. Some comfort can be obtained only by personal revelation, usually to the aggrieved party rather than to a well-intentioned, self-appointed comforter. Unless we have both the revelation and the right to offer it, we should normally give comfort by mourning with those who mourn and by sharing with them our faith in the Lord's ultimate justice and mercy, however difficult to see in this life.

Sometimes, even having the right answers is not enough. Thus Job's fourth and final comforter, Elihu, utters speeches that echo those issuing forth from the whirlwind. Yet young Elihu's words have no effect on Job. For reason alone—even the correct doctrine—cannot provide Job the real comfort he needs. Elihu's answer remains "mere argument"; the Lord's is a revelation.

As a personal revelation from the Lord to the long-suffering, steadfast Job, the Lord's voice from the whirlwind has authority and meaning that no merely human voice can match. Apart from what the Lord says, simply that he speaks to Job at all fulfills Job's deepest need—his need to be reassured that God has not forsaken him. Theology can never provide this knowledge; only the witness of the Spirit can.

One writer recently observed that "for those who experience godforsakenness there can be no answer except the stammeringly uttered truth that God himself keeps company with those who are oppressed." [^16] In its way, this observation is very wise. But it does not go quite far enough. To our witness that God keeps company with the afflicted must be added the witness of the Spirit that the Lord still keeps company with the aggrieved one, here and now, in his desperation. We can testify to the truth that the Lord loves and pities his children in the midst of their sharpest sorrows; we can offer scriptural insights about the various purposes served by suffering; but only the Lord can confirm his continuing love through the voice of the only unfailing comforter, his Comforter. Revelation is the essential comfort every Job requires.

The book of Job, then, is at bottom about the need for revelation. Revelation is the key to human crises of faith brought on by suffering. This interpretation, little recognized in biblical scholarship, fits Latter-day Saint teachings, which stress the need for both general and personal revelation. Indeed, "there is a mystery in the incidence of suffering that only a fresh revelation can solve." [^17]

Wisdom about Divine Justice and Love

A final gem of wisdom from the book of Job concerns the nature of this mystery, as revealed in the voice from the whirlwind. The Lord's words overwhelm Job with a sense of creation's mysteries. He is reminded that humans live surrounded by a cosmos whose design and purpose we do not fully comprehend (chaps. 38-39). The reason for any number of tragedies is but one of many mysteries. Beyond recognizing the mystery of suffering, however, Latter-day Saints affirm the existence of a just and loving God. Bible scholars from other faiths sometimes fail to read the whirlwind this way. They see oracles uttered from the whirlwind as cutting loose the God of the Old Testament from concepts such as justice, reward, and punishment altogether. [^18]

But does the Lord's speech to Job imply that the Almighty is so sovereign that he is divorced from the attributes of justice, order, and morality? Latter-day Saint doctrine, certainly, does not endorse this kind of sovereignty—which from a human vantage appears indistinguishable from caprice. The innate human demand for fairness, order, and law is doubtless a legacy from our divine parentage. In the words of the eminent Jewish scholar Abraham Heschel, "even the cry of despair—There is no justice in heaven!—is a cry in the name of justice that cannot come out of us and be still missing in the source of ourselves." [^19]

We glimpse traces of a divine regard for order in the very questions the Lord asks Job from the whirlwind. The Lord's language recalls descriptions of creation in Genesis, when the Lord imbued form and light upon the immense deep, that heretofore was "without form and void" and dark (Gen. 1:2). "Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? . . . When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?" (Job 38:4, 7). Such questions remind us that the voice in the whirlwind belongs to one who has brought order to the world. He is the God of Creation, not a capricious being who, in the words of one biblical scholar, rejects the "putative principle of order." [^20]

Nor is justice absent from the voice in the whirlwind. As we have noted, the Lord's equity reaches so deep that it penetrates beneath the superficial morality of the comforters and probes beneath the pride and sometimes reckless cynicism of Job, in order to honor the one who is most truly faithful (Job) and rebuke those who are most proud and cynical (the comforters). This is the voice of one who "looketh [not] on the outward appearance, but . . . on the heart" (1 Sam. 16:7).

It is, furthermore, the voice of a God who clearly continues to care about human suffering. This is a crucial, but often overlooked, point. That the Lord responds at all assures us that he is not a permanently hidden God, as Job fears (Job 23:1-9). In his own time and way, the Lord condescends to reveal himself to his children. Often he manifests himself, as he does to Job, in our darkest hours of need. As one scholar so eloquently phrases it: "A God who concerns himself for man is a God who loves. There is no love without sharing and a God who loves is a God who suffers. Underneath the high notes a De Profundis of God's own agonies is audible." [^21] Here the writer hints at a distinctively Latter-day Saint view regarding the Lord's outlook on the "problem of evil": namely, that evil is a problem for the Lord, too. In any world of both natural law (where apples and parachutists fall according to the same law of gravity) and of agency (where people are free to do good and evil), suffering will occur. But on the whole, God neither wants nor wills our suffering out of indifference or malice. In fact, he grieves over it; the heavens thunder and weep in emotional solidarity with the Saints (Moses 7:29-40). Enoch wondered how this can be so: "How is it that the heavens weep?" (Moses 7:28). But he finally came to share the Lord's view of human misery: "Wherefore Enoch . . . looked upon their wickedness, and their misery, and wept and stretched forth his arms, and his heart swelled wide as eternity; and his bowels yearned; and all eternity shook" (Moses 7:41).

Precisely because it verges on trivializing the Lord's compassion for human suffering and his relationship to the devil, many readers are disturbed by the wager story with which the book of Job begins. Similar reservations are often expressed about the final chapter too, in which Job's blessings are restored. If not literally true, however, these chapters may reflect truths about the nature of God's loving relation to us in this life. The wager story describes this life as a period of testing; a time when the Lord agrees to put all of us, like Job, temporarily in Satan's power; a time when he agrees not normally to intervene in our tests (see Job 1:12). All that is true of mortality. Latter-day Saint readers might discover in the wager story oblique reflections of agreements made in premortal councils. Moreover, if Job, too, agreed to such conditions, then he could be seen as more of a party and less of a pawn in the wager.

Similarly, the epilogue is often faulted for seeming to trivialize Job's loss (can new children ever replace the ones that were lost?) and for reintroducing the idea of retribution (Job ends up living a long and prosperous life, just as his comforters said all righteous men would; Job 42:10-17). I suspect, however, that these cavils miss the point. The book of Job corrects mistaken notions about the doctrine of retribution; it does not invalidate the idea of retribution altogether. The restoration of Job's blessings simply verifies the Lord's love for a long-suffering servant. That Job's blessings are restored reminds us that God delights to bless those who love him and also reaffirms the Lord's power to grace his children in this life as well as in the next. [^22] The epilogue also reintegrates Job, formerly isolated by affliction, into the society of friends and family. He reenters his community, presumably, a changed man, as we do also if, by studying the book of Job, we learn wisdom from the whirlwind.

Wisdom from the Whirlwind

Refusing to offer ready-made answers for why Job or any one suffers, God acknowledges from the whirlwind how inexplicably cruel life can be. At the same time he points to a way of enduring, proposing "not a speculative answer . . . but a way of consecrated living" and presenting a world "not [wholly] intelligible, but livable." [^23] From the whirlwind we learn indispensable lessons about honesty in our relationship with God, about compassion in comforting those in spiritual distress, and about tentativeness in offering them easy explanations. Foremost of all, we learn from the whirlwind that only personal revelation can resolve the crisis of faith that encompasses the problem of understanding, and we glimpse evidence that, however unfathomable, the God who reveals himself is a being of justice as well as of power. As Latter-day Saints, we should welcome a text that finally throws us back, just as it does Job, upon the necessity of seeking personal revelation from an occasionally inscrutable but nevertheless living and loving God. For finally the highest wisdom of Job is this: that only the divine voice from the whirlwind can answer the anguish that is borne to each of us upon the whirlwinds of affliction.

Notes

John S. Tanner is professor of English at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), p. 327.
[^2] Ibid., p. 374.
[^3] Mitchell Dahood, Psalms II, Anchor Bible 17 (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1968), pp. 179-80.
[^4] Asaph—and I would include in this designation the descendants of Asaph—is credited with having composed Ps. 50; 73-83. They enwrapped me, cords of Death and the torrents of the swallower engulfed me.
[^5] "Introduction to the Psalms," The Oxford Annotated Bible (London: Oxford University Press, 1962), p. 656. See "The Ceremonial Nature of the Psalms," below, for more discussion of the use of Psalms in temple ceremonies. The cords of sheol wrapped around me, they violently confronted me, snares of Death.
[^6] The passage used above to exemplify synonymous parallelism (Ps. 18:4-5) can also exemplify chiasm. This translation, unlike the one given above, represents a syntactical literal translation:
[^7] Psalm 29 is a parade example of Israelite imagery being borrowed from Canaanite imagery. In this psalm, as in other places in the psalms and the Old Testament, the Lord is described as the God of the thunderstorm, just as Baal is in the Ugaritic epic literature. See M. Dahood, Psalms I, Anchor Bible 16 (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1966), pp. 174-80.
[^8] D. N. Freedman, "Pottery, Poetry, and Prophecy," Journal of Biblical Literature 96.1 (March 1977): 15, 21.
[^9] Ibid., pp. 21-22.
[^10] See H. G. M. Williamson, 1 and 2 Chronicles, The New Century Bible Commentary (London: Marshall, Morgan, and Scott, 1982), pp. 293-94.
[^11] See A. R. Johnson, The Cultic Prophet and Israel's Psalmody (Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 1979).
[^12] "Introduction to the Psalms," The Oxford Annotated Bible. Mowinckle was the pioneer into the investigation of Psalm use in Israel's temple. See his book, The Psalms in Israel's Worship (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1965).
[^13] It must be remembered that what would be considered as singing by an Israelite may sound more like shouting to us. The Hebrew root used here, rnn, is closely associated with music in 2 Chron. 20:21-22, as in other places.
[^14] Note that in the verses that follow there is a historical review of God's relationship with Israel. This is common in a covenant renewal.
[^15] These processions and assemblies are used in many different contexts. Ps. 118:27; 42:4; and 68:24-27, among others, speak of processions; Ps. 109:30 and 149:1, among others, speak of assemblies. Ps. 136 may be an example of a text used in an assembly of some type. There, a line is recited and then a refrain is recited, most likely by the assembly of priests or the congregation.
[^16] These psalms and others like them could also be associated with the even more solemn occasion of the Day of Atonement. On this day Israel's sins of the previous year were atoned for through the scapegoat and the goat whose blood was carried into the most holy place and sprinkled on the ark of the covenant.
[^17] The pronouncement that the speaker is waiting for is one of forgiveness.
[^18] These could be the words of a specific individual or the words of an officiating priest who is speaking for an individual or assembly.
[^19] This could be the announcement of forgiveness made by an officiating priest. The Lord's forgiving disposition is one of the constant themes of the Psalter.
[^20] This is a very badly damaged line of poetry. Commentators and translators have assumed this line continues to refer to the man whose sins are forgiven. I have, however, assumed here that it is a pronouncement of the faithfulness of God's word: the man's sins are covered and he is happy. Verses 1 and 2 could be the words of an officiating priest; verses 3 through 7 the words of the individual who has been pronounced forgiven; verses 8 through 10 the words of the officiating priest again. Verse 11 could be either the individual, the priest, an assembly of priests, or worshipers. The affirmation of God's faithfulness (verse 2c) to his promise and edicts, then, would not be unlike that found in Psalm 12. There the Lord promises to come to the aid of the needy who have been denied justice by the rich and powerful. Then it is affirmed:
[^21] Samuel Terrien, Poet of Existence, p. 241. On the whole issue of the Old Testament image of a suffering God, see Terrence E. Fretheim, The Suffering of God (Philadelphia: Fortress, 1984), and also Kazoh Kitamori, Theology of the Pain of God, trans. M. E. Brachten (Richmond: John Knox, 1965).
[^22] For a sensitive treatment of the epilogue along these lines, see Hartley, especially pp. 22, 47, 540-45.
[^23] Samuel Terrien, "Introduction and Exegesis to Job," Interpreter's Bible, 12 vols., ed. G. A. Buttrick, et al. (Nashville: Abingdon, 1952-57), 3:902; Terrien, Poet of Existence, p. 248.
