Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

39

THE NATURE OF GOD IN THE PSALMS (PSALMS, PART 2)

R. SCOTT BURTON

The Political Nature of the Psalms

The book of Psalms affirms, with the rest of the Old Testament, that the Lord is not only the God of Israel but also the King of Israel. The two are one, inseparable. [^1] To him belong all the functions normally attributed to the state: protection of the citizenry from hostile parties outside the state (charge over the conducting of warfare), protection of individual citizens from hostile parties within the state (the legislation and enforcement of just laws that protect the rights of all citizens), and the overseeing of the state's economic well-being. These are the three functions of government, and, according to the Old Testament in general and the book of Psalms in particular, these belong to the Lord alone. This is no mere metaphoric or symbolic rule but actual, direct rule of God over the fortunes of his state, Israel. [^2]

Warfare

In the previous chapter we have already seen hints of God's charge over warfare, but some more direct references may be helpful. (All Old Testament quotations in this chapter are my own translations, unless otherwise indicated.)

For it was not by their sword that they took possession of the land

nor was it their own strength that gave them the victory,

but it was your right hand and your strength

and your presence; [^3] for you took delight in them.

You are the one who is my King and God;

the one who decrees deliverance for Jacob.

Through you we drive our foes;

through your name we tread down those who arise against us.

It is not upon my bow that I rely;

my sword cannot deliver me,

but it is you who delivers us from our foes,

it is you who humiliates our enemies.

We boast of God at all times,

and praise his name forever. [^4]

(Ps. 44:3-8)

Regarding warfare, Israel and Judah needed to be reminded over and over again that,

It is not in the strength of the horse that he delights;

nor is it in the power of man [^5] that he is satisfied.

The Lord is satisfied with those who fear him;

with those who hope in his unchanging faithfulness.

(Ps. 147:10-11)

Unless the Lord is guarding the city,

guards keep watch in vain.

(Ps. 127:1b)

There is not a single king who is delivered by possessing a large military

force;

a soldier does not deliver himself by possessing great strength.

Deliverance by horse is a lie;

even in its great strength it cannot deliver.

(Ps. 33:16-17; see also 76:4-7; 147:10)

Even a cursory study of history clearly demonstrates that very few monarchs or heads of state have believed this. These "shepherds" always wish to have the latest in technological advances as they arm themselves for war, believing the age-old adage, Might makes right. The kings of Israel and Judah were, sadly, no exception to this rule. The prophets could never penetrate their thick skulls—or should we say, bend their stiff necks—with this unwanted message. Their administrations did, of course, give lip service to Jehovah's right to rule, but history demonstrates unequivocally that Isaiah's criticism was right on target: "This people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me" (Isa. 29:13). Israelite and Judahite kings alike were enamored with the latest in war technology; the horse and chariot are but two examples of such technological advances. The book of Psalms agrees with the Old Testament prophets in viewing such attitudes as faithless, destructive, and a blatant refusal to accept the rule of God. Israel so often and conveniently forgot that the Lord's great deliverance of Israel in battle was dependent upon Israel's faithfulness to covenant obligations, not upon her commitment to and diligence in armament. [^6]

Ephraim, though armed with bowmen,

retreated in the day of battle;

They did not keep the covenant of God,

but refused to follow his laws.

(Ps. 78:9-10)

O that my people would listen to me!

O that Israel would walk in my ways!

I would quickly subdue their enemies,

and would stretch my hand over their foes.

(Ps. 81:13-14)

Law

The psalms avow with the rest of the Old Testament that, as head of state, the Lord himself was Israel's lawgiver—Israel's only perfectly valid lawgiver. His laws were based on his righteousness and sense of justice.

He had declared his word to Jacob;

His laws and decrees to Israel.

He has not done so for any other nation,

for they do not know of his decisions. [^7]

(Ps. 147:19-20)

For he decreed statutes in Jacob,

and established the law in Israel

which he commanded our fathers

to make known to their children.

(Ps. 78:5)

Righteousness [^8] and justice are the foundation of your throne. [^9]

Unfailing love and consistency are ever before you.

(Ps. 89:14)

Jehovah was also Israel's only perfectly capable judge, as he decided cases based on the laws he instituted and his own perfect sense of justice. His two most important functions as judge in Israel were to defend the vulnerable and reprove the powerful, prestigious, and wealthy who might, because of their position, take advantage of those less fortunate than themselves. He was not susceptible to the kinds of abuses of power so common among mortal leaders. His laws and his judgments were equitable and fair. He never sought advantage over the vulnerable but looked lovingly and ardently after their interests. Neither would he condone any evil use of power on the part of the wealthy, powerful, and prestigious. He could not be bought off by bribes or threats. [^10]

The Lord is the everlasting king!

Nations will perish from his land.

You are favorably inclined toward the afflicted.

The desire of the deprived you hear, O Jehovah.

You encourage them, and pay heed to them

to defend the orphan and the insignificant.

So that never again will a mortal person be viewed with awe.

(Ps. 10:16-18)

I know that the Lord gives heed to the plea of the deprived

and dispenses justice to the needy. [^11]

(Ps. 140:12)

A father to the fatherless,

and an advocate for the widowed

is God in his holy dwelling place.

(Ps. 68:5)

However, those who did not keep the laws of the kingdom could expect to be brought before the Great Judge, who would rule in their case in accordance with their actions.

Because of the ruin of the deprived;

Because of the groan of the needy;

I shall now arise, says the Lord.

I shall place them safely away from those who threaten them.

(Ps. 12:5)

God says to the wicked:

What do you mean by speaking of my laws,

and making mention of my covenant;

When you hate my instruction,

and cast my words behind you?

When you see a thief you aid him,

and you throw in your lot with adulterers.

Your mouth is used for evil purposes.

and your tongue for deceptive purposes.

You speak against your brother;

You place guilt upon your mother's son.

You have done these things while I have kept quiet.

You considered me to be just like you. [^12]

I shall convict you,

and I shall present the case against you. [^13]

(Ps. 50:16-21)

The Lord did not ask much of his subjects. His laws, while creating a model community, were "not grievous" (see 1 Jn. 5:3). He only asked, as Jesus so succinctly taught the Pharisees: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength: this is the first commandment. And the second is like, namely this, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. There is none other commandment greater than these" (Mark 12:30-31). Simply put, Israel's God asked only that they follow his example and walk in rightness and justness with others and that they walk before him with the reverence due his person. As Micah stated so eloquently, "He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God" (Micah 6:8). [^14]

Economy

The Lord's control over the economic welfare of Israel expressed itself in his control, as creator and maintainer, over nature. Rainfall, drought, wind, temperature, insect infestations, and so on, were all dependent upon him, and these in turn were dependant upon Israel's faithfulness to the covenant with her God. [^15]

You provide for the land and water it.

You enrich it greatly.

A channel from God is filled with water.

You furnish the people with grain; for it is you who furnish it.

You saturate the land's furrows with water;

making water to flow down the furrows,

softening them with abundant showers,

and blessing their new growth.

You crown the year with your blessings,

and from your carts drip abundance.

Pastures of the wilderness are well watered.

Hills are clothed with joy.

Pastures are covered with flocks,

and valleys are covered with grain.

They shout for joy; yea, they sing. [^16]

(Ps. 68:9-13)

No matter how talented her economists and government officials might be, they could only measure, analyze, index, and report. If they were to have any "control" over the economy, it could only be by means of their moral behavior toward others and their attitude toward God.

O that my people would listen to me!

O that Israel would walk in my ways!. . .

I would feed them with the choicest of wheat,

and I would satisfy them with honey from the mountains.

(Ps. 81:13, 16)

Just as the Lord looked after the legal interests of the underprivileged,

so too did he look after their economic interests.

I shall truly bless her [Jerusalem's] provisions;

her needy shall I satisfy with food.

(Ps. 132:15)

Who is like the Lord, our God;

the one who is enthroned on high;

the one who comes down to look

throughout the heavens and the earth;

Who raises up from the dust the poor;

from the trash heap, he lifts up the needy.

He seats them with the noble;

with the most noble of the people.

(Ps. 113:5-8)

God took the poor from the trash heap where they were searching for food and placed them in the company of those who had plenty. If those who had plenty were not generous with their means—and worse still, if they were tight-fisted and even sought to get gain through dishonest means—they might be altogether supplanted!

Your tongue plans the ruin of others;

it is a sharpened razor.

You practice fraud.

You love doing evil more than doing right.

[You love] lies more than upright speech.

You love every word [practice] that consumes,

O fraudulent tongue!

(Ps. 52:2-4)

This is the motivation behind such corrupt behavior:

Here is the strong man who did not make God his means of security,

but he relied upon his great wealth.

He sought security through his fraud.

(Ps. 52:7)

But a grim fate awaits such a rascal.

God will pull you down from your eminence.

He will snatch you up and tear you away from your dwelling;

and he will uproot you from among the living.

(Ps. 52:5)

The reader may be wondering about the application of the Lord's charge over warfare, law, and economy to today's Church and current political conditions; after all, things have changed—right? Two points should be made. First, the Doctrine and Covenants does make direct application of these principles to the establishment of Zion in the latter days. For example, Doctrine and Covenants 105:14 states: "For behold, I do not require at their hands to fight the battles of Zion; for, as I said in a former commandment, even so will I fulfil—I will fight your battles" (see also D&C 45:74-75). Consider the Lord's statements concerning the law of the Church or Kingdom: "But, verily I say unto you that in time ye shall have no king nor ruler, for I will be your king and watch over you. . . . And ye shall have no laws but my laws when I come, for I am your lawgiver" (D&C 38:21-22). "For it must needs be that they be organized according to my laws; if otherwise, they will be cut off" (D&C 51:2).

The laws spoken of in this last passage are those pertaining to the economy of the kingdom of God and include the following important features: "They shall look to the poor and the needy, and administer to their relief that they shall not suffer" (D&C 38:35). "Thou wilt remember the poor, and consecrate of thy properties for their support" (D&C 42:30). "It is not given that one man should possess that which is above another, wherefore the world lieth in sin" (D&C 49:20). "Let every man deal honestly, and be alike among this people, and receive alike, that ye may be one" (D&C 51:9). "Wo unto you rich men, that will not give your substance to the poor. . . . Wo unto you poor men, . . . whose bellies are not satisfied, and whose hands are not stayed from laying hold upon other men's goods, whose eyes are full of greediness" (D&C 56:16-17). That was spoken to members of the Church, not to Babylon. "In your temporal things you shall be equal, and this not grudgingly, otherwise the abundance of the manifestations of the Spirit shall be withheld" (D&C 70:14). "I, the Lord, stretched out the heavens, and built the earth, my very handiwork; and all things therein are mine. And it is my purpose to provide for my saints, for all things are mine. But it must needs be done in mine own way; and behold this [consecration], is the way that I, the Lord, have decreed to provide for my saints, that the poor shall be exalted, in that the rich are made low. . . . Therefore, if any man shall take of the abundance which I have made, and impart not his portion, according to the law of my gospel, unto the poor and the needy, he shall, with the wicked, lift up his eyes in hell, being in torment" (D&C 104:14-16, 18).

The Lord is still the king of his people. His warfare, legislative, and economic laws are still in effect for those who wish to establish his kingdom on earth. The reader may ask, When? Orson Pratt posed the same question to a group of Saints in 1874 and answered it for them. He was speaking specifically of the Lord's economic law-the law of consecration: "Now, why is it, Latter-day Saints, that we have been tossed to and fro and smitten and persecuted for these many years? It is because we have disobeyed the law of heaven, we have not kept the commandments of the Most High God, we have not fulfilled his law; we have disobeyed the word which he gave through his servant Joseph, and hence the Lord has suffered us to be smitten and afflicted under the hands of our enemies. Shall we ever return to the law of God? Yes. When? Why, when we will. We are agents; we can abide his law or reject it, just as long as we please, for God has not taken away your agency nor mine." [^17]

Furthermore, using warfare as our example, who can doubt that there is a furious and enveloping battle going on every day as individuals seek to overcome their own lusts, passions, evil desires, and sins, as well as the continual temptations of Lucifer with his hosts of demonic helpers? Who can doubt that the God of Israel will come to the aid of those fighting in these battles any less than to those who fought in the battles of Old Testament Israel? Who can doubt that he will send his "tens of thousands and thousands of chariots" (Ps. 68:17) forward to help us fight the "ten thousands of people [and demons] that have set themselves against [us] round about"? (Ps. 3:6). Who can question that he will "teach [our] hands to war," give us the "shield of [his] salvation," hold us up with his "right hand," and "enlarge [our] steps"? (see Ps. 18:34-36). Is not the Lord, who is the same yesterday, today, and forever, as much "a very present help in trouble" today as ever before? This is a God, who, as the Psalmist testified, "performs wonderful acts" and "manifests his power among the peoples" (see Ps. 77:14).

The Messianic Nature of the Psalms

The book of Psalms is the New Testament's most frequently quoted Old Testament book. More than seventy verses from the Psalms are directly quoted by the New Testament authors. [^18] Of these, just over thirty are used as messianic prophecies by New Testament writers. [^19] Most of the messianic allusions were either discovered in the Old Testament text after Jesus' death or were taught by Jesus himself, mostly after his death. [^20] As two disciples were walking the road to Emmaus, Jesus instructed them concerning the Old Testament prophecies: "And he said unto them, These are the words which I spake unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me. Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the scriptures" (Luke 24:44-45, KJV; emphasis added).

Given that the psalms have, by nature, a prophetic aspect to them, it is not at all surprising that they should speak of that which is of greatest significance in history—the atonement of Jesus Christ. The prophets and patriarchs "saw [his] day" (John 8:56); the sacrifices and other rituals of Israel's temple were "types and shadows" of this infinite and eternal sacrifice (see Mosiah 3:15). Why should the writers of individual psalms not write of this most important event? As Alma the Younger stated: "For behold, I say unto you there be many things to come; and behold, there is one thing which is of more importance than they all—for behold, the time is not far distant that the Redeemer liveth and cometh among his people" (Alma 7:7). [^21]

Just how important the Psalms were to New Testament authors for an understanding of the Savior's atonement can be seen from a study of the Gospel accounts of the crucifixion. For example, in Matthew's gospel, which was written for the purpose of convincing Jews that Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah, allusions from the book of Psalms are numerous throughout the crucifixion narrative: Jesus was given "vinegar to drink mingled with gall" (see Ps. 69:21); Jesus' garments became the object of a gamblers game (see Ps. 22:18); and Jesus was mocked in the same way and with the same words as the Psalmist (see Ps. 22:7-8). In addition, Matthew recorded words uttered by Jesus as he suffered on the cross—"My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (see Ps. 22:1). Many other things undoubtedly occurred during those depressing hours which could have been related (see John 21:25); they did not find their way into the record because Matthew's narrative was, at least partly, influenced and shaped by psalmic expectations. Many of the words of Matthew's narrative were word for word—or nearly so—direct quotations of psalms.

Luke added that Jesus cried out, "Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit" (see Ps. 31:5). John recorded an interesting item that may tell us something of Jesus' view of the psalms and their relationship to his earthly ministry: "After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished, that the scripture might be fulfilled, saith, I thirst. Now there was set a vessel full of vinegar: and they filled a spunge with vinegar, and put it upon hyssop, and put it to his mouth. When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, It is finished: and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost" (John 19:28-30, KJV; emphasis added). It is as though Jesus waited until every prophecy of the Old Testament concerning him was fulfilled (here it seems that Ps. 69:21 was still wanting in fulfillment); then he was free to return to his Father who had sent him. As Jesus suffered so immeasurably—physically, emotionally, and spiritually—he choose the words of the Psalter to express his horror: "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (Ps. 22:1).

There are many other passages from the psalms that might have been chosen to express Jesus' suffering in those last few hours, however inadequate those words might be. One of the reasons for the great power of the psalms is to be found in their imagery. Liken the following words to Jesus as he suffered, whether it be the suffering of Gethsemane or of Golgotha.

Deliver me, O God;

for the water is right up to my neck.

I am sinking in the mire at the bottom; [^22]

I cannot keep my footing.

I have fallen into deep water;

the current is sweeping me away.

I have grown weary from my calling out for help;

my throat burns,

my eyesight fails,

as I wait for my God.

(Ps. 69:1-3)

This is an exquisite and beautifully crafted picture, even if it is a somewhat dispiriting one. The speaker, on the verge of drowning, has been calling out for help for so long and so intensely that his throat is now parched and hoarse and his eyesight has blurred from the prolonged shouting. He is in true need, but no one has so far heard his cry for help. Who has not been swimming and felt the sudden shocking panic and sheer horror that races through one's body at possible drowning? The psalmist asks us to remember such an experience in order that we may understand how desperate he felt at a given moment—at the moment when he seemed alone without God.

How long, O Lord? Are you forgetting me forever?

How long are you going to withhold your presence from me? [^23]

(Ps. 13:1)

Could not such statements typify what Jesus felt emotionally as he cried out "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" Jesus—who had always been heard by the Father (see John 11:42), who had the Father always with him (see John 8:29), and who had not the Spirit given him by measure (see John 3:34)-this same Jesus was left alone, feeling for the first time what it was to live without God in this world. Little wonder that Jesus asked that "if it be possible, let this cup pass from me" (Matt. 26:39). Little wonder that Jesus felt, as he related to the Prophet Joseph Smith, "Would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink" (D&C 19:18). Perhaps these words of the Psalter entered Jesus' mind at some point:

My heart is in anguish in my midst, [^24]

the terrors of Death have fallen upon me.

Fear and trembling have come upon me;

horror has spread through me.

Then I said, "O that I had wings like a dove,

that I might fly away and be at rest."

(Ps. 55:4-6)

The picture of a cool, calm Jesus as he suffered at Gethsemane and Golgotha is, I think, mistaken. The death by which he was threatened was, of course, not so much the physical—he knew he had power over the grave—but the spiritual. Could it be that as he took upon himself our sins, he was, as it were, cast out of the presence of God—"there cannot any unclean thing enter into the kingdom of God"? (1 Ne. 15:34). Could it be that as he took upon himself our sins, those very sins became in some incomprehensible way his sins and he experienced firsthand the emotional and spiritual contradiction [^25] and anguish that accompany sin? Could it be that the Atonement was much more frightening an experience than any of us even care to ponder?

We are left to ourselves to go and search the psalms to see if perhaps they may teach us of the Atonement in a way we had not expected—in a more powerful way than we ever had imagined. After reading the psalms, and there finding the redeeming Christ at his glorious work, we may feel a more urgent need than ever before to confess with the penitent Ammon:

Therefore, let us glory, yea, we will glory in the Lord; yea, we will rejoice, for our joy is full; yea, we will praise our God forever. Behold, who can glory too much in the Lord? Yea, who can say too much of his great power, and of his mercy, and of his long-suffering towards the children of men? Behold, I say unto you, I cannot say the smallest part which I feel (Alma 26:16).

The Theology of the Book of Psalms

Joseph Smith stated in the King Follett discourse: "It is the first principle of the Gospel to know for a certainty the Character of God, and to know that we may converse with him as one man converses with another." [^26] This sounds like a restatement of the Savior's well-known teaching: "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent" (John 17:3, KJV).

The study and knowledge of the character of God is what I mean by theology. Perhaps nowhere in scripture do we have more information concerning God's character in so little space than in the book of Psalms. We have already seen some of his attributes in the preceding passages. Let us expand on what the Psalter has to say about the character of God.

The Lord Is Loving, Compassionate, Merciful, and Forgiving

Lord, your unfailing love reaches to heaven;

your faithfulness [dependability, fidelity], to the sky;. . .

How precious is your unfailing love.

(Ps. 36:5, )

The Lord's every action is guided by love and faithfulness (Ps. 25:10). His love not only reaches to the heavens but is "higher than the heavens" (Ps. 108:4) and "fills the earth" (Ps. 33:5). His love is not only unfailing but is "from old"—as is his mercy (Ps. 25:6) —and "endures forever" (Ps. 107:1). His love can be counted on to remain unchanged throughout time and eternity; it is dependable, faithful, constant, firm, and unshakable. His unfailing love is "better than life itself" (Ps. 63:3). Men are to "hope" in his love (Ps. 147:11), "give thanks to" and "praise" him for his love (Ps. 107:21; 138:2), "meditate upon" his love (Ps. 48:9), and "declare" his love (Ps. 40:10).

The Lord is compassionate and merciful,

slow to anger and of great love.

The Lord is good to all;

He is merciful to all his works.

(Ps. 145:8-9)

His love and compassion, mercy and grace make themselves felt in many ways in the life of each Saint, but nothing is more deeply felt and fully appreciated than his willingness to forgive sin. [^27]

For you, O Lord, are good and forgiving;

abounding in unfailing love toward all who call upon you.

(Ps. 86:5)

If you should pay attention to iniquity, Oh Lord,

Lord, who could stand before you? [^28]

But with you there is forgiveness;

therefore you are revered. . . .

Hope, O Israel, in the Lord

because he is faithfully loving,

and with him there is total redemption.

So will He redeem Israel from all his iniquities.

(Ps. 130:3-4, 7-8)

Certainly the writer of the third Lecture on Faith agreed with the Psalter on the forgiving nature of the Divine Character:

Unless he was merciful and gracious, slow to anger, long-suffering and full of goodness, such is the weakness of human nature, and so great the frailties and imperfections of men, that unless they believed that these excellencies existed in the divine character, the faith necessary to salvation could not exist; for doubt would take the place of faith, and those who know their weakness and liability to sin would be in constant doubt of salvation if it were not for the idea which they have of the excellency of the character of God, that he is slow to anger and long-suffering, and of a forgiving disposition, and does forgive iniquity, transgression, and sin. An idea of these facts does away doubt, and makes faith exceedingly strong. [^29]

So desirable is this love and devotion God has for his children that the Psalmist declared with eternal longing:

As a deer longs for streams of water,

even so does my soul long for you, O God.

My soul thirsts for God,

for the living God.

(Ps. 42:1-2)

The Lord Is Righteous, Good, Upright, Just, Holy, and Honorable

"Taste and see," declared the Psalmist, "that the Lord is good" (Ps. 34:8). "Good and upright is the Lord" (Ps. 25:8). "The Lord loves righteousness and justice" (Ps. 33:3). This rightness and justness is, as noted earlier, the "foundation of his throne;" they go before him in all his dealings with humankind. We can be assured that he will always make the correct and just decision as he deals with each of us.

My mouth will tell of your righteousness;

[it will tell] of your deliverance all day long;

though I cannot appreciate its extent.

(Ps. 71:15)

The Lord is also "holy;" that is, he is something completely apart from all else—whether it be mortal or divine.

Extol the Lord, Our God;

and bow down before his foot stool.

He is holy.

(Ps. 99:5)

For who, in all the heavens, is comparable to the Lord?

Who, among the sons of God, is like the Lord?

God creates awe among those in the council of saints.

He is feared above all those round about him.

(Ps. 89:6-7)

The Lord Is Powerful, Majestic, and Strong

One thing has God spoken;

These two things have I heard;

That might belongs to God,

and unfailing love belongs to my Lord.

(Ps. 62:11)

The Psalmist assures us through his testimony that God has power and acts with power in the lives of those who love and honor him. "The Lord is great and worthy of praise" (Ps. 48:1); to him belongs "strength" (Ps. 89:13); he is "exceedingly great," and "clothed with splendor and majesty" (Ps. 104:1).

Splendor and majesty are before him;

strength and glory are in his sanctuary.

(Ps. 96:6)

As mentioned earlier, it is from the Lord that strength unto deliverance comes, whether it be temporal or spiritual. The Psalmist calls his God by several epithets, all of which emphasize his power of deliverance: Shield, Refuge, Stronghold, Rock, Buckler, Horn, Fortress, and Strong Tower. Do you need protection? asks the Psalmist. Rely on the God who shields—the "Shield." Rely on the "inaccessibly high Stronghold." Rely upon the "firm and unmoving Rock."

Truly my soul finds peace through God;

he is the ground of my hope.

He is my Rock and my deliverance;

he is my stronghold, I shall not be shaken.

My deliverance and my honor depend upon God;

he is my Rock of might, my refuge is in God.

(Ps. 62:5-7)

This is a God who, as the Psalmist testifies, "answers the righteous when they cry out to him" (Ps. 34:17), "performs wonderful acts," and "manifests his power among the peoples" (Ps. 77:14). This God is, as Mormon would later testify, "a God of miracles"—always was and always would be (see Morm. 9:9-11).

Who can relate the mighty acts of the Lord?

Who can proclaim all his renown?

(Ps. 106:2)

Many, O Lord, my God

are the wonders you have performed.

Your plans for us

none can describe.

If I were to expound them and speak them

they would be too numerous to count.

(Ps. 40:5)

Great is the Lord and more than worthy of the praise given him.

His marvelous deeds are unfathomable.

Each generation will boast of your deeds to the next,

and tell of your might.

Each generation will speak of your honor and splendor;

they will meditate upon your wonderful works.

They will speak of your mighty and astonishing deeds;

they will recount your marvelous doings.

(Ps. 145:3-6)

Great is our Lord, and tremendously powerful.

His understanding is without limit.

(Ps. 147:5)

The Lord's Expectations of His People

Finally, we learn from the Psalmist's testimony concerning God what type of behavior and actions demonstrate our love and commitment to him and please him. God is pleased with those who are blameless, righteous (act rightly), upright, just, generous, gracious, compassionate, brokenhearted, humble, contrite, and pure. God is pleased with those who hope in him, rely on him, fear him (that is, are in awe of him, recognize his supremacy), and delight in his commands. God is pleased with those who speak the truth and keep a promise.

The Psalmist also warns against those things that God finds unpleasant. God is displeased with those who are proud, wicked, unjust, boasters, tight-fisted, selfish, and unfeeling. He is displeased with those who lie about and slander others, do wrong to their fellowmen, cast a slur upon their fellowmen, make a mock of their fellowmen, lend money at interest, accept bribes (show partiality), steal, cheat, scheme, murder, oppress, rely on themselves and their wealth rather than on him, do not recognize him as their ruler, and put his commands far from them.

The reader will, no doubt, recognize that all the positive attributes that God is pleased to see in his children are those attributes that he himself possesses. All those negative attributes, which God finds displeasing, are those which are contrary to his very nature. The Psalmist agrees with the Savior, "I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect" (3 Ne. 12:48); "What manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am" (3 Ne. 27:27).

Conclusion

Even this short survey of the Psalmist's views on the nature of God and his kingdom ought to demonstrate how much the psalms can instruct us on these important subjects. We speak much of the kingdom of God and can, through this inspired book, perhaps speak with a little more authority about the rule of God, what is required to make that rule become reality, what we must become, and what great expectations the Lord has for those of his people who accept him as their Eternal King.

We have viewed anew the boundless love and awesome power he possesses—a love and power most clearly seen through the atoning sacrifice of Jesus Christ (see 1 Jn. 3:16; Eph. 1:19-20)—and the faith we must develop. Perhaps we understand a bit better the reasons for the Psalmist's great confidence in the Lord's eventual triumph and the triumph of all those who diligently and faithful seek him. We may share more fully in the glorious vision of the Psalmist's prophetic mind when he announces:

Posterity will serve him.

Generations will be told of the Lord.

They shall come and declare his righteousness

to a people yet to be born.

God shall bring this to pass.

(Ps. 22:30-31)

Religion is ultimately a very personal thing. It is about a relationship between an individual and God. Once God has revealed himself—once he has revealed his character and attributes and the character and attributes he desires mortal men and women to incorporate—the individual on whom God has bestowed this great gift will desire to tell others of this most desirable, most sweet, most beautiful, most pure Being. Perhaps, through a faithful study of the Psalter's testimony, we may be better prepared to enter into a more intimate relationship with the God of Heaven, and thus answer the challenging query of the Prophet Joseph Smith: "What kind of being is God?" [^30]

Notes

R. Scott Burton is the director of the LDS Institute of Religion in Auburn, Alabama.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The biblical books of Proverbs, Job, and Ecclesiastes and the apocryphal books of Ecclesiasticus and Wisdom of Solomon are classified as "wisdom literature." Wisdom themes are also found in many other books of the Bible.
[^2] For further discussion, see J. G. Gammie and L. G. Perdue, eds., The Sage in Israel and the Ancient Near East (Winona Lake, Ind.: Eisenbrauns, 1990), pp. 95-184. For a discussion of the education of scribes, including excerpts from practice texts, see H. W. F. Saggs, Civilization Before Greece and Rome (New Haven: Yale University, 1989), pp. 98-113. The desire of kings to have wise counselors and the importance placed on their counsel are well illustrated in several biblical passages, e.g., 2 Sam. 16:20-23; 1 Kgs. 12:6-15.
[^3] For further discussion of wisdom literature in the ancient Near East, see W. G. Lambert, Babylonian Wisdom Literature (Oxford: Clarendon, 1960); G. E. Bryce, A Legacy of Wisdom: The Egyptian Contribution to the Wisdom of Israel (Lewisburg, Pa.: Bucknell University, 1979); J. H. Walton, Ancient Israelite Literature in Its Cultural Context (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan, 1989), pp. 169-200; R. E. Murphy, The Tree of Life: An Exploration of Biblical Wisdom Literature (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1990), pp. 151-79. While the term "wisdom literature" may be somewhat inadequate if pressed in specific cases, it has become the standard way of categorizing these sage scribal creations and compilations.
[^4] For a fuller discussion, see Murphy, pp. 3-5; see also Sidney B. Sperry, The Spirit of the Old Testament, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), pp. 70-73.
[^5] See Murphy, pp. 10-11, for further discussion and examples.
[^6] Footnote a to Isa. 14:4 in the LDS Bible rightly indicates that this passage is "a satirical song."
[^7] For further discussion of these forms, including several subtypes of "sayings," see Murphy, pp. 7-13.
[^8] This is usually considered a separate subheading, although in the Hebrew Bible, known as the Masoretic Text, and in most English translations, this phrase is part of a proverb. In the Septuagint, a third century B.C. Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible, the phrase functions as a heading. In this heading, as well as in 24:23, the word wise renders a plural Hebrew form (hakamim) and is best understood as "wise ones."
[^9] It is not clear whether the acrostic poem about the proverbial "virtuous woman" (Prov. 31:10-31; discussed below) should be considered part of "the words of king Lemuel."
[^10] Although there is no clearly discernible pattern in the arrangement of the content of the book of Proverbs, it has been observed that the number of proverbs in certain sections of the book and the number of lines in the final form of the book correspond to the numerical value of some of the names (Hebrew letters were assigned numerical value; there are no Hebrew numerals) contained in various headings of the book (see Murphy, p. 28). Perhaps this is one of the "riddles" alluded to in Prov. 1:6.
[^11] New International Version.
[^12] For a discussion of the semantic field (both synonyms and antonyms) of "wisdom" (hokma) and the "wise" (hakam; hakamim), see G.J. Botterweck and H. Ringgren, eds., Theological Dictionary of the Old Testament, trans. D. E. Green (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1980), 4:371-73.
[^13] Compare Paul's statement to the Ephesians: "See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise [people]" (Eph. 5:15).
[^14] See 1 Cor. 12:8; Moro. 10:9; D&C 46:17-18.
[^15] See also Prov. 9:10; Ps. 111:10; Eccl. 12:13; and several passages in the Book of Mormon in which wisdom and acting wisely are equated with reverence and righteousness. Note, for example, Alma's instruction to his son Helaman: "O, remember, my son, and learn wisdom in thy youth; yea, learn in thy youth to keep the commandments of God" (Alma 37:35).
[^16] See "Land" and "Lands of Inheritance," Topical Guide, LDS Bible.
[^17] See "Tithing" and "Honor," Topical Guide, LDS Bible.
[^18] See "Chastening," Topical Guide, LDS Bible.
[^19] See "God, Access to," Topical Guide, LDS Bible. Cf. 1:24-33 (esp. v. 28), in which it is stated that the wicked who seek "early" will not receive divine assistance.
[^20] See Murphy, pp. 133-49, for a well-balanced discussion of Lady Wisdom in all the relevant biblical and apocryphal texts.
[^21] The technique of comparing contrasting situations or ideas for the purpose of emphasizing what is the best choice or approach is found many times in the Bible and the Book of Mormon. See, for example, Mormon's editorial use of this style in Hel. 6:34-38.
[^22] Latter-day Saints will be familiar with the proverbial saying, in antithetic parallelistic form, which the Lord shared with Moroni: "Fools mock, but they shall mourn" (Ether 12:26).
[^23] The NIV rendition of the first phrase is more accessible and accurate than the KJV's "be thou not envious against evil men."
[^24] See Robert J. Matthews, "A Plainer Translation": Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible, A History and Commentary (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1985), p. 375; and Joseph F. McConkie, "Joseph Smith and the Poetic Writings," in The Joseph Smith Translation: The Restoration of Plain and Precious Things, ed. Monte S. Nyman and Robert L. Millet (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1985), p. 104.
[^25] Most scholars accept the primacy of the Egyptian text, based in part on the proposed date of composition, although surviving texts date several centuries later. Some suggest that the "Instruction of Amenemope(t)" and Prov. 22:17-24:22 both share a common source, whereas a few, such as Hugh Nibley, accept the primacy of this portion of Proverbs over the Egyptian text. See Nibley's semicryptic comment in Since Cumorah, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988), pp. 52-53.
[^26] Murphy, p. 24; see pp. 23-25 for a convenient discussion of the similarities. For an English translation of the "Instruction of Amenemope(t)," see Pritchard, pp. 421-25.
[^27] Rather than translate it as "prophecy," as in the KJV, some scholars prefer to render the Hebrew word massa as a place name; thus, "the words of Agur the son of Jakeh of Massa." The definite article attached to massa makes that unlikely; however, compare Prov. 31:1, in which massa' also occurs but without the definite article. It is often rendered as a place name there as well.
[^28] Some find the questions in v. 4 and the names of Agur and his father in v. 1 to be part of a riddle, the solution to which reaffirms that Jacob/Israel is the "son" of Jehovah. See Murphy, p. 25.
[^29] An example of the use of this technique to represent the consequences of sin is found in the Lord's expression: "for three transgressions, . . . and for four" (Amos 1-2).
[^30] See n. 27, above, concerning the term prophecy.
