Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

40

THE PROVERBS

DANA M. PIKE

The book of Proverbs is found in that portion of the Old Testament known as the Writings (material not included in the Law or the Prophets), and is categorized as Wisdom Literature. [^1] It is a compilation of instructions and sayings that has as its aim the social, moral, and ultimately, spiritual betterment of people. As an anthology, Proverbs is designed for consultation and study in measured doses.

Wisdom Literature in Israel and the Ancient Near East

The appreciation of wise instruction and the value given to it, as well as the collecting of it in written form, were not unique to the ancient Israelites. Texts preserved from throughout the ancient Near East, especially from Egypt and Mesopotamia (Sumer, Babylonia, and Assyria), demonstrate that wise men, or sages, were active and important in these ancient societies. These sages are usually thought to have been the scribes who were employed by royal courts and temples, the two major institutions in the ancient Near Eastern world. Scribes, in the learning of the world, were the most educated people in their societies (definitely more so than most rulers). [^2]

The content of most ancient Near Eastern wisdom literature does not generally emphasize religious, or theological, themes but rather practical, social, and ethical ones. (It goes without saying that religion was an integral part of all ancient Near Eastern societies, Israel included, so that such judgments are somewhat relative and based on modern perceptions.) Although Mesopotamian and Egyptian wisdom literatures employ somewhat different forms and emphasize somewhat different themes, as part of a broad genre they do share many themes and forms with the wisdom literature preserved in the Bible. The various types of wisdom literature preserved from the ancient Near East include proverbs, parables and fables, dialogues and monologues, instructions, and admonitions. [^3]

The formal wisdom texts in the Bible may have originated with sages in scribal circles and been preserved by them, but it is also evident that wisdom in general and proverbs in particular had roots in the common experiences of families and everyday life. The claims and teachings contained in wisdom literature did not derive from theory, nor were they attributed to revelation. They came primarily from observation: what worked and what did not. [^4] Adherence to wise counsel produced, according to the sages, happiness, prosperity, and longevity:

My son, forget not my law;

but let thine heart keep my commandments:

For length of days, and long life, and peace,

shall they add to thee

(Prov. 3:1-2; cf. 4:10; 13:18).

What Is a Proverb?

A proverb is usually defined as "a maxim, an adage, a pithy saying." As such it represents an attempt to render concisely in words a lesson learned through experience. Therefore, a proverb arises from, and its interpretation is at least partially dependent on, a specific context. On the one hand, the strength of proverbial wisdom is that it is so applicable to the life experiences of so many. On the other hand, one must not place too much weight upon the wisdom of any one proverb nor apply such wisdom in a context too dissimilar from that in which the proverb originated. [^5]

The Hebrew word masal is usually rendered "proverb" in the KJV, as it is in the title, "The Proverbs." Nevertheless, the "proverb [masal] against the king of Babylon" (Isa. 14:4-23) is not a "typical" proverb. [^6] Additionally, the word masal is rendered as "parable" more than a dozen times in the KJV, in passages such as Numbers 23:7; Psalm 49:4; Ezekiel 20:49; and Micah 2:4.

The proverbs compiled in the book of Proverbs represent various literary forms. For the sake of convenience they may be viewed as (1) multiverse, poetic wisdom "poems," (2) wisdom "sayings," (3) "admonitions/prohibitions," and (4) "numerical" proverbs. [^7] These designations will be illustrated below as the content of the book of Proverbs is discussed more fully.

The Book of Proverbs

It is with good reason that readers of the Bible usually think of King Solomon when they think of the book of Proverbs. We learn in 1 Kings 3 that Solomon sought and received the gift of wisdom from the Lord. It is recorded that many people came "to hear the wisdom of Solomon" and that "he spake three thousand proverbs" (1 Kgs. 4:32, 34). The superscription, or introductory first verse, of the book of Proverbs reads: "The proverbs of Solomon the son of David, king of Israel."

Although many of the proverbs in the book of Proverbs may have originated with Solomon, it is certain that he is not the source of all of them. The expression "proverbs of Solomon" in Proverbs 1:1 may mean proverbs that originated with Solomon or proverbs belonging to—that is, collected by—Solomon. It is likely that Solomon both originated and collected many of these proverbs, but it may be that some of this material was later associated with his name because of his fame in this regard. Furthermore, a few of the several subheadings throughout the book of Proverbs indicate that some of this material originated with others besides Solomon:

1:1 "The proverbs of Solomon" (1:1-9:18)

10:1 "The proverbs of Solomon" (10:1-22:16)

22:17 "The words of the wise" (22:17-24:22) [^8]

24:23 "These things also belong to the wise" (24:23-34)

25:1 "Proverbs of Solomon which the men of Hezekiah (25:1-29:27) king of Judah copied out"

30:1 "The words of Agur" (30:1-33)

31:1 "The words of king Lemuel" (31:1-31) [^9]

Footnotes

Whereas most of this anthology is attributed to Solomon, some is attributed to "the wise" (that is, wise ones, sages) and some to Agur and Lemuel, two otherwise unknown individuals. The notation in Proverbs 25:1 about the activity of Hezekiah's scribes indicates that the book of Proverbs, as we have it today, did not reach its final form before the reign of King Hezekiah (729-686 B.C.), who ruled Judah two centuries after the death of King Solomon. The material in the last two chapters (Prov. 30-31), attributed to Agur and Lemuel, may have been added later still. It is not really known when the collection reached its final form. [^10]

The book of Proverbs can best be appreciated when understood as containing instruction that mainly focuses on one facet of a multidimensional approach to achieving a happy and successful life. A wide range of topics is mentioned in Proverbs, including personal discipline, diligence, honesty, appropriate conduct and speech, the appropriate attitude towards wealth and possessions, and so on. What is immediately striking about the wisdom of Proverbs, however, is the lack of specific instructions to fulfill various requirements of the Law of Moses and the gospel (such as keeping the Sabbath day holy, attending the required holy-day festivals, or observing the laws of purity). Also, themes such as the house of Israel, the Exodus, Zion, or the Messiah, which receive attention in prophetic books, are not dealt with in Proverbs. The "wisdom approach" generally focuses attention on the outcome of faithful living, not on "how-to" specifics. It attempts to encourage and motivate by stating "the conclusion of the whole matter" (Eccl. 12:13):

The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord: but the prayer of the upright is his delight (Prov. 15:8).

The Lord is far from the wicked: but he heareth the prayer of the righteous (Prov. 15:29).

Thus, the purpose of Israelite wisdom is to supplement, and witness the benefits of, the teachings and covenants of the Lord, not to provide an alternative to them.

A quick or superficial reading of the content of Proverbs may give the impression that the Israelite sages thought they knew all the answers and that the problems of life could be dispatched in a few words. That is not the case, however. The number of proverbs dealing with any one topic and the occasional coupling of contradictory proverbs, such as in Proverbs 26:4-5, suggest that the sages realized that what is appropriate in one situation may not be so in another:

Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like unto him (Prov. 26:4).

Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit (Prov. 26:5).

The sages also recognized the Lord's (not always humanly predictable) influence:

There is no wisdom, no insight, no plan that can succeed against the Lord. The horse is made ready for the day of battle, but victory rests with the Lord (Prov. 21:30-31, NIV). [^11]

Three further observations will assist in appreciating the content of the book of Proverbs. First, "wisdom" is often used interchangeably with "understanding" and, to a lesser extent, "knowledge." [^12] To know and understand the ways of the Lord is to have wisdom. Second, wisdom and wise people are regularly contrasted with foolishness and fools:

Every prudent [that is, wise] man dealeth with knowledge: but a fool layeth open his folly (Prov. 13:16). [^13]

A fool hath no delight in understanding (Prov. 18:2).

The truly wise recognize that their wisdom derives from the Lord and that it is not usually compatible with the wisdom of the world: "Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. . . . Be not wise in thine own eyes" (Prov. 3:5-7). The wise also realize the value of true wisdom ("for wisdom is better than rubies"; Prov. 8:11; cf. 16:16). Fools, however, are those who "despise wisdom and instruction" (Prov. 1:7).

Finally, wisdom instruction is often depicted as teachings given from parents, usually a father to a son ("my son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother"; Prov. 1:8; cf. 1:10; 2:1; 3:1). It is thought that this parent-child imagery reflects the relationship between a teacher/sage and a student, but it is likely that sages employed family imagery because the family was the original source of learning and wisdom. The following proverb neatly combines the parent-child theme and the contrast between wisdom and foolishness:

A wise son maketh a glad father: but a foolish man despiseth his mother (Prov. 15:20; cf. 17:25).

Obviously it is not possible to discuss every proverb in, or even every chapter of, the book of Proverbs, so the following comments focus on the main divisions of the book and will discuss some of the interesting forms and content within these divisions.

Proverbs 1 through 9 Proverbs 1:1 through 7

The first seven verses of the book of Proverbs can be viewed as an introduction to the whole book. Following the superscription (Prov. 1:1), verses 2 through 6 provide a statement of purpose: by studying the content of this book, the reader will be able "to know wisdom and instruction; to perceive the words of understanding; to receive the instruction of wisdom, justice and judgment, and equity; . . . to understand a proverb, and the interpretation; the words of the wise, and their dark sayings [that is, riddles]" (Prov. 1:2-3, 6). This statement is followed in verse 7 by the underlying principle of Israelite wisdom: "The fear of the Lord [that is, Jehovah] is the beginning of knowledge." For the ancient Israelites, as for the Saints of God in any age, true wisdom is attained only by those who "hate evil" (Prov. 8:13) and who revere and honor the Lord. This is no surprise, considering that wisdom is a gift of the Holy Spirit. [^14] Job understood this concept and quoted the Lord as saying that "the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom; and to depart from evil is understanding" (Job 28:28). [^15]

Proverbs 1:7 through 9:18

Verse 7 of Proverbs 1 represents the beginning of the first collection of proverbial material attributed to Solomon. The form of most of the proverbs in this section is not that of a maxim but that of the multiverse "wisdom poem." The following three examples are typical of the type of proverbs contained in chapters 1 through 9. Proverbs 1:10-19 contains an exhortation to a "son" to avoid the ways of the greedy: "my son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not." The instruction that begins in Proverbs 4:1 ("hear, ye children, the instruction of a father") and that includes such exhortations as "wisdom is the principle thing; . . . with all thy getting get understanding" extends through Proverbs 4:9 and extols the virtue of wisdom. An extended proverb for a lazy person ("go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways, and be wise") is found in Proverbs 6:5-11.

It is this section of Proverbs, chapters 1 through 9, that contains most of the clearly gospel-oriented instructions in the book. As noted above, admonitions that equate specific religious practices with wisdom are rare at best in this book; however, the following passages illustrate the type of "religious" instruction that is included:

For the upright shall dwell in the land. . . . But the wicked shall be cut off from the earth (Prov. 2:21-22). [^16]

Honour the Lord with thy substance, and with the firstfruits of all thine increase: So shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst out with new wine (Prov. 3:9-10). [^17]

My son, despise not the chastening of the Lord; neither be weary of his correction: For whom the Lord loveth he correcteth (Prov. 3:11-12). [^18]

I love them that love me; and those that seek me early shall find me (Prov. 8:17). [^19]

This last example is especially interesting, because it is so similar to the Lord's statement in Doctrine and Covenants 88:83; however, in Proverbs 8:17 it is wisdom, personified as a woman, who makes this statement.

"Lady Wisdom"

Personification, especially in poetic texts, is commonly employed in scripture as a literary device for helping render abstract qualities or ideas more concretely. For example, "wine is a mocker" (Prov. 20:1) and "righteousness and peace have kissed" (Ps. 85:10). One of the most striking features of Israelite wisdom literature is the personification of wisdom as a woman. This is clearly evident in several passages in the first section of the book of Proverbs (including Prov. 1:20-33; 9:1-12; and especially chap. 8, where she speaks in the first person; see, for example, 8:17, quoted just above). [^20] Although scholars have suggested that Lady Wisdom represents a pagan goddess in sanitized form, it is clear that in the biblical context "she" is both an attribute of and a gift from God:

The Lord by wisdom hath founded the earth; by understanding hath he established the heavens (Prov. 3:19).

For the Lord giveth wisdom (Prov. 2:6).

"Her" voice is the Lord's voice; "her" teachings are the Lord's teachings. To gain understanding and wisdom is to gain insight and inspiration through the Spirit of the Lord.

The female personification of wisdom is also preserved in the Book of Mormon. King Limhi contrasted the "marvellous works of the Lord" with the "blind and impenetrable . . . understandings" of people, noting that "they will not seek wisdom, neither do they desire that she should rule over them!" (Mosiah 8:20; emphasis added).

The Strange Woman

Consistent with the contrast between wisdom and foolishness, Lady Wisdom is contrasted in the book of Proverbs with the "strange" woman, someone who has sold herself physically or spiritually and thus has no part in "covenant Israel":

Say unto wisdom, Thou art my sister;

and call understanding thy kinswoman:

that they may keep thee from the strange woman,

from the stranger which flattereth with her words (Prov. 7:4-5).

For the lips of a strange woman drop as an honeycomb, . . .

But her end is bitter as wormwood (Prov. 5:3-4).

Many strong men have been slain by her.

Her house is the way to hell (Prov. 7:26-27).

As with any personification, we must realize that the "kiss of death" can come in many forms from either gender.

Proverbs 10 through 29

Proverbs 10 through 29 contains material attributed to Solomon (Prov. 10:1-22:16; 25:1-29:27) and to "the wise," unidentified sages (Prov. 22:17-24:34).

Literary Forms

Although the prominent literary form in chapters 1 through 9 is the multiverse wisdom poem, this portion of the book consists mainly of concise "sayings" and "admonitions." Most of these are a single verse and employ a poetic form known as "parallelism." The two most basic forms of parallelism, and the ones most frequently employed in Proverbs, are synonymous parallelism, in which a statement is made and then is reiterated using different words, and antithetic parallelism, in which the second line or thought represents the antithesis, or opposite, of the first line or thought. [^21] These two types of parallelism will be evident in the examples that follow.

There is variety in the types of sayings preserved in the book of Proverbs (see n. 7, above), yet they all make a statement or express an observation. Note these examples:

Pride goeth before destruction,

and a haughty spirit before a fall (Prov. 16:18).

In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of pride:

but the lips of the wise shall preserve them (Prov. 14:3). [^22]

"Admonitions" may be positive or negative, in which case they are termed "prohibitions." They often employ an imperative verbal form, having the force of a command. An example of an admonition and a prohibition follow. Note that each proverb provides a reason for the behavior that is admonished:

Train up a child in the way he should go:

and when he is old, he will not depart from it (Prov. 22:6).

Do not envy wicked men,

do not desire their company;

for their hearts plot violence,

and their lips talk about making trouble (Prov. 24:1-2, NIV; cf. 3:31). [^23]

Joseph Smith Translation

There is only one verse in the book of Proverbs for which Joseph Smith provided a substantive change as part of his inspired revision of the Bible:

KJV: Whoso findeth a wife findeth a good thing,

and obtaineth favour of the Lord (Prov. 18:22).

JST: Whoso findeth a good wife

hath obtained favor of the Lord.

The emphasis of the proverb is appropriately restored to the significance of a "good" spouse. It is not clear whether Joseph Smith thought there were no further changes to be made in the book of Proverbs, or whether this book, because it is less doctrinal in nature, received less attention from the Prophet. The latter possibility seems more likely. [^24]

Proverbs 22:17 through 24:22

During the first part of the twentieth century, an Egyptian text known as the Instruction of Amenemope(t), thought to have been composed about 1200 B.C., was published. Scholars have observed a relationship between this text and the so-called "words of the wise" contained in Proverbs 22:17-24:22. Much of the material in this portion of Proverbs, including headings and key words, is similar to, and may be dependent on, the Egyptian text. [^25] If the Egyptian text is primary, however, "close comparison shows that the Israelite writer was quite independent; he adapted the Egyptian admonitions rather freely to suit his own purpose." [^26] Such a situation is not particularly surprising, given the extent of the wisdom tradition throughout the ancient Near East and the universal nature of much of proverbial wisdom.

Proverbs 30

Agur, to whom the content of Proverbs 30 is attributed, claimed to be "more brutish than any man" and that he had "not the understanding of a man" (Prov. 30:2). Although that would seem to disqualify anything he said from inclusion in a wisdom book, this self-deprecating description may have been made in the same spirit as Paul's statement that "Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief" (1 Tim. 1:15). Interestingly, Agur's words are described as a "prophecy" or inspired pronouncement. [^27] As noted above, nothing is known of Agur outside of this passage.

After a few rhetorical questions reminiscent of the book of Job ("Who hath ascended up into heaven? . . . Who hath gathered the wind in his fists?"; Prov. 30:4), there is one clearly religious statement: "Every word of God is pure: he is a shield unto them that put their trust in him" (Prov. 30:5). [^28] Nonetheless, this chapter mainly consists of multiverse "numerical" proverbs. For example:

There be three things which are too wonderful for me,

yea, four which I know not:

The way of an eagle in the air;

the way of a serpent upon a rock;

the way of a ship in the midst of the sea;

and the way of a man with a maid (Prov. 30:18-19).

The literary technique of numbering plus adding one more is an idiomatic means of expressing a cumulative affect. In the proverb just quoted, it is used to express the unfathomableness of some of the wondrous mysteries of the earth. Elsewhere in Proverbs, a list of sins is introduced by this numerical feature:

These six things doth the Lord hate:

yea, seven are an abomination unto him:

A proud look, a lying tongue . . . (6:16-19). [^29]

Proverbs 31

Verse 1 of Proverbs 31 indicates that the words that follow are not King Lemuel's but his mother's, given as instruction to Lemuel. [^30] This mother instructs her son to avoid the entanglements of women (presumably to whom he was not married!) and wine (Prov. 31:2-7) and to "judge righteously" and stand up for the oppressed (Prov. 31:8-9).

As noted above, it is not clear whether the proverbial poem about a virtuous woman that follows should be regarded as a continuation of the preceding comments of Lemuel's mother or whether it is a separate text that was appended to the end of the book without any heading.

Although it is not evident in the KJV (or most other translations), this proverbial poem is acrostic in form, meaning that the first word in the first verse of the poem, verse 10, begins with the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet, and each succeeding verse begins with the succeeding letter. There are twenty-two letters in the Hebrew alphabet; there are twenty-two verses in this poem about a virtuous woman. [^31]

The Hebrew phrase translated "a virtuous woman" in the KJV literally means "a woman of strength, ability" and it is often rendered as "a capable woman" in more recent English translations. The woman portrayed in this poem is, however, more than just capable. She represents an ideal, the epitome of a self-assured, productive, and successful woman. She is neither distant nor demure but energetic and involved. Above all, she is wise:

She openeth her mouth with wisdom;

and in her tongue is the law of kindness.

Favour is deceitful,

and beauty is vain:

but a woman that feareth the Lord,

she shall be praised (Prov. 31:26, 30).

The first phrase of this poem asks, "Who can find" such a woman? (Prov. 31:10). As was noted about the wisdom of Proverbs, the focus is more on the outcome than on the process. This portrait of a "virtuous woman" represents the end of a process, not the beginning.

It is probably no accident that this poem, the last passage in the book of Proverbs, represents a summation of the wisdom contained in the book, a final illustration of the benefits of a life founded on true wisdom. Not surprisingly, the attributes of this "virtuous woman" are the attributes of Wisdom herself: she is priceless (Prov. 31:10; cf. 3:15; 8:11), she is energetic, not lazy (v. 27; cf. 6:5), her spouse (thus all who embrace her) is happy and satisfied (Prov. 31:23, 28; cf. 3:13; 18:22), and when she speaks, she does so wisely, not foolishly (Prov. 31:26; cf. 8:7-9).

Final Thoughts

As with all the gifts of God, gaining wisdom usually proceeds "line upon line" and is not without effort. The Israelite sages understood this:

Counsel in the heart of man is like deep water;

but a man of understanding will draw it out (Prov. 20:5).

The quest for wisdom is the quest to know and understand and fear the Lord. It is a quest that involves a recognition of the wise and foolish choices available in life and the conscious selection of the Lord's way. With potent symbolism, Israel's wise ones depicted wisdom as "a fountain of life" (Prov. 13:14) and as "a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her" (Prov. 3:18). Well might the sages of Israel have admonished, as did Jacob, the brother of Nephi:

O be wise;

what can I say more? (Jacob 6:12).

Notes

Dana M. Pike is assistant professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

---
Notas:
[^1] See the Mishnah, Yadaim 3.5; in Herbert Danby, The Mishnah (London: Oxford University, 1933), pp. 781-82.
[^2] The other four books of the Megilloth are Song of Solomon, read at Passover; Ruth, read at Pentecost; Lamentations, read on the ninth of Ab to commemorate the destruction of the temple in 587 B.C. and A.D. 70; and Esther, read at Purim.
[^3] The relevance of Ecclesiastes to modern life has been eloquently expressed by Rabbi Harold Kushner in his thought-provoking best-seller based on an interpretation of Ecclesiastes: When All You've Ever Wanted Isn't Enough: The Search for a Life That Matters (New York: Summit Books, 1986). Likewise his book When Bad Things Happen to Good People (New York: Schocken Books, 1981) contains a perceptive discussion of the book of Job.
[^4] The final section of the book, Eccl. 12:9-14, was possibly added by someone other than the Preacher. Many scholars interpret verses 13 and 14, promising final judgment, as an "orthodox" conclusion inconsistent with the pessimistic tone of the rest of the book. They hypothesize that this ending was added by a later editor to make the book conform to covenantal theology. The addition of these two verses does significantly alter the tone of the book, but though the absoluteness of verses 13 and 14 is not apparent throughout Ecclesiastes, emphasis on the "fear of the Lord" is found in various passages (Eccl. 3:14; 8:12-13), and the ending is not as inconsistent as many believe.
[^5] See Murphy, pp. 10-11, for further discussion and examples.
[^6] Footnote a to Isa. 14:4 in the LDS Bible rightly indicates that this passage is "a satirical song."
[^7] For further discussion of these forms, including several subtypes of "sayings," see Murphy, pp. 7-13.
[^8] This is usually considered a separate subheading, although in the Hebrew Bible, known as the Masoretic Text, and in most English translations, this phrase is part of a proverb. In the Septuagint, a third century B.C. Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible, the phrase functions as a heading. In this heading, as well as in 24:23, the word wise renders a plural Hebrew form (hakamim) and is best understood as "wise ones."
[^9] It is not clear whether the acrostic poem about the proverbial "virtuous woman" (Prov. 31:10-31; discussed below) should be considered part of "the words of king Lemuel."
[^10] Although there is no clearly discernible pattern in the arrangement of the content of the book of Proverbs, it has been observed that the number of proverbs in certain sections of the book and the number of lines in the final form of the book correspond to the numerical value of some of the names (Hebrew letters were assigned numerical value; there are no Hebrew numerals) contained in various headings of the book (see Murphy, p. 28). Perhaps this is one of the "riddles" alluded to in Prov. 1:6.
[^11] New International Version.
[^12] For a discussion of the semantic field (both synonyms and antonyms) of "wisdom" (hokma) and the "wise" (hakam; hakamim), see G.J. Botterweck and H. Ringgren, eds., Theological Dictionary of the Old Testament, trans. D. E. Green (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1980), 4:371-73.
[^13] Compare Paul's statement to the Ephesians: "See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise [people]" (Eph. 5:15).
[^14] See 1 Cor. 12:8; Moro. 10:9; D&C 46:17-18.
[^15] See also Prov. 9:10; Ps. 111:10; Eccl. 12:13; and several passages in the Book of Mormon in which wisdom and acting wisely are equated with reverence and righteousness. Note, for example, Alma's instruction to his son Helaman: "O, remember, my son, and learn wisdom in thy youth; yea, learn in thy youth to keep the commandments of God" (Alma 37:35).
[^16] See "Land" and "Lands of Inheritance," Topical Guide, LDS Bible.
[^17] See "Tithing" and "Honor," Topical Guide, LDS Bible.
[^18] See "Chastening," Topical Guide, LDS Bible.
[^19] See "God, Access to," Topical Guide, LDS Bible. Cf. 1:24-33 (esp. v. 28), in which it is stated that the wicked who seek "early" will not receive divine assistance.
[^20] See Murphy, pp. 133-49, for a well-balanced discussion of Lady Wisdom in all the relevant biblical and apocryphal texts.
[^21] The technique of comparing contrasting situations or ideas for the purpose of emphasizing what is the best choice or approach is found many times in the Bible and the Book of Mormon. See, for example, Mormon's editorial use of this style in Hel. 6:34-38.
[^22] Latter-day Saints will be familiar with the proverbial saying, in antithetic parallelistic form, which the Lord shared with Moroni: "Fools mock, but they shall mourn" (Ether 12:26).
[^23] The NIV rendition of the first phrase is more accessible and accurate than the KJV's "be thou not envious against evil men."
[^24] See Robert J. Matthews, "A Plainer Translation": Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible, A History and Commentary (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1985), p. 375; and Joseph F. McConkie, "Joseph Smith and the Poetic Writings," in The Joseph Smith Translation: The Restoration of Plain and Precious Things, ed. Monte S. Nyman and Robert L. Millet (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1985), p. 104.
[^25] Most scholars accept the primacy of the Egyptian text, based in part on the proposed date of composition, although surviving texts date several centuries later. Some suggest that the "Instruction of Amenemope(t)" and Prov. 22:17-24:22 both share a common source, whereas a few, such as Hugh Nibley, accept the primacy of this portion of Proverbs over the Egyptian text. See Nibley's semicryptic comment in Since Cumorah, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988), pp. 52-53.
[^26] Murphy, p. 24; see pp. 23-25 for a convenient discussion of the similarities. For an English translation of the "Instruction of Amenemope(t)," see Pritchard, pp. 421-25.
[^27] Rather than translate it as "prophecy," as in the KJV, some scholars prefer to render the Hebrew word massa as a place name; thus, "the words of Agur the son of Jakeh of Massa." The definite article attached to massa makes that unlikely; however, compare Prov. 31:1, in which massa' also occurs but without the definite article. It is often rendered as a place name there as well.
[^28] Some find the questions in v. 4 and the names of Agur and his father in v. 1 to be part of a riddle, the solution to which reaffirms that Jacob/Israel is the "son" of Jehovah. See Murphy, p. 25.
[^29] An example of the use of this technique to represent the consequences of sin is found in the Lord's expression: "for three transgressions, . . . and for four" (Amos 1-2).
[^30] See n. 27, above, concerning the term prophecy.
[^31] Acrostics can also be found in the books of Psalms and Lamentations, although with the exception of Ps. 119, in which the Hebrew letter is indicated (apparently because groups of verses begin with the same Hebrew letter), these are not indicated or discernible in the KJV.
