Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 4: 1 Kings to Malachi ( 1993)

41

ECCLESIASTES

DAVID ROLPH SEELY

Ecclesiastes is a unique and distinctive book in the Old Testament; in fact, there existed a great deal of dissension among the early rabbis whether it should be considered part of the scriptures at all. [^1] That this book survived the ravages of time is probably because it did make it into the Jewish canon, where it is found in the Writings—one of the five Megilloth, "little scrolls," which, in the Jewish tradition, are read in the synagogue on the annual festivals. Ecclesiastes is read at the Feast of Tabernacles—its somber tone a marked contrast to the rejoicing of the festival and providing a solemn reminder of the transitory nature of mortality and of the need to fulfill one's vows (Eccl. 5:4-5). [^2] In the Christian canon, following the Septuagint, Ecclesiastes is grouped with the Song of Solomon and Proverbs, as all three are attributed to Solomon.

The title of Ecclesiastes is taken from the first line, "the words of the Preacher" (Eccl. 1:1). Ecclesiastes is a Greek translation of Hebrew qohelet, "one who convenes a congregation" and has often been translated "the Preacher." The book is attributed to Solomon, though his name does not occur in the book, because of the allusions to the author in chapters 1 and 12, which identify the Preacher as "the son of David, king in Jerusalem." Whether the book was written by Solomon is not known, but the attribution is certainly one of the reasons it became part of the canon.

Ecclesiastes is often defined as pessimistic, cynical, or philosophical and thus is disregarded by many. It is all of those, and yet when scripture offends us, that is when we should take a careful look at its message. Perhaps one of the most common criticisms is that it is a human-centered work and not a statement of faith. Yet, though admittedly human-centered—that is, not explicitly given by revelation—it is most assuredly a statement of faith, and in many ways it is a profound and mature faith.

Ecclesiastes is part of a very important internal dialogue that takes place between various books in the Old Testament. In the Mosaic covenant the Lord states: "Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse; A blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the Lord your God, which I command you this day: And a curse, if ye will not obey the commandments of the Lord your God" (Deut. 11:26-28). Job, on the other hand, learned that righteousness provides no escape from the trials and vicissitudes of mortality and vehemently protested his innocence to the Lord, seeking an understanding of his suffering. Based on their shallow religious understanding which they justify by the covenantal promises, Job's friends, seeing his suffering, assumed his guilt. The book of Proverbs, based on further interpretation of the covenantal principle, presents a whole series of aphorisms suggesting that correct behavior will bring results—stated in terms of health, wealth, prosperity, and success in life. Ecclesiastes is written by one who in the course of his life has come to the conclusion that such a connection between righteousness, wisdom, and worldly success is an abuse of religion and an oversimplified view of life. The Preacher's tone is often bitter and cynical, but his observations are timely and the issues he addresses are relevant to the world we live in today. [^3]

"Vanity of vanities; all is vanity" (Eccl. 1:2). The Preacher continually reminds us of the transitory nature of mortality and warns us against trusting too much in the things of the flesh. He recounts his search for fulfillment in life, first devoting himself to pleasure and laughter (Eccl. 2:1-3), then wealth (Eccl. 2:4-11), and finally wisdom (Eccl. 2:12-17), but ultimately finding that all is "vanity and vexation of spirit" (Eccl. 2:11, 17, 26). The Preacher's solution is simple and profound: "There is nothing better for a man, than that he should eat and drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy good in his labour. This also I saw, that it was from the hand of God" (Eccl. 2:24). He is not advocating the moral abandon described in 2 Nephi 28:7-8, where committing sin is justified, but he is recognizing that there is much to be enjoyed in life. In fact the Preacher goes on to acknowledge God's power to give "to a man that is good in his sight wisdom, and knowledge, and joy: but to the sinner he giveth travail, to gather and to heap up" (Eccl. 2:26).

"To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven" (Eccl. 3:1). Mortality presents us with a wide gamut of experiences: birth and death, weeping and laughing, war and peace. The Preacher warns us that we do not always know the mind of the Lord or the causes of these things: "No man can find out the work that God maketh from the beginning to the end" (Eccl. 3:11). The "gift of God" is that "every man should eat and drink, and enjoy the good of all his labour" (Eccl. 3:13). Ultimately all will die, at which time true "success" will be measured (Eccl. 3:16-17). In the meantime, it is allotted to mortals to find joy and meaning in their daily lives.

Some have put their faith in the power of acquisition to give meaning to their lives, but "he that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver; nor he that loveth abundance with increase: that is also vanity" (Eccl. 5:10-11).

The Preacher then asks the most difficult question—why do the righteous suffer? "There is a just man that perisheth in his righteousness, and there is a wicked man that prolongeth his life in his wickedness" (Eccl. 7:15). How then should one behave in order to have some control of one's mortal condition? The Preacher implicitly warns us that it is only with an eternal perspective that such a paradox can be understood and answers, "He that feareth God shall come forth of them all" (Eccl. 7:18).

The covenantal principle "if you are righteous you will prosper" is often only true in an eternal sense: "Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man. For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil" (Eccl. 12:13-14). [^4] Such a sentiment may not bring immediate comfort to those who suffer, but such an understanding is essential to a spirituality that can endure trials.

In the end, the message of the Preacher is that we understand the precarious and transitory nature of mortality. While a mindless pursuit of earthbound priorities is "vanity of vanities" (Eccl. 1:2; 12:8), mortality is a great blessing which offers much to be enjoyed—to "eat and drink, and enjoy the good of all his labour" (Eccl. 3:13), to live and to die, to laugh and to cry, and to love those around us — each in its own season (Eccl. 3:1-11). Eternal perspective is essential to achieving peace of mind. Precisely because we understand that mortality will not last forever, we can endure its trials and enjoy its bounty.

Notes

David Rolph Seely is assistant professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The other four books are Ruth, read at Pentecost; Lamentations, read on the ninth of Ab to commemorate the destruction of the temple in 587 B.C. and A.D. 70; Ecclesiastes, read at the Feast of Tabernacles; and Esther, read at Purim.
[^2] See the Mishnah, Yadaim 3.5; in Herbert Danby, The Mishnah (London: Oxford University, 1933), pp 781-82.
[^3] The most comprehensive study of this book in English is undoubtedly Marvin H. Pope, Song of Songs, Anchor Bible 7C (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1977). He systematically reviews all of the various interpretations of the book through the ages.
[^4] For example, see B. S. Childs, Introduction to the Old Testament as Scripture (Philadelphia: Fortress, 1979), p. 578.
