Directions: This Easter program can be presented by your family. Assign parts to family members, and write each person’s name in the blank by each part. The picture parts can be assigned to young children. They could add the cutouts to the appropriate picture when they say their parts. (Pictures: (1) branch with buds—blossoms, (2) bulb—tulip, (3) egg—bird, (4) cocoon—butterfly, (5) empty tomb—Jesus.) If possible, make copies of the entire program for everyone. Songs could be sung by everyone, or some could be solos. If you don’t have the music, perhaps your ward librarian could help.

Song: “Jesus Has Risen” (Sing with Me, F-17).

Narrator: The Easter story is a story of love. Heavenly Father loves us so much that He sent His Son to earth to atone for our sins. Jesus loves Heavenly Father; He was willing to obey Him. And Jesus loves each one of us. He gave His life so that we may be forgiven when we do something wrong and repent.

Narrator: “Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends.” (John 15:13.)

Narrator: Jesus died and then was resurrected, which means that He lived—and lives—again. We do not fully understand how Jesus can live again, so we think of it as a miracle. There are many miracles all around us that help us understand the resurrection of Jesus.

Narrator: Wintertime is long and dark;
The flowers and seeds are sleeping.
They wait for the light of the sun to awake them.
The warmth of spring brings them to life again,
Like a testimony of the Easter story.
A wonderful thing happens in spring—The birds sing, the grass becomes green, The world is awake with the promise of life, Restoring the earth in its fullness.

Song: “Nature’s Easter Story” (Sing with Me, F-16).

Picture: Tiny brown buds become blossoms on a tree.

Picture: Dry bulbs pressed deep into the earth bloom again.

Picture: A little egg inside a nest becomes a baby bird.

Picture: From a gray cocoon, hidden beneath a leaf, comes a beautiful butterfly.

Narrator: These tiny miracles help us to understand the greatest miracle of all, the Resurrection. Jesus rose from His tomb when the stone was rolled away that Easter day.

Picture: “He is not here: for he is risen.” (Matt. 28:6)

Narrator: Many people saw Jesus after He was resurrected. However, we do not need to see Him to know that He lives. As we keep the commandments and remember Jesus, we feel good. And that good feeling is the beginning of a testimony.

Narrator: “A testimony of Jesus means that you accept the divine mission of Jesus Christ, embrace His gospel, and do His works.” (Ezra Taft Benson, General Conference, April 1982.)

Narrator: The hearts of men were sleeping.
There was no spiritual light upon the earth.
Then at last the heavens were opened,
And the light of the gospel awakened the world
This was a glorious testimony of the Resurrection.
A wonderful thing happened one spring
When Joseph saw the Father and the Son.
The world was awakened, and the priesthood was returned to earth,
Restoring the gospel in its fullness.

Narrator: Joseph Smith tells us about the vision he received: “I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!” (JS—H 1:17)

Song: “In Perfect Faith” (Sing with Me, B-16).

Narrator: We are blessed to have the gospel restored in our day. As we learn more about the teachings of Jesus, our testimonies will grow.

Child: I know that Jesus lives and that He loves me.

Child: I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet and that through him the gospel was restored.

Child: I know that I can be happy when I keep the commandments.

Child: I know that my Heavenly Father lives and that He loves me.

Song: “I Know My Father Lives” (Sing with Me, B-39).
