Hugh Nibley, Gary P. Gillum, Of All Things! Classic Quotations from Hugh Nibley ( 1981)

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION

This book had to be written because Hugh Nibley exists. It is one affectionate reader's arbitrary collection of interesting, humorous, insightful, inspiring, educational, and representative quotes. I offer it to those whose greed for Nibleyana is insatiable but especially to those who would like to read Nibley but who get bogged down with footnotes, erudition, and anarchistic echoes from one culture to another, from Adam and Eve to the MX milieu of the 1980s. The collection is far from being Nibley's last word on everything and makes no attempt to digest or condense Nibley's essential thinking. It should rather be thought of as a museum tour where the exhibits are illuminated by lightning flashes of personality. Nibley himself would send the reader directly to the scriptures on many topics, adding characteristically that he had nothing more to say, "as far as that goes."

Nibley delights some readers and disappoints others, who finally rationalize their inability to accept his hidden and implied messages by simply labeling them exaggerated or idealistic or even crazy. Well, how does one even begin to describe his mind? One may use the terms "multidimensional" or "cosmic" to portray his intellect, but then he merely becomes an inscrutable alien from another world. More precisely, Nibley's viewpoint can be identified as eschatological (literally, "of the last things"). His parable on page 60 is an excellent introduction which mercilessly subjects mundane reality to the searchlight of eternal values. It has the paradoxical effect, however, of focusing our attention on this world, not on the next, and Nibley essentially is attempting to show us how individuals may transcend themselves (not others) and extend, perfect, and intensify their senses—not in some future existence only, but now. Historically, Nibley speaks of the eschatological viewpoint in terms of the mantic and the sophic—a dualism which has existed in all ages. The mantic perspective seeks the "big picture" and is intuitive and prophetic. Sophic focuses more on how things work than on what they mean, and emphasizes behavior. Whether it be the scriptures, animals, revelation, wealth, Joseph Smith, education, or the ills of society, Nibley opts for the big picture.

In typical understatement Nibley predicted that this volume would be "very thin" as well as "irresponsible." Though cooperative, he has been skeptical throughout. I have overridden that skepticism ruthlessly for two reasons: my own intense pleasure in Nibley's treatment of his subject and, second, the immense importance of his view of the world. In fact, if only the parable of the eschatological man touches the spirit of the reader, all my efforts are rewarded. Of All Things easily becomes irresponsible if readers give his aphorisms, parables, diatribes, metaphors, and exhortations the authority of scripture. They are fragments, meant to tease and tickle the mind and heart to greater awareness. And also to testify.

The germ of this book was born when I noticed, after my first wife Lyn passed away in the summer of 1977, that the last book she had been reading in this life was Nibley's Message of the Joseph Smith Papyri: An Egyptian Endowment. Since that time I have decided that it was not the subject alone which attracted Lyn but the spirit of the book itself. It is an extension of Nibley's mind. That same year saw the beginning of my own work with Nibley's writings.

As Ancient Studies Librarian at Brigham Young University, I began a long professional development project, with some released time each week, to compile an index and bibliography of all Nibley's writings, a project suggested by Truman Madsen and Howard Kempton. Members of the Harold B. Lee Library Professional Development Committee, the University's Professional Development Committee, and Sterling J. Albrecht, University Librarian, granted me professional development leaves for the undertaking of the entire project. Brigham Young University faculty members Wilfred Griggs, Louis Midgley, H. Curtis Wright, and Don Norton supplied me with copies of unpublished Nibley materials not yet in my possession. My wife Elizabeth, Randy Olsen, David Lisonbee, and Jack Welch offered encouragement, and Lavina Fielding Anderson served as a capable, sensitive, and open-minded editor. A major contribution came from the typists and researchers who transcribed tape recordings, retyped manuscripts, searched the sources, and provided me with the daily incentive to keep up with them: Sharee Covington, Kaja Hall, Ann Johnson, Ben Miller, Collette Ricks, Bonnie Percival, and Sharon Walters.

We express our appreciation to the following publishers for permission to quote from their publications: BYU Press, BYU Religious Studies Center, BYU Studies, Bookcraft, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter- day Saints, Deseret Book, Dialogue, Sunstone, Western Political Quarterly, and Western Speech.

Of All Things! includes selections from both published and unpublished, authorized and samizdat ("underground") books, serials, journal articles, manuscripts, and transcribed tapes. A short title at the end of each selection will lead the reader to the bibliography, where he or she can find the source cited and other locations for each item. The bringing together of such a variety of sources presents some technical problems. We have edited these selections for consistency of style, rather than following the originals, and eliminated footnotes. We have also reparagraphed and repunctuated where we have thought it would help the reader follow the idea better. We have not, however, added to or subtracted from Nibley's own words without appropriate brackets or ellipses. The index has been designed so that similar ideas and subjects may be found wherever they occur throughout the book.

Gary P. Gillum
