Do you know what a multitude is? A multitude is a great number. It can refer to a great number of people. When Jesus Christ taught in Judea, a multitude followed after him to hear what he had to say. He taught a multitude on the shores of Galilee. He taught a multitude on the mountain. He taught a multitude in Jerusalem. But the Savior wanted each person in the multitude to listen, to believe, and to decide to follow him.

Moses taught the Ten Commandments to a multitude. He told them, “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might” (Deut. 6:5). Even though he was speaking to a large group, he wanted each person to do the things he told them. And he wanted their posterity to know those things, too.

Nephi read from the scriptures and “did liken all scriptures unto us, that it might be for our profit and learning” (1 Ne. 19:23). To “liken” the scriptures unto us means that we see how our lives are like the lives of the people we are reading about. If the Lord says something to those people, we know he is saying it to us, too. We learn from the scriptures the happiness and peace we can feel when we keep the commandments. We also see the sorrow that comes when people break the commandments.

The Savior’s Sermon on the Mount is for you! You are happy and blessed when you are meek and merciful (see Matt. 5:5, 7). King Benjamin’s speech from the tower is for you! You, too, can have a mighty change in your heart (see Mosiah 5:2). The Word of Wisdom (see D&C 89) will help you find health and great treasures of knowledge.

When the prophets speak today, their message is for you and for those who come after you. And when you liken the scriptures to yourself and listen to the Spirit, you can hear the Lord speaking to you.

Remove page 5 from the magazine and mount it on heavy paper. In the center oval, glue a small photo of yourself, a mirror, or a picture you’ve drawn of yourself. Cut off the bottom strip along the solid black line. Cut out each box in the strip; then glue it in the appropriate box. Color the pictures and hang the poster where it can remind you to liken the scriptures to yourself.

1.  On large cards, print the first part of each beatitude (see Matt. 5; 3 Ne. 12), such as “Blessed are the merciful.” Then print on another card the second part of the beatitude, such as “for they shall obtain mercy.” Mix up the cards and place them face down in rows. Have the children come up one at a time and turn over two cards. If they match, post them together and have the children find the scripture reference. If the cards don’t match, turn them face down again. Continue until all the Beatitudes are posted.

2.  The Word of Wisdom (see D&C 89) was given to the Saints in 1833 when few people thought this advice was important. Many scientists now affirm the value of such wisdom, and we know that when we listen to the Lord, we will be blessed. Prepare three wordstrips: Fruits, Vegetables, Grains. Post a wordstrip; give the children one minute to write down items in that category that are good for their bodies; then discuss their lists. Repeat with the other categories. Younger children could use pictures from magazines to make collages of good and bad food choices.
