Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

PREFACE

It is true, as the Preacher recorded in Ecclesiastes 12:12, that "of making many books there is no end." That has been true especially of books about the Bible.

So why do I produce yet another?

This one is intended to offer such help to readers of the Old Testament as that for which a certain Ethiopian visitor to Judea expressed a need (Acts 8:30-31). Philip found him in his chariot, reading from the scroll of Isaiah as he drove homeward from Jerusalem. Philip asked, "Understandest thou what thou readest"? The Ethiopian replied, "How can I, except some man should guide me?"

This book is an Old Testament reader's guide. The intent is to help beginners understand more as they read for the first time and to help more mature students discover here and there some added meaning, some deeper implication, or some broader application. This volume complements the footnotes, Bible Dictionary, Topical Guide, and other study aids in the edition of the King James Version of the Bible published by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. More sophisticated aids are available in Bible dictionaries and in multivolume commentaries and exegeses; this interpretive guide is intended particularly for LDS readers of the Old Testament.

The individuals and the peoples of the Old Testament experienced hopes and fears, aspirations and disappointments, achievements and failings in all of which we can find examples of good or evil, to be emulated or avoided. Indeed, as we see Old Testament accounts of our spiritual forebears and sense their faith, reverence, hope and joy—or feel their doubt, infidelity, despair, and misery—we may find ways to avoid pitfalls ourselves, reach our ideals, and attain more joy. But it must here be declared that the most important aid to understanding the Old Testament, or any other book of scripture, is the inspiration from the Holy Spirit, which is promised to us in those scriptures (see 1 Cor. 2:10-12; 2 Ne. 25:1-4; Moro. 10:4-5; TG, "Discernment, Spiritual"; "Scriptures, Study of").

May all of these resources be combined to enhance your enjoyment of the Old Testament and make it rewarding; and may your "weariness of the flesh" (Eccl. 12:12) in studying be minimal.
