Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This book has its roots in many origins and is the result of many forces that have influenced, instructed, and inspired me. The greatest of them are the scriptures, the gospel, the Church, and the guidance of the Holy Spirit.

Among the people who must be acknowledged for their help is the late Sidney B. Sperry, whose influence on me began in 1941. His passion for and devotion to scriptural studies drew me into the languages and literature of the Old Testament. His instruction and encouragement helped me as a student, and he gave me the opportunity to become a teacher in the field. It was he who pointed out a pearl of great price contained in the book of Abraham, which has been the keystone of all my Old Testament teaching (Abr. 1:18-19; 2:6-11).

Other leaders and colleagues at Brigham Young University and the Church Educational System have given encouragement through the years to my study and teaching of the Old Testament. They are many, including B. West Belnap, Daniel H. Ludlow, Robert J. Matthews, Truman and Anne Madsen, David B. Galbraith, and D. Kelly Ogden. Kelly still uses some of my syllabi materials, improved and embellished by him, in teaching BYU home-study students.

I appreciate BYU Press for first suggesting that I produce a commentary on the Old Testament and then, in 1982, for giving me the copyright release to do so.

My wife has always given me devotion and support and, in our retirement years, a little prodding to "get the book to press." My family have also given their support, interest, and encouragement.

I am indebted to leaders past and present at Deseret Book, including William James Mortimer and Eleanor Knowles, especially in our work on other projects since 1973. They and others unmentioned have made the present project possible. Suzanne Brady's keen insight, careful attention to detail, and patient persistence in editing have been vital. She has clarified abstruse sentences, sensed inconsistencies, corrected errors, and polished the final product. And the help of others at Deseret Book, including Richard Peterson and Emily Watts, is also much appreciated.

But in the end, as in the beginning and throughout all my work, the Spirit of the Lord has helped the most. For that I am grateful.
