Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

INTRODUCTION

Why Study the Old Testament?

We study the Old Testament from time to time as individuals and as families, in Sunday School and elsewhere. Why do we do it? Why should we do it? Some Christian peoples make the amazing assumption that because Jesus our Savior "fulfilled the law" he abrogated the Old Testament—the Law, the Prophets, and the Writings. We know, of course, that he fulfilled the law of sacrifice; the supreme redemptive offering by the Father and of the Son did indeed fulfill and end the law of sacrifice by the shedding of blood.

But other laws, practices, and principles in the Old Testament endure. Jesus reiterated moral and spiritual laws taught by Moses and the other prophets—elucidating, defining, and applying them and urging our obedience to them. Many prophecies recorded in the Old Testament are now being fulfilled or shall yet be fulfilled. And certainly the poetic writings and wisdom literature of the Old Testament are full of good moral, spiritual, and theological truths, as valid today as they were in the past. We might well consider several uses of Old Testament scripture by Jesus and his apostles and also by Book of Mormon peoples, a few examples of verses in the Old Testament that are inspiring and vital to modern readers, and some other reasons why the Old Testament is still valuable to us today.

Old Testament Scripture in Other Books of Scripture

Luke recorded a parable by Jesus about a certain rich man and a poor beggar named Lazarus, both of whom were in the spirit world of the dead after departing from this life. Having asked several times for relief, the former rich man supplicated "father Abraham" that Lazarus be sent back to earth to warn five brethren about what they must do to avoid being sent also to the place of torment.

In response, Jesus taught a parable in which Abraham says, "They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them." The erstwhile rich man argues, "Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead, they will repent." Abraham replies, "If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead" (Luke 16:29-31). Jesus taught by means of this parable that people should hearken to the teachings of Moses and the other prophets: "Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me" (John 5:39). The scriptures, of course, were those that came through Moses and other prophets. We still may learn from them some of the ways to qualify for eternal life, especially from the multitude of scriptures that testify of Christ.

Jesus, after his resurrection, talked with two disciples on the road to Emmaus about prophecies written by "Moses and all the prophets" in the scriptures "concerning himself." Soon thereafter he reviewed for the apostles in the upper room details "written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms" about himself (Luke 24:27, 44). Those Old Testament scriptures can still help us appreciate Jesus the Redeemer.

When Paul and Silas taught the gospel in the synagogue of the Jews at Berea, "they received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the scriptures daily, whether those things were so. Therefore many of them believed" (Acts 17:11-12). The scriptures available to be searched in the synagogue were those of the Tanach, our Old Testament. We also can use them in our study and teaching to enhance the testimony that "those things were so." In Acts, we read about a Jewish missionary named Apollos who, "knowing only the baptism of John," taught the people with enthusiasm but imperfectly. Aquila and Priscilla "took him unto them, and expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly." Thus instructed, Apollos "mightily convinced the Jews, and that publickly, shewing by the scriptures that Jesus was Christ" (Acts 18:24-28). The scriptures those early Christian missionaries used to teach people more perfectly and convince them mightily are still there for our missionaries to use for the same purposes (TG lists more than fifty topics with scriptures about Jesus Christ).

Paul wrote to the Christians in Rome that "whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope" (Rom. 15:4). May we not also learn to exercise patience, receive comfort, and increase our hope through those and other such "things written aforetime" in the Old Testament?

Paul wrote to the young Timothy, "From a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus" (2 Tim. 3:15). At the time Paul was writing, the New Testament books had not all been collected or even written, so the scriptures to which he referred were those of the Old Testament; they are still good for us who would like to be more wise in enjoying salvation through Jesus Christ. Paul gave Timothy a very meaningful evaluation of those Old Testament scriptures: "All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness: that the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works" (2 Tim. 3:16-17). That is still true of the Old Testament as well as of our other scriptures.

In the Book of Mormon, young Nephi exhorted his brothers by rehearsing unto them the words of Isaiah, by which his rebellious brothers "were pacified and did humble themselves before the Lord" (1 Ne. 15:20). Nephi taught his brothers about the "covenant which should be fulfilled in the latter days; which covenant the Lord had made to our father Abraham" and of "the restoration of the Jews, or of the house of Israel" (1 Ne. 15:18, 20). Then he taught them the meaning of father Lehi's dream. The rod of iron "was the word of God; and whoso would hearken unto the word of God, and would hold fast unto it, they would never perish; neither could the temptations and the fiery darts of the adversary overpower them unto blindness, to lead them away to destruction" (v. 24). There are still good portions of the word of God and his commandments in the Old Testament for us to hold onto as a rod of iron that we too may be humbled, pacified, guided, and safeguarded thereby.

After Lehi's death Nephi wrote about the prophecies and blessings of his father: "I write the things of my soul, and many of the scriptures which are engraven upon the plates of brass. For my soul delighteth in the scriptures, and my heart pondereth them, and writeth them for the learning and the profit of my children" (2 Ne. 4:15). It was while he pondered these things that he wrote his own beautiful psalm of supplication and praise. Who knows what such scriptures might engender also in you or me?

King Benjamin taught his sons to read the language of their fathers, that they might "become men of understanding" and "know concerning the prophecies . . . delivered them by the hand of the Lord . . . on the plates of brass," that they might emulate Lehi who had been "taught in the language of the Egyptians; therefore he could read these engravings, and teach them to his children." Without knowing God's commandments and "his mysteries," the king said, the Nephites "would have dwindled in unbelief." With them available on the brass plates, his people could learn to "keep the commandments of God" and then "prosper in the land" (Mosiah 1:1-7). We have in the Old Testament now many of the teachings the people of Lehi had on those plates of brass.

Some Old Testament Scriptures Inspiring for Our Times

Deuteronomy 8:3. Quoting from the Law to refute a temptation of the devil, Jesus said: "It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God" (Matt. 4:4). Those words from a book of the Law may likewise admonish us, and there are many, many others like unto them throughout our scriptures.

Psalm 19:7-11. "The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul." This passage impressively affirms that the law of the Lord, with his testimonies, statutes, and commandments, can convert the soul, make wise the simple, cause the heart to rejoice, and enlighten the eyes; thus the scripture will engender reverence which is cleansing, and judgments which are true and righteous altogether. By them one is warned, and in keeping them there is great reward.

Isaiah 8:20. "To the law and to the testimony; if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them." This was Isaiah's advice to those who went to wizards and fortune tellers for enlightenment or guidance. It is still good advice, and "the law and the testimony" to which he referred are still there in the Old Testament.

Hosea 4:1-6. "Because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land," said Hosea, his people were in controversy with the Lord; and they were in danger of destruction through their swearing, lying, killing, stealing, adultery, and violence. Why was Israel in such a state of deterioration? The prophet revealed the basic reason: "My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge; because thou hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee. . . . seeing thou hast forgotten the law of thy God, I will also forget thy children." Can such things happen to the Lord's people today, if they allow such behavior? Surely.

Micah 6:8. "He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?" The justice, mercy, and humility recommended by Micah can still bring us peace, joy, and the blessings of the Lord.

Malachi 3:16-18; 4:1-2: "A book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name. And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels." Read the promises of the scriptures to those who revere the Lord and think upon his name through studying the scriptures and being obedient. Note the warnings, too. Both promises and warnings are good guides for us here and hereafter.

Other Reasons Why the Old Testament Scriptures Are Valuable to Us

Scriptures began to be written, because "it was given unto as many as called upon God to write by the spirit of inspiration" in the days of Adam. "A book of remembrance was kept . . . in the language of Adam, . . . having a language which was pure and undefiled" (Moses 6:5-6). A book of remembrance was God's way of perpetuating divine culture. All such divinely inspired scriptures are authentic; therefore "we believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly" (A of F 8).

Abraham contributed to ancient collections of scripture, for he could "delineate the chronology running back . . . to the beginning of the creation" (Abr. 1:28) because, said he, the "records of the fathers, even the patriarchs . . . the Lord my God preserved in mine own hands" (Abr. 1:31). So, even though Moses was the writer of the first book in our Bible, "The First Book of Moses Called Genesis" (as it is titled on the first page of Genesis), there were antecedents for his writings, which the Lord made known to Moses, and they are authentic.

The Lord revealed to Moses epochal facts "concerning this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, and also the heavens." He also explained the purpose of it all: "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." Even before he began to tell Moses of the beginnings of Creation, he commanded Moses to "write the words" he would speak (Moses 1:36, 39; 2:1). Those revelations are still available and valuable to us.

As his mission proceeded, "Moses wrote all the words of the Lord. . . . And he took the book of the covenant, and read in the audience of the people" (Ex. 24:4, 7; see also Deut. 31:9). Scholars of the scriptures in the literary posture called "higher criticism" proclaim that Moses did not write the books of Moses and that indeed they were not written until sometime near the Babylonian captivity (just before 600 B.C.). We believe the revealed book of Moses of our dispensation, which supports internal evidences in the five biblical books that Moses not only wrote the revelations but also taught the children of Israel by reading those revelations to them (cf. TG, "Scriptures, Writing of").

Joshua wrote a copy of some of the law of Moses on stone and also "wrote . . . words in the book of the law of God." Thus Joshua, according to internal evidences in the Old Testament, continued writing in the "book of the law of God" after the time of Moses (Josh. 8:32; 24:22-27). Such internal evidences of authorship and authenticity are not lightly to be dismissed.

"Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, and wrote it in a book, and laid it up before the Lord" (1 Sam. 10:25). The established manner of writing and preserving scriptures as sacred treasures continued in the days of the prophet Samuel. He could not have been the author of both of the books called the "books of Samuel," because his death is recorded before the end of the first book (1 Sam. 25:1), but there are evidences that he and other such prophets and seers contributed to our Old Testament (1 Chr. 29:29).

"Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah, first and last, did Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, write." Thus Isaiah served as a "church historian" as well as prophet in his times (2 Chr. 26:22). In Isaiah's book is written that which the Lord commanded him, "Take thee a great roll, and write in it" (Isa. 8:1). Later he recorded the Lord's command to write a prophecy "in a table, and note it in a book, that it may be for the time to come for ever and ever" (Isa. 30:8). Like Moses, he was divinely commissioned, and the literature of his book shows that he was a master writer.

The Book of Mormon quotes passages from throughout the book of Isaiah (see Book of Mormon index, "Isaiah"). Jesus himself quoted and commended Isaiah's writings (3 Ne. 22; 23:1).

"Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the Lord, which he had spoken unto him, upon a roll of a book" (Jer. 36:4). Thus that prophet's teachings were recorded. Then Jeremiah's secretary went, as the prophet had commanded him, to read all those words "in the ears of the people in the Lord's house upon the fasting day . . . in the ears of all Judah that come out of their cities," because, said Jeremiah, "It may be they will present their supplication before the Lord, and will return every one from his evil way, for great is the anger and the fury that the Lord hath pronounced against this people" (Jer. 36:5-7). Similar indications of authorship and intent can be found in other books of the prophets in the Old Testament.

The apostle Peter testified, "Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost" (2 Pet. 1:21). He thus commended the prophetic writings of the Old Testament.

Recall again that Jesus said through father Abraham in a parable, "They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them" (Luke 16:29). We may well follow his admonition.
