Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

GENESIS

Moses was given revelations from God regarding the world, the patriarchs, and the peoples before him. Some time after his call at the "burning bush" (Moses 1:17; Ex. 3:4), Moses was given visions of the earth, its many lands and inhabitants, and its past and future (Moses 1:25-29). The visions prompted Moses to ask, "Tell me, I pray thee, why these things are so, and by what thou madest them?" (Moses 1:30). The Lord replied that although He would not show Moses all of His purposes and processes in creating "worlds without number," He would give him "an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof" and commanded Moses to write and preserve the information (Moses 1:33, 35, 40; 2:1).

Through these revelations, Moses was being prepared by the Lord to leave his refuge in Sinai and return to Egypt to lead the children of Israel out of bondage to the land promised long before. The Israelites were then to be prepared to serve the Lord as their forefather Abraham and his seed had been called of God to do (Gen. 12:1-3; Abr. 2:6-11).

The information given to Moses reveals the Lord's purposes in creating this earth, and in placing his children upon it (Moses 1:39; 2:26; 3:16-18, 23-24; 4:1-31). That and later information helped Moses understand the Lord's intent in calling Abraham's seed to their mission. Those revelations must have clarified the purposes of Moses' own mission.

Family histories were then given, listing Israel's ancestors from Adam and Eve on through the antediluvian patriarchs and their wives and children. All of this information helped Moses know why the Israelites needed to be rescued from bondage and death in Egypt and be established in the land of promise. It also helped him (and it helps us) understand why the Lord would conduct that rescue operation in which the Egyptians and the Canaanites suffered and Israel was saved.

All who read these accounts can learn from those and later revelations. They reveal how earth life can best be used, how and why earth's early leaders were taught and called to teach God's ways, why the earth was cleansed in the time of Noah, what Abraham and his extended families were assigned to do to make the blessings of salvation available to all the families of all nations, how the Abrahamic family of Israel got into Egypt, and why the Israelites needed to be freed and established in the land promised to Abraham's seed. All of this information can help those who inherit or accept a part of Abraham's mission.

Commentary

1:1 In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth

Of course the announcement "In the beginning" refers only to God's organizing, or creating, "this heaven, and this earth" (Moses 2:1; 1:35) and not to the beginning of God or his beginning to work with the elements of the universe, because both he and they are eternal (Abr. 3:22-25; D&C 20:17; 93:33). Many related scriptures may be considered on this matter (TG, "Creation"; "Earth, Purpose of"; "God, Creator"; "God, Works of"; "Jesus Christ, Creator"; "Spirit Creation").

The English word God is the usual biblical translation for the Hebrew title Elohim, which is a plural noun from the Semitic root word el, connoting "might," "power." In this plural form, elohim can bear the concept of "almighty," "all-powerful." It usually refers to God the Father, who was in charge of the creative processes and working through his Firstborn Son (as other revelations affirm; John 1:1-3, 14 and fn.).

Created is used to translate the Hebrew word bara, which means "formed" or "organized" (Gen. 1:1c; Abr. 4:1); it allows the concept that this earth was organized and formed out of existing, eternal elements (D&C 93:33).

1:2 And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep

After being organized and formed, the earth obviously would not still be "without form, and void"; the Hebrew words here could better be translated by the phrase "empty and desolate" (cf. Abr. 4:2).

"Darkness" prevailed upon the primeval material until the creative force, called "the light of Christ" (D&C 88:7), focused upon it. Each periodic return of this organizing "light" to the project is called a "day" in the Creation epoch.

The "deep" was doubtless the surface of the primeval ocean covering the earth; note the parallel phrase "face of the waters" at the end of the verse.

1:2 the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters

Moved here translates the Hebrew merakhephet, which connotes what a bird does in incubating and guarding her eggs and young (cf. Deut. 32:11). It symbolizes the light of Christ influencing, or moving upon, the elements in the creative process, as mentioned in the comment on "darkness" above. Some translations use fluttered, brooded, or hovered rather than moved, and in those words the action of the bird over the nest is thus retained.

1:3 And God said, Let there be light: and there was light

The Hebrew verb here translated said bears also the sense of "proclaimed" or "commanded." A single short word in Hebrew, translated by the English phrase "let there be," expresses God's will that the divine emanation of "light" be brought to bear directly upon the formative earth. The light bathing the incipient planet was probably not that of the sun but rather the activating power called the Light of Christ. See the commentary on Genesis 1:2 about the creative power beginning to act upon the primeval "deep" and the commentary on Genesis 1:14-19 about the transmission of the physical light rays of the sun, moon, and stars through space and atmosphere to the earth.

1:4 . . . it was good

In both Hebrew and English, words meaning "good" are used to describe that which functions properly, constructively, harmoniously; in contrast, words meaning "bad" or "evil" connote that which functions improperly, destructively, disharmoniously, or disruptively. "Good" is repeated in verses 10, 12, 18, 21, and 25, evaluating each phase of the Creation; then, in verse 31, "very good" describes the whole Creation.

1:4-5 and God divided the light from the darkness. And God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night

Although the period of active light was called by God's word for "day" and the absence of it was called "night," there is no reason to assume that this "day" and "night" were measurements of periods of the same length as ours. Our days and nights are measured for us by our planet's revolutions in the sunlight; other periods are indicated for other of God's realms (Ps. 90:4; 2 Pet. 3:8; Abr. 5:13; Fac. 2, fig. 1-5). Indeed, even after they had placed Adam in the Garden, "the Gods had not appointed unto Adam his reckoning" (Abr. 5:13, 11-12).

1:6-7 And God said, Let there be a firmament. . . . And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament

Firmament is used here to translate raqiya', which means "expanse" (Gen. 1:6a; Abr. 4:6). This expanse is all or any part of space. From the surface of the earth outward, this expanse includes the atmosphere in which the birds fly and in which the clouds float as "waters . . . above" the earth, as well as all the space of the astral universe beyond (Gen. 1:7, 14-18, 20).

Evidently the Septuagint translation of raqiya' as stereoma (Gr., "that which has been made firm or solid") became the rationale for translating the Hebrew with the Latin-English word firmament. It implied that the sky was a "firm," or solid, dome. That is one of the items we believe only "as far as it is translated correctly" (A of F 8).

Our atmosphere includes water vapor and clouds floating a short space above the earth; but on parts of the surface of the earth is the fluid water of the oceans, rivers, lakes, and seas. Thus the atmosphere permits a division of waters "above" (in the air) from waters "below" (on the surface).

The marvelous evaporation-condensation cycle of water brings dew and rain to the land, making life possible on what would otherwise be a desolate planet.

1:8 God called the firmament Heaven

Several languages, including English, German, Hebrew, and Greek, use one word to designate either the vaulted "sky" or the "abode of the Gods." Only the context indicates which concept is intended. Here the firmament, or the expanse called "heaven," is evidently the "sky."

1:9-10 Let the waters . . . be gathered . . . , and let the dry land appear

The first creative actions of the third day perhaps entailed a wrinkling of the earth's solid crust to let some matter appear above the waters and become dry land. Evidence is given later (Gen. 10:25a-b) that for a time there was only one land mass. Other revelations indicate that this dry land was prepared by the Creators during the third day to support living things, which had been "spiritually" created before they were "naturally upon the face of the earth." They were "formed" later (Abr. 4:11-12; 5:4-5; cf. Moses 3:4-7).

1:11-13 Let the earth bring forth grass, . . . the herb . . . , and the fruit tree

A second project on the third day was the creation of varieties of plant life, each with power to reproduce itself according to its species or kind. The corresponding verses in Abraham's account (Abr. 4:11-13) state that the Creators "organized the earth" in this creative period, or prepared it, to bring forth grass, herbs, and trees from their seeds, but the establishment of plant life in the earth came later.

1:14-19 And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament . . . And God set them . . . to give light

On the fourth day of the Creation, "the Gods organized the lights in the expanse of the heaven" (Abr. 4:14), evidently placing the earth in an orbital relationship with our sun to allow transmission of a proper portion of sunlight through space and the atmosphere to the earth's surface so that life might flourish here. The earth's rotation upon its axis would provide the alternating periods of light and darkness we call days and nights. Starlight and moonlight would brighten the night, and the moon in its own orbit around the earth would mark seasonal sequences. The earth's orbital journey about the sun, with its axis at an optimum angle to its orbital plane, would provide annual growing seasons and promote the movement of essential moisture-laden air. Although in translation it appears that the sun, moon, and stars were created and "set" in the heavens after the earth was created, the Hebrew can be understood otherwise. Set here translates the Hebrew natan, but its basic meaning is "gave" or "provided." Natan is translated in the Bible hundreds of times with that meaning. Thus the sun, moon, and stars were "provided" as light sources for this earth; the stars and sun could have been associated with the "worlds without number" created earlier by God through his Son. Many worlds had been created, many had "passed away," and many "now stand" (Moses 1:33, 35; 7:30; D&C 76:24).

1:20-23 And God said, Let the waters bring forth . . . the moving creature . . . and fowl

The fifth creative period brought forth the living creatures of the waters and the fowls of the air that fly in "the open firmament of heaven." The waters were caused to "swarm with . . . living creatures," fowls, and "great sea-monsters" (Gen. 1:20b, 21a).

1:24-25 And God said, Let the earth bring forth . . . cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the earth

In the sixth creative period came the cattle, the English word used to translate a Hebrew word that is often used for herbivorous and domesticated animals in contrast to the "beasts," or the carnivores and wild animals. Also in this period were created the "creeping" things, or insects and other little creatures.

1:26 Let us make man in our image

Genesis does not indicate who said to whom, "Let us make man in our image," but Moses 2:26 says it was God the Father speaking to the Son (cf. John 1:1-4, 14; Heb. 1:1-3). God had eternal purposes in making his earthly children in his image and giving them "dominion" on earth (Gen. 1:26a-f).

1:27 in the image of God . . . ; male and female

Eliza R. Snow wrote poetically in "O My Father":

In the heav'ns are parents single? No, the thought makes reason stare! Truth is reason; truth eternal Tells me I've a mother there. (Hymns [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985],no. 292)

Reason indeed precludes the idea that a father could beget children without a mother to bear them. Thus the "male and female" children were "in the image" of their Heavenly Parents. Consider the potential of men and women eternally married to be like unto their Heavenly Parents (D&C 132:15-24; TG, "Family, Eternal"; "Marriage, Celestial").

1:28 multiply, and replenish the earth

The greatest opportunity of all, to learn eternal values and achieve heavenly potentials, resides in the responsibility and the privilege to create bodies for others of God's spirit children (TG, "Man, Potential to Become like Heavenly Father").

The very same Hebrew verb translated fill in verse 22 is here translated replenish. It means simply "fill," not "refill."

1:28 subdue it: and have dominion

The invitation to Adam and Eve and all their descendants to perform in the image of the eternal Father and Mother in bearing children and caring for them, making use of earth's resources and facilities, and employing creative and just powers of rulership ("dominion") are awesome and challenging. Recall the ultimate challenge issued by Jesus in the Sermon on the Mount: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect" (Matt. 5:48); it directs all of us toward ideal "dominion."

1:29-30 to you it shall be for meat

Thus far only fruits, seeds, and other vegetable matter are mentioned as food (Gen. 1:29a, 30a). The whole gamut of food chains of the later, mortal world had not yet been inaugurated.

1:31 it was very good

When the Creators evaluated all living things and their potential support systems, they found that everything would function harmoniously (commentary on Gen. 1:4).

2:1-3 Thus the heavens and the earth were finished

Genesis 2 begins with a summary of the work of the six creative periods outlined in Genesis 1, followed by a poetic ("chiastic") introduction to the Sabbath and its purposes:

"Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them;

"[a] And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made;

"[b] and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made.

"[c] And God blessed the seventh day,

"[c] and sanctified it:

"[b] because that in it he had rested from all his work

"[a] which God created and made."

The Hebrew of that last phrase says that God then "rested from all his project which God created to do," implying that his activity and involvement continued after cessation, or "rest," from the primary creative work (Gen. 2:1-3 and fn.).

2:1, 4-5 Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, . . . And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, . . . before it grew

The creative processes in heaven and on earth had been completed (Gen. 2:1, 4); then it is indicated that living things had not been placed on earth, although earth had been "prepared" for them (Abr. 4:11-12, 20-21, 24-31). All things had been created "spiritually" before they were created "naturally" and "all the children of men" had been created; but "there was not yet flesh upon the earth, neither in the water, neither in the air," because, said the Lord God, "in heaven created I them" (Moses 3:5; Gen. 2:5). The revelation to Abraham affirms that the Gods then "came down and formed these" and performed "all that which they had said concerning every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew" (Abr. 5:4-5).

2:4ff. The Lord God

Thus far in Genesis, Deity is called "God" (Heb., Elohim; commentary on Gen. 1:1). From this point on through Genesis 2 and 3, two words are used together to designate Deity: Lord God (Heb., Jehovah Elohim). The meaning of this combination title may be "Jehovah of the Gods," for elohim can be used as a plural common noun and Hebrew permits a genitive relationship of two nouns thus placed together without a preposition between them. Alternatively, the meaning may be "the Lord Omnipotent," which is a divine title for Jehovah, or Jesus, that is used several times in the Book of Mormon (e.g., Mosiah 3:5, 17, 18; 5:2, 15). This argument is persuasive, because elohim can be translated with the phrase "all might" or "all power" (see commentary on Gen. 1:1; TG, "Jesus Christ, Creator"; "Jesus Christ, Jehovah"; "Jesus Christ, Lord").

Throughout the Old Testament, with very few exceptions, Lord is used in English translations in place of the Hebrew word Jehovah; however, God (occasionally) and God (frequently) may refer to the Son rather than to the Father (BD, "God"; "Jehovah"). In some cases it is difficult to determine which Deity is meant (Gen. 7:5, 9, 16); but that is not necessarily a problem for one who understands that the Son always works under the direction of the Father and that together they work as one. It is not uncommon for the Son to deliver a message to humankind in behalf of the Father, speaking the words of the Father (Moses 4:1-4; D&C 29:1-42; TG, "God the Father—Elohim"; "God the Father—Jehovah").

2:6 there went up a mist . . . and watered . . . the ground

The final step in the preparation of the inanimate matter of earth to sustain life was the evaporation, movement, and recondensation of moisture to provide dew and rain, the lack of which had been mentioned in Genesis 2:5. Watering the dry ground made of it a medium suitable to sustain living things as we know them.

2:7 man of the dust of the ground

The spiritual being who had previously been created was at this point put into a tabernacle of flesh constituted of elements of the earth, and this body was energized through breathing the atmosphere of this earth. This creative act is also described elsewhere (Abr. 5:7; TG, "Man, Physical Creation of").

Adam is identified in other scriptures as the archangel Michael (D&C 107:53-54; BD, "Adam"). His role in the premortal earth life included leading the forces of the Lord against Satan in the warin heaven before the world was created (Rev. 12:7-12). He is the patriarch of our earthly family and will again lead the forces of good against the forces of evil in the final strife at the end of the Millennium (Dan. 10:13, 21; 12:1; D&C 29:26; 78:15-16; 88:111-15). The priesthood and his position in it shall continue (Moses 6:7, 64-67; D&C 27:11; 84:16; 107:41-55; BD, "Michael").

2:8-9, 15 the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden . . . the tree of life . . . and the tree of knowledge of good and evil

In an eastern part of the land of Eden (Heb., lit., "pleasantness"), the Lord God provided the first earthly home of our first ancestors. There were trees both beautiful and useful, including two that provided them the opportunity of choice—the "tree of life" and the "tree of knowledge of good and evil." The first would sustain life eternally (Gen. 2:9c-d); the second would permit them to learn by experience to discern good from evil but would also bring about the eventual separation of spirit and body, called death. Lehi described those two trees as opposites, "even the forbidden fruit in opposition to the tree of life; the one being sweet and the other bitter" (2 Ne. 2:15). In that garden of opportunities Adam was given his first responsibility: "to dress it and to keep it" (Gen. 2:15c; D&C 42:41-42).

2:10-14 a river went out of Eden . . . , and became into four heads

Four tributaries or "heads" of a river flowed eastward "out of Eden" and into the garden to water it. In the land encompassed by the first tributary there were precious stones and gold. The names of all those rivers and lands in humankind's primeval home have later been used for other lands and rivers not located in such a single river drainage system (Gen. 2:13b; Moses 3:13a; BD, "Eden, Garden of"; "Euphrates"; "Cush").

2:9, 16-17 thou mayest freely eat: . . . but

The opportunity for exercising choice, or agency, was then presented: in the garden the first inhabitants could "freely eat" of any of the foods produced except one, if they desired to remain there. They could not eat of the "tree of the knowledge of good and evil" if they wished to remain. In whatsoever day they would eat of it, they would begin to learn by experience the distinction between the good and the evil; but in that state they would eventually die. There would be two types of death: in a "spiritual death," they would immediately be separated from the "tree of life" and the presence of the Lord; later, in a "physical death," their spirits would be separated from their bodies (D&C 29:41; BD, "Death"; TG, "Death, Spiritual, First"). After physical death, their bodies would return to the ground, whose elements had been used in their creation (Gen. 3:19).

It is reasonable that on earth as in the premortal Council in Heaven (Abr. 3:25-28; TG, "Agency") humankind was free to choose to live either in "a state of probation" or "in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin" (2 Ne. 2:23, 21-22). God's children thus would be proven as to whether they would live by divine direction in "all things" (Abr. 3:25) or whether they would seek to "be as gods, knowing good and evil," gaining wisdom through their own experiences (Moses 4:11-12, 28).

"That satan" (Heb., ha-satan, "the adversary"), during the Council in Heaven, had "sought to destroy the agency of man which I, the Lord God, had given him" (Moses 4:1, 3). In Eden, he "sought to destroy the world," "for he knew not the mind of God" (Moses 4:3, 6).

2:18 It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him an help meet for him

Events seem to be in topical rather than chronological sequence in this chapter: the bringing of the female spiritual being into a body of earthly materials is related in one scripture before the naming of certain creatures (Abr. 5:14-19), whereas it is mentioned before but completed afterward, according to other scriptures (e.g., Gen. 2:18, 21-22; Moses 3:18, 21-22).

The words "an help meet for him" are from a composite word in Hebrew meaning a "helper like-the-opposite-of-him." The English adjective meet means "appropriate, fitting." Thus, husband and wife are to be complementary to each other's nature and needs.

2:19 Adam

The common noun adam in Hebrew is a collective noun meaning "man," "human," or "mankind"; as a common noun, it is used with "the"; but it may be used as a proper noun, Adam, without "the," and it appears as such for the first time in this verse. For its use as a collective noun, see Genesis 5:2.

2:19-20 whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name thereof

The beginning of man's earthly language is represented in the naming of the beasts and fowls by Adam. More about the divine Adamic language is told elsewhere (Moses 6:5-6, 57; 7:13; Ether 1:33-37; 3:22-24; 12:24). A future restoration of the "pure language" on earth has been promised (Zeph. 3:9).

2:21-24 and they shall be one flesh

The details of just how the man was made of the dust of the earth and the woman made of the same bone and flesh as man have not been revealed. Indeed, the ongoing miracle of creation we see in our continuing procreation of life is still marvelous to us, from the genetic combination at conception on through the intricate organization and preparation of a body for independent existence, ready at the proper moment for separation of child from mother. It is prophetically promised, however, that marvelous information about creation and other matters will continue to be discovered and revealed (D&C 101:32-34; 121:26-33); thus we eventually will understand the mysteries of creation and procreation.

As a properly married couple, the man and the woman can be compatible, complementary "help meets" (as suggested in Gen. 2:18). They are made of the same material and ideally formed to become "one flesh" in begetting and bearing children. They can also be united in rearing them, unselfishly cooperating in purposes, goals, and programs—manifesting constant concern about the welfare of each other and their children.

2:25 not ashamed

What engenders shame? Is it not consciousness of some impropriety, evil, or guilt? Clearly, the first man and woman had no cause for shame up to that time.

3:1 the serpent was . . . subtil . . . And he said

Into that garden of pleasantness (Heb., eden) came the being sometimes called the serpent, the tempter of man, the adversary of God. He spoke "by the mouth of the serpent," according to Moses 4:7; but he is often called by that metaphoric term, serpent (Gen. 3:13; 2 Cor. 11:3; Rev. 12:9, 20:2; 2 Ne. 2:18; Mosiah 16:3; D&C 76:28; 88:110; Moses 4:20-21). He launched his first earthly attack by a question inviting a reassessment of God's instructions: "Yea, hath God said—Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?" (Moses 4:7).

3:2-5 Ye shall not surely die: . . . ye shall be as gods

As mentioned in the commentary on Genesis 2:9, 16-17, Satan had rebelled against God and had "sought to destroy the agency of man" in the premortal council (Moses 4:3; Isa. 14:12-15). In Eden, Satan "knew not the mind of God, wherefore he sought to destroy the world" (Moses 4:6) by frustrating God's plan here. Apparently he did not know the divine plan of redemption as we know it (2 Ne. 9:5-10). For his own purposes, therefore, Satan sought to persuade the ancestors of the family of humankind to do a deed that would separate them from the presence of God in spiritual death and later separate their spirits from their bodies in physical death; then they would be like his unembodied spirit followers and subject to him (2 Ne. 9:8).

Satan's combining a falsehood (that they would not die) with a half truth (that by simply partaking they would "be as gods") was persuasive. Satan's statement was intended for his own gain; but ironically, by their response Eve and Adam launched into the desirable process of learning good from evil by experience through the use of their own precious agency. Thanks to God and His Beloved Son, their choice did not relegate them and their descendants to a hopeless predicament. It initiated a program, already planned, whereby humankind could work toward eternal life (TG, "Devil"; "Earth, Purpose of"; "Man, Potential to Become like Heavenly Father"; "Redemption").

3:6 she took . . . , and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her; and he did eat

There has been much speculation, but no revelation, about what the "fruit" was that the woman saw and perceived to be "good for food," "pleasant to the eyes," and "a tree to be desired to make one wise." She partook of it partly because of those perceptions and partly because she was deceived (Gen. 3:13; 1 Tim. 2:14-15). Later, when she fully understood the potential of her choice (made available through the plan of redemption), she rejoiced about it (Moses 5:4-11). It was good that she gave the fruit also to her husband and that he did eat, so that procreation, with all its positive potential, could proceed (Moses 5:11; 2 Ne. 2:22-27).

3:7-10 they knew that they were naked. . . . Adam and his wife hid

Adam and Eve had been "in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin" (2 Ne. 2:23). By an act done in spite of a warning, and, in part, because of a satanic enticement, they had begun to learn about actions and reactions, laws and consequences; they experienced fear and perhaps shame (Gen. 2:25). They tried to escape by hiding from God but learned that that is impossible. Doubtless these basic lessons were revealed to Moses and recorded by him so that the descendants of Adam and Eve could learn such truths by vicarious experience and be spared some more costly personal experiences with all their consequences.

3:9-13 Where . . . ? Who . . . ? Hast thou . . . ? What is this thou hast done?

Obviously, because God knows all things, he asked questions about where his children were, who had told them about nakedness, whether they had of their own agency chosen to partake, and what they had done so that he might give them their first opportunity to evaluate, confess, and thus begin to repent. The consequences of what they had done could then be plainly linked to the deeds. Adam responded that Eve had influenced him, and Eve said that "the serpent" had "beguiled" her (Gen. 3:13a).

3:14-15 the Lord God said unto the serpent, . . . thou art cursed

The Lord began in reverse order to point out the consequences. First he addressed Satan, who had sinned in contradicting divine warnings and had imposed his own will and influence upon others for his own purposes. He had sought to destroy the proper purposes of the world-laboratory that God had created for his children's development (commentary on Gen. 3:1; 3:2-5). Therefore, the Lord told Satan, he would be cursed above all.

Being cursed is the very opposite of being blessed; God's blessing graciously invokes good, whereas his curse justly invokes evil upon one deserving it. Thus Satan was informed through symbolic terms that he would not have the privilege of earth life that even cattle and beasts have. He had persuaded humans through their appetites and ambitions to do what he thought would destroy them; and although he would be permitted to continue to tempt or test humankind through their visceral appetites and mental urges and would inflict some basic afflictions—"bruise his heel"—yet one Seed of the woman would come to nullify Satan's triumph—"bruise thy head" (Gen. 3:15b-d; Gal. 3:16). Many prophecies and accounts concern the suffering of that chosen Seed, the Savior, in overcoming Satan's gains (Isa. 53:10-12; final chapters of the four Gospels). The words metaphorically spoken to the "serpent" can reassure all of us, for though Satan has the power to tempt us, we have been given power to resist him. If we need help to resist, or if we are overwhelmed by him, we may be aided to stand firm, or to recover, through the administration of those who bear priesthood powers to cast out Satan in the name of Jesus Christ. Thus we see that both Satan's freedom to act and his power to overcome people are curbed by the curse he received (James 4:7; Matt. 10:1; Mark 3:15; D&C 24:13).

Significant antithetical parallels occur later, as in Moses' raising a bronze serpent on a pole to bring about the healing of deadly serpent bites (Num. 21:6-9). That in turn symbolized Jesus' being raised upon a cross, as he himself said (John 3:14-18; Hel. 8:13-18). The serpent was reminiscent of the tempter who had persuaded Eve and Adam to disbelieve part of God's warning and do something that brought about death, but looking upon the bronze serpent with faith in the prophet Moses, and in God's promise through him, could heal and preserve lives. Just so, we may look up with faith in Jesus Christ's atonement, which gives promise that his death and resurrection can bring about our resurrection, a cleansing forgiveness from sin, and eternal life—if we obey the laws of the gospel. Paul summed it up in concise parallelism: "For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead" ( 1 Cor. 15:21). One serpent symbolized the bringer of death; another symbolized the Bringer of Life.

3:16 multiply thy sorrow . . . ; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children

Sorrow is used in Genesis 3:16 and 17 to translate the Hebrew 'etzev, which connotes "toil, pain, travail." Doubtless the burdens and pain of pregnancy and childbirth were thereby anticipated (Gen. 3:16b).

This is a great revelation to women. Eve and her daughters can become cocreators with God by preparing bodies for his spirit children to occupy on earth and later in eternity. Mothering would entail inconvenience, suffering, travail, and sorrow; these the Lord foretold as natural consequences and not as a curse. Satan had sinned and was justly cursed; but Eve had made a reasonable choice and was told some of the results of that choice. Later, she rejoiced when she learned about the ultimate results (Moses 5:11; 1 Tim. 2:15).

In mothering, nurturing, and caring for children, mothers (and women who adopt or otherwise give loving care to children) develop that most godlike virtue called mother love (Gen. 3:16a-e).

3:16 thy desire shall be to thy husband . . . rule over thee

In the Hebrew text there is often a depth of meaning not evident in the translated words. An intimate, loving, and righteous relationship is implied, but it must be fostered (Eph. 5:25-33; Col. 3:19-21; D&C 121:41-42).

3:17-19 cursed is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it

As in Genesis 3:16, the Hebrew word translated sorrow connotes toil, pain, and travail (Gen. 3:17c). Woman would suffer one kind in her mothering functions, and man another—in sweat and toil, as provider and protector. The ground was cursed, but humankind was not; and the ground was cursed for their "sake," so that humankind might learn good from evil by experiencing both. Thus the ground was cursed to bring forth opposites of all sorts, including weeds (thorns and thistles) rather than only the plants of Eden, which were all "pleasant to the sight, and good for food" (Gen. 2:9 and fn.).

3:19 till thou return unto the ground . . . , and unto dust shalt thou return

The inevitable separation of the spirit body from the mortal body of "dust" is sometimes symbolized by related Hebrew words such as adam ("mankind"), dam ("blood"), and adamah ("ground" or "dust") in the scriptures (Gen. 3:19c-d).

3:20 Adam called his wife's name Eve . . . the mother of all living

The Hebrew form of her name is Chavvah, related to chayyah, "life"; thus her name prophetically signifies her giving and sustaining life.

3:21 clothed them

The Lord clothed Adam and Eve with garments of skins (Gen. 3:21a) as coverings for their naked bodies. The Hebrew word translated coats is really the name of a garment worn next to the skin. Their garments would impress them with the sanctity of the body and protect it from abuses. Profane exhibition is now commonly used to entice people to actions having little to do with the primary and proper purposes and potential of these beautifully formed and marvelous bodies.

3:22-24 the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil

The truth that Satan had enticingly mixed with a falsehood was confirmed; by use of their agency, the man and woman did begin to "be as gods, knowing good and evil" (Gen. 3:5). But to prevent their choosing to return to the primeval "good" of an easy life in the Garden of Eden where perfect food was freely available, they were sent out of the garden, and the way to the "tree of life" was closed and guarded. As the Lord doubtless intended, humankind's challenge to find ways to satisfy needs and alleviate discomforts has resulted in the development of much pure and applied science and art, ever since humankind was launched into this world of experience and enterprise.

3:24 Cherubims, and a flaming sword

Ever since the supernatural guardians were placed at the gateway to Eden, the entrances to holy places in many ancient cultures have been guarded by some form of cherubim (already a plural, without adding s). The meaning of the word cherub (singular) is not precisely known, but the ancient statues representing cherubim were usually composite creatures with parts from the bull, lion, eagle, and so on to symbolize superior powers (BD and TG, "Cherubim").

The nature of the "flaming sword which turned every way" (Heb., lit., "gyrating flame of the sword") has also not been revealed. Compare the supernatural phenomenon described in Ezekiel 1:4.

3:24 tree of life

The symbolic tree (Gen. 2:9c; commentary on Gen. 2:8-9, 15) had functions at the beginning and will again at the end of the earth's program. References to it in the last book of the Bible are informative, and those in the Book of Mormon also broaden and deepen the meanings and concepts associated with that remarkable "tree."

4:1-2 Cain . . . Abel

Although only two children of Adam and Eve are mentioned here, the existence of others is implied later, when Cain and others took wives. A third son, Seth, and his descendants are reported in detail beginning in Genesis 5.

Restored scripture (JST Gen. 4:1-13; 5:1-3; Moses 5:1-15) reveals that much time had passed and many events had occurred before the birth of Cain and Abel. Adam and Eve had worked together for years and had had children who had grown up and in turn had children before Cain and Abel were born. Adam and Eve had received important revelations and commandments, through which they had learned about redemption and atonement and rejoiced in anticipation of it. They had learned ordinances and covenants to keep and to pass on, with all their meaning, to all their children. After all these items of family history, the account of Cain and Abel is presented.

Cain's name appears to be related to one Hebrew verb for "get, acquire" and another for "fit together, forge, fabricate"; thus his name was appropriate to his career—as names of biblical people often are. Abel's name is the Hebrew word for things evanescent or transitory, such as "vapor, a breath, a puff," and seems to have anticipated the brevity of his life.

The reasons for the preservation of an account of only these two children of our first parents are not explicit. It may be that they typify earthly tragedies that arise out of the conflicts between fair and unfair, proper and profane. Many of earth's sorrows have indeed arisen out of plots involving murder for gain by individuals or nations, practiced both covertly and overtly.

4:3-7 Cain brought of the fruit of the ground. . . . Abel . . . brought of the firstlings of his flock

Offerings of fruits, vegetables, and grains are later known and used in thanksgiving and supplication (TG, "Sacrifice"), but the only offerings thus far specified for Adam and Eve and their family (JST Gen. 4:5-9; Moses 5:5-9) were the firstlings of the flock. After Adam and Eve had been commanded to make such offerings and had obediently begun to do so, they were informed that they could thereby anticipate the redemptive offering of the Savior, the Only Begotten Son of God to come. Cain's substitute offerings of the fruit of the ground were not "a similitude" of that saving sacrifice and thus were not an acceptable innovation. He was corrected and assured by a personal revelation, "If thou doest well, thou shalt be accepted" (Moses 5:23). Both the right attitude and the right performance of covenant ordinances are important. Abel had performed his sacrifice in a way that was acceptable and effective. Evaluations of both sacrifices are recorded in later scripture (Heb. 11:3; 1 Jn. 3:8-12).

Cain was instructed by God also regarding consequences: if he did not master sin and its initiator, they would master him; and danger for him was imminent, "at the door" (Gen. 4:7; Moses 5:23). The restored account in Moses 5:18-33 (JST Gen. 5:6-18) provides the significant fact that it was Satan who had suggested the alternate sacrifice of crops because he desired to "have" Cain; hence he was pleased with the Lord's rejection of Cain's sacrifice and with Cain's anger. Note also that Cain "loved Satan more than God" and "rejected the greater counsel which was had from God" (Moses 5:18, 25). He actually made a covenant with Satan, receiving from him the "great secret" that it is possible to "murder and get gain"; that is, he could kill his brother and get his brother's flocks. How many horrible crimes and wars have been motivated by that "great secret"? (Moses 5:31).

4:8-18 I know not: Am I my brother's keeper?

The first murder was followed by the first cover-up lie. When confronted by the Lord, Cain denied knowing where his brother was and sarcastically asked whether he was responsible for his brother's welfare. Keeper is used to translate a word whose root meaning is "to watch and guard." The Lord declared that evidence of the evil deed arose from the very ground that had received Abel's blood; but He gave Cain one more opportunity to confess what he had done.

The ground (the same Hebrew word is used here as in Gen. 3:10, 17) which had given evidence against Cain would not thereafter give abundant yields of fruit and other crops to him. He would be cursed, or punished, by the very ground that had been cursed for man's sake (see commentary on Gen. 3:17-19); he would become a wanderer and a fugitive.

The phrase translated "My punishment is greater than I can bear" can also be translated ". . . too great to be forgiven," because the Hebrew verb can be rendered either bear or forgive. There is scriptural evidence that such a deed as Cain's, committed after personal communications by revelation from God, can bring one to "perdition," without hope of pardon or forgiveness (TG, "Sons of Perdition"; "Murder, Murderer").

Cain was to suffer poor crops, the danger of vengeance, and isolation from God and man. Feeling the weight of that estrangement, Cain did as many do: he sought some amelioration by placing blame elsewhere. He blamed Satan for tempting him and blamed God for rejecting his offerings while accepting those of Abel (Moses 5:38-41).

Translators and interpreters differ considerably on the rendition and meaning of the statement that "whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold." Perhaps the most apt summation of the important point is in later revelations from the Lord: "To me belongeth vengeance and recompense," and "Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord" (Deut. 32:35; Rom. 12:19; Heb. 10:30; 1 Jn. 3:11-12). Cain feared that "every one that findeth me shall slay me" (Gen. 4:14), but the Lord does not approve such anarchic "justice."

The stated purpose of the "mark" (Heb., lit., "sign," an identifier) set upon Cain by the Lord was to prevent others' assuming the prerogative to punish him. Many false assumptions have been generated over the centuries about the "mark of Cain." Other scriptures somewhat clarify the purpose of such an identification (Gen. 4:15a). There is a question about why the mark would be perpetuated upon the descendants of the one punished. "The sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children" in God's justice (Moses 6:54; Deut. 24:16; TG, "Accountability"). Nevertheless, parents can and do pass on impairments and disadvantages, advantages and blessings, to their children; and it will be seen that refinements and extensions of Cain's evil "secret" were known and used by his descendants and others (Ether 8:11-19; TG, "Secret Combinations") and that they too suffered thereby.

Doubtless Cain's exclusion from "the presence of the Lord" (Gen. 4:16) had many effects upon his way of life and that of his family. Perhaps there is symbolism in the name of the land to which they migrated, the land of Nod (Heb., lit., "land of wandering"). Tents and cattle characterized their nomadic way of life (v. 20).

Do not confuse the names of Cain's descendants with the names of the descendants of Seth (Gen. 5), whose names are similar. Cain even had a son, with a city, whose name was Enoch (Gen. 4:17).

4:19-22 tents . . . cattle . . . harp and organ . . . brass and iron

Recorded here is the genesis of some positive developments fostered in agriculture, music, and metallurgy among Cain's family.

4:23-24 If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold

The song of the righteous gives thanks and praise to God (e.g., Eve's song, Moses 5:11), but the song of a sinner is boastful and cynical, like this stanza in three couplets of synonymous parallels by Lamech, a fifth-generation descendant of Cain (translation mine):

Adah and Zillah, hear my voice, ye wives of Lamech, give ear to my speech; for I have slain a man for wounding me, even a young man for bruising me. If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, then Lamech, seventy-sevenfold!

Lamech evidently misunderstood or misapplied the Lord's warning to anyone usurping His prerogative to punish Cain and cynically arrogated to himself a tenfold greater "protection" from vengeance.

The contrasting righteous and wicked developments in the two different cultures among the descendants of Adam and Eve are summarized in the restored account (Moses 5:49-59).

4:25-26 then began men to call upon the name of the Lord

Eve bore Adam another son, Seth (Heb., lit., "put, place, or appoint"), to replace Abel; and it was among Seth's descendants that righteous ways, doctrines, and ordinances were perpetuated (Moses 6:1-8; cf. D&C 84:16; 107:42-54). In the days of Seth and Enos, the righteous were instructed to supplicate God in the name of the Lord (Heb., JHVH, "Jehovah"; Moses 5:8; TG, "Jesus Christ, Jehovah").

5:1-32 the book of the generations of Adam

The phrase "the book of the generations of Adam," or a similar one ("These are the generations of—"), usually introduces a chapter of family history. Adam and his heirs were called "by the spirit of inspiration" to write this first "book of remembrance" in "a language which was pure and undefiled" (Moses 6:5-6). This was the real beginning of the writing of scripture.

In the last days, preparatory to the peaceful reign of the Lord on earth, "a pure language" will be restored to humankind (Zeph. 3:9). That should be one contribution to peace on earth.

Note that similar phrases compare Adam to God and Seth to Adam (Gen. 1:26-27; 5:3); thus the "anthropomorphic" concept of God was taught early in the scriptures.

As stated earlier (commentary on Gen. 2:19; 3:19), the Hebrew collective noun adam means human, and it is the same word as the proper noun Adam; thus the whole family of humankind can collectively be called adam (Gen. 5:2a). In Hebrew there was no capital letter to differentiate common from proper nouns.

Many theories have been proposed to rationalize or explain the long life span of these early forefathers, but, of course, none can be proven. Modern revelation confirms that Adam did live long enough to bless seven generations of his descendants (D&C 107:53; Moses 6:10ff). Life spans were reduced by about half after the flood of Noah (that is, from more than nine hundred years to around four hundred years), and half again after the Tower of Babel (to about two hundred years).

During the six hundred and twenty-two years during which were born the seven patriarchs who were preachers of righteousness, unrighteousness was also developing (Moses 6:11-29). The restored records (Moses 6:31-7:69; JST Gen. 6:28-7:78) tell of a remarkable preaching of repentance by Enoch, a patriarch who "walked with God" (Gen. 5:22; Moses 7:69). He taught vital doctrines concerning the Fall, sin, salvation, and Adam's baptism. He contrasted the wicked, called "sons of men," with the righteous, called "sons of God"; he built "Zion"; he foresaw the perfect "Son of Man" and the final Zion and New Jerusalem (Gen. 5:22-24 and fn.; BD, "Enoch"). Enoch's Zion was miraculously removed from earth when evil prevailed all around it (Moses 7:15-16, 19-21, 69).

Enoch's son Methuselah remained on earth and prophesied, as did Methusaleh's son Lamech, father of Noah (Moses 8:1-9). Lamech named his son Noah, meaning "rest" (Gen. 5:29a); and he did bring the troubled earth to rest and repose in the cleansing baptism of the Flood (1 Pet. 3:19-21; commentary on Gen. 6:5-7), but only after his prophetic warnings and pleas for repentance had been rejected.

6:1-4 sons of God . . . daughters of men

Different ways of life differentiate "sons and daughters of God" from "sons and daughters of men" (TG, "Sons and Daughters of God"). Mixed marriages between "godly" and "earthly" partners, such as those between the daughters of the righteous and the sons of the wicked (Moses 8:14-15), contributed to the constant increase of rebels against righteousness.

As hinted in Genesis 6:3 and made clear in the restored records (Moses 8:17-20), the Lord granted humankind one hundred twenty years to repent in response to Noah's prophetic warnings rather than perish in the cleansing flood.

Rather than indicating that they were mythical giants and demigods, as some readers have imagined, the Hebrew name of these vaunted children of the mixed marriages, when they became "mighty men," merely supplied a rationale for unrighteous boasting by their parents and for rejecting Noah's warnings (Gen. 6:4; Moses 8:21). Their Hebrew name, Nephilim, is apparently derived from the verb naphal, "fall"; they are therefore thought by rabbinical commentators to have been "fallen ones" (rather than persons of gigantic stature; the Greek Septuagint rendered the Hebrew word as gigantes, for reasons unknown). Nephilim is one of four different Hebrew words translated "giants" in the King James Version of the Old Testament (Gen. 6:4a; BD, "Giants").

6:5-8 God saw that the wickedness of man was great. . . . And it repented the Lord

The Hebrew word JHVH (Jehovah) is rendered as God in Genesis 6:5 and as Lord in Genesis 6:6, for reasons unknown.

Because children born on earth had little chance to learn to choose good from evil when "every man was lifted up in the imagination of the thoughts of his heart, being only evil continually" (Moses 8:22), most people growing up in those circumstances would become corrupted rather than gain exaltation. God in his justice and mercy could not continue to send his children to such an earth (Gen. 6:5, 13; cf. Moses 8:22).

According to Genesis, the Lord was "sorry" and "moved to pity" and to "have compassion" (Gen. 6:6a) on those who suffered in that evil society; but the inspired restoration of this passage indicates that it was Noah whom "it repented" (caused sorrow and regret to) and whose "heart was pained" because God's good earth and humankind had come to such despicable conditions (Moses 8:25).

The cataclysm involving all animate life on land is reported in many places in the scriptures (Gen. 6:13, 17; TG, "Earth, Cleansing of"; "Flood, Noah's"; BD, "Noah"). Its causes and effects help us understand the work of God with humankind in the past and prepare us for the future, for Jesus prophesied similar conditions to come near the end of the wicked world (Matt. 24:37-39; JS-M 1:41-43). The implication is that conditions can again get so bad in this world that continuation of its practices will be intolerable (TG, "Earth, Cleansing of").

6:8-10 Noah was . . . perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God

The Hebrew word here translated perfect means "complete, whole, or having integrity" (Gen. 6:9c). Noah and his family were people of such quality (Moses 8:13, 27).

The first use of generations in verse 9 is to translate the Hebrew toledoth, which means "genealogical lines," but the second use of generations here is to translate the Hebrew doroth, meaning "cycles" or years of time.

"Walked with God" is a metaphor used to describe a righteous way of life (Gen. 6:9d).

6:11-13 all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth

In contrast to the integrity of the family of Noah, "all flesh" were "corrupt," that is, debased and degraded. The "work and glory" of God is "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39), but his children too often respond to things sensual and devilish instead. Thereby some descend to subbestial immorality rather than ascend to a godly immortality.

6:14-15 an ark of gopher wood. . . . The length of the ark shall be three hundred cubits . . .

Gopher is transliterated from a Hebrew word used only once in the Old Testament; it may designate a resinous wood, being related to kopher ("pitch"), a word that appears twice in this same verse; if so, it would be a water-resistant wood.

The dimensions of the ark indicate a very large vessel, approximately four hundred fifty by seventy-five by forty-five feet. Its construction was certainly a miraculous feat of engineering, possible only with divine help.

6:16 A window . . . door . . . ; with lower, second, and third stories shalt thou make it

Scant information prevents precise visualization of the openings in the ark. Levels of openings may be indicated, but no word for "stories" (printed in italics in the KJV) is given in the Hebrew description. The Hebrew word rendered window is a word for something shining or bright (Gen. 6:16a). Light and ventilation would of course be requisite in a vessel "tight like unto a dish, . . . tight like unto the ark of Noah," as the Book of Mormon describes both the ark and the Jaredite vessels. Those vessels were lighted by miraculously luminous stones (Ether 2:22-25; 3:1-6; 6:7).

6:17 all flesh, wherein is the breath of life

Man and beast, fowls and creeping things were mentioned (Gen. 6:7); "all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth" (Gen. 6:12); a summary tells what died (Gen. 7:21-22). Mankind had become self-destructive through sin, but how other living things had become incompatible with proper earth life is not revealed. Certainly, though, a cataclysmic change on earth had become necessary.

6:18 with thee will I establish my covenant

Latter-day revelation tells that the covenant involves all future nations of earth (Gen. 6:18a). The eight souls "saved by water" (1 Pet. 3:20) to begin repeopling the world were the four couples mentioned here.

6:19-22 two of every sort . . . to keep them alive

At least one pair of every creature to be saved was to be taken aboard; more than one pair of some species was specified later (Gen. 7:2-3). Food to be stored for all these creatures and for the people would certainly have required another miracle; but Noah was directed by the Lord in all that he did, and only by His help was such a project possible at all.

7:1 Come thou and all thy house

Peter later understood that the few righteous souls of Noah's house were "saved by water" from the wicked world by the Flood. This was a "like figure" to baptism, to cleanse the earth (1 Pet. 3:20-21).

Peter also recorded the revelation that our merciful Redeemer went in the spirit, while his body was in the tomb, and preached to such spirits "in prison" as those "which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah" (1 Pet. 3:19-20). Thus they could learn the gospel, "live according to God in the spirit," and be justly "judged according to men in the flesh" (1 Pet. 4:6). Other scriptures tell how the Lord organized that great mission of mercy so that all who will listen may hear the gospel (D&C 1:11; 138:6-37; Isa. 24:22; John 5:25-29).

7:1-9; 6:3, 5, 6, 8, 11, 13, 22 Lord . . . God . . . God

Either Lord or God, given in capital letters, stands for Jehovah, whereas God can refer to either the Father or the Son. Various hypotheses have been contrived to explain such interchanges of the divine names, but lack of unanimity and consistency in their rationales leaves them unconvincing (see commentary on Gen. 2:4).

7:2-3 clean beast . . . by sevens, the male and his female

"Clean" describes the animals suitable for food or for sacrifice (BD, "Clean and Unclean"). For the year and more they would be aboard the ark (see commentary on Gen. 7:4-12), there could have been a need for more than one pair of each of the "clean" beasts (see Gen. 8:20).

7:4-12, 19-20 the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights

Rain, supplemented by "fountains of the great deep" (Gen. 7:11b), raised the water level to some twenty-two feet (fifteen cubits) above the mountains (Gen. 7:19-20; 8:5).

7:11 six hundredth year . . . second month

Note the date of the beginning of the deluge, and later the date of the end (Gen. 8:13-14), to avoid the common mistake of thinking the total duration of the Flood was only forty days. It actually lasted a year and ten days.

7:13-18 In the selfsame day entered Noah, and . . . the sons of Noah, and Noah's wife, and the three wives of his sons . . . into the ark; they and every beast. . . . And they went in unto Noah

Noah did not drive the animals into the ark, for after he and his family entered the ark, the beasts, cattle, creeping things, fowls, and birds "went in unto" him; and "they went in, . . . as God had commanded" (Gen. 7:14-16).

7:21-24 Noah only . . . and they that were with him

The Genesis account of the Flood concerns a universal cataclysm, not a local one, as confirmed by many other scriptures (Gen. 7:21-24 and fn.; TG, "Flood, Noah's"; "Earth, Cleansing of"; BD, "Noah"). Besides the record of the Judaeo-Christian scriptures, legends of such a deluge and renewal have been preserved by other peoples. The concept is general that a man, his wife, and their married children were saved (see almost any multivolume commentary on the Old Testament).

7:24; 8:1-14 prevailed . . . an hundred and fifty days . . . asswaged . . . returned . . . decreased . . . abated . . . dried

The Hebrew says the waters were "mighty" upon the earth one hundred fifty days before they began to recede. Then for another one hundred fifty days the waters receded (Gen. 8:3), until in the tenth month, mountaintops reappeared (Gen. 8:5; 7:19-20). Noah waited forty days more and then made weekly checks until the waters had abated and the land masses had dried enough that the people and animals could leave the ark (Gen. 8:6, 10, 12). The great flood had lasted one year and ten days (Gen. 7:11; 8:13-14).

8:15-19 Go forth . . . be fruitful and multiply

The people, animals, fowls, and creeping things disembarked and launched life in this great earth-laboratory once more.

8:20-22 Noah . . . offered burnt offerings

With gratitude and supplication, Noah offered sacrifices in worshipping God. The restored account records that Noah then prayed that no such curse as the Flood would come again (JST Gen. 9:4-6, as cited for Gen. 8:20a), and the Lord responded (Gen. 9:8-17).

9:1-4 into your hand are they delivered

As in the days of Adam, so again in the days of Noah, God blessed his children and gave them dominion over other living creatures, not to abuse them but to use some for work and some for food. But blood was not to be consumed (Gen. 9:4b-c). As noted here and elsewhere in the scriptures, blood symbolizes mortal life; shedding the blood of man and needlessly shedding the blood of animals is forbidden (Gen. 9:4a, 6a; BD, "Blood"; D&C 49:21).

There is fear and dread between humankind and many other creatures on the earth today; but in an ideal age to come, enmity and fear between animals and man will no longer prevail (Isa. 11:6-9 and fn.).

9:5-7 Whoso sheddeth man's blood

Sin, violence, and bloodshed had been rampant before the Flood; but in the newly reborn world, preventive laws and warnings were issued against such evils, and punishment by execution for murder was prescribed. The sanctity of the human body derives in part from its having been created in the image of God (Gen. 9:6). Later a law was given that even the body of a person executed was to be safeguarded from degradation (Deut. 21:22-23 and fn.).

9:8-17 I will establish my covenant with you

As noted in Genesis 8:20-22, the Lord and Noah made a covenant and the rainbow became a token of their covenant that floods would never again be the Lord's instrument of cleansing the earth (Gen. 9:13, 17). Perhaps the Lord gave that assurance lest humankind thereafter seek to avoid punishment rather than seek to uphold righteousness (commentary on Gen. 11:4). The covenant also included a promise of Zion (Gen. 9:9a, 11c, 16a; Moses 7:51-52). Nevertheless, when the world in the last days becomes as wicked as it was in the days of Noah, it will again be cleansed—but by a baptism of fire (Matt. 24:37-51; Mal. 3-4).

9:18-27 Japheth . . . shall dwell in the tents of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant

The sons of Noah and his wife were listed in Genesis 5:32; they were to become forefathers of the peoples who would inhabit the earth (Gen. 9:19), details of which follow in Genesis 10. Restored sources (Moses 8:12) indicate that Japheth was forty-two years older than Shem, and Shem was eight years older than Ham; thus, Ham was the youngest son (cf. Gen. 9:24). Just what Ham did to limit his spiritual privileges and those of his son Canaan is not indicated in the scriptures; but nonbiblical legends tell of his stealing Noah's sacred garment so that he might claim the authority granted to its legitimate possessor and pass it on to his sons. Some of this information correlates slightly with scripture (Abr. 1:21-22, 27); but, according to revealed principles (Alma 3:19; 13:3-7; Deut. 24:16; A of F 2; D&C 130:20-21), punishments or blessings come by one's own obedience or disobedience and not that of someone else. A curse of a family, clan, or people endures only as long as the way of life that caused it is perpetuated (TG, "Accountability"; "Chastening"; "Correction"; "Curse"; "Blessings"; "God, Justice of"; "Good Works"; "Inheritance"; "Justice"; "Punishment"; "Retribution").

It is not evident in history that early Canaanites were servants for any substantial time to Semites, but they were conquered and suppressed by Semitic Israel over a long period, beginning at the time of Joshua. In one notable case a Japhetic, or Indo-European people, the Medo-Persians, dwelt near Semites, the Babylonians. Eventually the Medo-Persians conquered Babylon and fostered the return of other Semites, the Judeans, to Jerusalem (2 Chr. 36:20-23; Isa. 44:28-45:4).

9:28-29 all the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years

Noah was the last to have a life span of more than nine hundred years, although Shem's was only somewhat less, at some six hundred ten years. Noah thus lived for fifty-eight years after Abraham's birth, and Shem lived for thirty-four years after Abraham's death. The next few generations, however, lived about half as long as Noah did, and after the Tower of Babel episode, half of that. What caused such long life at first and then the phased reductions has not been revealed. Although some hypotheses have been raised, neither research nor revelation has yet sustained any of them (commentary on Gen. 5:1-32).

10:1-5 Japheth . . . Gentiles . . . nations

Genesis 10 is commonly called the Table of Nations because it identifies several nations as descendants of the families of Noah's three sons and their wives. (They are more expressly identified in Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews 1.6.) Peoples of the Greek islands and peninsula and broadly northward through the Caucasus are generally the "Gentiles," or Japhetic nations. Gentiles is the word used to translate the Hebrew goyim ("nations" or "peoples"), which is any or all nations outside Israel (BD, "Gentiles"). There are prophecies about some of these peoples being involved in earth's final battles (Gen. 10:2a-b).

The work of Paul, missionary to the Japhetic "Gentiles," from Galatia to Ephesus, to Macedonia, Greece, and Rome, is well known; his letters to them are basic documents of Christianity (Acts 13-28; Epistles of Paul).

10:6-20 the sons of Ham

Ham's four sons and the nations attributed to them are Cush (Ethiopia), Mizraim (Egypt), Phut (Libya), and Canaan (Canaan). A daughter, Egyptus (Abr. 1:25), born to Ham and his wife Egyptus (Abr. 1:23), is not mentioned in Genesis, nor is her son who was the first "pharaoh" (Abr. 1:25-27) of the people of Egypt. An ancient wall painting in the tomb of Seti I of the Nineteenth Dynasty shows representatives of the four Hamitic nations as four races: black (Cush), copper-red (Mizraim), pink-white (Phut), and olive-tan (Canaan). An excellent color reproduction of this painting is in Views of the Biblical World (Jerusalem: International Publishing Co., Ltd., 1959), pp. 38-39.

The Old Testament records in Genesis 10:9 that Nimrod, of the family of Cush, is "a mighty hunter before the Lord"; other sources portray him as being against the Lord as a leader of the Babel rebellion (Gen. 10:10b; 11:1-9; Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews 1.4.2-3). The New Testament records that an early convert of Philip was an Ethiopian ("Cush") who was an important official in the court of Candace, queen of Ethiopia (Acts 8:26-40).

Descendants of Mizraim (Egypt) are seen mostly in Exodus, of course; but other interactions with them are seen throughout the Old Testament and some in the New Testament. Indeed, the New Testament records that the Holy Family took refuge in Egypt during the early years of Jesus' life (Matt. 2:13-18). The New Testament also records that Simon of Cyrene, which is a town of northern Libya (thus possibly making him a descendant of Phut), bore the cross of our Savior on the last part of the journey to Golgotha (Matt. 27:32).

The descendants of Canaan are seen most frequently in the early books of the Old Testament in their interactions and conflicts with the Israelite descendants of Shem.

10:21-32 children of Shem

It is with the descendants of Shem that the Bible history is mostly concerned; indeed they were the writers of most of the Bible and the Book of Mormon. They are the "Shemites," or Semites; and best known of them are the progeny of Shem's great-grandson Eber, or Heber—the "Heberites," or Hebrews. Shem was a forefather rather than the immediate "father" of all the children of Eber (Gen. 10:21-24).

Other scriptures briefly allude to the dividing of the earth in the days of Peleg (Gen. 10:25a-b); and a latter-day prophecy anticipates future changes in land masses and water bodies, making the earth "like as it was in the days before it was divided" (D&C 133:24).

From Shem, Ham, and Japheth, peoples of the nations of the world descended.

11:1-9 confound the language . . . scatter them abroad

Genesis 11 continues the account of the genesis of nations and peoples. Josephus, in Antiquities of the Jews 1.4.2-3, declared that Nimrod, grandson of Ham, "gradually changed the government into tyranny, seeing no other way of turning men from the fear of God, but to bring them into a constant dependence on his power. He also said he would be revenged on God, if he should have a mind to drown the world again; for that he would build a tower too high for the waters to be able to reach!" Genesis 11:4 indicates that the builders intended the tower to reach heaven and "make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth." But the Lord confounded their language and did scatter them (Gen. 11:7-8; Ether 1:33-43).

The biblical writer saw the name Babel as derived from a root word like the Hebrew balal, which means "to suffuse, mix, or confound." Others have seen it as a boastful name, "Gate of God," from bab ("gate") and el ("God").

Information about the pure language of Adam, its preservation by Jared's colony, and its superiority as a language is found in the restored scriptures (Ether 1:33-37; 3:22-28; 12:24-25; Moses 6:4-6). One prophet of the Old Testament prophesied the eventual restoration of the "pure language" (Zeph. 3:9; commentary on Gen. 5:1-32).

11:10-26 These are the generations of Shem

The recapitulation of Shem's descendants here traces only a single patriarchal line, from Noah's son Shem for ten generations to Abram (later Abraham). Peleg, in whose days "was the earth divided" (Gen. l0:25; 11:16-19), was the fifth generation, midway between Noah and Abraham.

11:26-32 Terah begat Abram

A major figure in the history and destiny of the world, Abram, who became Abraham, is introduced in Genesis 11. The eleven chapters of Genesis, to this point, are an introduction to all the scriptures that follow. They provide selected bits of information about the Creation and the purposes of the earth, survey a few epochal events from thousands of years of history, and briefly sketch ten generations of patriarchs from Adam to Noah and ten more from Noah's son Shem to Abram. The remaining thirty-nine chapters of Genesis cover only about three hundred years and provide far more detail about Abraham and three generations of his descendants than was provided about all twenty generations of his ancestors.

Abraham's seed became the writers and major characters of the rest of the Old Testament, the New Testament, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. All of these scriptures contain history, doctrine, and prophecy of the missions of Abraham and his seed. Included among them is the central figure of all time, Jesus of Nazareth, the Messiah, the Divine Redeemer.

Some details about Abraham's family history are recorded in the Pearl of Great Price (Abr. 1-3). It tells that in the ancestral home in Ur, Abram's father Terah was not faithful to God and even threatened the life of Abram; but he did repent for a time and migrated with Abram when he and his family left Ur because of religious persecution and a famine. One of Abram's brothers, Nahor, accompanied the migration to the valley of a tributary of the upper Euphrates; they named the place Haran, for another brother, who had died in the famine. Two of the daughters of Haran became wives to their uncles, Nahor and Abram (if the one named Iscah in Gen. 11:29 is the same as Sarai, as attested by both Ibn Ezra and Josephus as well as earlier editions of Abr. 2:2). Lot, son of Nahor, continued with Abram beyond Haran to the land of promise. Terah, however, returned to his idolatry and remained in Haran, where he died (Abr. 2:1-21; Gen. 11:27-32).

12:1-3 I will bless thee . . . and thou shalt be a blessing . . . and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed

Abram had sought peace, righteousness, knowledge, the blessings of the righteous fathers, and the right to administer them; and he had become a high priest (Abr. 1:1-2). He had been saved by the Lord from a sacrificial death in Ur (Abr. 1:12-19; Fac. 1) and had been promised a new homeland (Abr. 2:3; Gen. 12:1). He had been called to a priesthood mission (Abr. 1:18-19) and had migrated from Ur in Chaldea to Haran (Abr. 1:1, 30; 2:4; Gen. 11:31-32; Bible Map 2).

In Haran certain aspects of the commands and promises of the Lord were reiterated as Abram's mission was further specified: he and his seed would bring blessings to all families of all nations (Abr. 1:19; 2:6, 9-11). These are "the blessings of the Gospel, . . . the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal" (Abr. 2:11). Understanding the mission of Abraham and his seed can facilitate understanding all of God's ways and intentions in working through "chosen" people throughout history.

12:4-5 Abram took Sarai, . . . Lot, . . . and the souls that they had gotten in Haran

Abram's great mission began with those souls "gotten" (Heb., lit., "made"; Abr. 2:15, "won") in Haran. With them they moved southward at the Lord's command (Abr. 2:5-6). They may have taken the trade route by way of Damascus and "won" another soul there, "Eliezer of Damascus," whom Abram later called "the steward of my house" (Gen. 15:2). They went on southward by way of Jershon (Abr. 2:16-17; possibly known later as Jerash).

Lot, son of Haran, was treated like a son and sometimes was called "brother" by Abram (Gen. 13:8; 14:14, 16). Sarai was also called Abram's "sister" (Gen. 12:11-13).

12:6-10 Sichem . . . Moreh . . . an altar unto the Lord

Sichem (Heb., shkhem, "one's upper back, neck, and shoulders") is spelled Shechem in all other occurrences in the Old Testament. The city is in a narrow valley between Mount Gerizim and Mount Ebal, at about 1870 feet above sea level; those two mountains are among the highest ("shoulders") of the land. (Shechem was also the name of the son of a leader in this area at the time of Jacob; Gen. 34.) A number of important events took place here in biblical times.

The "plain" (Heb., 'elon "terebinth" or "oak") of Moreh was likely the terebinth or oak near Shechem mentioned in Genesis 35:4 and Joshua 24:26. Moreh means "guide" or "teacher" and is a good name for this place, for Abram built another altar unto the Lord there, and He appeared to Abram to teach him. Later, on a mount of a similar name in Jerusalem, Moriah ("Jehovah is my guide"), Abraham was taught by the Lord the greatest lessons of life (Gen. 22:2-18; Gal. 3:8; Jacob 4:5).

The Lord appeared and confirmed the promise of a land (Gen. 12:7). Further revelations clarify the blessing of a promised land, which would be possessed by Abraham's seed only under the condition that "they hearken to my voice" (Abr. 2:6;Gen. 17:7-9: "thou shalt keep my covenant"). They were to inherit the land "from the river of Egypt unto . . . the river Euphrates" ( Gen. 15:18); yet Abraham was warned that his seed would be strangers in lands not their own for centuries, until the "iniquity of the Amorite" peoples dwelling in Canaan was "full"; only then could they justly be dispossessed (Gen. 15:7, 13-16, 18). These vital principles are reiterated throughout the scriptures: the Lord does not arbitrarily cause some people to suffer and be destroyed while others are blessed to prosper.

Thus in events recounted in Genesis, Exodus, and beyond, the families of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were "strangers" (Heb., lit., "sojourners") in Canaan and Egypt; indeed, they sojourned in Egypt "four generations" until the time of Moses (Gen. 15:16; Ex. 6:16-27). Only in Joshua's time, after wandering in the wilderness, did the Israelites come to "inherit" the promised land (Josh. 1:1-4).

Abram regularly built altars as he moved along, and he called upon the name of the Lord (Heb., lit., "called in the name of Jehovah"). From him Abram received guidance; and frequently, it is recorded, "the Lord appeared unto him" (Gen. 12:7-8; 13:3-4; Abr. 2:17).

Abram's first sojourn in Canaan was short because of a famine; however, before he left, the Lord gave him some great revelations about the universe of His creations and His ultimate purposes. He said, "I show these things unto thee before ye go into Egypt, that ye may declare all these words" (Abr. 3:15). These revelations were given through an instrument called "Urim and Thummim" (Heb. plurals used as abstract nouns to denote "light and perfection"), which the Lord had given him already in Ur (Abr. 3:1). Some of those revelations have been restored (Abr. 3-5).

12:11-13 Say . . . thou art my sister: that it may be well with me for thy sake

Abram and Sarai told no untruth in Egypt in identifying Sarai by her blood relationship rather than her marital relationship with Abram. Because they were descended from a common ancestor, Terah (Gen. 11:26-32; 20:12; Abr. 2:23-25), according to their custom she could be called Abram's sister, just as Lot could be called his brother (Gen. 13:8; 14:14, 16). No special terms were used for such relationships as niece, nephew, cousin, granddaughter, grandson. Ancestors could be called "father" or "mother," and descendants could be called "daughters" or "sons" (as in Luke 3:8; John 8:39).

Abram was guided by the Lord to use this strategy (Abr. 2:22-25); its other purpose may have been to create an opportunity for Abram to teach the Egyptian leaders (Abr. 3:15).

12:14-20 he entreated Abram well for her sake

Sarai was nevertheless taken to Pharaoh's house but not as another wife, and she was returned (Gen. 12:19). Abram was treated well and made rich in goods (Gen. 12:16; 13:1-2). A good relationship developed between host and guest (Abr., Fac. 3 and fn.), but that status was not perpetuated forever. Pharaoh and his house-hold were plagued until he called Abram in, restored his wife, and then sent the whole Semitic clan away with all their possessions.

13:1-4 Abram went up out of Egypt . . . into the south . . . And . . . from the south even to Bethel

The "south" is the desert area south of Canaan, the Negev (or Negeb; Heb., lit., "dry, parched"). Thus they traveled eastward from Egypt to get to the "south" of Canaan.

Because Pharaoh sent them away with all their possessions, they left Egypt "very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold" (Gen. 13:2; 12:20). The company doubtless hastened through the arid Negev and proceeded northward back to Bethel, to the altar Abram had made at first, to call again on the name of the Lord, as was his consistent practice (Gen. 13:4a-b). That was part of his mission, for the Lord had said, "Through thy ministry my name shall be known in the earth forever" (Abr. 1:19).

13:5-13 Let there be no strife . . . for we be brethren

When conflict arose between the herders of the many flocks of Abram and Lot, a division of grazing land became necessary. Facets of the character of both men are evident in their actions (their status as "brethren" is explained in the commentary on Gen. 12:11-13). Abram stated his principles and made his offer, but Lot chose somewhat selfishly and unwisely (Gen. 13:8-13). He took advantage of Abram's generous offer and claimed what looked like a choice district for his livestock. Evidently climate and soil then were very different from what they were after the cataclysm that destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah (Gen. 19) and different from conditions in that dry valley now.

13:14-18 all the land . . . to thee . . . and to thy seed for ever

The Lord confirmed the promise of the land (Gen. 12:7), all around about where Abram stood, to become the first base of operations for him and his descendants. Recall the conditions under which Abraham's seed might possess the promised land "for ever"; it was not an unconditional grant (Gen. 13:15a; Abr. 2:6).

Mamre became Abram's home for some time. As was his custom, he built there an altar for worship (Gen. 12:7-8; 13:18c). Even today, visitors are shown the "Oaks of Mamre" or the "Oaks of Abraham" about a mile and a quarter north of Hebron.

14:1-12 these made war . . . And they took Lot . . . and departed

Lot had made a self-serving choice in taking the green valley of the Jordan and an unwise choice in pitching his family's tents near Sodom. The first of two misfortunes befell him when four allied Mesopotamian kings raided the lower Jordan valley, taking people and goods from the five kings of the area. Lot and his family and all their possessions were taken. Had his uncle Abram not rescued him, Lot's progeny would probably not have been known thereafter in Genesis.

14:13 Abram the Hebrew

Genesis 14 is the first chapter in the Bible to use the patronymic identification of Abram as a descendant of Shem through Eber, or Abram the Hebrew (see commentary on Gen. 10:21-30). Eber, or Heber, was one of Abram's ancestors in the patriarchal line who was still alive at this time, although he was five generations older than Abram. Thus Abram could be called a "Heberite," or Hebrew, as one in the clan of Heber at the time.

14:13 these were confederate with Abram

The last phrase of Genesis 14:13 could be more literally rendered from the Hebrew as "These were possessors of a covenant of Abram"; it would be interesting to know what their covenant included. It is evident from the action of the men who accompanied Abram and his troop to rescue Lot that they felt some loyalty and commitment to him.

14:14-16 when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive

When Abram heard that his "brother" (that is, his nephew; Gen. 12:5) was in trouble, he did not hesitate to form a small attack force of his three hundred eighteen servants and his neighbors (Gen. 14:13, 24). They pursued the captors and captives nearly two hundred miles. Near Damascus, they divided their group, attacked at night, and recovered all the captive people and goods. It was a miraculous victory for Abram, and he gave God credit for it upon returning home (Gen. 14:20).

14:17-24 And the king of Sodom went out to meet him . . . And Melchizedek king of Salem . . . priest of the most high God

The kings of the cities involved went out to meet Abram on his return (Gen. 14:2). Among them was a most noteworthy king, Melchizedek, a high priest, king of Salem (later called Jerusalem), prince and king of peace, king of righteousness (Gen. 14:18a-d; Heb. 7; Alma 13:14-19; D&C 107:2-4; Ps. 110:4). Melchizedek had ordained Abram to the high priesthood (D&C 84:14-17), and to him Abram paid a tithe of the goods God had blessed him to regain (Gen. 14:20).

The bread and wine (Gen. 14:18) were a ceremonial meal, elements of which were later used in the Passover and transmuted later still by Jesus into symbols of the salvation with which he has blessed all mankind.

The place of meeting, "the king's dale," may have been in either the Kidron or the Hinnom valleys, near the city of Salem. Salem, or Jerusalem, was called Uru-salim in the Tel-el-Amarna tablets, and the name can be translated "City of Peace." This meaning harmonizes with a Book of Mormon statement that "Melchizedek did establish peace in the land in his days; therefore he was called the prince of peace, for he was the king of Salem" (Alma 13:18; BD, "Melchizedek"; "Melchizedek Priesthood").

In contrast to that great priest-king, the earthly king of Sodom also went out to meet Abram. He must have been among those who had not fallen into the bitumen pits but rather had fled to the mountains (Gen. 14:10). He met Abram on his return (Gen. 14:17), and, with gratitude for the rescue of his people, offered him all the goods retrieved. But Abram had vowed to the Lord that the campaign was not for self-aggrandizement; therefore, he accepted compensation only for the supplies they had eaten and the service given by his three confederates from Hebron (Gen. 14:13, 24). The account of this historic event displays well the character of Abram.

15:1-6 what wilt thou give me, seeing I go childless

Though the Lord had indeed been Abram's "shield" in the rescue of Lot and others and now reminded him of an "exceeding great reward" for his obedience (Gen. 15:1; Abr. 2:6), Abram was growing old and understandably felt that no other reward would be of lasting significance unless he received fulfillment of the promise of seed (Gen. 12:2; 13:16; Abr. 2:9-11). That seed would become the "great nation" and bless all families of the whole earth.

According to a custom described in the Nuzi tablets from eastern Mesopotamia, one born in a man's house could become his heir. Was Abram's heir to be one born to his steward, Eliezer of Damascus (Gen. 15:3)? Eliezer may have been one of the worthy converts "won" during their migrations (Abr. 2:15; Gen. 12:5).

It was an honest question, and the Lord gave Abram a clear response, with details later: Abram would yet beget a son of his wife (Gen. 15:4-6; 17:15-17), and the promised multitude of seed would indeed be given. Despite their age (Abr. 2:14; Gen. 12:4; 16:3, 16; 17:1), Abram and Sarai had faith enough to believe the promise, and their faith itself became exemplary (Heb. 11:8-11). Further, according to an inspired restoration of this passage (Gen. 15:6a), when Abram learned that the Son of Man, the Messiah, would come, he believed that too, and he rejoiced (as Jesus later attested in John 8:56-58).

15:7-21 to give thee this land . . . in the fourth generation

In answer to Abram's desire for confirmation of the promise of the land, the Lord instructed him to sacrifice three animals, each of them three years old (two females and one male), and also a turtledove and a pigeon. The reasons for this selection and the unusual manner of sacrificing them are not revealed to us; but the number three can signify completeness or perfection.

In any case, when night came and a deep sleep fell upon Abram, he received a revelation that his seed would be sojourners ("strangers," or temporary inhabitants) in lands not theirs for four hundred years, and only in the "fourth generation" (Gen. 15:16a) would they return to inherit the land of promise. The explanation that "the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full" (Gen. 15:16) indicates that people are not removed from the land of their natural inheritance until or unless they have become unworthy of being preserved in it. It is also true that people inherit a land by the hand of the Lord only when they are worthy of it. Those principles are stated in many scriptures (Abr. 2:6; Lev. 18:28; Deut. 4:25-31; 6:18; 1 Ne. 17:33-35; Ether 2:7-10).

For the origins of the Amorites (Gen. 15:16), see the descendants of Canaan, son of Ham, in the Table of Nations (Gen. 10:15-20).

That night, Abram saw a smoking incense burner and a flaming torch pass between the divided halves of the sacrificed animals, and a covenant was established between the Lord and Abram specifying the extent of the land of promise and the peoples who were being dispossessed. Sad to say, Israel, of Abram's seed, were similarly dispossessed centuries later when they became unworthy.

16:1-3 Sarai . . . took Hagar . . . gave her to . . . Abram

"God commanded Abraham, and Sarah gave Hagar to Abraham to wife. And why did she do it? Because this was the law; and from Hagar sprang many people. This, therefore, was fulfilling, among other things, the promises" (D&C 132:34). Note that Hagar became another wife to Abram (Gen. 16:3). Later (Gen. 25:1-6), yet another family, children of yet another wife, became part of Abraham's seed. Abraham's mission call pertained to all the faithful among Abraham's seed, for the words of the calling were "I will make of thee a great nation, . . . and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations" (Abr. 2:9, emphasis added; also vv. 10-11; emphasis added).

16:4-15 when she saw that she had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes

Conflict and near tragedy arose from the new union. Hagar had made the common assumption of the culture that pregnancy was a blessing and barrenness a curse, and so she looked down upon her mistress. Such attitudes may be seen in other instances (e.g., Gen. 30:1; 1 Sam. 1:1-20).

It is understandable that Sarai would find her low status, which seemingly had resulted from her generosity and obedience, to be intolerable. Abram gave her leave to do whatever "was good in her eyes" (Gen. 16:6a), and she punished Hagar. But human actions taken to satisfy some human sense of justice are not always just, and the Lord may intervene. When Hagar fled, she was told by an angel messenger to return and was reassured that she would bear a son, to be named Ishmael (meaning, "God will hear"). History records that from him came a nation. The prophecy about Ishmael may seem derogatory but does not malign his people (Gen. 16:12a).

Hagar humbly asked herself whether she had been properly attentive to the Lord who was so attentive to her welfare (Gen. 16:13) and commemorated the event and lesson by naming the place Beer-lahai-roi (Gen. 16:14b). Arabs claiming descent from Ishmael held annual festivities for centuries by the well so identified.

Hagar returned and bore Abram's first son, Ishmael, when Abram was eighty-six years old. Ishmael was not the son originally promised to Abram and Sarai, however, and was not designated as the one bearing birthright responsibility (Gen. 21-22).

16:16 Abram was fourscore and six years old

Note Abram's age at this event, and recall it later, when the narrative recounts Isaac's birth (Gen. 21:5).

17:1-9 walk before me, and be thou perfect . . . thy name shall be Abraham

It was a high point in Abram's life when the Lord next appeared; for he gave him a great preparatory challenge, a new name, and additional covenants. Identifying himself as El Shaddai (which may imply "the God whose bosom sufficeth" but is usually translated "God Almighty"), the Lord challenged Abram to walk before him in perfection. Some patriarchs before him had "walked with God," and two had been described as "perfect" (TG, "Walking with God"; "Perfection"). Perfect is used to translate the Hebrew tammim, which connotes wholeness, completeness, and integrity. Jesus later challenged his disciples, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect" (Matt. 5:48; 3 Ne. 12:48).

On the occasion of this personal visitation to Abram, "God talked with him," renewed and expanded his covenant and gave him the new name Abraham, "Father of a Multitude" (Gen. 17:1, 3-5). The Lord promised him that he and his seed would be fruitful and multiply and become many nations and kings. Through them the everlasting covenant would be established. The promise of the land wherein they sojourned was again confirmed (Gen. 17:6-8). But to gain the blessings, Abraham and his seed after him had to keep the covenant (Gen. 17:9), perpetuating it by living according to its principles.

The restored version of Genesis explains that the old covenant of baptism made known in Adam's time (Gen. 17:3a; Moses 6:52-66; 7:11) had been corrupted, along with other ordinances, both in doctrine and practice. But now Abraham and his seed were commanded by the Lord, "Keep all my covenants wherein I covenanted with thy fathers," as well as those newly given them (JST Gen. 17:12; Gen. 17:7a); then circumcision was instituted as a sign of the covenant.

17:10-14 he that is eight days old shall be circumcised

As a sign of the covenant, circumcision would remind all fathers and mothers to teach children the laws and ways of the Lord, and it would remind all boys and men to perpetuate their covenants in purity. Circumcision continued as a sign of the covenant until the mission was extended to all nations in New Testament times (Acts 15:1-29; Gal. 5:6; 6:15; Col. 2:6-15).

According to the inspired restoration of these scriptures (Gen. 17:7a; JST Gen. 17:12), circumcision at the age of eight days would also remind parents that children become "accountable," when they are eight years of age, to keep the commandments in covenants made with the fathers. One might suppose those covenants would include the proper baptism of Adam's time (Moses 6:64-68) rather than the corrupted "baptism" that had evolved (JST Gen. 17:5-6), but that is not made explicit.

17:15-22 Sarah shall her name be. . . . I will bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings . . . shall be of her

Sarai's new name foretold a change from her way of struggle and persistence to prevail. Sarai is derived from the Hebrew root srh ("prevail"), the same root from which the Hebrew yisrael, or Israel, was later derived. Sarah, "Princess," is the feminine form of the word meaning "chieftain," "chief," "ruler," "official," "captain," or "prince." Thus the promise "kings of people shall be of her" (Gen. 17:16) was a play on the meaning of her new name.

Abraham laughed (or rejoiced; Gen. 17:17a) upon receiving the promise of a son in his old age by his aged wife. He immediately expressed the hope that his son Ishmael would remain in God's favor. The Lord gave a great promise regarding Ishmael and his descendants (Gen. 17:18, 20), and he also reassured Sarah and Abraham that they would indeed have a son to perpetuate the covenant and bear the birthright responsibility (Gen. 17:19, 21). His name would be Yitzkhaq ("he shall rejoice/laugh"; in English, Isaac, transliterated from the Greek, Isaak, which was pronounced EE-saak).

Note again the very personal nature of divine visitations to Abraham: "And he left off talking with him, and God went up from Abraham" (Gen. 17:22).

17:23-27 circumcised . . . the selfsame day as God had said

With the beginning of circumcision as the token of God's covenant with Abraham, both old and young men were circumcised on the same day, but the age thereafter for boys was eight days (Gen. 17:12). Ishmael's age of thirteen (Gen. 17:25) became the age for that initiation among his descendants and is still perpetuated in Islam (TG and BD, "Circumcision").

18:1-8 the Lord appeared, . . . and, lo, three men stood by him

In a quite extraordinary visitation, three men and the Lord next communicated with Abraham. The "three men" (Gen. 18:2) were addressed as "brethren," according to the inspired revision of the account (Gen. 18:3a). It was those three whom Abraham courteously addressed and for whom he and his wife prepared food, which they ate (Gen. 18:8, 22a; Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954], 1:16-17). Only after Abraham and Sarah took care of the duties of hospitality was the purpose of the visit made known, which was to reassure them concerning the promise of a son (Gen. 17:17).

18:9-15 Sarah thy wife shall have a son

Sarah's laughter in response to the surprising promise that a child would be born to her in her old age corresponds to that of Abraham earlier (Gen. 17:17-19); hence the child's name means either "he laughs" or "he rejoices" (Gen. 21:6a). The Lord's response to Sarah's laughter was a mild rebuke, and a truth was taught by a question, "Is any thing too hard for the Lord?" (Gen. 18:14).

18:16-33 Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do

The statement of the Lord indicating why he could trust Abraham and why he desired to let him know about the catastrophe coming to Sodom and Gomorrah is an impressive indication of God's esteem for that good man (Gen. 18:16-19).

In the inspired version of the account, the Lord sent the three "angels which were holy men" to Sodom to see that the iniquities of the people of that place were duly punished. They went to do so while Abraham conversed with the Lord (Gen. 18:22a; JST Gen. 18:19-23).

Consider why the Lord let Abraham go through the long process of pleading on behalf of those wicked places, knowing (as Gen. 19:29 implies) that it was Lot's family Abraham wished to save when he asked that the places be spared even if only as many as ten righteous could be found in them (Gen. 18:23-32). Evidently the Lord lets us exercise our intelligence and agency in order to develop, for if all things were done by the Divine initiative alone, there would be no challenges to help us grow in faith, hope, charity, intelligence, and judgment.

19:1-29 the Lord being merciful . . . brought him forth

When the three messengers arrived in Sodom (Gen. 19:1a-b; JST Gen. 18:19-23), they found evils there were indeed rampant—and were soon directed even against them (Gen. 19:5). A shocking problem is evident in the text that reports the conversation about the virgin daughters of Lot (Gen. 19:7-9); important corrections of that text are given in the inspired revision of it (Gen. 19:8a).

The crass condition of the men of Sodom and the spiritual lassitude of some members of Lot's family make it evident why mercy must not overrule justice and permit the wicked to escape the fruits of evildoing. The hesitant family of Lot could not justly be saved without some test of their faith and worthiness. Some did not accept the warning, and even Lot's wife looked back in spite of being led out by the hand and being duly warned (Gen. 19:14, 16-17, 26). She perished in the holocaust with the others who refused to heed. Jesus used this lesson in his prophecy about the end of our wicked world (Gen. 19:26; Luke 17:31-32); it concludes: "Remember Lot's wife."

19:30-38 there is not a man in the earth to come in unto us

Lot's daughters' rationalizing their incest makes it appear that they too may have been imbued with the ways of Sodom. Their purpose could not justify such a means, for it was not a righteous way nor was it likely the only way.

Some commentators have supposed this account of illicit acts was contrived to impugn the Moabites and Ammonites; but that is a poor argument, for equally scandalous stories are preserved later concerning even the royal line of Judah. Doubtless such accounts were kept to provide vicarious experiences that should help others avoid such rationalization. There is, of course, no implication that because prominent people of the Bible did such things their actions were approved.

20:1-18 indeed she is my sister; . . . the daughter of my father, but not . . . of my mother

The incident involving Abraham and Abimelech parallels in several particulars a similar incident involving Pharaoh. Sarah was Abraham's "sister" in being of the same paternal line from Terah; but her maternal line was that of Haran's wife (commentary on Gen. 12:4-5, 11-13).

Why Abimelech took Sarah is not clear, but since he felt he had acted in integrity of heart and innocence of hands, the Lord intervened to save Sarah and spare Abimelech from sinning in ignorance, giving him correct information so that he could right the wrong (Gen. 20:3-7). Abimelech, like Pharaoh before him, learned through experience to respect the God of Abraham and not to obstruct his will. He showed generosity in seeking to compensate Abraham's group and in inviting them to stay wherever they pleased. Also, the affliction of his people was healed.

21:1-8 Sarah conceived, and bare Abraham a son in his old age. . . . And Abraham circumcised his son

The Lord caused the miracle to happen: the promised son was born to Abraham and Sarah in their old age. They circumcised him at eight days of age as a sign of the covenant, as they had been commanded (Gen. 17:7-12, fn. 7a; JST Gen. 17:11-12).

Regarding his name, Isaac, see the commentary on Genesis 17:15-22; 18:9-15.

21:9-21 Sarah saw the son of Hagar . . . mocking. Wherefore she said . . . the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son

After Isaac was born, named, circumcised, and weaned, and Ishmael had reached age fifteen or sixteen, trouble again arose between Sarah and Hagar, as it well might even though it should not. Sarah may appear to have been supersensitive about the status of her son and quite callous about the welfare of the second wife and first son of Abraham, but it is unwise to judge those matters from the limited information we have.

Abraham was naturally grieved by Sarah's demand that Hagar and her son be sent away, and only after receiving a revelation concerning Ishmael's destiny and Isaac's calling and responsibility did he let her be sent away. Apparently, however, the provisions he gave Hagar and Ishmael were inadequate, and it was by the Lord's intervention that tragedy was averted (Gen. 21:11-19).

God's concern and compassion for the individual are shown again in this episode. He "heard the voice of the lad" (v. 17), and the same "Living One Who Seeth" who had given guidance to Hagar in her need once before (Gen. 16:13-14) on this occasion provided life-giving water for her and her son. He also gave her assurance that Ishmael had an important destiny, which must have helped her in rearing him and securing a wife for him (Gen. 21:17-21).

21:22-34 he called that place Beer-sheba; because . . . they made a covenant

Abraham's Philistine neighbors, acknowledging to Abraham that "God is with thee in all thou doest" (Gen. 21:22), proposed that a covenant of peace be made between them. People could see in Abraham's way of life and in his prudence evidences of the power of the living God in his life. So they made the covenant and named the well—which Abraham had dug and which Abimelech's servants had taken over but then restored—Beer-sheva (anglicized, Beer-sheba), "Well of the Covenant." Abraham gave Abimelech seven lambs in token of that agreement. The Hebrew root sheva bears the meaning of "seven" and also of "swearing" an oath in making a covenant.

22:1-19 My son, God will provide himself a lamb

The vital episode in which the Lord "preached before the gospel unto Abraham" (Gal. 3:8, 24) let Abraham experience a terrible "similitude of God and his Only Begotten Son" (Jacob 4:5). Often this incident is seen only as a "test" of Abraham; certainly it did try him and prove him (Gen. 22:1a), and the "angel of the Lord" himself commended Abraham (Gen. 22:11-12, 15-18), confirming what he had declared earlier (Gen. 18:18-19). Because Abraham had already proved himself worthy in many ways and had been blessed by God for that, the main purpose of this episode may have been to let Abraham appreciate the mission of the Savior, "and he saw it, and was glad" (John 8:56). That is the point Jacob emphasized in the Book of Mormon (Jacob 4:5).

The mission of Abraham and his seed was and is to bear the priesthood and knowledge of the true and living God "in the earth forever" (Abr. 1:18-19). Thereby "shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal" (Abr. 2:11, emphasis added; Gen. 12:3; 22:18). Abraham could know and teach the good news of salvation because the Lord had taught him. He would certainly have been in a perfect frame of mind to receive it after he said with prophetic faith, "My son, God will provide himself a lamb" (Gen. 22:8).

This epochal event occurred in "the land of Moriah . . . upon one of the mountains," the place that later became the Temple Mount (Gen. 22:2a-d; commentary on Gen. 12:6-10). A map of Jerusalem (Bible Map 17) reveals that the Garden Tomb and the Hill of Golgotha are on a higher part of the same mount or ridge northwest of the temple site; thus it may be that the Savior, the divine Seed of Abraham, was offered nearly two thousand years later on a higher eminence of the same mount where the birthright son of Abraham was a "type" of Him.

22:20-24 Milcah . . . Nahor . . . Bethuel . . . Rebekah

Information reached Abraham about the family of his brother Nahor, who had stayed in Haran when Abraham migrated to Canaan. One of Nahor's granddaughters, Rebekah, later became the wife of Abraham's son Isaac (Gen. 22:23a-c).

23:1-20 after this, Abraham buried Sarah

Many years after the sacrifice, when Isaac had reached the age of thirty-seven years (calculated from information in Gen. 17:17; 21:5; 23:1; 25:20) and his mother was one hundred twenty-seven, Sarah died. The account of Abraham's purchase of a cave for her tomb in Machpelah gives additional insight into the character and reputation of Abraham. He was honest, considerate, persistent, and straightforward. The process of bargaining to make a purchase, or a contract, is still common in the Middle East, but usually the seller overstates the price rather than understates it. In this case the seller was trying to show favor and respect for the buyer; but the buyer, Abraham, was firm in doing what he considered to be right and just.

A shrine exists to this day at Machpelah, in Hebron, with cenotaphs for three patriarchs and their wives.

24:1-9 thou shalt go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son Isaac

A proper wife for Abraham's birthright son was one who would believe in the true God and be able to bring up children in the faith to carry on the mission (Gen. 24:3c). The help of the Lord and the will of the young woman were both vital to the satisfactory completion of this mission of Abraham's servant (Gen. 24:3, 5, 7-8).

24:10-28 O Lord God of my master Abraham, I pray thee, send me good speed this day, and shew kindness unto my master Abraham

The servant took ten camels laden with gifts for the family and bride-to-be (BD, "Marriage," for the little that is known about wedding customs). He humbly supplicated the Lord for blessings for himself and his master, needing assurance of a safe journey and of guidance in selecting the bride, and then he set off.

The help he desired was given. A practical and significant sign from the Lord identified Rebekah as the right wife for his master Abraham's son, and the servant was duly grateful. Her gracious willingness to serve him must have been impressive. The writer of the account mentions that she was fair to look upon and adds the more important fact that she was a virgin (Gen. 24:16). The servant was assured that she would be an acceptable bride.

He gave Rebekah some impressive preliminary gifts and inquired about her identity; when he learned she was indeed of Abraham's brother's family, he thanked the Lord, and she went home to report (Gen. 24:22-28). More gifts were given later (Gen. 24:53).

24:29-50 Laban and Bethuel answered . . . The thing proceedeth from the Lord

Rebekah's brother Laban's mode of addressing Abraham's servant, and the response of both Laban and Bethuel, evidenced that they were still faithful worshippers of the true Lord (Gen. 24:31, 50-51). Abraham's servant had given a conscientious, faithful account of his mission, and they responded well.

24:51-60 And she said, I will go

Respect for the feelings and desires of the maiden involved was shown as Abraham had intended, for when she was asked directly, she affirmed that she would go to become the wife of Isaac (Gen. 24:5, 8, 57-58). The gifts of silver, gold, and raiment given the bride-to-be and the precious things given her mother and brother were doubtless part of the dowry, or mohar (Gen. 24:51-56; BD, "Marriage"). The bride was not "purchased" thereby; she was in no sense the chattel of the husband. Her demeanor in the home, her exercise of agency and will, her initiative and effectiveness, both as an individual and as a marriage partner, illustrate that she was truly a help meet for her husband.

As Rebekah, her nurse, and her maids departed, the parting wish and blessing of the family was perhaps more prophetic than they knew; for through her Abraham's seed was to become as numerous as the sands of the sea, so that they might eventually bless all families of the earth (Gen. 24:59-61; TG, "Seed of Abraham).

24:61-67 she became his wife; and he loved her

There is even a bit of romance in the account of the young couple's meeting and marriage. The details are quite nicely told, including the conclusion: "and he loved her."

Unfortunately, no details are given us about the marriage ceremony; but that may be understandable, for in our dispensation details of priesthood marriages (in the temple) are also not made public.

25:1-4 a wife . . . Keturah . . . bare . . . Midian

We could also wish for more details about Abraham's other family of six sons by Keturah, and especially about the possible ordination of Midian or someone in his line to the holy priesthood. The book of Exodus records that Moses married a daughter of Jethro, a priest of Midian; and latter-day revelation indicates that Jethro conferred the true priesthood upon Moses (Gen. 25:2b; D&C 84:6).

25:5-6 all . . . unto Isaac. . . . But unto the sons of the concubines, . . . Abraham gave gifts

Abraham gave the birthright leadership responsibility of his family to Isaac, but he may have given priesthood powers also to at least one of his other sons (see commentary on Gen. 25:1-4). He gave gifts of material things to all of them and sent them to seek their fortune in the "east country."

Confirmation of Abraham's mission upon the head of Isaac by the Lord is seen later (Gen. 26:1-6), as is transmission of it by authority of the Lord from Isaac to Jacob (Gen. 28:10-22). It is significant that in the accounts of these ordinances, the hand of the Lord is emphasized more than the hand of man.

25:7-10 gave up the ghost . . . gathered to his people

A typical Old Testament description of the event and process of death, the passage recording Abraham's death illustrates a recognition that the spirit departed from the body and was reunited with family members whose spirits had gone before. Other examples of this concept can be found in other scriptures (TG, "Family, Eternal.") There are other interpretations of this description of death, but the credibility of this one merits its consideration.

Great honor has been attached to the name of Abraham in scriptures written hundreds and even thousands of years after his life was over. In Jesus' time some thought it sufficient for their salvation that they were descendants of Abraham. Jesus challenged that belief: "If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham" (John 8:39). Paul assured his gentile converts in Galatia that by faith in Christ and baptism unto his righteous way, they became Abraham's children (Gal. 3:7-9, 26-29; Abr. 2:10). Abraham has indeed become the "father of the faithful" (D&C 138:41; 84:33-34; Gen. 17:5; Rom. 4:16; BD, "Abraham").

25:11 God blessed his son Isaac

The good relationship that Isaac maintained with the Lord is noted; details follow (Gen. 25:19ff). The well at Lahai-roi was an important place in the history of Abraham's family (Gen. 16:7-14).

25:12-18 these are the generations of Ishmael, Abraham's son

In the group record of Ishmael's descendants, twelve "princes" (Heb., nsi'im, "ones elevated, chiefs") over his "nations" or clans are listed and their locations described.

The death of Ishmael is described in Genesis 25:17 in the same terms used to describe the death of Abraham in verse 8. That his death was recorded at the end of his family record does not necessarily mean that he died before the first events in the family record of Isaac, which follows.

25:19-26 these are the generations of Isaac, Abraham's son

This family group record continues the family history accounts that have been seen earlier in Genesis (cf. Gen. 5:1; 10:1) and may be seen later as well (1 Chr. 2-4). A variant account was used in Exodus (Ex. 6:14-30).

Like Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebekah had to seek the Lord's blessing to start their family. When Rebekah did conceive and later felt conflict within, she asked the Lord the reason and meaning of it and received a revelation about the destiny of the twins she would bear. It appears later (Gen. 27) that she felt she had to help the younger child receive his destiny.

The first was named Esau (from a Heb. root meaning "hairy"), but his descendants were usually called Edom (Heb., "red"); both names recall his appearance as a newborn. The second twin was named Jacob, the meaning of which is "He shall follow at the heel," a Hebrew idiom meaning "he shall assail, overreach, or supplant"; his name was perhaps given by his mother Rebekah because of her revelation that he would acquire the birthright responsibility rather than the firstborn, Esau. The writer of the account saw significance in the fact that Jacob's infant hand took hold of his brother's heel, for the noun 'aqev, "heel," is from the same Hebrew root as the name Ya'aqov, "Jacob."

25:27-28 Esau was a . . . hunter, a man of the field; and Jacob was a plain man, dwelling in tents.

Jacob's and Esau's were the contrasting ways of hunter and husbandman. Plain (Gen. 25:27b) is used here to translate the same Hebrew word that is often translated perfect (Gen. 6:9; 17:1), perfect meaning, ideally, a "man of integrity." This word was used to describe Noah and to inspire Abraham. Remember also Jesus' challenge to his followers to become "perfect" (Matt. 5:48). Jacob, like most of us, started out far from possessing that quality but achieved a degree of it later.

A quite superficial reason is recorded for Isaac's favoring Esau; Rebekah's favor of Jacob, on the other hand, may have been because of her revelation about his destiny. Their favoritism nonetheless held potential for tragedy—as it can in any family.

25:29-34 I am at the point to die; and what profit shall this birthright do to me?

Surely Esau must have exaggerated somewhat, coming home from the hunt and saying he was hungry to the point of death and thus saw no "profit" in the birthright (Gen. 25:32). The writer of the account concluded that Esau "despised" it (Gen. 25:34). Jacob's asking his starving, dying brother to "sell" the birthright before giving him food is also surely exaggerated; but certainly Jacob did take advantage of the opportunity to offer food in return for the birthright.

26:1-5 Sojourn in this land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee; . . . and I will perform the oath which I sware unto Abraham thy father; . . . and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed

Isaac was assured that he could remain during the cyclical drought in the Philistine-held coastal plains near Gerar. The Lord would bless him there and confirm upon him the blessings of Abraham. The revelation declared that Abraham qualified to retain his blessings by obeying the Lord—keeping his charge, his commandments, his statutes and laws (Gen. 26:5).

26:6-11 he said, She is my sister: for he feared

Recall the nearly parallel cases of Abraham and Sarah in Egypt (Gen. 12:13-20) and later in Philistine lands (Gen. 20:1-18). Isaac and Rebekah were double first cousins once removed, for they had a common ancestor and several closely related forebears; thus Rebekah could be called Isaac's "sister" in their manner of speaking, just as Sarah could be called Abraham's "sister."

This Philistine king was also named Abimelech; it means "father of a king" or "my father is king" and could be the title of a dynastic family. Isaac's experience with a king named Abimelech in Gerar was some sixty to eighty years after Abraham's.

26:12-33 We saw certainly that the Lord was with thee

Isaac's blessings helped him prosper in Philistia, and that prosperity aroused jealousy, fear, and acts of vandalism despite King Abimelech's proclamation. Nevertheless, Isaac lived the law of patience and forbearance that the Lord had given to the ancient patriarchs (D&C 98:23-32); and when the Philistines saw that the Lord continued to prosper him, they offered to make peace with him (Gen. 26:28-29). After patiently moving from well to well, Isaac finally went to the old well, Beer-sheba, where his father had made a covenant with the Philistines (Gen. 21:22-34). The Lord appeared at night and assured Isaac that he would continue to be blessed; so Isaac, like Abraham, built an altar and worshipped the Lord there. Another covenant was made with the Philistines; the name of the well was renewed, Beer-sheba, "Well of the Covenant"; and all parted in peace (TG, "Peacemakers"). This is an example of the way Isaac carried out the Abrahamic mission, making known by his way of life the name, ways, and powers of the Lord (Abr. 1:18-19; 2:6-11; commentary on Gen. 26:1-5).

26:34-35 Esau . . . took to wife . . . daughter[s] of . . . the Hittite: Which were a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah

Esau showed further disregard for the birthright (commentary on Gen. 25:34) by marrying Hittite women, who were unlikely to bring up his family with faith in the Lord (BD, "Heth"; "Hittites"). Esau's marriages were "a grief of mind" to his parents. Recall how their own marriage had been carefully and prayerfully planned and carried out (Gen. 24).

27:1-29 I shall bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing

Why Rebekah was so strongly motivated that she risked a curse upon her son or herself (Gen. 27:6-13) is difficult to know. Her revelation about his destiny (Gen. 25:21-23) may have been a factor, but deceit does not get blessings (D&C 82:10a; 130:20-21; TG, "Blessings"). It is not known whether she had ever shared her revelation with Isaac. Inasmuch as he was directed by the Spirit of the Lord, Isaac could not have given a patriarchal blessing to the wrong son. He did speak words conveying the birthright blessing while his hands were on the head of Jacob disguised as Esau; but that was by the will of the Lord. If the words spoken were to be confirmed and fulfilled, the Lord through Isaac would confirm them and Jacob would have to live worthy of fulfillment. Isaac did later confirm the promised blessing (Gen. 27:33; 28:1-5). Jacob's improved deportment and the Lord's confirmation of the blessing are shown later (Gen. 29-32).

27:30-33 yea, and he shall be blessed

When Isaac realized it was Jacob to whom he had given the blessing, he could have rescinded it and replaced it with a curse if he had been inspired to know Jacob was the wrong candidate (Gen. 27:12; D&C 56:4; 58:32; all fn.); yet he said, "Yea, and he shall be blessed" (Gen. 27:32). It is as if he realized at that moment, if not before, that Jacob had the potential to bear the birthright responsibility despite his existing faults. Patriarchal blessings may be given us today before we are fully worthy, but we also must live worthily before we can realize their fulfillment.

27:34-40 the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of heaven

Without mentioning that he had "despised his birthright" and traded it for food (Gen. 25:34), Esau bitterly denounced Jacob for being a "supplanter" who "took away" the birthright and then the blessing (Gen. 27:36a). He asked whether some blessing were not still available to him and received a promise of the bounties of the earth; moreover, his people were promised that they could sometimes free themselves from domination by Israel and have dominion themselves (Gen. 27:34-40). The vicissitudes of the strife between Edom and Israel are told from the book of Numbers on through the books of Kings—and that strife still goes on today.

27:41-45 then will I slay my brother Jacob

Esau valued more highly what he had lost after it was gone, as many people do, and vowed violent revenge after the death of father Isaac. But the alert and resourceful Rebekah averted the double tragedy of loss of one son by murder and the other by the execution in accord with the law (Gen. 9:6); she proposed to Isaac that Jacob be sent away to find a proper wife in her ancestral homeland. Thus she would get Jacob away for "a few days" until Esau's anger cooled. He actually would be away for twenty years.

27:46 if Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, . . . what good shall my life do me?

Knowing that their responsibility for perpetuating the Abrahamic mission would be frustrated if Jacob married as Esau had (Gen. 26:34-35), Isaac responded favorably to his wife's proposal.

28:1-5 Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him, and charged him

Isaac confirmed the future blessing upon the head of the son whom the Lord had allowed him to bless before he was fully worthy of it. The "blessing of Abraham" was explicitly transmitted this time. Isaac then gave strict instructions to Jacob on selecting a proper wife. They were much like those Abraham had given his steward for choosing a wife for Isaac (Gen. 24:1-9).

28:6-9 Esau . . . took . . . the daughter of Ishmael . . . to be his wife

The reasons for Esau's taking a wife of Abrahamic descent in addition to his Hittite wives (Gen. 26:34-35) are clearly stated.

Note some confusion of the names of his wives in Genesis 36:2-3.

28:10-15 in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed. I am with thee . . . and will bring thee again into this land

After walking more than sixty miles, Jacob slept on hard rocks; there he received a marvelous dream-vision from the Lord God of Abraham, divinely confirming the birthright promise and assuring him of a safe return to the land promised to Abraham's seed, where he could raise a family to fulfill their mission.

28:16-22 this is . . . the house of God . . . the gate of heaven

Awakening in this awesome ("dreadful") place of the Lord's presence, Jacob named it "House of God" (Heb., Beth-el; Gen. 28:19a-b). He resolved to pay a tithe of all his gains to God thereafter, out of gratitude for His blessings and promises (Gen. 28:22). Some commentators have failed to note that first the Lord offered the blessings (Gen. 28:13-15) and then Jacob responded to the offer, saying, "If God will be with me, . . . then shall the Lord be my God. . . . I will surely give a tenth unto thee" (Gen. 28:20-22). This is the second time tithing is mentioned in Genesis; the first is of Abraham's tithes given in gratitude for the blessings he had received in rescuing Lot and the other captives (Gen. 14:14-20).

29:1-12 Rachel came with her father's sheep

Upon Jacob's arrival among "the people of the east" (that is, Haran, in upper Mesopotamia), he providentially met Rachel, daughter of his uncle Laban, at the community well. Recall the similar circumstances under which Abraham's steward met for the first time Rebekah, who became the wife of Isaac and Jacob's own mother (Gen. 24:1-27).

The source of water was protected by a huge stone that could be rolled away only by several shepherds; but with strength born of eagerness to be of service (and perhaps to make a good impression), Jacob himself rolled it away and watered Rachel's sheep. He was a bit bold in that first meeting: he gave her an introductory kiss. He was following his father's instructions, however, in seeking out his mother's family to choose his wife.

29:13-20 I will serve thee seven years for Rachel

Jacob had taken into his own hands the means of gaining the birthright, and now he had nothing but his own hands to produce the needed mohar, or dowry, to gain a bride. There was no camel train laden with gifts as there had been when Abraham's steward negotiated for a bride for Isaac. Jacob's first seven-year contract with Laban seems to have worked out rather well. It is surprising to read that the seven years "seemed unto him but a few days" because of his love (Gen. 29:20); for a modern suitor, a few days would seem rather like seven years.

29:21-30 he took Leah his daughter, and brought her to him

Although it had been agreed that Jacob was working to marry Laban's younger daughter, Rachel, Laban contrived to have him marry the older daughter, Leah, who was described as "tender eyed." The contrast between her and Rachel, who is described as "beautiful and well favored" (Gen. 29:17), is less striking in Hebrew, in which Leah's eyes are described as "soft."

Perhaps Jacob's resentment was mitigated by a concession allowing him to marry Rachel after Leah's week of wedding festivities. But he also was "permitted" to work an additional seven years.

29:31-35 Rachel was barren. . . . And Leah conceived

A sort of "baby contest" began between the two wives (told in Genesis 30); in the course of it, Jacob gained two more wives, twelve sons, and at least one daughter. More than half of the children were mothered by the faithful but unfavored Leah. Note the significance in the name of each child, explained in a footnote to each, in Genesis 29 and 30.

30:1-24 God hearkened to her. . . . And she . . . bare a son

Again, as in two previous generations, the birthright son was born only after some delay, soul-searching, and sincere prayers to God. Rachel had turned first to her husband to demand children and had been called to repentance; she then turned to her sister Leah to negotiate for some herbal remedies, only to find that Leah was blessed to bear another son (Gen. 29:31; BD, "Mandrakes"). Finally Rachel turned to God, and he responded to her supplications. When at last a son was born to Rachel, she named him Joseph (Heb., lit., "He shall add"), hoping for yet more; but the name was more prophetic still, for it may be derived from a verb meaning "He shall gather." That concept seems implied in statements in later scriptures (e.g., Deut. 33:17; D&C 58:45).

30:25-43 when shall I provide for mine own house also?

Although Jacob's birthright at home should have included the right to a double portion of the parental property, he apparently did not wish to wait for the inheritance to make him economically self-sustaining. He showed admirable initiative in assuring his father-in-law that Laban need not give him anything but that the off-color animals among Laban's livestock should be his wages (Gen. 30:28, 32). He had already served fourteen years for his wives. Because his father-in-law wanted him to continue, Jacob proposed developing his own flocks and herds while continuing to work as before. Laban agreed, saying, "I have learned by experience that the Lord hath blessed me for thy sake" (Gen. 30:27). Just as Abimelech had learned from observing Isaac (Gen. 26:12-16, 23-26), so Laban had learned from watching Jacob the effects of the blessings of the Lord in a person's life. Jacob also was aware of those blessings.

Jacob's animal husbandry (Gen. 30:36-43) included the use of striped and spotted willows to engender conception of off-color animals, according to a superstition of the time. We know today that they could not have had any such effect, but similar superstitious beliefs and practices still persist in some places today. Jacob simply gave credit to the Lord for his increases in livestock (Gen. 31:6-10).

31:1-16 the Lord said unto Jacob, Return unto the land of thy fathers, and to thy kindred; and I will be with thee

Several factors let Jacob know he should leave at the end of his last six years of managing his father-in-law's flocks: Laban's sons manifested jealousy; the countenance of Laban was changed toward Jacob; Laban's daughters, Jacob's wives, were disaffected toward their father, feeling disinherited; and the Lord himself revealed that it was time for Jacob to return home.

Nothing is recorded here commending Jacob's twenty years of work for Laban, but it was noted later (Gen. 31:38-42).

31:17-55 Jacob stole away unawares. . . . Then Laban overtook Jacob

Though Laban learned of Jacob's departure three days afterward, he overtook him in seven days, at Gilead, on the way to Canaan. Laban complained of Jacob's departure without farewell amenities and accused someone of stealing his "gods" (Gen. 31:30). Rachel had indeed stolen her father's "images" (Gen. 31:19;Heb. teraphim; BD, "Teraphim"); they may have been deemed protectors of property ownership. Laban was restrained from punishing Jacob by a dream-revelation from God ( Gen. 31:24); but he showed his resentment by identifying Deity to Jacob only as "the God of your father" (Gen. 31:29).

When Rachel's deed was neither confessed nor discovered, the two men made a peace agreement (Gen. 31:50-53), setting up boundary markers and invoking God's surveillance of their future acts toward one another. The matter was amicably concluded with a sacrifice by Jacob, a meal together, and even some good-bye kisses by Laban on the following morning before separating.

32:1-2 the angels of God met him

Another divine manifestation was granted Jacob, perhaps to prepare him for meeting and reconciling with his brother, Esau, after twenty years' separation. Jacob called the angels "God's host" and the place "Mahanaim" (Gen. 32:2a-b).

32:3-23 And Jacob sent messengers before him to Esau

To do what he could to assure peace between him and his brother, Jacob sent a message to Esau about his prosperous state—perhaps to suggest that he was not coming to claim any material inheritance. Distressed when he learned of Esau's approach with a company of four hundred, Jacob divided his company into two bands (Gen. 32:7, 2a-b; Heb., lit., "camps"). He hoped that at least one group might survive an attack, and he humbly and urgently prayed for God's protection (Gen. 32:9-12). Then he added works to his faith by sending generous gifts to Esau, to be delivered one group at a time with conciliatory messages, in the hope that strife might be averted (Gen. 32:13-23).

32:24-32 there wrestled a man with him

Jacob did not sleep that night after sending his families and attendants over the brook Jabbok. The brook's name means "the Wrestler," doubtless in commemoration of Jacob's experience that night, for while he tarried alone "there wrestled a man with him" who had divine power to bless him (Gen. 32:24a; compare the spiritual wrestling of Enos and Alma). Jacob would not let him go until he gave the blessing, even suffering physical injury while tenaciously holding on.

The "man" also had authority to change his name from Jacob (meaning "he shall supplant") to Israel (meaning "let God prevail"; Gen. 32:28a-d). The new name seems to symbolize the end of his past ways and contrast them with the way he could succeed as a true patriarch, by letting God prevail in guiding his emerging mission. Note also that during the night's experiences Jacob had "seen God face to face" and had been "preserved," not destroyed (Gen. 32:30). To commemorate that vision, Jacob named a place by the brook of his wrestling Peniel, "face of God." The "man" who wrestled with Jacob, and blessed him, and bestowed upon him a new name, was a man with authority from God; Jacob's seeing "God face to face" that night was an additional special experience.

33:1-16 Take, I pray thee, my blessing . . . because God hath dealt graciously with me, . . . and he took it

There were no traces of ill will between Jacob and Esau when they met twenty years after their conflict about birthrights; indeed, both the acts and words of each helped to create good will. If Esau had come out with his four hundred men intending something else, Jacob's advance gifts helped him "find grace in the sight of" Esau, and the prayers of Jacob were answered (Gen. 32:8-12).

33:17-20 And Jacob came to Shalem, a city of Shechem

The little green valley of the Jabbok and the broader green valley of the Jordan must have looked good to Jacob's company, and they camped a while where the Jabbok enters the Jordan, at a place named Succoth ("booths"). There they built succoth (sheds made of posts supporting pole beams and joists and covered with willow branches), and they even built Jacob a house (Gen. 33:17).

When the group moved again it could have been up a western tributary to the Jordan, the Wadi Fari'a (or "Farah"; Bible Map 1) toward Shechem. Passing Tirzah, they could have turned south and in half a day reached Shalem ("fulfillment") near Shechem.

Jacob bought land there, the first that he owned in the whole land of promise. There he "spread his tent" and erected an altar to God, naming it "El is the God of Israel" (Gen. 33:20a). Jacob and his family doubtless hoped to enjoy some peace and fulfillment.

The New Testament (John 4:3-15) indicates that Jacob also dug a well there; at that well, Jesus taught first a woman of Samaria and then many people of that city. Modern tourists and others who come to worship there are still able to drink at "Jacob's well" in Nablus.

34:1-31 Shechem . . . defiled her. . . . Dinah's brethren . . . slew all the males. . . . Jacob said . . . Ye . . . make me to stink

Israel's peace in Shalem was short-lived. An act of risk followed by an act of lust, an attempt at recompense, an agreement made in duplicity, and a violent assault by sons of Israel—all caused Israel "to stink among the inhabitants of the land," so Israel had to move on. Jacob's remonstrance with his guilty sons (who had reasoned they were justified in using violence to revenge the honor of their sister) may seem mild, but there were deep and lasting effects (Gen. 49:5-7).

35:1-15 God appeared unto Jacob again . . . and blessed him

At God's command, Jacob was to take his family next to the hills of Bethel. Before departing he prepared them to receive covenant blessings by a spiritual and physical cleansing—burying any idolatrous things under an oak near Shechem. With gratitude for God's help, Israel went to Bethel and built an altar to worship the Lord, naming and anointing it El-beth-el, "God of the house of God." It was, for the time being, his temple. Blessings were renewed that had been given at the place of his wrestling, where he had received his new name (Gen. 35:9-10; 32:24-30). Abraham's blessings, previously conferred at that place, were confirmed upon Israel (Gen. 35:11-15; 28:10-15).

35:8 Rebekah's nurse died, and she was buried beneath Bethel under an oak

It seems that Jacob's mother's nurse, of a generation before (Gen. 24:59), had died and was buried near Bethel under an oak; hence, that place was called Allon-bachuth, "oak of weeping." It hardly seems possible that she could have lived long enough to come out to meet Jacob's company, dying at the time of the events recorded here.

35:16-21 Rachel travailed, and she had hard labour. . . . And Rachel died, and was buried in the way to . . . Bethlehem

A sad death followed a providential birth near Ephrath (Bethlehem), as the company moved southward; Rachel had trusted that the Lord would give her another son (Gen. 30:24), which He did, but she died in giving birth. The place is marked with a little shrine and a cenotaph in the outskirts of present-day Bethlehem.

Rachel named this son of her suffering Benoni, "son of my affliction"; but Israel renamed him Benjamin, "son of the right hand" (Gen. 35:18b-c), a hopeful and forward-looking name.

35:22 Reuben went and lay with Bilhah

Sadder still is the account of Reuben's instability of character, for by his breach of a basic moral law he lost his birthright (Gen. 49:3-4; 1 Chr. 5:1).

35:22-26 sons of Leah . . . Rachel . . . Bilhah . . . Zilpah

The twelve potential patriarchs, sons of Israel by four mothers, are listed in family groups; their births and the meaning of their names are recorded in Genesis 29:31 through 30:24.

35:27-29 Jacob came unto Isaac his father

Father Isaac, who had felt old twenty years before (Gen. 27:1-2) and had given the final birthright blessings at that time, did not die until he was one hundred eighty years old, many years after Jacob's return. Jacob's home in the land was Mamre, near Arbah, or Hebron, home of Abraham and Isaac (BD, "Hebron"; "Isaac"). Esau and Jacob, still at peace with each other, joined in performing the burial rites for their father Isaac.

36:1-43 Now these are the generations of Esau, who is Edom

The names of descendants of Jacob's brother, Esau (also called Edom) and of Seir the Horite, a leader of the earlier inhabitants of the Arabah, have been preserved here. These are the neighbors with whom the Israelites interacted during most of the history recorded in the Old Testament. The "dukes" and "kings" of those peoples who lived long before the Israelites had kings are listed. The people of "Seir the Horite," who intermarried with the Edomites, may have been the first dwellers in the rock-hewn caves of the sikh that later became the cliff-carved city called Sela (Gr., Petra, "rock"). Visitors to that remote sikh ("wash," a gulch or canyon) today may see in the sandstone cliffs some of the sculpted temples, treasuries, and dwellings left there by the Byzantines, the Romans before them, the Nabataeans before them, and others of the Edomites and the Horites back to the beginning. The Khorim, or Horites, may indeed have been cave-dwellers, as Khor is a word used to mean "cave" (e.g., 1 Sam. 14:11; Job 30:6).

It would have been a blessing if the spirit of the meeting of Esau and Israel at Peniel (Gen. 33) and at the burial of Isaac (Gen. 35:29) could have prevailed, but most accounts of interaction between Israel and Edom from this time on report strife and contention. For that reason, some of the prophets have used the name Edom or its Latin form Idumea as a symbol and synonym for "the wicked world" (e.g., Isa. 34:5-6; Ezek. 35:15; 36:5; D&C 1:36).

37:1-11 Now Israel loved Joseph more

The explanation of Israel's favoring Joseph "because he was the son of his old age" may suggest Jacob was much older when Joseph was born than is accounted for in the records of his twenty-year sojourn in Haran.

In any case, favor with his father put Joseph into disfavor with his brothers. His telling the prophetic dreams to his brothers, certainly the action of an immature seventeen-year-old, only increased the disfavor, for the meaning of the dreams was plain enough. Note that whereas his brothers "envied" Joseph, his father "observed" (Heb., lit., "watched, guarded") the concepts in the dreams (Gen. 37:11).

37:12-36 they conspired . . . to slay him. Reuben . . . said, Let us not kill him. . . . Judah said . . . let us sell him

An evil inspiration surely motivated Joseph's brothers to seek to use violence to eliminate the source of their irritation. Years later, however, Joseph gave the Lord credit for taking him into Egypt and giving him high status there. It is evident that the Lord helped to bring good out of an otherwise evil situation. Even though the brothers' callousness about their younger brother and their aged father was not caused by the Lord, He could have influenced them through Reuben not to kill Joseph and caused Judah to think of selling him rather than abandoning him in the pit. The traders unknowingly took him to trials and opportunities in Egypt.

Two peoples related to Jacob's family, the Ishmaelites and the Midianites, were involved in the trade and transfer. The nature of their negotiations is not entirely understandable from the information we have been given (Gen. 37:28, 36).

38:1-30 Judah . . . said . . . She hath been more righteous than I

The sordid account of Judah and Tamar contains some genealogical facts pertinent to an important family line, that of King David (Ruth 4:18-22; Luke 3:33). Perhaps it can assure readers that they can excel in spite of problems in their ancestry; Jesus of Nazareth was born of that genealogical line.

There is also some satisfaction to one's sense of justice in that a self-righteous man, who was willing to have his daughter-in-law punished for adultery, had to face up to his own sins.

39:1-6 his master saw that the Lord was with him, and . . . made all that he did to prosper

Though sold to Potiphar to serve, Joseph did not become a common slave. With the Lord's gracious help, he was soon overseer of Potiphar's house and then of all he possessed.

Potiphar was captain of Pharaoh's guard. This Pharaoh may have been one of the foreign line of Semitic rulers, called Hyksos, who formed the Fifteenth through the Seventeenth dynasties of Pharaohs of lower Egypt. They ruled between 1720 B.C. and 1550 B.C., the period during which, it is almost certain, Joseph lived in Egypt (BD, "Pharaoh"). This possibility is important later in the history of Joseph's family (Gen. 41:45).

39:7-20 thou art his wife: how then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?

Potiphar's wife's lack of connubial loyalty and moral and personal character contrasts strikingly with Joseph's concern for God's law, decency, fairness, and right. But though he was fortified against her wiles "day by day," a time came when the temptress had an opportunity to make him yield or suffer the consequences of her easily contrived accusations. Her assertion in Genesis 39:17 that he came to "mock" her is more pointed in the original Hebrew, which could imply that he came to "play," or "toy," with her.

There may be a clue to Potiphar's evaluation of the situation in his putting Joseph in prison rather than summarily executing him. The Lord helped Joseph in that incident also.

39:21-23; 40:1-23 the Lord was with Joseph . . . and that which he did, the Lord made it to prosper

Certainly Joseph was rewarded by the Lord for doing right; he soon was made a leader in the prison. There again he performed exemplary acts such as giving aid, advice, and comfort; and he brought blessings from the God whom he served. One blessing from God enabled him to interpret the revelatory dreams of two fellow prisoners—and eventually helped get him out of prison.

41:1-38 It is not in me: God shall give Pharaoh an answer

Patient service for two more years in prison was yet required of Joseph, however, until the butler whom he had helped finally mentioned him to Pharaoh (Gen. 40:14). Pharaoh's own troublesome dreams provided the opportunity.

Joseph shaved and groomed himself before appearing before Pharaoh. He immediately corrected Pharaoh's impression that Joseph of himself could "understand a dream to interpret it." Fulfilling a part of the responsibility of Abraham's seed, Joseph bore testimony of the Lord's name "in a strange land" (Abr. 2:6). He said that it was not he but God who could give an interpretation of the dreams. After giving the interpretation, Joseph explained that God had indeed shown what He was about to do in Egypt. Thus Pharaoh should understand that the idols of Egypt were bringing neither the plenty nor the dearth.

In recommending that Pharaoh select and appoint "a man discreet and wise" (Gen. 41:33) to collect one-fifth of the crops in the seven plenteous years to store up food against the famine years, Joseph did not suggest that he wanted the job for himself; it was Pharaoh who was impressed that they could not find another "such a one as this is, a man in whom the Spirit of God is" (Gen. 41:38).

41:39-45 Thou shalt be over my house, . . . only in the throne will I be greater than thou

Pharaoh believed that the Spirit of the God Joseph served had shown Joseph truths that made him more "discreet and wise" than anyone else; therefore Joseph was made chief minister, appropriately attired, decorated, acclaimed, and given a new name, Zaphnath-paaneah—usually interpreted to mean "he who reveals that which is hidden" (BD, "Zaphnath-paaneah").

In view of the emphasis placed on proper marriage in previous generations of the seed of Abraham, it is likely that Joseph's wife also was chosen for him through the Lord's influence. It may be assumed that the priests were of the same lineage as the kings of the dynasty; thus, Asenath, daughter of the priest of On, who was given to Joseph as a wife, could have been Semitic (see commentary on Gen. 39:1-6; cf. Gen. 24:1-5; 28:1-5; D&C 86:8). Joseph and Asenath became the parents of Manasseh and Ephraim (commentary on Gen. 41:50-52).

41:46-49 And he gathered up all the food of the seven years, . . . in the land of Egypt, and laid up the food in the cities

Joseph's wise implementation of his prophetic advice caused food to be stored throughout the land of Egypt during the seven good harvest years. The food was stored in cities in the farming areas (Gen. 41:48) and not all in one great central storage area for the whole country, as has sometimes been assumed.

"Corn" (Gen. 41:49) in King James English means "grain," not the American "maize" (BD, "Corn").

41:50-52 the firstborn Manasseh; . . . second . . . Ephraim

Joseph's work, his position of trust with Pharaoh, his marriage, and his children must have been a comfort, a joy, and a blessing to Joseph after all his years of lacking family love and appreciation. The name of his first child, Manasseh, may mean "causing to forget," as Joseph's comment suggests. Ephraim is from the Hebrew word for "fruit," with a dual suffix, suggesting double fruitfulness.

41:53-57 the seven years of dearth began . . . And Joseph opened all the storehouses . . . And all countries came

Note that Joseph retained control of distribution. Although at first glance his selling the grain rather than giving it away might seem unjust, anyone experienced in distributing aid knows of the problems and dangers inherent in a dole.

42:1-38 Joseph's brethren came, and bowed down themselves before him

Like many other foreigners who needed grain (Gen. 41:57), Joseph's brothers went to Egypt, where they bowed themselves before him, unknowingly fulfilling the old prophetic dream (Gen. 42:6b). Recognizing them and understanding their language, Joseph apparently seized the opportunity to test their integrity before divulging his identity. He challenged their claim that they were not spies but ten of one man's twelve sons—one of whom was at home "and one is not" (Gen. 42:13). Three days in jail with the prospect that only one would be allowed to return home must have terrified them. Then Joseph's release of all but one must have amazed them, as also his explanation that he did so be-cause he had reverence for God. In addition, they had a new challenge: to return with their youngest brother to prove their veracity.

Note how guilty they felt regarding the lost brother, how Reuben chastised them, and how Joseph reacted—obviously not enjoying their suffering. Joseph may have held Simeon rather than Reuben, the firstborn son and natural leader, because he appreciated Reuben's attitude and remembered Reuben's effort to frustrate his brothers' violent intent and lack of compassion when they sold him (Gen. 42:21-24; 37:22, 29-30).

The return of Israel's money by Joseph was generous, but even that was looked upon suspiciously by the brothers as a plot whereby God might yet punish them.

Back home again, Reuben offered a sure pledge in order to persuade their aged father to entrust him and his brothers with Benjamin on their return trip to get more food and redeem Simeon, but Jacob was afraid.

43:1-10 Judah said unto Israel . . . Send the lad with me, . . . I will be surety for him

The brothers did not go back to Egypt to obtain Simeon's release until their acute need of food persuaded their father to let them go in spite of his fear of losing Benjamin in addition to Simeon and Joseph. So Judah also volunteered to be surety for Benjamin. Recall that it had been Judah's suggestion years before that Joseph be sold so that his blood would not be shed (Gen. 37:26-27).

43:11-14 fruits . . . balm, . . . honey, spices, and myrrh, nuts, and almonds

How in a famine could any food or spices be available in Canaan for Israel's sons to take to Egypt? Cyclical droughts that may cause crops of grain and other annuals to fail do not ordinarily kill the trees that produce figs, dates, olives, nuts, and balm; shrubs and vines ordinarily survive and bloom, so some honey also is produced. Spices such as sage, oregano, or rosemary are produced by shrubs that survive most droughts.

43:15-34 Bring these men home, and slay, and make ready; for these men shall dine with me at noon

When the ten brothers, including Benjamin, returned to Egypt, they must have been amazed at being treated as honored guests, even having their feet washed before a noon meal and being seated according to rank in age. The money they brought back was not accepted by the steward: he said he had received it (he had indeed received it but had not kept it). Then what must they have thought of Benjamin's receiving a portion at dinner five times that of anyone else! If the brothers noticed that Joseph hurriedly left the room for a time, they could not likely have guessed he went out to weep—a second such occurrence (Gen. 43:30; 42:24). But he had one more test to perform before confessing his identity and reassuring them.

44:1-34 therefore . . . let thy servant abide instead of the lad

In the final test, Joseph contrived to cause Benjamin to be detained in Egypt. Judah proved true to his pledge—and more compassionate than he had been years before: he volunteered to take Benjamin's place rather than risk bringing down the gray head of their father in sorrow to the grave.

45:1-15 Then Joseph could not refrain himself

Joseph was so gratified that he wept again (Gen. 45:1-2; 43:30). Assured that they would not abandon their youngest brother and that they apparently were better men than they had been some twenty-five years before, Joseph divulged his identity. He hastened to reassure them that God had thus brought good out of that otherwise evil situation. Through Joseph, God had provided for the whole clan of Israel in the last five years of the famine. Father Jacob was to be brought, and all of his extended family could dwell in the good pasture lands of Goshen. Tender was their reunion.

45:16-24 the fame thereof was heard in Pharaoh's house, saying, Joseph's brethren are come; and it pleased Pharaoh

Pharaoh and his people were gracious to Joseph's family, but they had ample reason to be grateful: Joseph had not only saved the nation from the famine but had unified the whole land under a strong monarch (an achievement like that of the New Kingdom, in the Eighteenth Dynasty; but Joseph's time was much earlier than that).

Generously, Pharaoh urged Joseph to send for his father and all of his family and to have no concern about their goods in Canaan, "for the good of all the land of Egypt is yours" (Gen. 45:20). His generosity was shown in the goods and wagons he sent to help them move to Egypt. Pharaoh was solicitous, saying, "See that ye fall not out by the way" (Gen. 45:24).

45:25-28 Joseph is yet alive, and he is governor

It was understandably overwhelming to Jacob to learn that Joseph was not only alive but "governor over all the land of Egypt." Only when he heard what Joseph had said to his brothers and saw the Egyptian wagons could the aged father believe it.

46:1-4 I am God, the God of thy father: fear not to go down

At the southern outpost of their homeland, Beer-sheba, former home of Abraham and Isaac, God gave Jacob reassurance "in the visions of the night," tacitly sealing their covenant. He promised to go with Israel into Egypt, make them "a great nation," and bring them out again. In symbolic terms, God also promised Jacob that Joseph would attend him at his death (Gen. 45:4; 50:1-13).

46:5-27 besides Jacob's sons' wives . . . threescore and six

The fathers of the future twelve tribes of Israel were named along with their sons in a symbolic count of seventy; but their wives and their sons' wives, plus all the grandchildren, would have made a much larger total. Seventy is a tenfold multiple of seven, and seven symbolizes completeness. Note that Benjamin had the largest family—ten.

46:28-30 Now let me die, since I have seen thy face

Anyone who has a family can empathize with the emotions of gratitude, joy, and satisfaction in this family reunion. Jacob doubtless only intended to characterize his life as full and his wishes fulfilled when he cried, "Now let me die." He lived some seventeen more years (Gen. 46:30; 47:28).

46:31-34 when Pharaoh shall . . . say, What is your occupation? . . . say, Thy servants' trade hath been about cattle from our youth

So that this Semitic clan with their flocks and herds might have good grazing lands, and be as unobtrusive as possible among the Egyptians, Joseph advised his brothers to tell Pharaoh frankly that they were herdsmen. Evidently rough and rugged nomads were repulsive to the fastidious court class ("an abomination unto the Egyptians"), so Israel could be assured of being granted the grasslands in Goshen, as Joseph had hoped (Gen. 46:34; 45:10). Goshen lay in the eastern part of the Nile delta, allowing also a natural separation of the herdsmen from Egyptian tillers of the soil elsewhere up the river. Joseph's headquarters,if they were at the Hyksos capital Avaris, would have been nearby.

"Cattle" in King James English, as in the Hebrew word it translates, means the domesticated animals we call cattle, sheep, and goats.

47:1-6 in . . . Goshen let them dwell; and . . . make them rulers over my cattle

The delegation of Israelite brothers went to Pharaoh and did as Joseph had directed, and they were granted land as he had hoped. Appropriately, they were also given the job of caring for Pharaoh's livestock, whose flocks and herds were being much augmented by people trading for grain as the famine went on (Gen. 46:16-17).

47:7-12 Jacob blessed Pharaoh

When the old patriarch and shepherd was brought in for an audience with Pharaoh, Pharaoh was given a blessing by the patriarch. It was an unusual interaction between a leader with earthly power and a man with divine power.

Note how humbly Jacob responded to Pharaoh's inquiry about his age; perhaps he counted his one hundred thirty years as "few" because his father Isaac had lived to one hundred eighty and Abraham to one hundred seventy-five. Doubtless he counted his years as "evil" (Gen. 47:9b, "unpleasant") because of the loss of Rachel to early death, the disappearance of Joseph, and the trials incident to the famine.

The land of Goshen of Joseph's time was called "land of Rameses" by Moses (Gen. 47:11).

47:13-26 so the land became Pharaoh's

All Egypt was consolidated under Pharaoh as Joseph accumulated the people's money, livestock, and lands, and the people pledged their fealty (see commentary on Gen. 45:16-24). Seed was provided them for planting when conditions permitted; and four-fifths of the crop would be theirs thereafter, with one-fifth going to the government. Priestly possessions remained in the hands of the priests, however. Little is known from ancient Egyptian sources about the Hyksos period, and hence there is no confirmation of this biblical account of economic and political consolidation under Joseph's Pharaoh.

47:27-31 the time drew nigh that Israel must die . . . ; bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt

For the remaining five years of the famine (Gen. 45:6, 11) and for twelve more years (seventeen in all; Gen. 47:28), Jacob lived with his extended family in Egypt. Then he called for Joseph, who of course managed everything, and arranged for burial in the family tombs in the cave Machpelah at Hebron in southern Canaan (Gen. 23:9, 19; 25:9; 49:30).

48:1-22 And now thy two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, . . . are mine; as Reuben and Simeon, they shall be mine

Joseph took his sons to Jacob for patriarchal blessings. The patriarch reviewed for them the promises made by the Lord concerning Canaan and the return of Israel's people to it after he had made them "a multitude of people" (Gen. 48:4). He established the status of Joseph's two sons to be like that of his own first two sons, Reuben and Simeon, and declared that Joseph's issue thereafter would be called by the names of Ephraim and Manasseh, thus giving Joseph a double inheritance (Gen. 48:5a; 1 Chr. 5:1-2).

Although Joseph brought his firstborn conveniently to Jacob's right and the secondborn to his left, it was once again not priority of birth that determined the appointment to birthright leadership, for Ephraim was chosen. Note, however, that both would develop into great peoples, although Ephraim's descendants would be more numerous and found in "a multitude of nations" (Gen. 48:19). In poetic phrases, the grandfather-patriarch expressed his gratitude for the divine providence he had enjoyed and invoked it upon the boys. Dividing Joseph's heritage into two would give Joseph two "portions" in the future land of Israel.

49:1-2 Gather yourselves together, that I may tell you that which shall befall you in the last days

Jacob, who was Israel, next summoned all his sons that he might prophetically tell them their destiny in time to come. In the blessing of some was an indication of future tribal location and work. The heritage of some would be very good; some, not so good. Some blessings pertained to the individual being blessed; some, only to their progeny.

49:3-4 Reuben . . . Unstable as water, thou shalt not excel

Reuben, the firstborn, received a sad evaluation and prognosis. Recall the deed recounted in Genesis 35:22, which characterized him as "unstable," but remember also his good qualities, shown in his attitudes and actions toward Joseph. Watch in the scriptures hereafter for information about his tribe, and note that his descendants will be among the one hundred forty-four thousand high priests of all the tribes of Israel sealed in preparation for the launching of the millennial kingdom of the Lord (Rev. 7:5; D&C 77:11).

49:5-7 Simeon and Levi are brethren; . . . I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel

Ominous words also were spoken to Simeon and Levi, whose depredations at Shechem were recalled (Gen. 49:6c, 7b); and they individually would not be distinguished, for Jacob indicted them as impulsive and violent. Yet it is again noteworthy that one's descendants are not impaired by ancestors' misdeeds. Simeon's descendants would continue among Israel, later largely "scattered" within Judah (Josh. 19:1, 9; Judg. 1:3). Levi's descendants later were appointed to the priesthood and rendered service among all of the tribes of Israel (Num. 3; Deut. 33:8-11; Josh. 21).

49:8-12 The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come

The first of two detailed blessings is Judah's. Unlike the preceding three sons, he heard nothing about his own sins, qualifications, or individual destiny. He was told about the status of leadership his descendants would attain among the tribes, in the later nation of Israel, and in the messianic kingdom.

The lion is a symbol of rulership, and allusions to the "sceptre" and "lawgiver" envisioned the future Messiah. The royal power, beginning with David, would remain with his descendants until a divine lawgiver, "Shiloh" (Gen. 49:10c), would be born (indicated by the idiom "from between the feet"). The royal colt upon which he would ride and the "blood of grapes" which would stain his clothing identify the same figure spoken of in Isaiah 63:2 and Doctrine and Covenants 133:48—the Redeemer of Israel, the Savior. The last clauses of the blessing can be translated "His eyes shall be darker than wine and his teeth whiter than milk"; they imply his regal, distinctive countenance.

49:13-15 Zebulun . . . shall be for an haven of ships. . . . Issachar . . . the land . . . pleasant

The parts of the land of Canaan to be occupied by the tribes of Zebulun and Issachar are clearly indicated. The natural harbor north of Carmel, the good lands of the valley of Jezreel, and the plains of Megiddo were places of productivity but also of international conflict. Their inhabitants therefore suffered invasions and repressions. The area is mentioned in Isaiah's prophecy of the ministry of the Messiah (Isa. 9:1-4).

49:16-18 Dan . . . shall be . . . an adder in the path

Dan's name means "judged." His people's role as the first line of defense against invaders from the north may have been hinted at in this short blessing, but any such security would be temporal and temporary. It is better to await the salvation of the Lord.

49:19-21 a troop . . . royal dainties . . . goodly words

The military strife suffered by Gad and the prosperity of Asher's heritage can only be found later in the areas they inherited. Naphtali's inheritance was Galilee, the area of the later "goodly words" of Jesus, and the same envisioned by Isaiah, where "the people that walked in darkness have seen a great light" (Isa. 9:2). Perhaps the patriarch alluded to those events.

49:22-26 Joseph is a fruitful bough . . . whose branches run over the wall

As indicated already in the blessings upon the two branches of Joseph's family (see commentary on Gen. 48), they would be numerous and prosperous; here it is shown that their inheritance of land would be beyond the vineyards of Israel. Though adversaries harass them severely, they ultimately prevail, for their help comes from the God of Jacob. From Jacob, the Savior, the "Stone of Israel," the Good Shepherd, would come (D&C 50:44; commentary on Gen. 49:8-12). Jacob's blessings above and beyond those of his forefathers were invoked upon his birthright son (Gen. 49:26 and fn.; 1 Chr. 5:1-2; Deut. 33:13-18; D&C 133:30-32; 1 Ne. 3:4-22).

49:27 Benjamin . . . shall devour the prey, . . . divide the spoil

Benjamin's blessing may predict his descendants' prevailing, physically or spiritually, but it is difficult to know whether such descendants as King Saul or the apostle Paul could be meant. Applications of the blessing to the tribe of Benjamin are vague.

49:28-33 Jacob . . . yielded up the ghost, and was gathered unto his people

Jacob repeated his request for burial in Canaan and repeated his charge (Gen. 47:29-31). Then his spirit ("ghost") departed, to be "gathered unto his people" (Gen. 49:33a-b).

50:1-14 And Joseph went up to bury his father

With an extensive entourage and ceremony, the mourning for Jacob and his burial at Machpelah were accomplished. Forty days of embalming and seventy days of mourning in Egypt were followed by the long journey to Hebron in Canaan, seven days of mourning at the border beyond Jordan, and finally the burial in the cave at Machpelah.

50:15-21 ye thought evil against me; but God meant it unto good

Joseph responded with magnanimity to his brothers' entreaty for forgiveness and provided well for the whole extended family after the death of the old patriarch. The brothers had feared that only their father's presence had restrained Joseph from taking vengeance.

50:22-26 And Joseph saw Ephraim's children of the third generation; the children also of Machir the son of Manasseh were brought up upon Joseph's knees

Joseph's last fifty-five years and his grandfatherly roles are summed up in a sentence or two. Before his death, he reminded his people of the prophetic promises that one day they would return to the land of their inheritance. His last request was merely that his remains be taken with them and buried there in due time (Gen. 50:25b).

The inspired revision of the Genesis account includes some important prophecies by Joseph himself (Gen. 50:24a; JST Gen. 50:22-26). The Book of Mormon records prophecies that Lehi quoted from those made by Joseph (2 Ne. 3).

So ends the book of beginnings—Genesis.
