Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

DEUTERONOMY

The opening declaration of the book of Deuteronomy and some statements within it identify it as Moses' farewell, which he delivered beyond Jordan before he ascended Mount Nebo and departed from Israel and from the earth. It is also a review of some teachings he had given to the people at several places in the wilderness from the time they were near the Red Sea until they camped in Moab (Deut. 1:1-5).

Deuteronomy is an English word derived from a Greek word meaning "second law."

Along with detailed reviews of revelations recorded in the earlier books of Moses, Deuteronomy provides some new revelations appropriate to Moses' time but still valuable to us in the latter days. Indeed, it is marvelous how useful this book is now, more than three millennia later, for doctrine, reproof, correction, and instruction in righteousness, as Paul in his time said of scripture (2 Tim. 3:16).

There is a later reference to "the book of the law in the house of the Lord" (2 Kgs. 22:8), which helped engender a religious reform by young King Josiah, who lived about 621 B.C. Some scholars think Deuteronomy may have been that book.

Numerous statements are found within Deuteronomy itself concerning the writing and preservation of its contents and the reading of parts of it to the people in Moses' time; watch for them in the text and in the commentary.

In Deuteronomy, the cross-references given in the footnotes are particularly useful in locating previous accounts of events and teachings. They are also helpful in calling attention to reiteration of doctrines, admonitions, or organizational structures. It is helpful to read both the account in Deuteronomy and the earlier one, as they may supplement each other; often they differ in emphasis (e.g., Deut. 1:23a).

Commentary

1:1-5 These be the words which Moses spake unto all Israel

A general introduction to the book of Deuteronomy, the first five verses may have been supplied by an editor after Moses' time, but the verses confirm that the book contains Moses' words in Moab and at various times and places from the Red Sea to the Jordan.

1:6-8 The Lord our God spake unto us in Horeb, saying

Speaking to Israel, Moses recalled the Lord's command of forty years before that had directed them to start their great trek from Horeb, or Sinai, toward the promised land (Deut. 1:5-8 and fn.).

1:9-18 I spake unto you at that time, saying, I am not able to bear you myself alone. . . . So I took the chief of your tribes, wise men, and known, and made them heads over you

Moses reminded the children of Israel of the organizational structure he had introduced to govern them in the wilderness.

1:19-46 our brethren have discouraged our heart, saying, The people is greater and taller than we; the cities are great

In reviewing Israel's first approach to the promised land, the mission of the spies, and the people's response to their report, Moses emphasized the responsibility of the generation he was addressing, for some of them had been young at the time of the events he reviewed. In his farewell, Moses' purpose was evidently to emphasize the people's responsibility in much that had happened and would happen (e.g., Deut. 1:26-46).

2:1-3:11 the space in which we came from Kadesh-barnea, until we were come over the brook Zered, was thirty and eight years

Moses reviewed their long trek, the goodness of the Lord to them, the directions and the restrictions He had given them, the adversaries they had encountered, and the aid they had received. He reminded them of the reasons for the death of all the older generation during their time in the wilderness.

The Joseph Smith Translation is helpful in an additional verse: "But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us pass by him; for he hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, that the Lord thy God might deliver him unto thy hand, as he hath done this day" (JST Deut. 2:30).

Some ancient cultures were named who had lived earlier in parts of the land of promise. Their lands had been inherited by the people of Esau (Edom), Moab, and Ammon; and it was emphasized that these peoples, who were related to Israel, were not to be deprived of their lands, except in cases where they refused to let Israel pass through on the way to their own inheritances (Deut. 2:1-3:11 and fn.).

The "giants" could have been the large peoples who frightened the earlier Israelite scouts (Deut. 2:11; 3:11).

3:12-22 this land, which we possessed at that time, gave I unto the Reubenites . . . Gadites . . . and . . . Manasseh

The boundaries were delineated on the east of Jordan in Moses' time for the inheritances of the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and Manasseh (Num. 32 and fn.; Bible Map 5).

What the Lord had helped Israel to do should have given them hope of help in the future (Deut. 3:21-22).

3:23-29 I besought the Lord at that time, saying, . . . I pray thee, let me go over, and see the good land that is beyond Jordan

Moses regretted his loss of the privilege of entering the promised land and pointed out again that the people bore part of the blame (Deut. 3:26; 1:37; Num. 20:12; 27:12-14). And then he reviewed for them the appointment, ordination, and charge of Joshua to lead them into the promised land (Deut. 3:28; Num. 27:15-23).

4:1-4 Now therefore hearken, O Israel, unto the statutes and unto the judgments, . . . for to do them, that ye may live

Israel could possess the promised land and be preserved therein only through hearkening to the Lord's commandments, with no additions or deletions—an admonition relevant also to later dispensations (Deut. 4:2a).

The Israelites were warned against such moral and religious infidelity as that at Baal-peor (Deut. 4:3a-b).

4:5-8 Keep therefore and do them; for this is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the nations

Here is an excellent statement of the mission of Israel and of every true believer in the Lord and his gospel. It is related to Jesus' basic charge to believers: "Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven" (Matt. 5:16; Deut. 4:5-6).

4:9-24 Only take heed to thyself, . . . lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart . . . : but teach them thy sons, and thy sons' sons

Further admonitions included a reminder of their great and unique privilege of hearing "the voice of the words" of the Lord when he first gave the covenants and commandments on Mount Sinai, before "he wrote them upon two tables of stone" (Deut. 4:12; 4:13e; 4:10a).

The Israelites had been granted the privilege of hearing the Lord so that they could know for themselves, bear record of him, live his laws, and teach others; those who did so would be blessed and preserved. They had not been granted the privilege of seeing him lest they corrupt themselves and make a graven image to represent him (Deut. 4:15-16; Ex. 20:23). The Israelites and their seed should remain "unto him a people of inheritance" (Deut. 4:20). To reemphasize the seriousness of that responsibility, Moses recalled again the consequences of their infidelity, for which they and he had suffered (Deut. 4:20-24).

4:25-40 Did ever people hear the voice of God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou hast heard, and live?

After such great blessings, if the Israelites of that time or any time should forget God and turn from him, they would be scattered (Deut. 4:27-28); yet in later times if any would seek the Lord, turn to him, and be obedient to his laws, the covenant would be renewed (Deut. 4:29-31). Israel then and now should know that the Lord let his voice be heard and his miraculous help be seen so that his people might "keep therefore his statutes, and his commandments" that all may "go well" with them; then their days would be prolonged in his service (Deut. 4:33-40).

4:41-43 Then Moses severed three cities on this side of Jordan . . . That the slayer might flee thither

The three cities of refuge for the tribes east of the Jordan were appointed as promised (Num. 35:9-34).

4:44-49 These are the testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments, which Moses spake unto the children of Israel after they came out of Egypt, On this side Jordan

This summary of the place and content of Moses' farewell review is thought by some to be the end of his first speech to Israel on the occasion. More reviews follow.

5:1-5 And Moses called all Israel, and said unto them, Hear, O Israel . . . The Lord our God made a covenant with us in Horeb . . . not . . . with our fathers, but with us, even us, who are all of us here alive this day

Beginning the second part of his review, Moses summoned Israel and reminded the rising generation to whom he spoke of a truth that is as valid today as it was then: the covenant made on Sinai is valid for "us, even us, who are all of us here alive this day" (Deut. 5:3). The covenant was delivered to all Israel as a personal revelation (Deut. 5:4).

5:6-21 I am the Lord thy God . . . Thou shalt have none other gods before me

Moses included in his review of revelations the Ten Commandments received on Sinai. There are some differences from their form in Exodus 20; for example, in keeping the Sabbath day, we should remember times of servitude and be grateful for liberty (Deut. 5:15). Also, Deuteronomy urges us to "Honour thy father and thy mother . . . that it may go well with thee" (v. 16). In Hebrew "Thou shalt not covet" not only forbids one to "take pleasure in" the wife of one's neighbor but also admonishes (with a different Hebrew verb) not to desire his properties (Deut. 5:21b; Ex. 20:17a).

5:22-27 we have seen this day that God doth talk with man, and he liveth

It had been a special privilege for the multitude to hear all that great revelation, spoken to them by the voice of God, and delivered later through Moses on tables of stone. See their testimony of it and of their appreciation for the privilege (Deut. 5:24, 26). It was indeed so awe-inspiring that they had humbly asked to receive any further word from God through the prophet (Ex. 20:18-19; Deut. 5:27).

5:27-33 speak thou unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee; and we will hear it, and do it

Moses reminded all who were old enough to remember, and all who had been born or reared since that time, that they had promised to be obedient and keep the commandments (Deut. 5:27; Ex. 24:7). The Lord had heard their promise and expressed his wish that "there were such an heart in them, that they would" do so for their own good (Deut. 5:28-29; D&C 20:18-20). The Lord had then sent the people to their tents while he taught Moses all the "commandments, and the statutes, and the judgments" to be passed on to the people, promising that if they would hearken and "walk in all the ways which the Lord your God hath commanded," they would live long, and all would be well with them (Deut. 5:30-33).

6:1-4 Now these are the commandments, the statutes, and the judgments, which the Lord your God commanded to teach you . . . Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord

Moses opened his overview of divine laws with a proclamation: "Hear, O Israel: JEHOVAH is our God; JEHOVAH is one" (Deut. 6:4, translation mine). The first word, hear, is shema in Hebrew, so the whole verse is called the Shema by Jews; they recite it on special occasions, and the deeply religious desire to repeat the verse at the moment of death. They do not, of course, pronounce the name Jehovah but use a substitute, Adonai, which means "my Lord."

The law of God is for man's good: "Observe to do it; that it may be well with thee" (Deut. 6:3).

6:5 thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might

This primary law, if obeyed completely along with another "like unto it," would engender living in harmony with all the laws of God and teachings of his prophets, as Jesus said (Matt. 22:34-40; Lev. 19:18, 34). Loving God with heart, soul, and might would motivate us to behave in total harmony with him—mentally, spiritually, and physically.

6:6-25 these words . . . shall be in thine heart: And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children

Several admonitions in Deuteronomy 6:6-25 help promulgate the divine laws the Israelites received. Some symbolic reminders derived from them have been developed in Judaism and used in worship and teaching for many centuries; dialogues from the last of them are repeated during the Passover Seder (Deut. 6:8-9, 20-26). Jesus quoted an admonition from Deuteronomy during the trials and tests administered by Satan (Deut. 6:16; Luke 4:12).

7:1-5 Neither shalt thou make marriages with them . . . For they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may serve other gods

The most fundamental reason for Israelites not to marry out of the faith was so they would not adulterate their spiritual heritage and fail in their mission. The warnings against idolatrous practices still apply today to our trends in materialism and hero-worship. Marriage in the faith to raise up faithful children is still vital (Deut. 7:3a; TG, "Idolatry").

7:6-16 For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God

Holy people are those consecrated to the Lord's service to carry out the Abrahamic mission (Deut. 7:6a-d). Great are the blessings of the Lord to all who live his law and serve him.

7:17-26 If thou shalt say in thine heart, These nations are more than I; . . . Thou shalt not be afraid of them

The Lord's promise of help in overcoming worldly opposition has relevance for the Lord's people in latter days also, if they seek to overcome evils and replace them with righteous ways of life (Deut. 7:17-26 and fn.).

8:1-20 remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee

Moses reviewed for Israel the purposes of the tests in the wilderness and reminded the people again of the gracious gifts of the Lord. He described the beautiful and provident land they could expect if they would live worthily, and he gave them dire warnings lest they forget God's providence and boast, "My power and the might of mine hand hath gotten me this wealth" (Deut. 8:17). Israel would be no more blessed and preserved in the land than were the nations who went before if they behaved as those nations (Deut. 8:20; Lev. 18:24-30).

9:1-6 but for the wickedness of these nations the Lord doth drive them out from before thee

Moses and the Lord wanted Israel to know that it is not because of favoritism that one nation is displaced by another by the hand of the Lord. It was earlier revealed to Abraham that his seed could not inherit the land promised as long as "the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full" (Gen. 15:16; 1 Ne. 17:33-35). Even in Moses' time, Israelites were only relatively righteous compared to Canaanites; thus, they were warned not to pride themselves on their own supposed worthiness (Deut. 9:4-5).

9:7-29 Remember, and forget not, how thou provokedst the Lord thy God to wrath in the wilderness: from the day that thou didst depart out of the land of Egypt, until ye came unto this place

Lest they become proud, Moses reminded the Israelites of their apostasy at Sinai while he was on the mount for forty days and of their later complaints about lack of water, meat, and trouble-free entry into the promised land. Yet, he also reminded them, they were the Lord's people and greatly favored.

10:1-5 At that time the Lord said unto me, Hew thee two tables of stone like unto the first, and come up unto me, and make thee an ark of wood

Moses reviewed for them how and why a second set of tables of divine law was given: "save the words of the everlasting covenant of the holy priesthood" (Deut. 10:2b; D&C 84:17-26). Note that the tablets were kept in the ark Moses had made.

10:6-11 At that time the Lord separated the tribe of Levi

Although he had resumed the review of their journeys and the death of Aaron, Moses returned to an event that had occurred before the journey from Sinai began, when the Levitical priesthood was installed and the Aaronic priests began their ministry (Deut. 10:6, 8a-b). He told Israel how he had pleaded for them on the mount the second time that they might not be destroyed because of their perfidy.

10:12-22 And now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul

With a marvelous summary of the way that worshippers of the Lord should live, Moses began to review the principles that matter most in relationships with God and with each other.

11:1-9 Therefore thou shalt love the Lord thy God, and keep his charge, and his statutes, and his judgments, and his commandments, alway

Again Moses challenged the Israelites whose eyes had seen all the marvelous things the Lord had done, trying to motivate them to live according to the commandments reviewed for them that day so that they could be blessed.

11:10-17 For the land, whither thou goest in to possess it, is not as the land of Egypt, from whence ye came out

Crops in Egypt had been irrigated in various ways from the Nile river—in some cases by an apparatus operated by the feet— but the new land of Israel would be "a land of hills and valleys, and drinketh water of the rain of heaven." Anyone who has lived in the near-desert conditions of Israel (and of Utah) knows that it is a blessing when there is adequate rain and snow in their seasons; without them, people cannot live there (BD, "Rain").

11:18-21 Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in your soul

Again they were asked to remember and apply the laws, symbolically binding them on the hand, keeping them as "frontlets" between the eyes. Those phrases mean they were to abide by the words of the Lord in their thoughts, desires, and actions. They were to think of them going out and coming in, and teach them to each rising generation (cf. Deut. 6:4-12).

11:22-25 There shall no man be able to stand before you

Keeping God's commandments would also assure Israelites of possession of the land and the capacity to replace those "greater nations and mightier" (Deut. 11:23) who "had rejected every word of God, and . . . were ripe in iniquity" (1 Ne. 17:32-35).

11:26-32 Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse; . . . the blessing upon mount Gerizim, and the curse upon mount Ebal

Moses set out the parameters of free agency: to reach good ends, there are required actions; ignoring the requirements, or indulging in other actions through other motivations, may bring bad ends. Agency never was the right to do whatever one wishes and get whatever one wants.

The children of Israel were to gather in the center of the land of promise, in a valley at Shechem between Mount Ebal on the north and Mount Gerizim on the south; half were to be on the slope of each mountain to hear from Ebal lists of evils that would lead to curses and from Gerizim lists of good deeds that would bring blessings. This place for launching the commonwealth of Israel was also the place of Abraham's first altar in the land of promise, and it was the place of Jacob's first camp upon arriving back from Haran, where he also built an altar (Deut. 11:29a-b; Gen. 12:6-7; 33:18-20). An area there was called the "plains of Moreh" (or oaks of Moreh), and moreh means "director, teacher," just as torah means "direction, or doctrine." Both are from yareh, "to point out, give guidance." It was thus a place where the Lord gave guidance and direction to Abraham, Jacob, and their descendants (Gen. 12:6; Deut. 11:30).

12:1-32 These are the statutes and judgments, which ye shall observe to do in the land, which the Lord . . . giveth thee

Idol worship was to be destroyed and true worship would finally be established in a "place which the Lord your God shall choose"; that place would be Jerusalem, a fact not revealed at this time but later (Deut. 12:5a-b).

Better discipline in diet, behavior, and worship was anticipated, with people living the laws of God and not each doing whatever is "right in his own eyes." Most certainly they must avoid the abominations of the Canaanites—but they did not always avoid them (Deut. 12:8, 31a-c).

13:1-18 If there arise among you a prophet, a dreamer of dreams, . . . saying, Let us go after other gods, . . . Thou shalt not hearken unto the words of that prophet, or that dreamer

The people of Israel were given a warning (not unlike another given thousands of years later in the latter days) to safeguard them against prophets inspired by the wrong spirits. Such were condemned to death, even if they were family members. It was the same warning in different terms that Jesus later gave his followers that a false teacher is more to be feared than a murderer. Infidelity to God is degenerative because it engenders infidelity to all his principles, laws, and doctrines (cf. D&C 50:1-8; Matt. 10:28).

14:1-21 the Lord hath chosen thee to be a peculiar people unto himself. . . . Thou shalt not eat any abominable thing

In this review of clean and unclean meats, remember that it is ceremonial and symbolic "uncleanness" that is considered. Non-Israelites were not bound by these specifications; therefore, to give to the alien or stranger an animal not slaughtered in the kosher manner, or one that had been killed accidentally, could be helpful in some circumstances. If done carelessly or for profit, however, it would be unjustifiable, and the Joseph Smith Translation indicates it was forbidden (Deut. 14:21a-b; Lev. 11; BD, "Clean and Unclean"; on meat with milk, Deut. 14:21c).

14:22-29 Thou shalt truly tithe all the increase

The tithe, or tenth, of all increase, was ordinarily contributed "in kind"; but if the contributor lived too far from the place specified to take it, he could instead sell the tithing goods, carry the proceeds to the place of worship, and there purchase "whatsoever thy soul lusteth after" (in the KJV, the phrase "lusteth after" is used to translate a word meaning simply "desires" or "yearns for"). Therewith he could make his contributions and prepare the thank-feast associated with tithe-paying. Some of the food items contributed were to be used by the priests and Levites, and some were given to the poor (BD, "Levites," "Tithe"; TG, "Tithing").

The use of wine and other fermented fluids called "strong drink" may surprise latter-day worshippers who are not to use them, but they were permitted in ceremonial exercises in ancient Israel; only excessive or improper use was forbidden (TG, "Drunkenness"; "Temperance"; "Word of Wisdom"). Fermented drinks were not to be used by the priests in service and not by Nazarites at all (Deut. 14:26; Lev. 10:9-11; Num. 6:2-4).

15:1-6 At the end of every seven years thou shalt make a release

Israelites were not to exact repayment of loans from fellow Israelites beyond any sabbatical year; however, they were not expected to release strangers from their responsibility to repay. If Israelites would obey God's commandments, they would be blessed with prosperity and be able to lend to others and have no need of borrowing from them (Deut. 15:1a-b; 15:4a; Ex. 21:1-6; TG, "Sabbatical Year").

15:7-11 thou shalt not harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother

Israelites were to be charitable always and were not to slacken when the sabbatical year was nigh because they feared loss of repayment. As Jesus later said, the poor will always be with us (Matt. 26:11; Deut. 15:11).

15:12-18 in the seventh year thou shalt let him go free

Recall the detailed regulations of the release of Hebrew servants (Lev. 25:35-55).

15:19-23 All the firstling males . . . thou shalt sanctify unto the Lord

The sanctification and sacrifice of a portion of each firstborn male among the clean animals was followed by a ceremonial meal in which the remaining flesh was roasted and eaten (Deut. 15:19-23, fn., and commentary). The injunction regarding blood was reiterated (Deut. 15:23; Gen. 9:4; Lev. 3:17; and commentary).

16:1-17 Three times in a year shall all thy males appear before the Lord thy God in the place which he shall choose

The three major annual feasts were reviewed (Ex. 23:14-17; Lev. 23; and commentary; BD, "Feasts").

Although only males (Deut. 16:16) were ordered to worship at the central place—which was Jerusalem for much of the biblical period after Solomon—all the holy days have become family affairs and are kept by men, women, and children in home and synagogue.

16:18-20 Judges and officers shalt thou make . . . Thou shalt not wrest judgment

Here is another reminder of the system of judges, introduced and amplified earlier; there is much in scripture about righteous judges and judgment (Ex. 18:13-26; Deut. 1:9-18; TG, "Judge"; "Judgment"; "Justice").

16:21-22 Thou shalt not plant thee a grove of any trees near unto the altar of the Lord thy God

The prohibition against planting groves near their places of worship was to prevent them from becoming shrines of fertility cults. Apostasy and adopting Canaanite religious practices was a constant problem for Israelites in the land of Canaan and became a major cause of Israel's decline and destruction centuries later (Deut. 16:21-22 and fn.).

17:1 not sacrifice . . . any bullock, or sheep, wherein is blemish

It is not known how well Israelites understood that sacrificial animals had to be perfect to be in similitude of the divine Redeemer to come, but it is a good point for us to appreciate (Lev. 1:10; Mosiah 13:31-32).

17:2-7 If there be found among you . . . man or woman, that hath. . . . gone and served other gods, and worshipped them

The strict laws and severe punishments pertaining to idolatry were particularly important while the worship of the Lord was being established (Deut. 13:1-18 and commentary).

17:8-13 If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment. . . . being matters of controversy within thy gates

Matters of judgment were part of the responsibility of the priests and Levites, along with teaching and officiating at the altars of the Lord. Theirs was a vital part of the Israelite government (Deut. 16:18-20 and commentary).

17:14-20 When thou art come unto the land . . . and shalt say, I will set a king over me

A prophetic anticipation of kings in Israel restricted and instructed those future rulers. They were to educate themselves to remain humble and obedient by reading every day in their own copy of the laws of God. The principles apply to kings, and to all of us, but it is evident later that neither Saul, David, nor Solomon lived out their lives in accord with them; and only a very few kings after them did so.

18:1-8 The priests the Levites, and all the tribe of Levi . . . shall eat the offerings of the Lord

The provisions for the Levites' sustenance were summarized (Deut. 18:1-8 and fn.).

18:9-14 When thou art come into the land . . . thou shalt not learn to do after the abominations of those nations

Moses again condemned the spiritualistic divination by the peoples of the land Israel was about to take over (Deut 18:9-14 and fn.).

18:15-22 The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet . . . like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken

The special spokesman for God thus anticipated was to be Jesus himself. In the last days others would also have some leadership responsibilities like those of Moses (Deut. 18:15b; D&C 103:16; 107:91).

19:1-10 Thou shalt separate three cities . . . that every slayer may flee thither

A review was given of the procedure for guaranteeing the right of a just trial to one who may have caused another's death (Num. 35:9-34; Deut. 4:41-43; Josh. 20).

19:11-21 at the mouth of two witnesses, or . . . three witnesses, shall the matter be established

Israel was reminded of some important procedures for judging those charged with murder or other evils.

20:1-4 When thou goest out to battle against thine enemies . . . be not afraid of them: for the Lord thy God is with thee

Faith in God could give Israel assurance in their struggles and confidence in their destiny. Some dramatic fulfillments of these promises are recorded later.

20:5-9 let him go and return unto his house, lest he die

Generous exemption from military service was granted anyone newly establishing a home, and even one faint at heart could be excused from battle!

20:10-18 When thou comest nigh unto a city to fight against it, then proclaim peace unto it

Cities outside Canaan, if they negotiated peacefully, could become tributaries to Israel and be left intact. Canaanite cities were to be destroyed because of the likelihood of corrupt peoples corrupting Israel (Deut. 20:15-18).

20:19-20 thou shalt not destroy the trees

During times of siege and conquest, trees that produced food were not to be cut down, but other trees might be cut down to make siege implements.

21:1-9 If one be found slain in the land . . . , lying in the field, and it be not known who hath slain him

People in a city near a field where a homicide victim was found were to make a special sacrifice and let all citizens declare whether they were innocent of the homicide; and if all so declared, the Lord was supplicated not to hold the city guilty.

21:10-14 among the captives a beautiful woman, . . . that thou wouldst have her to thy wife

Permission was given to marry certain captives, but because that would be an exception to the law forbidding marriage with peoples of the land, it has been supposed to pertain to peoples other than the Canaanites, although no reason for it was declared (Deut. 7:3-4).

21:15-17 If a man have two wives, one beloved, and another hated, . . . he may not make the son of the beloved firstborn before the son of the hated, which is indeed the firstborn

Favoritism was not to be shown the child of a favorite wife in the matter of inheritances; thus justice would not be denied.

21:18-21 If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son . . . aglutton and a drunkard . . . all the men of his city shall stone him with stones, that he die; so shalt thou put evil away from among you

Discipline and punishment could be severe within a family. It is to be hoped this kind of execution was seldom used.

21:22-23 if a man have committed a sin worthy of death . . . and thou hang him upon a tree: His body shall not remain all night upon the tree

"According to Rabbinical commentaries, to leave a body hanging was a degradation of the human body and therefore an affront to God, in whose image man's body was made" (Deut. 21:23a). An alternate translation of "he . . . is accursed of God" is "it is an affront to God." Note the urgent observance of that law at the time of Jesus' crucifixion (Deut. 21:23a-c).

22:1-12 Thou shalt not

Moses reiterated a series of rules against keeping lost animals, passing by a brother who needs help, transvestite deceit, robbing a nest and killing its occupant, failing to protect against hazards at home, sowing mixed seeds, plowing with a mixed team of animals, and mixing fabrics in a garment. Some of these were for obvious practical purposes; some perhaps reminded Israel of the urgent principle of purity.

The "fringes" on garments were reminders of covenants (Deut. 22:12a).

22:13-30 If any man take a wife, and go in unto her, and hate her, And give occasions of speech against her, and bring up an evil name upon her

A man must not impute unchastity to his wife or commit adultery with another's wife or with a virgin. If rape was committed in a field, out of the city, so that a damsel's outcry would not be heard, he who does it is to be considered guilty, but she is free. If a man was intimate with a virgin not betrothed, he must pay a heavy fine, marry her, and never "put her away." Finally, the prohibition against incest was reiterated (Deut. 22:13-30 and fn.).

23:1-8 shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord

In the Church in the latter days there are no restrictions against converting and baptizing any worthy person, so proscriptions set out here are not in force. Indeed, even in Old Testament times, Ruth, a Moabitess, accepted the God of Israel, married in Israel, and became an ancestress in a most important line (Ruth 1:4, 16; 4:9-13, 18-22; Matt. 1:1-17).

It is not clear why the Moabites and Ammonites were not to "enter into the congregation of the Lord" whereas Edomites and Egyptians were acceptable (Deut. 23:7-8). Physical impairments, lineage, or faults of one's parents would not keep anyone from baptism, priesthood, or temple covenants today.

23:9-14 any man, that is not clean by reason of uncleanness

The regulations here pertained not only to ritual uncleanness but also to practical matters of keeping the body and clothing clean of excretions. Even a way to dispose of body wastes was described. Such procedures could be helpful still in many undeveloped countries.

23:15-25 Thou shalt not

Another list of rules provided sanctuary for refugees as well as forbade prostitution, usury, failure to pay vows, and illicit harvesting.

24:1-25 When a man hath

Reviewed were rules for annulment, military exemption, pledges, stealing, quarantine, oppressing servants, individual responsibility, fairness, and gleaning.

It was decreed once again that individuals shall be punished only for their own sins (Deut. 24:16; Ezek. 18; A of F 2; Ex. 20:5-6 and commentary).

25:1-18 If there be

Moses reviewed punishments for crimes, moderation of punishments, provisions for widows, and rules on fairness, violence, honesty, and vengeance. In the book of Ruth is an example of levirate marriage in accord with this law and also an example of the prescribed procedure for those unwilling to accept that responsibility (Deut. 25:5-10; 25:9a).

26:1-15 take of the first of all the fruit

When offering the firstfruits of the land in their first harvest, the Israelites were to recall the history of their many blessings from the Lord and pay their tithes. Worthy individuals could well preface their supplications for blessings with a declaration of innocence and righteousness.

26:16-19 Thou hast avouched the Lord this day to be thy God . . . And the Lord hath avouched thee . . . to be his peculiar people

Moses ended the review with a reiteration of the covenant. The purpose of divine law is to help covenant people improve in their lives and mission and help others become servants of the Lord (Deut. 26:18a; D&C 100:15-17).

27:1-3 when ye shall pass over Jordan . . . set thee up great stones, and plaister them with plaister: And thou shalt write upon them all the words of this law

A monument to be built where the Israelites crossed over Jordan would remind succeeding generations about the blessings of the Lord in leading them into the promised land (Josh. 4; 8:30-36).

27:4-26 And there shalt thou build an altar unto the Lord

The altar and the monument were two separate structures, not just one. When Israel arrived in the promised land, a general conference was to be held between two mountains, Gerizim and Ebal; this is a review of the revelation about that conference, with more details on the curses that would result from evil-doing (Deut. 27:11-26; cf. 11:26-32; Josh. 8:30-35).

28:1-68 if thou shalt hearken diligently . . . all these blessings shall come on thee, . . . if thou wilt not hearken . . . all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee

One-fifth of this chapter is a more complete catalog of the material, physical, and spiritual blessings to be earned by living according to the law; the remaining four-fifths of the chapter detail the curses that come from ungodly behavior, including a return to bondage.

These alternative blessings and curses characterize what some call "the deuteronomic idea," but they are common in all the scriptures and are in force in the latter days (Deut. 28:15-68; D&C 41:1; D&C 59; 130:20-21; TG, "Blessings"; "Obedience"; "Punishment"; "Disobedience").

29:1-28 These are the words of the covenant, which the Lord commanded Moses to make with the children of Israel in the land of Moab, beside the covenant which he made with them in Horeb

If the covenant of Horeb was mainly a covenant of sacrifice to God, then this was mainly a covenant of obedience to God. Obedience would help people prosper, and disobedience would put people into bondage like that of Egypt, even a scattering abroad. All nations would know that the Israelites had forsaken the covenant of the Lord God of their fathers if they were exiled.

29:29 The secret things belong unto the Lord . . . but those things which are revealed belong unto us

Moses urged all of Israel to learn and then to act in accord with all that God has revealed and be ready for more revelation.

Many mysteries "belong unto the Lord," for humankind does not yet know or understand everything; but those things that have been revealed should be learned and heeded, for our benefit. In later dispensations it has been promised that as more light is needed, it will be given (D&C 121:26-31).

30:1-20 when all these things are come upon thee, . . . And [thou] shalt return unto the Lord thy God, and shalt obey his voice . . . then the Lord thy God will turn thy captivity

Moses prophesied the scattering and the gathering of Israel; and for every person then or now the principle is clear: "See, I have set before thee this day life and good, and death and evil" (Deut. 30:15). It is the eternal principle of agency: Choose what you will, and do what you must to get it; or do what you will, and content yourself with what you must get. The Lord plainly set before Israel the alternatives, and he pleaded with the people to love him enough to obey his voice; for only thereby would any people be free from captivity.

31:1-8 the Lord hath said unto me, Thou shalt not go over this Jordan . . . The Lord thy God, he will go over before thee

Nearing the end of his farewell address, the great leader Moses, then one hundred twenty years old, encouraged the Israelites to be strong and faithful so the Lord could lead them into the promised land. Moses knew well enough the reasons that he himself could not enter with them, but he was not negative; he encouraged the people and Joshua, the new leader, to be strong and trust in the Lord, who would go with them and not fail them.

31:9-13 Moses wrote this law, and delivered it unto the priests the sons of Levi, which bare the ark of the covenant

Internal evidence indicates that Moses wrote these scriptures during his life, provided for their preservation, and ordered their public review every seven years.

31:14-23 Behold, thy days approach that thou must die

As preparations for Moses' farewell were made, Joshua was summoned with him to the tabernacle to receive his calling and charge. Note that Moses was told he would die and sleep with his fathers (Deut. 31:14, 16; but see Deut. 34:5-6 and commentary).

Moses was then instructed by the Lord to write certain memorable things into a song and teach it to the people. It would help them remember vital facts (Deut. 31:19, Deut. 21; Deut. 32).

31:24-30 Take this book of the law, and put it in the side of the ark of the covenant . . . that it may be there for a witness

Moses finished writing the laws of the Lord in a book and preserved it in the sacred ark, which was in the tabernacle and the temple for centuries as a witness to right and wrong for all.

32:1-47 And Moses came and spake all the words of this song in the ears of the people

In typical parallel lines of Hebrew poetry the song began:

Give ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak; and hear, O earth, the words of my mouth.

Then, with many such paired phrases, Moses reminded the people of the divine origins of true doctrine, the sure dependability of the Lord's justice, his compassion in having "bought" them and brought them as a father from bondage, their favored status and responsibility, the divine help given them in the wilderness despite their rebelliousness, warnings that God is "jealous" of his chosen servants (vitally concerned with their welfare), the traumas of his punishment if people are negligent in behavior, the inferiority of other religions, and the Israelites' lamentable state if they forsake the true God and he forsake them. Moses spoke these things to the people and to Hoshea (Joshua), admonishing them to set their hearts upon all that he had testified and teach their children accordingly. It would not be a vain thing for them; it would be their way to life.

32:48-52 Get thee up into this mountain . . . and behold the land of Canaan

Moses was directed to a mountain overlooking the Jordan crossing (Heb., avarim; English, abarim; Deut. 32:49; Num. 27:12-13 and commentary); a high point was Mount Nebo, from which he could view the land of promise. Then he would depart from this world (Deut. 34:5-6). Moses had trespassed against the Lord, failing to sanctify Him when bringing forth water from the rock, but even in death he would leave a lesson for the benefit of others' lives (Deut. 32:51a-b, 52).

33:1-25 And this is the blessing, wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the children of Israel before his death

Using again the types and parallels of Hebrew poetry, Moses left a blessing for the twelve tribes of Israel, as Jacob had done before his death (Deut. 33:1c). He began by reviewing briefly the Lord's help given from Sinai to Seir, and in Paran in between, to his "saints," those sanctified by commitment to their covenants with him. When Moses delivered the law to them, "he was king in Jeshurun" (Deut. 33:5;Heb. lit., "uprightness").

The sequence of the tribes in the blessing follows generally a geographical sweep, proceeding with tribes to be located in the south, center, and north parts of the land. Many of the blessings mention natural resources or other geographical features of the areas.

Reuben was blessed only that his tribe would not dwindle in number; this was a nominal blessing for the son who could have been the birthright bearer ( Gen. 49:3-4; 1 Chr. 5:1).

Simeon was not mentioned here but was later, in the distribution of the land adjoining Judah (Josh. 19:1, 8-9; Judg. 1:3, 17).

Judah was blessed to be heard of the Lord, to be self-reliant, and to be helped against adversaries. His blessing by Jacob anticipated the line of kings and the Messiah as his descendants (Gen. 49:8-12).

Levi had been made the priesthood-bearing tribe, and the breastplate bearing the divine Urim and Thummim was to be kept and used by the chief priest. Though one great Levite, Moses, had "proved" (tried) the Lord at Massah and Meribah (striking the stone for water), and though the Levites would not be a familial unit like the others because they were scattered among all the other tribes, they would be preserved to teach all Israel, administer justice, and officiate at altars in offering sacrifices.

Benjamin would be near the future holy dwelling of the "beloved of the Lord." That, of course, would be at Jerusalem, whose temple site would lie along Benjamin's east border.

Joseph was given a multifaceted blessing; it alluded to lands and precious things "of the ancient mountains" and the "lasting hills." It included promises of leadership, glory, and the power ("horns") to gather the other tribes at last from all ends of the earth (Deut. 33:13-17 and fn.). It is apparent that the mission of Joseph's seed through Manasseh and Ephraim was to be far-reaching in time and in eternity.

Zebulun and Issachar were foreseen enjoying their homes and surroundings, and with good reason: their settlement would be in the choice valley of Jezreel, with good water from surrounding mountains, good soil, and a river that emptied into Israel's only natural harbor.

Gad would inherit the land already allotted them east of Jordan by Moses. Their territory was extensive, including the border lands of Israel, which was to be guarded as a lioness guards her terrain.

Dan was also blessed as to territory, something of a "leap" northeastward from Bashan on a common route of travel and invasion. Moses made no mention of Dan's original allocation on the Mediterranean coast, near Philistine country (Josh. 19:40-48; Judg. 18).

Naphtali was to inherit the sea (Deut. 33:23b) and its surrounding district in Galilee, a rich area agriculturally.

Asher, in the northern highlands, would be rich in olive oil production; the bars, or defense (Deut. 33:25a), of this northern boundary tribe of Israel would be strong.

33:26-29 There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun

Jeshurun ("the upright") was an idealistic title for Israel in this benediction in praise of the God of righteousness. The last half-dozen poetic strophes combine Moses' praise of God with felicitation of Israel.

34:1-4 And Moses went up . . . unto the mountain of Nebo . . . And the Lord shewed him all the land

Moses did at last see the promised land, which can be seen from the peak called Nebo on the mountain "divide" (Heb., Pisgah) east of the north end of the Dead Sea. Tribal territories named in Deuteronomy 34 include some of those given earlier in the tribal blessings. It has been supposed that Joshua was the author of this last chapter of Deuteronomy.

34:5-8 So Moses the servant of the Lord died there in the land of Moab

The writer of these verses understood that Moses "died" and that the Lord buried him; but he simply may not have known how Moses departed from this earth, just as the Nephites did not know of Alma's death and burial: they understood that Alma, like Moses, had been "buried by the hand of the Lord"; but they also had scriptures which said "the Lord took Moses unto himself" and supposed that "he has also received Alma in the spirit, unto himself" (Alma 45:18-19). What is meant in Jude 1:9 regarding Satan and Michael disputing over the "body" of Moses is not now evident.

Moses and Elijah appeared to Jesus and three apostles on the Mount of Transfiguration; Elijah is known to have been taken from earth without the ordinary process called death; thus it may be that both Elijah and Moses were "transfigured" and had not "died" in the ordinary sense (2 Kgs. 2:11; Matt. 17:3).

34:7-8 Moses was an hundred and twenty years old when he died; his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated

No commentary is needed on that remarkable statement.

There was probably much more than mere ceremonial weeping and mourning for Moses during those thirty days. The people must have been sad indeed as they watched their great leader depart for the last time from camp and ascend the gray-white hills east of the Dead Sea to the heights of Nebo, never to return to them.

34:9 Joshua . . . was full of the spirit of wisdom; for Moses had laid his hands upon him: and the children of Israel hearkened unto him, and did as the Lord commanded Moses

It is gratifying to read this report; would that such a report could still have been made many years later in Israel.

34:10-12 And there arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face

Recall the earlier prophecy regarding the Messiah as a prophet like unto Moses (Deut. 18:15, 18). There were other prophets like Moses in some ways, but no one altogether like unto him.

Joshua was well able by nature, endowment, and divine appointment to take over as leader of the Israelites, even though he was not the equal of Moses in intimacy with the Lord. Each leader appointed by the Lord has an endowment to perform his own mission, if he will faithfully try.

The book of Deuteronomy fittingly concludes the Torah, the teachings, guidance, and testimony of Moses, prophet of the Lord.
