Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

JUDGES

The book of Judges covers the first centuries of Israel's cycles of success and failure in the newly occupied land of Israel, where they should have become "a peculiar treasure . . . a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation" (Ex. 19:5-6); by the end of the book, the Israelites' failure to fulfill the mission of Abraham to bring blessings to "all the families of the earth" is manifestly evident (TG, "Israel, Mission of," "Abrahamic Covenant"; BD, "Abraham, Covenant of").

The first two chapters in the book of Judges review the situation at the close of Joshua's era and preview the coming cycles of success and failure in Israel's efforts to be God's exemplary nation. Details follow about several of the judges (Heb., shophetim, "leaders, defenders, judges"). Most of them were raised up by the Lord to supplement the priestly leaders in governing Israel, but some who were not raised up by the Lord are also covered. One of them was Jephthah, a somewhat tragic man whom the people themselves summoned to lead them. A different tragic case is Samson, who was called of God even before his birth but seems to have failed his divine calling. The book concludes with a few examples of the extremes of evil that developed during periods of Israel's deep apostasy when "every man did that which was right in his own eyes" (Judg. 17:6; 21:25).

Commentary

1:1-15 Now after the death of Joshua . . . Israel asked the Lord, saying, Who shall go up for us against the Canaanites first

Although the narrative of the book of Judges begins "afterthe death of Joshua," some events prior to his death are reviewed.

When Israel asked who should begin to occupy their lands, the Lord responded that Judah should go. The men of Judah invited men of Simeon to accompany them, and they attacked Bezek, Jerusalem, Hebron, and Debir. The mutilation of Adoni-bezeq was a common enough practice, but it hardly seems justifiable by Israel. It is surprising that Adoni-bezek could moralize about it and count it as just (Judg. 1:7).

Though Jerusalem was breached and burned, it was still held by Jebusites until King David's time (Judg. 1:8, 21; Josh. 15:63; 2 Sam. 5:4-9; 1 Chr. 11:4-9).

Debir, or Kirjath-sepher, near Hebron, was within the inheritance of Caleb of Judah; part of this account was told before (Josh. 15:13-19).

1:16 And the children of the Kenite, Moses' father in law, went up . . . with the children of Judah . . . and dwelt among the people

A promise by Moses was fulfilled when the Kenites, a special Abrahamic clan, went into Judah (Judg. 1:16; Num. 10:29-32; BD, "Kenites").

1:17-20 And Judah went with Simeon his brother, and they slew the Canaanites

Further clearing of Canaanite territory by the armies of Judah and Simeon are here recounted. But Gaza, Askelon, and Ekron were Philistine cities whose "valley" (coastal plain) could not be overcome because of their iron-bound chariots; indeed, the Philistines remained dominant there sporadically in the reigns of David and Solomon.

1:21 And the children of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites that inhabited Jerusalem

Jerusalem, or some part of it, was conquered by Judah, but it appears that not all of the city was purged of Jebusites. Part of the city lay within Judah's inheritance and part within Benjamin's, so some reports may pertain only to one part.

1:22-29 And the house of Joseph . . . went up against Bethel

Some of the territories of Ephraim and Manasseh had been previously occupied but not divested of Canaanites. Additional efforts to remove them are recounted, but those efforts were never entirely successful (Judg. 1:27-29; Josh. 16; 17).

1:30-36 Zebulun . . . Asher . . . Naphtali . . . Dan

The tribes of Zebulun, Asher, Naphtali, and Dan also failed to drive out all former inhabitants but instead dwelt among them; and the ways of those inhabitants became temptations and "thorns" in their sides as Moses had warned, Joshua had reiterated, and an angel later reinforced (Num. 33:55; Josh. 23:13; Judg. 2:1-3). The Israelites' adoption of Canaanite morals and religious practices became one of the causes of Israel's eventual overthrow (TG, "Apostasy of Israel").

The neighboring Ephraimites ("the house of Joseph") subjected some of the Amorites, but the Danites had difficulty with their inheritance south of Ephraim and later moved to a northern outpost (Josh. 19:40-48; Judg. 1:34-36; 18).

2:1-6 And an angel of the Lord came up from Gilgal to Bo-chim

The first part of Judges 2 also recounts some events that occurred before Joshua's death; it is possible that this is the message from the earlier angelic visit. Note that it was given in the first person as a message from the Lord himself, warning against adopting Canaanite ways (Josh. 5:13-15).

2:7-9 And the people served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders that outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great works of the Lord, that he did for Israel

This summary repeats a previous one. The people of that generation served the Lord, but transmission of faith and responsibility to the next generation did not succeed well (Josh. 24:31; Judg. 2:7, 10-13).

2:10-23 and there arose another generation after them, which knew not the Lord, nor yet the works which he had done

Here is the regrettable report of apostasy and its results, though the Lord raised up leaders to combat it. A preview tells of the cycles of repentance, prosperity, apostasy, suffering, and repentance again, which continue throughout the book of Judges. Because the Israelites did not long remain righteous after any of the judges the Lord raised up, he could not cause them to prosper.

3:1-7 these are the nations which the Lord left, to prove Israel

The angel had warned that because the Israelites had not driven out the Canaanites and Amorites but had made treaties with them and had not destroyed their places of worship, the Lord would not do it for them (Judg. 2:1-6). Thus those peoples and their ways were the tests "to prove Israel." Israel tended to fail the tests.

3:8-11 Therefore the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he sold them into the hand of Chushan-rishathaim

For eight years, the Israelites suffered and repented; then they were given a "deliverer" (Heb., moshia', "a rescuer, or savior") who led them in a war to free them from their oppressor. This first "judge" was Othniel, nephew of Caleb (Judg. 1:13). Note that it was the Spirit of the Lord that gave him power to lead Israel.

The oppressor is not well identified, for he is called by a derogatory name in Hebrew, meaning "Cushite of the double wickedness." He was king of a place called, in Hebrew, "Aram of the double rivers," here rendered in English as Mesopota-mia. It may have been in Aramea, near two tributaries of the Euphrates.

After that war, Israel had rest for forty years, a number which often represents a lifetime or career of one individual.

3:12-30 the children of Israel did evil again . . . and the Lord strengthened Eglon the king of Moab against Israel

Eglon (Heb., lit., "round one"), an obese king of Moab, was the next oppressor of a part of Israel, occupying an area near Jericho, or "the city of palm trees." He was opposed by an Israelite "deliverer" named Ehud, a Benjamite. The bold personal attack of Ehud upon Eglon is told in gory detail. Eighty years of rest followed.

3:31 after him was Shamgar the son of Anath

No details are known about Shamgar, the next deliverer of Israel. He had a Hittite or Philistine name and was the son of Anath, whose name is that of a Canaanite goddess. Perhaps he was a Philistine rebel. His weapon, an "ox goad," would have been effective as a short stabbing spear, having a staff six to ten feet long and a point of metal or stone. His name appears again in a poetic review of conditions before Deborah's term as a judge (Judg. 5:6).

4:1-9 Israel again did evil . . . when Ehud was dead. And the Lord sold them into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan . . . And Deborah, a prophetess . . . judged Israel at that time

The account of Deborah's time as a judge ties back to Ehud's time, ignoring Shamgar.

Rather than a few verses, as with some of the judges, two chapters were written about Deborah, the only female judge of Israel and a prophetess (TG, "Prophetess"; "Holy Ghost, Gifts of"). She was a wife and mother (Judg. 4:4; 5:7) who provided advice and judgment for people who came to her home between Ramah and Bethel in Ephraim. She called Barak, a man of Naphtali, for the campaign against Sisera, captain of King Jabin's Canaanite hosts from the area of Hazor. Barak was reluctant to serve unless the prophetess herself went to battle with him. She consented but prophesied that the honors of the campaign would go to a woman (not referring to herself; Judg. 4:17-21).

4:10-24 Barak called Zebulun and Naphtali . . . and Deborah went up with him

It seems that only the oppressed tribes were involved in the respective campaigns recounted in the book of Judges; there is seldom any indication that all of Israel acted together. Ephraim, Naphtali, and Zebulun (Judg. 4), together with Benjamin and Issachar (Judg. 5), are listed as participants in the campaign under Deborah and Barak; the participation of Reuben, Dan, and Asher was doubtful.

With Deborah giving the commands and Barak leading the armies, battle was joined and victory was won. But the final coup was administered by Jael, wife of Heber, a Kenite; wielding a hammer and a tent peg, she ended the life of the Canaanite captain, Sisera. (Driving tent pins and pitching tents were part of a woman's work among the nomads.) A graphic account of her deed, in dramatic poetry, follows in the next chapter.

5:1-31 Then sang Deborah and Barak . . . on that day, saying

The victory poem of Deborah and Barak, aside from dramatic details about the death of the enemy, is chiefly a song of thanks and praise to the Lord. Some stanzas also extol valor in the armies and the preeminence of Deborah (Judg. 5:7, 12, 15). The bold courage of the Kenite woman, Jael, is praised, in contrast to the poignant bereavement of the mother of Sisera (Judg. 5:24-30).

Literarily, Judges 5 is highly reputed as poetry. Paired reiterations tell the death of Sisera (Judg. 5:27).

Remembering what the function of the priesthood should have been (Num. 27:21), we conclude that the priests were either failing or ignored as spiritual advisers; a good woman, Deborah, became the messenger of the Lord to Israel.

The name Deborah (meaning "bee") and its diminutive forms (e.g., Debbie) have been popular in many cultures since hertime.

6:1-10 And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord: and the Lord delivered them into the hand of Midian

Again, instead of a single verse or only a few to characterize the career of a judge, three chapters deal with one great leader, Gideon—and one with his terrible successor, his son Abimelech.

The era began with seasonal raids on crops and herds by peoples of the east and south, including Midianites and Amalekites. Before calling Gideon as a judge to lead Israel when they cried out, the Lord raised up a prophet to declare to them that their failure to keep their covenants was the cause of their lack of divine protection (Judg. 6:7-10).

6:11-24 Gideon threshed wheat by the winepress, to hide it from the Midianites. And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him

When Gideon was called, he was first greeted by an angel with complimentary words. Gideon responded with irony: "If the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us? and where be all his miracles which our fathers told us of?" (Judg. 6:13). But the Lord's message from the angel was still positive: if Gideon would serve God with his might, God would be with him and help him do what he was called to do (Judg. 6:16). Gideon was too overwhelmed and humble to accept immediately; he asked for a sign that the message really was from the Lord. There is a difference between asking for signs out of an urge to be gratified and asking because of the desire to discern; so, as a sign, the Lord let the angel turn a meal provided by Gideon into a miraculous burned offering. (On the problem of discerning whether a messenger is from the Lord or not, see 2 Cor. 11:13-15; 1 Jn. 4:1-2; D&C 129.) Then Gideon was more overwhelmed with awe, gratitude, and fear, but the Lord graciously comforted him and gave him peace; wherefore, Gideon built a memorial altar and named it Jehovah-shalom, meaning, "Jehovah is peace." 6:25-32 throw down the altar of Baal that thy father hath, and cut down the grove that is by it: And build an altar unto the Lord thy God upon the top of this rock

Gideon was to start the reform by destroying idolatry at home and restoring there the worship of the true God. He did so, and after his father's timely repentance, they demonstrated the impotence of idols. Later, the power of the true God was demonstrated (Judg. 7:1-23). His new name was a challenge to Baal (Judg. 6:32).

6:33-40 Then all the Midianites and the Amalekites and the children of the east were gathered together, . . . But the Spirit of the Lord came upon Gideon, and he blew a trumpet . . . And he sent messengers throughout all Manasseh . . . Asher . . . Zebulun . . . and unto Naphtali

The reformation and restoration were launched immediately. The people of his community gathered to Gideon, and then those of his own large tribe and of the neighboring tribes to the north, for the enemy was gathered in the important north-central valley of Jezreel.

Additional signs were granted Gideon to indicate the time for action and to give assurance that the Lord would save Israel (BD, "Miracles").

7:1-25 Then Jerubbaal, who is Gideon, and all the people that were with him, rose up

The enemy was numerous and their camels without number, but the sizable Israelite army of 32,000 assembled from the four tribes was reduced by command of the Lord to a mere 300—so that the help of the Lord might be very apparent. Then, against the formidable camel-mounted marauders, with whom hand-to-hand combat could have been disastrous, the Lord gave Israel miraculous success. When the rout began, Gideon summoned Ephraimite warriors and sent them to cut off the enemy retreat across the Jordan at Beth-bara, which they did.

8:1-21 men of Ephraim said unto him, Why hast thou served us thus, that thou calledst us not, when thou wentest to fight

Despite the miraculous defeat of the main army, Gideon had needed cooperation to stop some of the retreating forces at the Jordan and to overtake the leaders responsible for the years of plundering. The Ephraimites had helped, but they were insulted that they had not been called earlier to participate. Gideon wisely complimented them sincerely on their vital contribution, and they were satisfied.

Inhabitants of Succoth, beyond the river, refused to provide food for the soldiers with Gideon; they were warned and later punished; so also were the people of Penuel, some seven miles farther on. Finally, the fleeing Midianites were caught beyond Jogbehah, at least fifty miles from the crossing of the river. Those who feared to help Gideon lest the Midianites return were punished (Judg. 8:7, 16), and the Midianite leaders were eliminated.

8:22-28 I will not rule over you, neither shall my son rule over you: the Lord shall rule over you

Gideon clearly understood his role in the Lord's government, and refused personal aggrandizement. He honored the Lord with a new ephod (part of the garment of the chief priest in Israel) made of precious things gathered from the smitten soldiers of the enemy; unfortunately, it later became a "snare" because people idolized it (Judg. 8:27).

8:28-35 and the country was in quietness forty years in the days of Gideon

Gideon's life was exemplary and his contributions noteworthy, but after his death the people returned to idolatry, apparently having forgotten the help of the Lord through Gideon.

9:1-57 And all the men of Shechem . . . made Abimelech king

Ignoring or forgetting the teachings of the Lord and Gideon, some people still wanted a king. Abimelech, one of seventy or more sons of Gideon, was not like his father; he wanted to be king, and he murdered his brothers and others to achieve that end. He hired followers with silver from an idol's shrine, and an evil spirit attended his reign. He is not usually counted as one of the judges in Israel and certainly was not raised up by the Lord. His reign, his end, and the response of God to his evils need no explication.

10:1-5 And after Abimelech there arose—

Brief records were preserved of two more judges and defenders of Israel: Tola, of Issachar, and Jair, a Gileadite, probably of Manasseh in Gilead. Those two judges may have ruled in peace, for no details are given.

10:6-18 And the children of Israel did evil again . . . and served Baalim, and Ashtaroth, and the gods

Peace and prosperity usually allowed indulgences and aberrations to develop—not an uncommon phenomenon. The results were usually the same: loss of worthiness and morale, and then loss of liberty. In this case the Philistines from the west and the Ammonites from the east invaded. When the Israelites repented and cried to the Lord for relief, he let them learn a lesson from life—advising them to cry to the gods they had chosen to serve. When they further repented, the Lord was grieved for their misery, but this time he only prepared them to fight for their own deliverance.

11:1-40 Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty man of valour . . . And they said unto Jephthah, Come, and be our captain

So the people themselves chose a leader, an outcast, a son of a harlot but yet a "mighty man of valour." He accepted the appointment as leader only after the people assured him he could remain as such after the crisis was removed. He knew the history of Israel's invasion of Moabite and Ammonite lands under Moses after their kings had refused his request for peaceful passage (Judg. 11:13-25 and fn.). Naturally the Ammonite king rejected Jephthah's overtures and prepared for war.

Jephthah was acquainted with the Lord's powers and had faith in his help, but he mistakenly believed he could secure that help by promising to offer as a burnt sacrifice whatever might come out from the doors of his house to meet him.

He did indeed succeed in the campaign, and when his beloved daughter came to meet him, he tragically felt he must fulfill his vow. Because the Lord does not require human sacrifice, it may only be hoped that she was dedicated to the service of the Lord rather than sacrificed as a burnt offering (Judg. 11:34-37; Jer. 32:35).

12:1-7 the men of Ephraim gathered . . . and said unto Jephthah, Wherefore . . . didst [thou] not call us to go with thee?

When the Ephraimites complained because Jephthah had not let them join in his campaign against Ammon, he countered that they had been invited but had sent no help. There was a brief period of strife as he chastised them for their presumption and petulance. Some of them tried to escape back to their lands west of the Jordan, but Jephthah's forces identified them by their dialect: they pronounced shibboleth as sibboleth. Because they had crossed over Jordan to fight against Jephthah, they were put to death.

A brief note recorded Jephthah's death after six years of rule. He was cited, however, even into New Testament times, as one of the historic exemplars of great faith (Heb. 11:32-34).

12:8-15 and after him—

Jephthah was followed by three judges who are briefly mentioned and who judged Israel seven, ten, and eight years, respectively. The number of sons and daughters and the number of animals seem to be facts relevant to status.

13:1-25 And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord; and the Lord delivered them into the hand of the Philistines forty years

Thus begins a four-chapter account of forty years of Philistine oppression and the miraculous rise of a leader who became a folk hero but not a valiant leader. He was Samson, who was blessed with power whereby he could have delivered Israel. An angel promised a son to a Danite woman, and she was instructed to prepare for him before birth and dedicate him to serve the Lord as a Nazarite. He should have become one of Israel's greatest judges, but he did not.

The gracious second visit of the herald to confirm the promise to the woman's husband and the divine acceptance of their offering left them awestruck. His promised birth, his blessings as he grew, and his early actions in Philistine country as moved upon by the Spirit of the Lord looked auspicious. He was named Samson (Heb., Shimshon, perhaps from shemesh, "sun").

14:1-20 Samson went down to Timnath, and saw a woman . . . of the daughters of the Philistines

Samson seems to have behaved whimsically. His parents must have been distressed when their foreordained Nazarite son desired to marry someone not of Israel, disregarding the laws of Moses. They may be forgiven for failing to understand it as a motivation "of the Lord" that Samson "sought an occasion against the Philistines" (Judg. 14:4); for the Lord hardly needs to set up an occasion to take action against oppression.

In violating Nazarite standards in his proposed marriage and his behavior otherwise (Num. 6), he must have been moved by some spirit he assumed to be the Spirit of the Lord. His proposed marriage, the impossible riddle and betrayal, and the slaughter of thirty men to pay off a silly vow seem unlikely ways to free Israel or bring blessings from God.

15:1-20 Samson visited his wife . . . And her father said, . . . I gave her to thy companion

Samson's incendiary raid out of the frustration of his wish to return to his riddle-ruined marriage and his subsequent slaughter of "a thousand men" with the jawbone of an ass also seem inappropriate actions for a Nazarite. Samson's story appears to be that of a popular hero from the apostate days of the rule of the judges. His prayer for water was one of two prayers mentioned in the story of his life.

Lehi is the English rendering of the Hebrew lechi, meaning "cheek," "jaw," or "jawbone," and is so used in this chapter.

16:1-3 Then went Samson to Gaza, and saw there an harlot, and went in unto her

Samson's next act, after spending half a night with a harlot in the Philistine city of Gaza, was to slip out and pull up the city gates, gateposts and all, and carry them about forty miles into Judah, to a hill near Hebron—no service to God or fellowman.

16:4-31 afterward . . . he loved a woman in the valley of Sorek, whose name was Delilah

Samson developed a passion for another Philistine woman, Delilah, who enticed him and he teased her, until at last he disclosed the secret of his strength and she betrayed him. The Philistines then bound, tortured, and taunted him until he prayed one more prayer; his last "service" was to slay more in his death than he had slain in his life. He is said to have judged Israel twenty years, but no record of that service is given. He was a man foreordained, but not disciplined, to do good (Judg. 16:31; D&C 3:4).

17:1-13 his mother took two hundred shekels of silver, and gave them to the founder, who made thereof a graven image and a molten image

Here is another account from apostate times in Israel: "In those days there was no king in Israel, but every man did that which was right in his own eyes" (Judg. 17:6 and fn. a-c). It was no doubt the lack of informed and conscientious priesthood leaders rather than lack of a king that caused Israel to flounder.

A young Levite from Bethlehem of Judah went to Ephraim, where he was employed by Micah as his private priest, in his house of gods, to officiate at his idolatrous altars in the name of the Lord. The characters of this story seem to have sinned more in ignorance than by intent; for there would be no point in knowingly dedicating so much silver to molten and graven images as an insult to God and then hoping for his blessing (Judg. 17:4-5, 13).

18:1-31 In those days there was no king in Israel: and . . . the tribe of the Danites sought them an inheritance to dwell in

Again the lack of a "king in Israel" was given as a kind of apology for bad behavior. Such tribal pillage as the Danites taking an Ephraimite's idols and priest and then raiding a town of peaceful Sidonians is especially disconcerting when committed by a people whom God had called to become "a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation" (Ex. 19:6).

The Danite move north (Josh. 19:47-48; Judg. 18:7, 27-28) established Israel's northern outpost, and the extremes of a stretch of territory were thereafter described as "from Dan even to Beersheba" (Judg. 20:1; 1 Sam. 3:20; 2 Sam. 3:10; 17:11). Many conquests have occurred at Dan, as shown by a tell (a mound of the ruins of a succession of cities, destroyed and built atop one another) called "Dan" in northern Israel, in a beautiful little river valley. It is a pleasant park, reminding one today of the peaceful place that attracted the Danite band three thousand years ago.

A final irony is recorded: Micah's idolatrous priest was probably a descendant of Moses (Judg. 18:30a).

19:1-30 in those days, when there was no king in Israel, . . . a certain Levite . . . took to him a concubine

The synopsis at the head of the chapter covers briefly this account of some evil people (except for one charitable old man). "Certain sons of Belial" sought to violate and kill a migrant Levite but accepted instead his concubine, whom they raped and abused until she could hardly return to the house where they lodged. There she died; that she was dead before the Levite cut her to pieces is only to be hoped (Judg. 19:28; 20:5-6).

Nothing excuses the lack of morals, decency, faith, courage, or compassion shown by the host and guest, who offered a daughter and a concubine to the violent men at their door to save themselves; it bespeaks the terrible apostasy of the time. All involved were "sons of Belial" (BD, "Belial")!

20:1-48 Then all the children of Israel went out, and the congregation was gathered together as one man . . . Then said the children of Israel, Tell us, how was this wickedness?

There was general revulsion and outrage against the Benjamites who committed the sin and crime described above; but as often occurs in popular uprisings, the punishment went to extremes, and tens of thousands on both sides were slain. In the end, most of the Benjamites were wiped out.

One can only wonder what mode of inquiry was used in asking the Lord's advice and consent for these actions; whatever it was, the leaders felt they were justified for the time being (Judg. 20:18, 26-28, 35).

21:1-25 And the people came to the house of God . . . And said, O Lord God of Israel, why is this come to pass in Israel, that there should be to day one tribe lacking in Israel?

Repenting of their rash punishment of one sin, they prayed, sacrificed, and then took extreme vengeance on another segment of Israel (some from Jabesh-gilead who had not joined in the former action), killing everyone except four hundred virgins to provide wives for the remaining Benjamite men. More amazing still, it is recorded that they repented that the Lord had caused one tribe to be destroyed (Judg. 21:3, 15). Could they really have blamed the Lord for it all and made amends by inviting the remaining men of Benjamin to wait in hiding for the annual dances in the vineyards near Shiloh, so that they could catch wives to replace their wives and children slain in the first putsch?

The book ends with a repetition of the apology "in those days there was no king in Israel: every man did that which was right in his own eyes" (Judg. 21:25). Although it is repeated only in the last few chapters of the book of Judges, that statement characterizes many of the cycles of apostasy during the centuries from Joshua until Samuel—a period about as long as the time from the Pilgrims in America to the present day.
