Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

RUTH

The book of Ruth serves as an appendix to the book of Judges. It tells of some nobler events that "came to pass in the days when the judges ruled" (Ruth 1:1). It is reassuring to read about Israelites of that time who were good, even exemplary—showing faith, love, loyalty, generosity, and devotion to duty. Perhaps they represent many other Israelites of the time whose family history we do not have.

The first two chapters introduce a family, their situation, characters, problems, and options for solutions. Bereavement, followed by some good decisions and admirable actions, moves the story to a climax. The third chapter shows how Israel's welfare laws facilitated the exercise of goodwill, agency, and enterprise to accomplish good ends. The final chapter records the results, the immediate benefits, and the historic developments.

Commentary

1:1-2 there was a famine in the land. And a certain man of Beth-lehem-judah went to sojourn in the country of Moab, he, and his wife, and his two sons

All of the names in these introductory verses are significant: Beth-lehem-judah names a community in the usually pleasant, productive hills and dales south of Jerusalem; Beth-lehem-judah means "house of bread" or "place of food" in Judah. The other name for the area, Ephratah (Ruth 4:11), connotes "fruitfulness." Nevertheless, an intense cyclical drought and famine caused a family of Ephrathites to leave the area and seek sustenance in Moab.

The name Elimelech means "my God is king" and characterizes the religious loyalty of the man and his family.

Naomi means "pleasantness, sweetness," and though this good woman later became so depressed that she thought Mara ("bitter sorrow") would be a more appropriate name, she recovered her pleasantness and showed wisdom and faith as well.

Mahlon is possibly derived from mahlah, implying "illness," and seems to have anticipated his short life.

Chilion is possibly derived from kalah, which has one root meaning "to be ended, spent, consumed," also anticipating a short life and early death.

1:3 And Elimelech Naomi's husband died; and she was left

Tersely the account of Naomi's triple bereavement begins.

1:4-5 they took them wives . . . and they dwelled there about ten years. And Mahlon and Chilion died also

And tersely the account continues. Marriage of the sons to Moabite women was not forbidden because Moabites were an Abrahamic people (BD, "Moab"), but a return to the true faith was essential.

1:6-13 Then she arose with her daughters in law, that she might return from the country of Moab

Options for the three widows' survival were limited. For Orpah and Ruth, there was the possibility of another marriage; for Naomi there could be security and redemption under the marriage laws of Israel (Gen. 38:8; Lev. 25:23-28, 35; Deut. 25:5-6), but Naomi was not very optimistic. She felt that the hand of the Lord was against her and recommended that her daughters-in-law return to their families (Ruth 1:11-13, 20-21).

1:14-18 And they lifted up their voice, and wept again: and Orpah kissed her mother in law; but Ruth clave unto her

The tension between love and loyalty on the one hand and an uncertain future on the other led Orpah to choose to return to her parents' home and hope for another marriage.

Ruth chose differently. Her testimony shows that her loyalty and love for Naomi and Naomi's God were real; her declaration thereof is radiant (Ruth 1:16-17). Interestingly, Ruth means "companion."

1:19-22 when they were come to Beth-lehem . . . all the city was moved about them, and they said, Is this Naomi?

Naomi's rather gloomy return and pitiful prospect made her feel more like Mara (Ruth 1:20a-b).

Their arrival "in the beginning of barley harvest" (probably late April) was propitious, however, and prospects soon improved.

2:1-16 Naomi had a kinsman of her husband's, a mighty man of wealth . . . and his name was Boaz

The name Boaz means "in him is strength, swiftness, quickness" (Ruth 2:1a).

The younger widow, Ruth, volunteered to go out as a gleaner to secure food for both herself and her mother-in-law (Ruth 2:2a), and it was indeed a blessing that she was guided to the field of Boaz, a "kinsman." The good qualities of Boaz may be seen in the way he greeted the workmen, in his inquiry about the foreign gleaner, and in his generous treatment of Ruth after learning she was the Moabite daughter-in-law to Naomi. Ruth's humility and appreciation are also noteworthy. It is evident here, as it was earlier, that she had become a converted follower of the true God (Ruth 1:16; 2:12).

2:17-23 So she gleaned in the field until even, and beat out that she had gleaned: and it was about an ephah of barley

Naomi was impressed with the amount of grain Ruth had gleaned and threshed (nearly two-thirds of a bushel) and the leftover parched grain from Ruth's lunch. She was yet more pleased to learn whose field Ruth had gleaned and recognized the blessings of the Lord in all that had happened.

A kinsman had the right to purchase (redeem) the land of a deceased relative, marry his widow, and produce offspring—the first of whom would be the heir of the man who had died. Thus a "redeemer" could restore to a widow a degree of security and status she could not of herself attain and even provide for continuation of the seed. Understanding this meaning deepens our appreciation for the prophets' use of the word redeemer (Heb., go'el) to characterize our Savior (TG, "Jesus Christ, Redeemer").

Naomi recognized all the potential and guided the follow-up action throughout the harvests.

3:1-5 Then Naomi her mother in law said . . . My daughter, shall I not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee?

Naomi suggested that Ruth consider a levirate marriage (Ruth 3:1a). It was proper for Naomi to propose this option because she was the responsible parent. She knew the threshing would be done during the time of evening breezes. For Ruth to return thereafter and lie at his feet as a humble servant would bring her status to Boaz's attention, and Naomi was confident that he would tell Ruth what to do. There would have been moral danger in such proceedings except for the known character of Ruth and Boaz—in which Naomi implicitly trusted.

3:6-9 And he said, Who art thou? And she answered, I am Ruth thine handmaid: spread therefore thy skirt over thine handmaid; for thou art a near kinsman

When Boaz awoke from his sleep by the pile of grain (which he and the others were guarding, as was customary at harvest time), he was startled by Ruth's presence. She was direct in her response, for the Hebrew word meaning "skirt" is also the word meaning "wing." Her request therefore was not unlike our idiom, "take me under your wing": it was a proposal of marriage.

3:10-18 And he said, Blessed be thou of the Lord, my daughter: . . . fear not; I will do to thee all that thou requirest: for all . . . doth know that thou art a virtuous woman

Boaz responded graciously, generously, and properly, appreciating her honest choice in seeking security for herself and her mother-in-law. But there was another go'el with a precedent claim that he would respect, so he promised sincerely to do the redeemer's duty by this virtuous woman if the other man refused.

He sent with her a quantity of grain as a token to her mother-in-law near morning, while it was yet too dark for anyone to recognize her, thus safeguarding her reputation. Naomi comprehended fully, confident the matter would be concluded that very day.

4:1-10 Then went Boaz up to the gate, and . . . the kinsman . . . came by . . . And he turned aside, and sat down

The proceedings were duly accomplished according to the law. The writer has not even preserved the name of that kinsman who was willing to redeem the property but not to marry the widow and raise up a son to the name of the dead. The heir of the dead man would get the redeemed property, and thus it would not increase the redeemer's estate; hence he said selfishly, "I cannot redeem it for myself, lest I mar mine own inheritance" (Ruth 4:6).

4:11-12 And all the people . . . said . . . The Lord make the woman that is come into thine house like Rachel and like Leah

The wish of the witnesses at the gate for the bride-to-be proved to be prophetic: the marriage would indeed be as fruitful as that of their ancestral grandmothers and that of the young widow Tamar, who bore an ancestor of Boaz (Ruth 4:18a).

4:13-17 So Boaz took Ruth, and she was his wife: and . . . the Lord gave her conception

The wishes of the witnesses were complemented by the blessings of the women upon Naomi and Ruth in celebrating the birth of the baby. The Moabitess Ruth, who did indeed come into the congregation of the Lord (despite Deut. 23:3), became part of the royal line of Judah; numbered among her descendants would be kings of Israel and Judah and our Redeemer, King of the world.

4:18-22 Now these are the generations of Pharez

A writer after the birth of David may have added this genealogical list to clarify all the connections from Pharez through Boaz to David. (David's history begins in 1 Sam. 16.)

Thanks to the Lord may appropriately be offered for inspiring the writing and preservation of the book of Ruth; it provides more inspiration than does most of the book of Judges.
