Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

FIRST SAMUEL

The first book of Samuel contains a historic announcement: "all Israel from Dan even to Beer-sheba knew that Samuel was established to be a prophet of the Lord" (1 Sam. 3:20). For the first time since the days of Moses and Joshua, the tribes became somewhat united, first under the prophet Samuel and then under the first two kings, Saul and David. Samuel was an inspired judge and a prophet, able to motivate the people to defense or to repentance. He influenced Israel to begin again to become the holy people they were called to be (Ex. 19:5-6).

When the people first requested a king (1 Sam. 8), Samuel reasoned with them, comparing civil government to the government of the Lord and warning them against it; but they persisted, and the Lord granted their wish. Samuel was inspired to choose Saul, of whom he said, "See ye him whom the Lord hath chosen, that there is none like him among all the people?" (1 Sam. 10:24).

But Samuel and Saul were not able to convert Israel to be the "peculiar treasure" and "holy nation" intended (BD, "Abraham, Covenant of"; "Peculiar"). Samuel's own sons diminished his potential effectiveness, and Saul deteriorated from a man of faith and humble confidence to one imbued with vain jealousy, violence, and spiritual degeneration to the tragedy of his suicide.

As Saul's behavior worsened, the Lord, through Samuel, chose and prepared David to become king (1 Sam. 16). Saul jealously tried to assassinate David, and finally, without divine guidance or hope, Saul went into his last battle against the Philistines and died by his own sword.

Some facets of this part of Israel's history are exemplary, but many are not.

Commentary

1:1-2 Now there was a certain man . . . and his name was Elkanah . . . And he had two wives; the name of one was Hannah

Elkanah and Hannah were the parents-to-be of Samuel. According to later genealogical lists, Samuel's father was of the tribe of Levi living in Ephraim. Samuel did function as a priest as well as a prophet (1 Chr. 6:16-28).

1:3-18 And this man went up . . . yearly to worship and to sacrifice unto the Lord of hosts in Shiloh

The first book of Samuel opens with the situation that led to his birth as a child of promise. As with Sarah, Rebekah, Rachel, and others, Hannah was not blessed with children at first, despite her prayers and sacrifices. She and her husband took the matter to the Lord when they went to worship at Shiloh, the site of the old tabernacle of the congregation (Josh. 18:1; BD, "Tabernacle"). Childlessness was considered a curse and motherhood a blessing, so Hannah prayed in deep sorrow, promising that if she had a son he would be given as a Nazarite to the Lord. The old priest, Eli, mistook her profound emotion for drunkenness (1 Sam. 1:11d; BD, "Nazarite"). She protested that she was not such a "daughter of Belial" (BD, "Belial"), and Eli relented and promised she would be blessed.

1:19-28 Elkanah knew Hannah his wife; and the Lord remembered her. Wherefore . . . she bare a son, and called his name Samuel, saying, Because I have asked him of the Lord

The name Samuel (Heb., Shmu'el) could be a contraction of "heard of God" or even "requested from God." True to her promise, and with gratitude, Hannah gave Samuel into the care of the priestly family at Shiloh after he was weaned.

2:1-10 And Hannah prayed, and said, My heart rejoiceth in the Lord, mine horn is exalted in the Lord

Hannah's poetic song of thanksgiving, with its prophetic insight and appreciation, is in some ways like Mary's (Luke 1:46-55). In poetic parallels and figurative phrases she praises God, his powers, and goodness. Her language is sometimes terse but always clear; for instance, she knows that birth, life, death, and resurrection are all prerogatives of the Lord (1 Sam. 2:5-6). She prophesies of the ultimate kingdom, when the Lord will be acclaimed as ruler, judge, and kingmaker. The "horn" symbolizes the power of the "anointed" one. Hannah was a prophetess.

2:11 And the child did minister unto the Lord before Eli

Simply translated, the Hebrew says, "And the lad was serving the Lord within the presence of Eli the priest."

2:12-17 Now the sons of Eli were sons of Belial; they knew not the Lord

Belial was an epithet meaning "worthlessness, evil"; the English translators capitalized it as if it were a cognomen for Satan, and, indeed, in New Testament times, Paul apparently so used it (2 Cor. 6:15; BD, "Belial"). The immoral and blasphemous acts of the sons of Eli justified the label.

2:18-21 But Samuel ministered before the Lord . . . girded with a linen ephod

In contrast to Eli's own sons, the child Samuel was dutiful in his training and service. He wore the new robe his mother made for him each year and the apronlike ephod (BD, "Ephod"). Eli blessed Samuel's happy parents to have more children, and Samuel grew "with the Lord" (1 Sam. 2:21, translation mine).

2:22-25 Now Eli was very old, and heard all that his sons did unto all Israel

Eli knew of his sons' grave violations not only of their priestly privileges (they had the right to certain portions of flesh and other food items offered in sacrifice, but they took more than allowed and demanded choice parts) but also of the commandments (their abuse of women worshippers emulated the behavior of the priests of fertility cults in Canaan). The priest reproved his sons, but he did not effectively restrain them. The tragic results of his failings and their faults became evident later (1 Sam. 2:27-36; 3:11-14; 4:12-22).

2:26 And the child Samuel grew on, and was in favour both with the Lord, and also with men

Again Samuel's good development was contrasted to that of Eli's sons. Compare the brief description of Jesus' growing up (Luke 2:52).

2:27-36 And there came a man of God unto Eli, and said

The Lord knows what people are wont to do, and he communicates warnings through his spokesmen. The "man of God" who warned Eli is typical of many such prophets throughout the Old Testament; their names are sometimes given, but often they are not. His message was plain and must have been devastating to hear.

The promised "faithful priest" was Samuel, but thereafter another priestly line was to be established (1 Sam. 2:27-36 and fn.; BD, "Eli"; "Zadok").

3:1-15 And the child Samuel ministered unto the Lord before Eli. And the word of the Lord was precious in those days; there was no open vision

Samuel's ministry as a prophet, priest, and judge was needed in those apostate times. The downward spiral of apostasy in the days of the judges left the "word of the Lord" and "open vision" "precious"—both rare and valuable.

Young Samuel was sleeping near the doors he was to open each morning at the tabernacle—where the ark of God was—when a new dispensation dawned. He heard his name called, and after two calls and some confusion he learned from Eli that it could be a call from the Lord. He received first the bad tidings for Eli.

3:16-18 Then Eli called Samuel, and said, . . . What is the thing that the Lord hath said unto thee?

Samuel feared to report until Eli adjured him to hide nothing of the Lord's message. When Eli did receive the dread warning, he humbly accepted it, saying, "He is Jehovah; what is good in his eyes let him do!" (1 Sam. 3:18, translation mine). Eli was a well-meaning man who had not been firm enough with his sons and in humility felt his punishment was just.

3:19-21 And Samuel grew, and the Lord was with him, and did let none of his words fall to the ground. And all Israel from Dan even to Beer-sheba knew that Samuel was established to be a prophet of the Lord.

Thus began a new dispensation. The Lord continued to reveal his word to Samuel at Shilo and to fulfill it. "Let none of his words fall to the ground" means the Lord let none of his words fail. News of the new prophet in Israel soon spread.

4:1-11 And the word of Samuel came to all Israel

But before Samuel could teach the Israelites to repent and thus qualify for divine assistance, they tried to enlist the Lord's help by taking the ark out to battle. Instead, the armies of the Israelites were decimated, and the Philistines, stimulated by fear, captured the ark. Truly, the ark had no place in battle. Its proper use was in its holy place in worship and communication with the Lord (BD, "Ark of the Covenant"; "Mercy Seat"). Later, Samuel was able to teach Israel how to get the help of the Lord to "deliver [them] out of the hand of the Philistines" (1 Sam. 7:3).

4:12-18 And when Eli heard the noise of the crying, he said, What meaneth the noise of this tumult? And the man came in hastily, and told Eli

A messenger from the war gave a threefold tragic report: Israel had fled before the Philistines because of a great slaughter, Eli's two wicked sons were dead, and—the ultimate shock to him—the ark had been taken. Eli collapsed, fell backward from his seat by the gate at Shilo, and died.

The old tabernacle at Shilo ceased to be a sanctuary at that time. In King Saul's time, there was something of a shrine at Nob, some twenty-five miles southward. Destruction of the tabernacle thereafter, though not recorded here, was still being told centuries later (Jer. 7:12; 26:6).

4:19-22 His [Eli's] daughter in law, Phinehas' wife, was with child, near to be delivered: and when she heard the tidings . . . bowed herself and travailed; . . . And she named the child I-chabod, saying, The glory is departed from Israel

There is pathos in the account of the birth and naming of Ichabod, grandson of Eli. The wife of the infamous Phinehas appears to have been a righteous woman. She knew that her husband and father-in-law were both dead, but she lamented especially that "the glory is departed from Israel: because the ark of God was taken." With her last breath she named her baby Ichabod, meaning "Where is the glory?" (1 Sam. 4:21a).

5:1-12 And the Philistines took the ark of God, and brought it from Eben-ezer unto Ashdod . . . [and] to Ekron

The victorious Philistines with some awe placed the ark of the Lord as a trophy in the temple of Dagon at Ashdod; but when they and their idol suffered as a result, they passed it on to the Philistines at Gath and then to Ekron. When the people in those cities were smitten, they proposed to send the ark "again to his own place" (1 Sam. 5:11, 6a).

6:1-21 And the ark of the Lord was in the country of the Philistines seven months

The Philistine priests and diviners recommended that the ark be sent back to Israel with an offering of golden images of the tumors they had suffered and of the "mice that mar the land" (1 Sam. 6:5); but they also suggested the things be sent in a way to test whether there was really supernatural power associated with it. If cows not trained to work were yoked to the cart to carry the ark while their calves were confined at home and if the cows then pulled the cart up the road to Israel, the Philistines would know that a supernatural power was involved. The cows went indeed, bearing the trespass offering on behalf of all five Philistine city-states (1 Sam. 6:17).

Of the men of Beth-shemesh who were smitten for the sacrilege of looking into the ark, the Hebrew account states: "And he smote among the people seventy men, fifty thousand men" (1 Sam. 6:19; literal translation mine). That is not a proper Hebrew expression of the number 50,070, and Josephus (Antiquities of the Jews 6:1:4), as well as some Hebrew manuscripts, reads simply, "seventy men." Some translate the Hebrew as "seventy men, fifty chiefs"; but though the words for "thousand" and "chief" are of the same root, they are not the same form. The village of Beth-shemesh could hardly have had 50,070 inhabitants; so the problem remains, and we can believe the account "as far as it is translated correctly" (A of F 8).

7:1-2 And the men of Kirjath-jearim came, and fetched up the ark of the Lord, and brought it into the house of Abinadab . . . and sanctified Eleazar his son to keep the ark of the Lord

Nothing is given at this point about the identity of the man in whose house the ark was kept for twenty years; however, Josephus asserts he was a Levite by birth. Oddly enough, Beth-shemesh was a Levitical city, but Kirjath-jearim was not.

Note that Israel felt the loss of the Spirit (1 Sam. 7:2).

7:3-14 And Samuel spake unto all the house of Israel, saying, If ye do return unto the Lord with all your hearts, then put away the strange gods and Ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your hearts unto the Lord, and serve him only: and he will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines

Samuel sought to renew the covenant, gathering all of Israel for a great conference at Mizpeh, in fasting and prayer. For a time the Israelites did put away the Baalim and Ashtaroth (male and female idols) to serve the Lord only. They experienced the promised blessing when the Philistines attacked again, for Samuel told them to pray while he offered a sacrifice of supplication. The Lord "thundered with a great thunder . . . upon the Philistines, and discomfited them" (1 Sam. 7:10). The Philistines were driven out and did not attack again during Samuel's administration. After Samuel was replaced by a king, however, the Philistine depredations resumed.

7:15-17 And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life.

Samuel served Israel by traveling from city to city, including his home city of Ramah, where he also built an altar for worship.

8:1-5 when Samuel was old . . . he made his sons judges

Unfortunately, Samuel's sons were not of his character, and they perverted judgment for bribes. That was one factor that led the people to ask for a king; but they also wanted a king to lead them like the kings who led the other nations.

8:6-22 they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them

Perhaps partly because the Israelites had suffered attacks by neighboring kings for generations, they felt a need for a king to judge them and lead them in battle; but it was tragic that they thereby rejected direct leadership by the Lord. Nevertheless, the Lord instructed Samuel to grant their request, respecting their agency even though it would not be best for them (D&C 88:65). If their priests had been faithful, the people responsible, and the judges fair, the Israelite government after Moses and Joshua could have been a peaceful theocracy. Samuel's warning speech about the dangers of monarchy was inspired. His warnings pertain not only to kings but also to autocrats or dictators. Yet the people insisted; so, under the Lord's command and guidance, Samuel selected a king.

Centuries later, when Israel had indeed become like other nations spiritually as well as politically, they were conquered and exiled.

9:1-27 there was a man of Benjamin, whose name was Kish, . . . And he had a son, whose name was Saul, a choice young man

Even though the people had made a bad choice in rejecting the Lord that he "should not reign over them" (1 Sam. 8:7), and though the Lord had directed Samuel to "protest solemnly unto them" (1 Sam. 8:9) and they refused to hearken, yet in wisdom and grace the Lord appointed a choice candidate for king in Israel (1 Sam. 9:2). The narrative is clear about the meeting of Samuel and Saul and the preparation of Saul for his awesome responsibility.

In addition to the historical shift in the terms prophet and seer, here mentioned, there are some specific differences in the meaning of the two titles (1 Sam. 9:9; BD, "Prophet"; "Seer").

10:1-16 Then Samuel took a vial of oil, and poured it upon his head, and kissed him, and said, Is it not because the Lord hath anointed thee to be captain over his inheritance?

Saul of Benjamin was called by prophecy and anointed by the prophet of the Lord to become king in Israel. It was done in secret first so that the choice of the Lord could be properly disclosed in public later (1 Sam. 9:25-27; 10:1, 17-27).

The term captain is used to translate the Hebrew word nagid, meaning "leader" or "prince."

The Israelites are called the Lord's "inheritance" in a metaphor implying that they should be his servants from generation to generation (1 Sam. 10:1; Deut. 32:9: 1 Kgs. 8:51-53).

Kings properly chosen to rule in Israel were anointed with oil to become king, and in that sense they were the anointed of the Lord (Heb., meshiach, "messiah"); but only the divine Messiah will be the ultimate King.

God gave Saul "another heart" when "the Spirit of God came upon him" (1 Sam. 10:9a; 10:10); contrast his behavior under the aegis of that Spirit with his behavior after the Spirit departed and another spirit "not of the Lord" came upon him (1 Sam. 16:14-16 and fn.).

The "prophesying" by a company of prophets who met Saul was the chanting of poems or songs as psalms of praise with accompaniment by musical instruments. Prophets may preach, teach, admonish, praise, predict, or warn—as inspired by the Lord. Saul was inspired to join the company of prophets temporarily.

10:17-27 Samuel called the people together unto the Lord to Mizpeh

Samuel gathered Israel to Mizpeh again for a historic event (recall 1 Sam. 7:5-12). He reminded them that they had in one sense rejected their God, who had so often saved them, by insisting on an earthly king; but he then demonstrated the Lord's choice of a king for them, indicating the tribe, family, and person. Saul was finally found hiding among the baggage of the people. He was an impressive choice, standing head and shoulders above other men.

Samuel not only announced the Lord's choice of king but also made the occasion a kind of constitutional convention, for he "told the people the manner of the kingdom, and wrote it in a book, and laid it up before the Lord" (1 Sam. 10:25). Recall the prophetic instructions for Israelite kings given by Moses (Deut. 17:14-20). The consenting, sustaining voice of the people was also a factor, as seen in the installation of kings Saul, David, Solomon, and Rehoboam (1 Sam. 10:24).

Samuel then sent the people home, and Saul went home also, but "there went with him a band of men, whose hearts God had touched" (1 Sam. 10:26).

Another evidence of Saul's humble character was shown when "he held his peace," even when certain unbelievers ("children of Belial") despised him and gave him no presents. Later in life, it will be seen, he lost that admirable humility.

11:1-13 Then Nahash the Ammonite came up, and encamped against Jabesh-gilead

An Ammonite who threatened the Israelites east of the Jordan and proposed to blind their right eyes and enslave them, as a stigma upon Israel, was the first to challenge King Saul. The Spirit of God came upon Saul when he heard the threat, and he met the challenge with decisiveness and dispatch. The prophet Samuel was still associated with him in leadership (1 Sam. 11:7).

When King Saul had vanquished the foe, some enthusiastic supporters wanted to punish those who had rejected him; but Saul showed magnanimity towards his people and humble recognition of the help of God, saying, "There shall not a man be put to death this day: for to day the Lord hath wrought salvation in Israel" (1 Sam. 11:12-13; 10:27).

11:14-15 Then said Samuel to the people, Come, and let us go to Gilgal, and renew the kingdom there

This time "all the people" sustained and confirmed Saul as king. They made this new start at Gilgal, where Israel had first entered the promised land, and a monument to the Lord's help was raised (Josh. 4:19-24).

12:1-25 And Samuel said unto all Israel

Samuel clarified his role and status with the people, challenging them to indict him if he had treated anyone unrighteously. He reminded them that the Lord had delivered them from bondage, and he recalled some of the leaders the Lord had provided, reassuring them that though they had turned from the Lord as their only King, he would not reject them if they were obedient to his laws and revelations (1 Sam. 12:1-15). Samuel gave them a miraculous demonstration of the Lord's ratification of his words, and then, while they remained in their humbled state, he assured them that he would continue to teach them the Lord's "good and the right way" (1 Sam. 12:16-23). He ended with a warning and a challenge to the new kingdom of Israel.

13:1 Saul reigned one year; and when he had reigned two years over Israel

Problems of chronology arise here. How much time passed from Saul's anointing as a young man, who was out seeking his father's lost asses (1 Sam. 9:15-10:10), until the time of the public announcement at Mizpeh? (1 Sam. 10:17-26.) Also, how much time elapsed from that announcement until the Ammonite war and the public sustaining of King Saul at Gilgal? (1 Sam. 11:14-15). The problems arise because the translation of 1 Samuel 13:1 states "Saul reigned one year; and when he had reigned two years," the events related in chapter 13 occurred; but Saul was by then a mature man with a mature son, Jonathan, in the army with him (1 Sam. 13:3, 16). Perhaps these events happened two years after the confirmation of Saul's kingship at Gilgal.

13:2-22 And Jonathan smote the garrison of the Philistines that was in Geba

Much time must have passed since the Lord "discomfited" the Philistines at the launching of Samuel's ministry at Mizpeh, after which they "came no more into the coast of Israel . . . all the days of Samuel" (while he was sole leader; 1 Sam. 7:10-13). Jonathan seized the initiative and smote the garrison, but when Israel prepared to follow up, the Philistines mustered such a formidable force that the Israelites melted away. Saul needed Samuel and the Lord, and when the prophet did not appear at the appointed time, the king offered an offering without priesthood authority. When Samuel did arrive, he saw the king's assumption of priestly prerogatives as a very serious innovation and warned Saul that he and his family would not continue as rulers in Israel; indeed, the Lord had already chosen another.

Thus it was that a disheartened, poorly equipped king and a mere six hundred soldiers faced the Philistine invader. Lack of metal armaments in Israel were part of the problem, for the Philistines kept a monopoly in iron work. Only Saul and Jonathan had swords; the weapons of the others would have been of wood and stone (1 Sam. 13:19-23).

14:1-23 And Jonathan said to the young man that bare his armour, Come, and let us go over unto the garrison of these uncircumcised: it may be that the Lord will work for us: for there is no restraint to the Lord to save by many or by few

In spite of all, the courageous and faithful Jonathan launched a private raid that routed the Philistines. The Lord did save by only a few. Meanwhile, Saul wondered about the noise among the enemy, found out about Jonathan's absence, and joined the pursuit. Israelites rallied who had hidden or deserted (1 Sam. 14:21a; 14:22a).

14:24-52 the men of Israel were distressed that day: for Saul had adjured the people, saying, Cursed be the man that eateth any food until evening, that I may be avenged on mine enemies. So none of the people tasted any food

Conscience-stricken, King Saul had tried to get the Lord's help in battle by proclaiming a fast, but obviously the time for preparation was past and the time for action was at hand—as evidenced by Jonathan. Yet after Jonathan's raid and the resultant rout, Saul asked the Lord whether he should follow up and break the Philistine power. He received no answer and assumed the Lord was angry with Israel. Learning that Jonathan had eaten some food, Saul reasoned that the Lord was angry with Jonathan and he must be punished, even though he had not known of the fast and the Lord had helped him rout the Philistines. Saul had deteriorated in spirit since the time when he had refused to punish even the offenders who had opposed him (1 Sam. 11:1-15). Fortunately, the will of the people could still prevail over the will of the king, and Jonathan was saved.

A summary of Saul's former achievements, his family, and his connections concludes the chapter.

15:1-35 I remember that which Amalek did to Israel . . . Now go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have

The episode with Amalek was one more challenge for King Saul. The account of it has some problems, however. Although it is true that the Amalekites in the days of Moses were the first to attack Israel in the wilderness, punishment of their descendants several centuries later was not according to God's law (Deut. 24:16).

It is not clear that Saul's saving some animals for sacrifice was a capital sin, although the lesson taught is valid: "to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams" (1 Sam. 15:22). Saul's confession, "I have sinned . . . because I feared the people, and obeyed their voice," does indicate an uncharacteristic weakness in leadership. But the dread message to Saul was final: "the Lord hath rent the kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and hath given it to a neighbor of thine." That decree stood even though Saul humbly sought forgiveness and though Samuel himself mourned for him (1 Sam. 15:28-31, 35).

The old prophet Samuel then resolutely took a sword and "hewed Agag in pieces before the Lord." The verb translated by the phrase "hewed in pieces" occurs only in this place in the Bible, and its meaning is not certain. "Before the Lord" may mean he did it by the altar.

The last problem passage states that "the Lord repented that he had made Saul king" (1 Sam 15:35). It is well known that the Lord "will not lie nor repent"; that truth is stated only six verses earlier (1 Sam. 15:29). The Joseph Smith Translation renders verse 35 as "the Lord rent the kingdom from Saul whom he had made king over Israel" (JST 1 Sam. 15:35).

16:1-16 the Lord said unto Samuel, How long wilt thou mourn for Saul . . . ? fill thine horn with oil, and go . . . to Jesse the Bethlehemite: for I have provided me a king among his sons

Samuel mourned Saul's deterioration and rejection, but he accepted it and obeyed the Lord's errand to go anoint a future king. Samuel knew that Saul would be jealous of his successor's royal status and likely violent because of his rejection and replacement by someone better (1 Sam. 13:13-14; 15:28); therefore only his sacrificial duty was announced. It is curious that the elders of Bethlehem were fearful of the prophet's errand and inquired if it were peaceable (1 Sam. 16:4-5).

Even in a prophet's evaluations, we can note the difference between man's power to discern and God's power to know (1 Sam. 16:7).

After David was anointed, "the Spirit of the Lord came upon David from that day forward"; but for other reasons, "the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul" (1 Sam. 16:13-14). The incongruity of an "evil spirit from the Lord" is removed in the Joseph Smith Translation text (1 Sam. 16:14-16a).

16:14-23 command thy servants . . . to seek out a man, who is a cunning player on an harp; . . . when the evil spirit . . . is upon thee . . . he shall play . . . and thou shalt be well

It is a classic irony that David, the one chosen to replace Saul, was also the one chosen to heal his spiritual affliction.

Unfortunately, David's status as a loved and trusted comforter and armor-bearer to the king soon changed—and tragically.

17:1-54 Now the Philistines gathered together their armies to battle . . . And there went out a champion out of the camp of the Philistines, named Goliath

The story of David and Goliath is one of the best known stories in the Bible, so probably little comment on it is warranted. Note the circumstances that took David's brothers into the army and David back to his shepherd's work for a time but then brought him into the crucial contest of champions (1 Sam. 17:12-37).

David's faith and his experiences in guarding his flocks left him surprised at the Israelites' fear of the blasphemous challenger, Goliath—and perfectly confident that he could meet such a challenge. It is of course not surprising that some, especially his brothers, scoffed; indeed, it is somewhat surprising that Saul believed in David. Saul had been a very religious man, however, and there were still times when the evil spirit did not dominate him.

Naturally Saul thought it well to arm David as well as possible, and David put the armor on. It is not surprising that when he "assayed [tried] to go" in it, he could not. He could not trust it either, for he had not "proved" it; so he trusted what he had proved: his sling and stones and his faith in the Lord (1 Sam. 17:37, 45).

The covenant relationship of Israel and the Lord was evidently known to David; he believed that if the Israelites did what was required, God would do his part to save them, for his own sake as well as for theirs (1 Sam. 17:45-47). The outcome is well known.

17:55-58 And when Saul saw David go forth against the Philistine, he said unto Abner, . . . whose son is this youth?

It appears that Saul had forgotten whose son David was (1 Sam. 16:18-21), perhaps because of his spiritual and mentalillness; or it may have been that Saul was so impressed with David that he wished to learn more about his background. (One hypothesis holds that this inconsistency remains from two uncoordinated traditions—if that is of any value.)

18:1-4 the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David

One admirable development in the story of Saul and David was the covenant of love and cooperation between Jonathan and David, who ordinarily should have been rivals. The knowledge of David's appointment to become king created no jealousy in Jonathan. Indeed, the transfer of his robe, garments, girdle, sword, and bow to David seems to symbolize Jonathan's willing yielding of his natural claim to the throne, which he made explicit later (1 Sam. 23:17).

18:5-16 And Saul eyed David from that day and forward

Although Saul at first trusted David and sent him on important military missions, David's conscientiousness and success soon aroused Saul's jealousy. It is pathetic to see the character of the formerly strong, noble, and yet humble Saul degenerate into one of fear, insecurity, envy, jealousy, and anger.

18:17-30 her will I give to thee to wife

Saul attempted to contrive David's death at the hands of the enemy while he was securing tokens of success in combat with a hundred or more of them. David, unsuspecting, went out to battle with the Philistines and returned with twice the number required. As a reward, Saul gave his daughter Michal to David as a wife.

Several times it is mentioned that "David behaved himself wisely"; doubtless his faith, the Spirit of the Lord, and his intelligence made his wise and confident actions possible. But David's good qualities only disturbed Saul more and more.

19:1-24 And Saul spake to Jonathan his son, and to all his servants, that they should kill David

The noble Jonathan, loyal both to his father and to David, dissuaded Saul from shedding innocent blood (1 Sam. 19:5-6), and for a time David and Saul were together "as in times past." But David's success in another war revived Saul's jealous and evil spirit. Forsaking all reason, promises, and responsibilities, he tried to kill David with a javelin while David played music to soothe him. The Joseph Smith Translation emends that report: "And the evil spirit which was not of the Lord was upon Saul" (JST 1 Sam. 19:9). Michal, the daughter by whom Saul had hoped to entrap David, was a true wife to David and sent him away at her own peril. Saul accepted her reasons for a time but later took vengeance.

Saul next attempted to seize David at Samuel's dwelling place at Naioth, in Ramah, where David had taken refuge. A spiritual phenomenon saved him from the emissaries and even from Saul himself. A religious exercise of singing or chanting praises to God was again called "prophesying" (1 Sam. 19:20-24; commentary on 1 Sam. 10:1-16). Saul joined in but was soon apparently overcome by the evil spirit, which caused him to strip and lie inert.

20:1-42 And David fled from Naioth in Ramah, and came and said before Jonathan, What have I done? what is mine iniquity? . . . So Jonathan made a covenant with the house of David

Jonathan offered to do anything David required, so they planned signals to indicate danger for David. Thus Jonathan made a covenant of friendship "with the house of David" in full faith that David would show kindness to the house of Jonathan forever; and both promises were kept (1 Sam. 20:14-17, 42; 2 Sam. 9; 21:7). The covenant was made in full knowledge that David was the heir-apparent to the kingship, which Jonathan approved in spite of his father's outrage (1 Sam. 20:30-34; 23:17). Mutual trust and personal regard, not sentiment or politics, were at the foundation of their covenant.

21:1-9 Then came David to Nob to Ahimelech the priest

The shrine at Nob, where a number of men of the priestly clan of Eli remained, seems to have substituted for the tabernacle at Shiloh, which ceased to function after the ark of the covenant was taken away (1 Sam. 5). At Nob, the priests had the hallowed bread, or shewbread (BD, "Shewbread"), an ephod (part of the high priest's garments), and Goliath's sword, which was apparently preserved there as a memento of David's earlier triumph in the name of the Lord. When David persuaded the priest to let him and his men have some of the sacred bread and take the sword, the priest was blameless, for he had no reason to know David was fleeing from the king. (Recall Jesus' use of this event in justifying to the Pharisees his disciples' picking and eating grain on the Sabbath; Matt. 12:1-4). Saul's Edomite herdsman who observed the favors done for David contributed to a tragedy later by testifying, for his own reasons, against the priest (1 Sam. 21:7; 22:9-19).

21:10-15 And David arose, and fled that day for fear of Saul, and went to Achish the king of Gath

It may seem strange that David would take refuge with the Philistines, but because Saul was the enemy of both Achish and David, David may have hoped Achish would treat him as an ally. When he heard the servants of Achish declaring his former exploits and his heirship to the throne, David contrived a way to appear to be harmless so that he could flee.

22:1-2 David . . . escaped to the cave Adullam: . . . And every one that was in distress . . . in debt, and . . . discontented, gathered themselves unto him

Fellow refugees and malcontents who joined him at Adullam in the valley of Elah became a nucleus of supporters that increased steadily (1 Sam. 23:13).

22:3-5 And David went thence to Mizpeh of Moab

David sought sanctuary for his parents in Moab, which the king of Moab granted. Whether David's great-grandmother Ruth's having been a Moabitess had any bearing on this choice of refuge is not known. Possibly the Moabite king was willing to befriend David because of his prowess and his being Israel's future king.

David also had the help of a prophet named Gad to advise him.

22:6-23 Saul said unto his servants . . . will the son of Jesse give every one of you fields and vineyards, and make you all captains

Saul bitterly resented that many of his people, and even his own son, appeared to be more loyal to David than to him. But his challenging questions gave an opportunity to Doeg, his Edomite servant, to ingratiate himself with Saul by telling of the help David had received from the priest at Nob (1 Sam. 21:7; Ps. 52). Enraged, Saul caused the whole priestly clan there to be slain by the same Edomite when the Israelite soldiers would not lift their swords against priests. Eighty-five priests, the whole city of Nob, and all their animals were slain. Only the priest Abiathar escaped, and he joined David. David regretted the tragedy and retained Abiathar as his priest for most of the rest of his career (1 Sam. 22:20a).

23:1-15 Then they told David . . . the Philistines fight against Keilah . . . Therefore David inquired of the Lord, saying, Shall I go and smite these Philistines? And the Lord said, . . . Go

Guidance from the Lord was important to David. A warning later helped him escape from Keilah, when citizens who were more loyal to Saul than to David would have betrayed him there.

23:16-18 and thou shalt be king over Israel, and I shall be next unto thee; and that also Saul my father knoweth

How and when Saul and Jonathan learned that David would be king is not recorded, but they knew before this time (1 Sam. 23:17a). The commitment of Jonathan is again evident.

23:19-29 Then came up the Ziphites to Saul to Gibeah, saying, Doth not David hide himself with us

The people of Ziph, a town of Judah south of Hebron, would have betrayed David to Saul, but someone told David, and he fled a few miles farther south to the desert of Maon to escape. While another Philistine raid diverted Saul, David's little band retreated eastward, down the wadis toward the Dead Sea, and encamped at a rare freshwater spring, En-gedi.

24:1-22 David [was] in the wilderness of En-gedi. Then Saul took three thousand chosen men . . . and went to seek David

The wilderness of En-gedi was one of two places where David refused to lift up his hand to remove "the anointed of the Lord" (1 Sam. 24:6; 26:10-12). Saul's repentance upon hearing David's message and seeing the evidence that David could have killed him was probably sincere, but it did not last. Saul did confirm, however, that he knew David would be the next king; and he obtained David's oath and promise not to destroy Saul's name and seed (1 Sam. 24:20-22; 23:16-18).

David and his men took the precaution to remain at En-Gedi.

25:1 And Samuel died; and all the Israelites were gathered together, and lamented him

Only this simple statement tells the end of the life and work of the great prophet Samuel. Possibly David went to Ramah for the burial of his friend and patron, but he then took refuge farther south in the Negev, in the deserts of Paran.

25:2-44 there was a man in Maon . . . and the man was very great . . . the name of the man was Nabal; and . . . his wife Abigail

Hearing that a wealthy herdsman of Maon was shearing near Carmel (about a mile northward), David and his men went to him for supplies. Shearing time, like harvest, was a time for generosity, and David hoped for favors because his band had really done the shepherds no harm and had given them protection (1 Sam. 25:7, 15-16, 21). But the man was "churlish" (Heb., lit., "hard, rough"); his name was Nabal (Heb., lit., "foolish"), and foolish he was. Except for the wisdom and insight of Abigail, David's band would surely have punished Nabal (1 Sam. 25:3, 18, 23-35). As it was, his rage appears to have caused a stroke, and he died ten days later (1 Sam. 25:36-38).

David was grateful to the Lord and impressed with Abigail. He sought her hand in marriage, and she hastened to accept (1 Sam. 25:39-42). Another wife of David, Ahinoam, is mentioned, as well as Michal, who was taken from him by Saul.

26:1-25 And the Ziphites came unto Saul . . . saying, Doth not David hide himself in the hill of Hachilah

The Ziphites, who lived four miles north of Carmel, tried again to betray David to Saul (recall 1 Sam. 23:19-29); but again David escaped and could have slain Saul but for his principles. Note his conviction that only the Lord should remove the Lord's anointed (1 Sam. 26:8-11, 23). Once again Saul confessed his faults and this time acknowledged the great things done by David.

27:1-12 And David said in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul: there is nothing better for me than that I should speedily escape into the land of the Philistines; and Saul shall despair of me

The Bible does not tell only of the exemplary activities of the heroes but tells frankly about their faults as well. Surprisingly, David appears not to have asked counsel of the Lord, either directly or through a priest or prophet, whether he could trust Saul's promise (1 Sam. 26:21). He sought refuge with Achish of Gath on his own. For a year and four months, he and his band of six hundred lived in Philistine lands, deceiving their host by raiding non-Israelite peoples while appearing to Achish to be raiding cities of Judah. The ruse worked, and Achish trusted David to be his ally and Israel's enemy forever (1 Sam. 27:12).

28:1-2 And Achish said unto David, Know thou assuredly that thou shalt go out with me to battle

Because Achish trusted David, he was willing to set him in battle against the Israelites and make him his personal bodyguard (1 Sam. 28:2a). The account of Achish and David is interrupted here but is resumed later (1 Sam. 29).

28:3 Now Samuel was dead . . . And Saul had put away those that had familiar spirits

The short reprise of Samuel's death and of Saul's elimination of others supposed to know about the future sets the stage for Saul's last tragic episode.

28:4-25 And the Philistines gathered themselves together, . . . and Saul gathered all Israel together

The doleful account of the end of King Saul recounts his futile last battle. He could not get divine guidance through legitimate avenues, so he turned to the spurious diviners he had banished in his better days (1 Sam. 28:3, 7 and fn.). There is no reason to suppose that the Lord, who had refused to respond to Saul through legitimate avenues, would then send him a bona fide revelation through the diviner at En-dor. Her vision of "gods ascending out of the earth" may well have been an apparition of the forces of evil that wished to bring about a formerly good man's destruction. Note that Saul himself did not see the "Samuel" described by the medium; he assumed it to be the former prophet (1 Sam. 28:13-14). The message, ostensibly from Samuel, overwhelmed Saul, for it was a combination of truths he could not deny with predictions he could not dismiss. Ironically the compassion of the diviner-woman then persuaded the fear-racked and emaciated Saul to take nourishment and rest to prepare for his dreadful and fateful day.

29:1-11 Now the Philistines gathered together all their armies to Aphek: and the Israelites pitched . . . in Jezreel

More than forty miles separated the Philistines gathering on the coastal plain from the Israelites in the rich north central valleys of Jezreel. Though David had won the confidence of Achish, the other princes of the Philistine confederacy were skeptical of his loyalty to their cause, so David was not allowed to go into battle against Saul and Israel.

30:1-31 when David and his men were come to Ziklag . . . the Amalekites had . . . smitten Ziklag, and burned it

David's city of refuge was raided by the ever-threatening Amalekites while he was away. He sought divine guidance through the priest Abiathar, with the ephod, and was assured that he should go to the rescue of his people (1 Sam. 30:8).

David's men found abandoned a sick Egyptian servant of the Amalekites, revived him with food and drink, and with his help found the raiders; they recovered all the captives and goods.

Some of David's men, exhausted by the eighty-mile trek from Aphek to Ziklag and on to Besor (1 Sam. 29:1-3, 11; 30:1, 10), could not continue. Therefore David established the generous principle that they also serve who watch the camp and goods while others fight (1 Sam. 30:22-25).

From Amalekite spoil, taken in addition to their own goods, David and his men sent favors to friendly elders in cities of Judah, doubtless for political reasons (1 Sam. 30:26-31).

31:1-13 Now the Philistines fought against Israel: and the men of Israel fled . . . and fell down slain in mount Gilboa

Saul was wounded, his sons were dead, and when he was unable to persuade his armorbearer to kill him, he became one of the few suicides reported in scripture; his loyal armorbearer followed him in death (1 Sam. 30:1-6; see a different account in 2 Sam. 1:1-10, given by an Amalekite who hoped for favors from David). The Philistines made their deepest inroads into Israel at that time, taking many cities. When they found the bodies of Saul and his sons, they sent his head and armor as trophies to Philistine temples and cities and fastened the bodies to the wall at Beth-shan. The inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead, to honor the great Saul they had known in former times (1 Sam. 11), retrieved the bodies, burned them, and buried the remains under a tree in their city. David's eulogy and lament for Saul and Jonathan follow in 2 Samuel 1:17-27.

So ends the first book of Samuel. Obviously it was not all written by Samuel, for his death was recounted before the end of the first book and the second book of Samuel follows. Perhaps the books covering an era influenced by him were given his name, much as the plates of Nephi continued to be written long after Nephi's death (Book of Mormon INdex, "Plates of Nephi, Large").
