Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

FIRST KINGS

The first book of the Kings continues the narratives of the second book of Samuel. In fact, in their subtitles the books of Samuel are "otherwise called" the first and second books of the kings; thus the subtitle of this book is "Commonly Called the Third Book of the Kings," and the four books are presented as a continuum.

The first half of the first book of the Kings (1 Kgs. 1-11) relates the transmission of the kingdom from David to his son Solomon. It recounts Solomon's consolidation and further expansion of the kingdom and the establishment of Jerusalem as the religious capital with a glorious new temple. It accounts for Solomon's acquisition of wealth and fame. But then Solomon declined and fell, as did the previous two kings.

The second half (1 Kgs. 12-22) illustrates what Jesus once said: "Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation; and every city or house divided against itself shall not stand" (Matt. 12:25). Ancient Israel deteriorated, lost the concept of the divine Abrahamic mission of Israel, and lost the blessings promised those who faithfully perform it.

Parallel accounts are found in 2 Chronicles 1-20 but with more details about Judah than about northern Israel.

It is said that Solomon "spake three thousand proverbs; and his songs were a thousand and five" (1 Kgs. 4:32). Most of the book of Proverbs is indeed attributed to Solomon.

Commentary

1:1-4 Now king David was old and stricken in years

David had indeed grown old. His beautiful young wife Abishag was later innocently involved in a political action by a brother of Solomon (1 Kgs. 2:13-34).

1:5-10 Then Adonijah the son of Haggith exalted himself

Adonijah might logically have assumed that he should succeed his father, David. He was David's fourth son (2 Sam. 3:2-5); two elder brothers, Amnon and Absalom, were already dead; a third, called Daniel or Chileab (1 Chr. 3:1; 2 Sam. 3:3), is not spoken of in the record after the sons of David are listed; and Solomon was younger than Adonijah.

But no one could properly make himself king in Israel. One was to be called prophetically and anointed, as were Saul and David. Surprisingly, Adonijah had the support of the priest Abiathar, King David's long-time friend, and he also had the support of the redoubtable Joab, David's staunch defender. But he did not have the support of Zadok, the chief priest, nor was he called to the kingship through Nathan the prophet. Neither did he have the support of Benaiah, one of the three mightiest of David's thirty mighty men and Joab's chief rival (2 Sam. 23:20-22). But Adonijah did not invite his brother Solomon to his coronation (1 Kgs. 1:19, 26).

1:11-53 Didst not thou, my lord, O king, swear unto thine handmaid, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me

Bath-sheba and the prophet Nathan knew that David had told Solomon the Lord had promised his birth, his peaceful reign, and his building of the temple (1 Kgs. 1:13a). They also knew it was urgent that David should be told of Adonijah's usurpation. Bath-sheba therefore reminded him, and Nathan confirmed what she said, giving more facts about Adonijah's intentions. All of this, with the gentle sarcasm in Nathan's last question, brought a response (1 Kgs. 1:27).

Adonijah's coronation feast at the spring En Rogel, about half a mile down the Kidron valley from the spring Gihon, was interrupted, as were his royal hopes. The priest Abiathar, last of the line of Eli, was cut off from his priesthood position.

The prophet Nathan, with the chief priest Zadok and the military leader Benaiah, who was to replace Joab, summoned the royal bodyguard and the people to follow Solomon as he rode the king's mule down to the spring Gihon, water-source for Jerusalem, where Solomon was anointed and proclaimed king.

Adonijah and his followers saw that their cause was lost and their lives in danger, so the pretender fled for sanctuary to the ark, where he clung to the horns of the altar for safety until he was assured that if he would prove worthy, he might be saved. Solomon was judicious and tolerant, and for a time there was peace.

2:1-11 Now the days of David drew nigh that he should die

David gave Solomon his farewell charge; a poetic version reports more detailed blessings, transcending Solomon's reign and anticipating the Messiah (Ps. 72). Hearkening to the charge could indeed have made Solomon an outstanding king under the covenant promise of the Lord to David and his descendants (1 Kgs. 2:4). Less saintly were David's dying requests for Solomon to punish Joab and Shimei for past deeds, but he did remember to reward Barzillai's family.

The king's death is recorded simply and his reign briefly reviewed. His burial "in the city of David" (1 Kgs. 2:10) was unusual; burials were typically outside Israelite cities. The traditional site of his burial is venerated to this day on "Mount Zion" southwest of the Old City of Jerusalem, where many people visit David's cenotaph every day.

2:12-46 Then sat Solomon upon the throne of David

Solomon immediately executed the punishments requested by his father. He also soon found grounds to put to death Adonijah, the erstwhile usurper of the throne, for Adonijah provided a reason himself. He should have known that anyone who acquired a wife of a former king would appear to be the royal heir. Why the mother of Solomon presented Adonijah's request to her son is not recorded; perhaps she acted simply out of kindness. But Solomon was suspicious of Adonijah and with autocratic dispatch decreed his death.

Abiathar is a tragic figure (1 Kgs. 2:26-27 and fn.). The sole survivor of Saul's purge of Eli's priestly family, he was embraced sympathetically at first and served David well, but he chose unwisely to support Adonijah and was terminated from his priestly service by Solomon. How the king got authority over the priesthood is not recorded.

Joab's championing of Adonijah had left him vulnerable to Solomon, and he sought sanctuary at the tent set up by David to house the ark, clinging to the horns of the altar and rashly saying, "Nay, but I will die here" (1 Kgs. 2:30). So there he was executed at Solomon's command by the new military leader, Benaiah (1 Kgs. 2:28-35).

Shimei, who had cursed David but had been given a reprieve, was restricted to the city of Jerusalem. Almost inevitably an occasion arose for which he could also be put to death.

3:1-2 building his own house, and the house of the Lord, and the wall of Jerusalem

The king's need for royal housing and the people's need for a temple because they were still sacrificing on mountain tops provided reasons enough for Solomon's major building projects (2 Kgs. 5-7). Marriage of an Egyptian princess to an outsider was a rare concession from Egypt, and Solomon gave his Egyptian wife special treatment (2 Kgs. 3:1).

3:3-4 And Solomon loved the Lord . . . a thousand burnt offerings did Solomon offer upon that altar

Solomon himself had made abundant offerings to the Lord on one of the "high places," but a proper place of worship chosen by the Lord had been anticipated since Moses (Deut. 12:1-6). That was reason to build the temple, even though worship on hilltops, common in all of Canaan, had been acceptable to the Lord in patriarchal times.

3:5-15 In Gibeon the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream . . . and God said, Ask what I shall give thee

King Solomon may be seen at his best in this event. When given the opportunity in a dream to ask the Lord for whatever he desired, he asked only for ability to understand and judge fairly. Because of his choice, he was promised other blessings. The recorded commendation of David is a problem in view of his moral deterioration, but the emphasis is upon his loyalty to the Lord in never turning to other gods. Some later references specify that his heart was right in the eyes of the Lord except in his sins against Uriah and Bath-sheba. Such references commend his behavior in his better days rather than approving his whole life.

3:16-28 Then came there two women, that were harlots, unto the king, and stood before him

In this famous illustration of Solomon's wisdom, it is surprising that his solution to the question worked out at all. Normally two women who both desired the same baby would both have objected to the crude suggestion that it be cut in two. His wisdom must have been in his insight to see that one would be brazen enough to consent. Naturally the true mother gave in rather than consent to the death of the child.

4:1-28 So king Solomon was king over all Israel

A huge government bureaucracy began to develop in Solomon's reign; the first officers are listed here. Evidence of the size of it is shown in the quantity of provisions for each day and in the numbers of horses and horsemen (1 Kgs. 4:22-28). It is surprising that Abiathar is listed as a priest (1 Kgs. 4:4; 2:27). Possibly the Nathan whose sons are named was the prophet who aided in Solomon's coronation; such appointments for his sons would have shown gratitude to him (1 Kgs. 4:5).

Solomon reorganized his nation into twelve administrative districts, preserving some of the old tribal units but altering others. Two of his twelve procurement officers were sons-in-law (1 Kgs. 4:11, 15). These officers were to collect the people's contributions of food for the royal household.

The boundaries of the promised land, anticipated in the covenant with Abraham, were reached (1 Kgs. 4:21b).

4:29-34 And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and largeness of heart

The Hebrew phrase "largeness of heart" denotes power and breadth of understanding. Evidence for some of the king's talents is shown by the number of his proverbs and songs. Obviously our book of Proverbs does not contain all the compositions attributed to Solomon.

5:1-18 And Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants unto Solomon

The favorable trade relationship, which began between King David and King Hiram, became advantageous to both nations in Solomon's time (2 Sam. 5:11-12). The Israelites had never developed cutting and carving skills in wood and stone anciently, possibly because of an overgeneralized interpretation of the laws against making graven images. Agricultural products, such as grain and oil, were among the Israelite goods that were traded to the Sidonians for their excellent cedar and for the labors of their skilled workmen.

Most of the common laborers would have been state slaves from other lands. The Israelite workers, sent to the places in which the trees and stones were cut, "ruled over the people that wrought in the work" (1 Kgs. 5:13-17; 9:20-23; 2 Chr. 2:17-18; 8:7-9).

6:1-10 in the four hundred and eightieth year after the children of Israel were come out of . . . Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon's reign . . . he began to build the house of the Lord

This date is important in calculating much biblical chronology. The wilderness wandering was forty years long, and the reigns of Saul and David were each forty years. That would leave only three hundred sixty years for all the events recorded in the books of Joshua, Judges, Ruth, and Samuel. The terms of the judges cannot be added end to end, as that would total more than three hundred sixty years, so it is apparent that some of the judges were contemporaries serving in different parts of the land during terms that overlapped.

Details about the size and features of the temple show that it was not a large edifice, but its architecture and adornment must have been beautiful. The floor plan was that of the tabernacle of the congregation but with all its dimensions doubled (BD, "Temple of Solomon"; "Tabernacle").

The building materials were cut and shaped before being brought to the site, so that the work might go on with reverent quietness there.

6:11-13 And the word of the Lord came to Solomon

Another revelation came to Solomon, emphasizing that blessings would come to him and the people for keeping the covenants and obeying the laws, ordinances, and statutes.

6:14-38 So Solomon built the house, and finished it

The central holy places were most ornate, with such features such as the large cherubim, which were fifteen feet in height and width and made of olive wood overlaid with gold. They were placed with their wings over the gold-covered ark and its smaller cherubim.

None of the carved and engraved objects violated the first two of the Ten Commandments, which forbade the making and worshiping of carved or cast idols (Ex. 20:4 and commentary).

Building the temple took seven years.

7:1-12 But Solomon was building his own house thirteen years, and he finished all his house

Nearly twice as much time was required to build Solomon's residence, which included housing for government officials and for Solomon's wives.

7:13-51 Solomon sent and fetched Hiram out of Tyre. He was a widow's son of the tribe of Naphtali, and his father was a man of Tyre, a worker in brass

This Hiram, of course, was not the king Hiram of Tyre (5:1-12) but a craftsman "filled with wisdom, and understanding, and cunning to work all works in brass" (1 Kgs. 7:14; 2 Chr. 2:14). His creations in cast metal included two colossal bronze pillars to stand in front of the temple proper. Whether these were reminiscent of the pillars erected from time to time by the patriarchs in remembrance of special blessings is not known (1 Kgs. 7:15-21; Gen. 28:18-22; 31:13, 51-52).

A font of bronze was set on the backs of twelve bronze oxen. It was used for the ceremonial "washing of priests" (2 Chr. 4:2-6; BD, "Temple of Solomon"; "Baptism"). Temples built in antiquity by various peoples had basins for water to be used in ceremonial ablutions, if not baptism. Recall that true baptism had ceased by Abraham's time and had been replaced with apostate practices (Gen. 17:7a; JST Gen. 17:3-7). Whether baptism was restored and practiced in Solomon's temple has yet to be revealed, but outward washings symbolic of inner cleansing were common (TG, "Wash, Washing"; BD, "Temple of Solomon").

Ore for the extensive bronze work may have been found in what has come to be called King Solomon's mines near Eilat (the site of which is known). Much material for building the temple had been gathered and dedicated by King David (1 Kgs. 7:51b).

8:1-11 Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, . . . that they might bring up the ark of the covenant of the Lord out of the city of David, which is Zion

Attended by priests, elders, and tribal leaders, the ark of the covenant, the tabernacle, and the holy vessels of the tabernacle were brought up from the little citadel of David, then called Zion, to the new temple. It was higher on the ridge north of the old citadel, and it also came to be called Zion. The old portable tabernacle of the wilderness, last used at Shiloh and retained for a time at Gibeon, was brought with all its vessels to the temple compound. (What ultimately became of it is not recorded.) A tent had been pitched by David to shelter the ark and other sacred things in his city (2 Sam. 6:17; 2 Chr. 1:4-5).

The two tables of stone remained in the ark; it would be interesting to know where the other sacred objects and writings were (1 Kgs. 8:9; BD, "Ark of the Covenant").

After the ark was in place, a glorious cloud indicated the presence of the Lord and his acceptance of the temple.

8:12-21 Then spake Solomon, . . . I have surely built thee an house to dwell in

Solomon began the services by blessing the congregation and thanking the Lord for the many blessings that had made it possible for him to build the temple. It had been eagerly anticipated by his father David and others since Moses received revelations about it (2 Sam. 7:1-13; Deut. 12:5-7; BD, "Temple of Solomon").

8:22-53 And Solomon stood before the altar of the Lord in the presence of all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands toward heaven: And he said, Lord God of Israel

The dedicatory prayer by King Solomon is the best indication of the breadth and depth of his faith, his philosophy of life, and his regard for eternal values. He recognized that the great God could not be confined to his little temple, but it would be a place where the king, priests, and people could come before Him. It was a place where people could make covenants and receive promises. Solomon knew they would be blessed if they kept their covenants and punished if they broke them. He outlined several situations of need in which the people might come and supplicate the Lord; or, if compelled to be away, they might look toward the temple and be heard and blessed, being forgiven as necessary. Strangers might pray toward this house and be blessed. Solomon arose after his prayer before the altar; he had been kneeling on his knees—a mode of prayer we still use.

8:54-61 when Solomon had made an end of praying . . . he stood, and blessed all the congregation of Israel

As Solomon blessed the congregation, he reminded them of good things the Lord had done for them and their ancestors and prayed that all might live accordingly, keeping their hearts perfect with the Lord by keeping his statutes and commandments. He prayed for all people of the earth to know that the Lord is the only true God, thus showing that he knew of the mission of Abraham and Israel (TG, "Israel, Mission of").

8:62-66 And the king, and all Israel with him, offered sacrifice before the Lord

This account means not that the king and people officiated at the altars but that they provided the sacrifices and participated in the worship services. Recall that King Saul officiated in offering a sacrifice and was condemned for arrogating unto himself the authority to do so (1 Sam. 13:9-14).

It appears that this offering was a festival "peace offering" in which some of the fat was burned upon the altar, the priests received a portion for food, and the remainder of the animal was eaten by the families on whose behalf it was sacrificed (Lev. 3; 7:11-21). It does not appear that the "continual burnt offering" was involved in this celebration (Ex. 29:38-42; Lev. 6:8-13; 8:18-21; Num. 28:3-8).

The festival for the first seven days of the seventh month would have included the solemn Day of Atonement. The second seven days would have been the joyful Feast of Tabernacles, or Sukkoth, ending on the eighth day with Simchas Torah, "Joy in the Torah" (BD, "Fasts"; "Feasts").

9:1-9 And it came to pass, when Solomon had finished the building of the house of the Lord . . . That the Lord appeared to Solomon the second time

The effects of keeping or breaking one's covenants were reiterated in a revelation confirming the covenant promises made at the temple dedication. David was again cited as an exemplar of integrity of faith in the Lord, having never turned to other gods (recall, however, that by his sins he fell from his exaltation; D&C 132:39; BD, "David").

9:10-14 at the end of twenty years . . . king Solomon gave Hiram twenty cities in the land of Galilee

It appears that Solomon was unable to pay all his construction costs and was obliged to give King Hiram of Tyre twenty cities, mostly along the coastland of western Galilee from the place of the present Arab village of Kabul northward and adjoining Phoenician lands below Tyre. The cities did not please Hiram, and he called them Cabul (1 Kgs. 9:13a). Nevertheless, they seem to have more than paid the debt, for Hiram sent Solomon six score talents of gold—a very large amount. It is possible, however, that this was the gold used in adorning the temple.

9:15-25 And this is the reason of the levy which king Solomon raised; for to build the house of the Lord, and his own house, and Millo, and the wall of Jerusalem, and Hazor, and Megiddo, and Gezer

Solomon's levy that enabled him to build so extensively was heavy for the people to bear. The word in Hebrew that is translated here as levy means "conscripted labor," the chief sources of which were the non-Israelites left in the land, for Solomon did not require the children of Israel to be "bondmen."

When all the work was finished, Solomon's wife who was Pharaoh's daughter moved up to her new house (1 Kgs. 9:24; 3:1).

At last the people of Israel might fulfill their hopes and the Lord's commandments that they should gather at appointed seasons each year to worship and to sacrifice in the place which He had chosen (1 Kgs. 9:25; Deut. 16:16).

9:26-28 And king Solomon made a navy of ships in Ezion-geber, which is beside Eloth, on the shore of the Red sea. . . . And they came to Ophir

Little is known about the place called Ophir or its gold or even whether it was the source of gold for the temple. One may wonder at the resources Solomon used in building and in foreign exchange, but they were burdensome and oppressive to the people (1 Kgs. 12:4).

10:1-13 And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon concerning the name of the Lord, she came to prove him with hard questions

The call of Abraham was that through the ministry of him and his seed, the name of the Lord should be "known in the earth forever" (Abr. 1:19). Just how Solomon gained fame in relation to the name of the Lord is not stated, but it must have something to do with the temple he built and with his reputed wisdom.

Because both "Sheba" and "Ophir" were named in connection with the descendants of Shem through Joktan, brother of Peleg, both being sons of Eber, father of the Hebrews, it is plausible that their descendants still dwelt in the Arabian peninsula and that this queen of Sheba came from there (Gen. 10:21, 25-30).

A long dynasty of kings of Ethiopia, which ended with Haile Selassie (1891-1975), claimed descent from the queen of Sheba and Solomon, but no evidence for that claim is given in this biblical account.

The "hard questions" (Heb., lit., "riddles") presumably were to prove Solomon's intellect, knowledge, and wisdom. The queen was impressed and gave him lavish gifts. He responded by giving her "all her desire, whatsoever she asked," and she returned home (1 Kgs. 10:13).

10:14-29 Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six hundred threescore and six talents of gold

The weight of six hundred sixty-six talents would be very great (BD, "Weights and Measures"). One can only marvel at the opulence implied by that amount of gold.

Sources of many chariots, horses, and wealth are given. (A place-name is mistranslated "linen yarn"; 1 Kgs. 10:28a.)

With all his wealth, military power, and renowned wisdom, Solomon had an unequaled opportunity to make known the name of the true God, for "all the earth sought to Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which God had put in his heart." But only in the story of the queen of Sheba is evidence given that he followed through (1 Kgs. 10:24; 1-13).

11:1-8 King Solomon loved many strange women, together with the daughter of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonians, and Hittites

This passage declares Solomon's violation of a basic law. Every Israelite was warned that a foreign wife might turn away his heart and that of their children after other gods, and Solomon's many wives and concubines did turn away his heart so that it was no longer perfect with the Lord (1 Kgs. 11:2-3; Deut. 7:3-4).

Again the heart of David was commended for being perfect with the Lord, his God, but only his fidelity in worship was so commended. Solomon's violation of the marriage laws led to his breaking the first and second of the Ten Commandments; David's breach of the tenth led to his breaking the sixth and seventh. Grievous results followed in both cases.

11:9-13 And the Lord was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel

Solomon's faults and the response of the Lord to them makes it difficult to believe that he was permitted to continue enjoying his kingdom because of the merits of his father David, whereas his son Rehoboam would suffer the division of his kingdom because of the violations of his father. Such is stated here as a revelation, but it is possible that the information has not been transmitted accurately through the centuries. The principle of individual responsibility is that everyone is to be punished for his own sins (Deut. 24:16; Ezek. 18:20; A of F 2).

11:14-40 the Lord stirred up an adversary unto Solomon

It is not surprising that some peoples who had been conquered by David and compelled to pay tribute to Solomon rebelled as soon as they saw an opportunity to do so. Such were Hadad of Edom and Rezon of Damascus, Syria (1 Kgs. 11:14-25). One rebel who became a major force in the future of the kingdom of Israel was Jeroboam, an Ephrathite, or Ephraimite, of Zereda in the hill country of Ephraim. Jeroboam's leadership abilities and ambition were factors, but the prediction of Ahijah the prophet that he would become king over ten of the tribes set him on his path. Though he had been a trusted foreman over the laborers of the tribes of Joseph during Solomon's building projects, Solomon sought to kill him when his future status was made known. It was not unusual that a refugee such as Jeroboam would be harbored for a time in another land (1 Kgs. 11:26-40).

11:41-43 And Solomon slept with his fathers

A rather terse note, without any eulogy, tells of Solomon's death. Although he reigned forty years, few details are told of his reign after his building was completed. Neither has he been cited as a hero or exemplar in later scripture. The "book of the acts of Solomon" is not available to give other facts about him (1 Kgs. 11:41).

12:1-15 And Rehoboam went to Shechem: for all Israel were come to Shechem to make him king

The people gathered for the coronation at Shechem, a central city in northern Israel, rather than the capital at Jerusalem, and asked for relief. Their proposal was simple: if the new king would reduce the taxes and quotas of labor conscription, they would accept him and serve him. Ironically, this son of Solomon refused an offer that the father of Solomon would have felt fortunate to receive. It took David seven years to win the northern tribes and unite all Israel (2 Sam. 2:4; 3:1; 5:1-5).

So Rehoboam rejected the wise but conservative counsel of the elders and acted on the despotic suggestions of his peers. That action marked the beginning of the end of the united nation of Israel, as it became a house divided against itself.

12:16-20 So when all Israel saw that the king hearkened not unto them, the people answered the king, saying, What portion have we in David?

With a short rallying song, the people departed to their own tents. Rehoboam failed to take the rupture seriously and sent his supervisor of the labor draft into the camps of Israel; but when the officer was stoned to death, Rehoboam fled to Jerusalem. Only the tribe of Judah and some of Benjamin accepted his leadership. The northern ten tribes of Israel made Jeroboam king, as had been prophesied (1 Kgs. 11:29-31; 12:20).

12:21-24 when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he assembled all the house of Judah, with the tribe of Benjamin

Only Judahites had shown loyalty to Rehoboam at the assembly in Shechem, but some Benjamites joined them, perhaps because Jerusalem was virtually on the border between the tribes of Judah and Benjamin.

Thanks to the inspired advice of a "man of God," a prophet, who warned Rehoboam against making war on the northern tribes to force them back under his subjection, Rehoboam's military forces turned back. His action is surprising—and commendable—but it also confirmed the divided state of Israel.

The southern Israelite nation of Judah thereafter included the tribes of Judah and Simeon, some of the tribe of Benjamin, and all the faithful of the tribe of Levi (Josh. 19:1, 9; Judg. 1:3, 17; 1 Kgs. 12:21; 2 Chr. 11:1, 5-14).

12:25-33 Then Jeroboam built Shechem in mount Ephraim, and dwelt therein

Northern Israel was led into idolatry by King Jeroboam, and was provided with an apostate, non-Levite priesthood. Jeroboam did not simply lose his faith in Jehovah (1 Kgs. 14:1-20) but willfully created golden-calf idols and false priests to compete with the true religion and temple at Jerusalem for his own political purposes (1 Kgs. 12:27-33). He even made priests for "devils," causing the true priests in all the tribes of Israel to flee to Jerusalem (2 Chr. 11:13-15b, 16-17; Lev. 17:7).

The "ten tribes" to the north were really nine and a fraction, for there were thirteen, total, counting the Levites and reckoning Joseph as two: Ephraim and Manasseh.

13:1-34 And, behold, there came a man of God out of Judah by the word of the Lord unto Bethel: and Jeroboam stood by the altar to burn incense. And he cried against the altar in the word of the Lord

Note the prophecy about Jeroboam's idolatrous altar and watch for its fulfillment (1 Kgs. 13:2a). And observe that the miraculous punishment of King Jeroboam, followed by the miraculous healing of his afflicted hand, did not cause him to turn from his wicked ways (1 Kgs. 13:4-10, 33).

There are problems in the account of an "old prophet" trying the integrity of the man of God from Judah, and the results seem unfair; but there is a general lesson: if one knows by revelation what he should do, he must not let anything dissuade him. There is precious little comfort in the honor the old prophet bestowed upon the dead corpse of the man of God from Judah (1 Kgs. 13:18b, 21-32).

So, despite a prophetic warning that cost a righteous man's life, neither the king nor the people repented, and others followed in the sins of Jeroboam, going from bad to worse until they were destroyed.

14:1-20 Abijah the son of Jeroboam fell sick. And Jeroboam said to his wife . . . disguise thyself . . . and get thee to Shiloh: behold, there is Ahijah the prophet, which told me that I should be king

Here may be evidence that Jeroboam still had faith in the prophet who had appointed him, and in the Lord—not in his own idols. A poignant, dramatic, and tragic narrative, it foreshadows the course of northern Israel during the ensuing two hundred years. Jeroboam continued his idolatry, despite the prophet's warning. Likewise, king after king of Israel perpetuated the sins of Jeroboam, despite continuing prophetic warnings, until their related evils, from within and without, destroyed them (1 Kgs. 16:31; 2 Kgs. 3:3; 10:29; 13:6, 11; 14:24; 15:9, 18, 24, 28; 17:22).

14:21-24 Rehoboam was forty and one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem

All was not well in Judah's religious life either, even though Rehoboam had repented and obeyed a prophet at the beginning of his reign (1 Kgs. 12:21-24). His mother was an Ammonitess whom King Solomon had married, so Rehoboam's religious upbringing may not have been ideal. His violations of God's laws included worship of images in the old high places and groves (Heb., asheroth, "female fertility images") on the hills and under the green trees; there were also sodomites and cultic prostitutes. These evils always signified apostasy in Israel.

14:25-31 Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem: And he took away the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the king's house

Shishak had been Jeroboam's friend, so perhaps Rehoboam's treasures and the costly things of the temple from Solomon's time seemed fair game to him (1 Kgs. 14:25a).

The second book of Chronicles provides more history about the kings of Judah, and a number of Rehoboam's additional accomplishments are recounted there (2 Chr. 11-12).

15:1-8 Now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam . . . reigned Abijam over Judah

The chronology of the kings of each of the two Israelite nations is correlated in the record of the royal succession of the other.

The second king of Judah after the division of the kingdom perpetuated the sins of his father, Rehoboam (but see 2 Chr. 13). Abijam's very name honors Yam, the Canaanite god of the sea; it means "Yam is my father"—certainly an apostate name for David's great-grandson. Abijam was compared, as are many of the later kings of Judah, with David, who was commended for his worship of the true God and for general goodness except for his sins against Uriah the Hittite (1 Kgs. 15:5c).

15:9-24 And in the twentieth year of Jeroboam king of Israel reigned Asa over Judah . . . . And Asa did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord

At last Judah had a righteous king and was blessed during his long reign (the account in Chronicles adds some important details; 2 Chr. 14-16). Asa even "removed" his idolatrous mother Maachah "from being queen" (1 Kgs. 15:13). Such good kings as Asa made the difference between the unstable conditions in Israel and the relatively more stable conditions in Judah during much of the ensuing three centuries.

15:25-34 And Nadab the son of Jeroboam began to reign over Israel . . . and Baasha smote him . . . and reigned in his stead

The house of Jeroboam ended, as had been prophesied (1 Kgs. 14:7-14). Nadab was replaced by a usurper, Baasha, the first of many usurpers in northern Israel. Although he fulfilled the prophecy against Jeroboam, Baasha himself perpetuated the same idolatrous ways.

16:1-7 the word of the Lord came to Jehu . . . against Baasha

The Lord continued to send prophets to warn Israel's kings, but they continued to be idolatrous, as had Jeroboam; also, a wicked man who slays a wicked man is not justified thereby.

16:8-14 In the twenty and sixth year of Asa king of Judah began Elah the son of Baasha to reign over Israel . . . two years

Only two years passed until another assassin killed the son of the first assassin-king, wiped out his family, and reigned. As Jesus later said, "all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword" (Matt. 26:52).

16:15-20 In the twenty and seventh year of Asa king of Judah did Zimri reign seven days

An army captain, Zimri, who slew his drunken king, was soon opposed by another captain, Omri. The desperate Zimri burned the royal residence and perished in it.

16:21-28 Then were the people of Israel divided into two parts; half . . . followed Tibni . . . and half followed Omri

Omri's faction prevailed, and he reigned twelve years—six in Tirzah and six more in a new capital, Samaria, which remained the capital of northern Israel until the Assyrians conquered Israel in 722 B.C. Other sources, such as inscriptions of Mesha, king of Moab, and the annals of Shalmaneser III, held Omri in some regard for his military prowess; but the Bible reports that he did more evil than all that were before him.

16:29-34 In the thirty and eighth year of Asa king of Judah began Ahab the son of Omri to reign over Israel . . . twenty and two years. And Ahab . . . did evil . . . above all that were before him

Ahab, who outdid his father's records for evil, is also better known than his father, Omri. Six chapters tell of his evils despite warnings by the great prophet Elijah. That prophet's mission continued throughout Ahab's life and after his death (1 Kgs. 17-22; 2 Kgs. 1-2).

One fateful move by King Ahab was to marry Jezebel, daughter of a king of Zidon (1 Kgs. 16:31). She was an avid worshipper of Baal and powerfully influenced Ahab. Their marriage, their descendants, and the way of life they engendered had evil effects upon both Israel and Judah for the next fifty years.

Recall the prophecy of Joshua about the man who would rebuild Jericho (1 Kgs. 16:34a).

17:1-7 And Elijah the Tishbite, who was of the inhabitants of Gilead, said unto Ahab

Here is a brief introduction to Elijah, a great prophet for his time and for the future. His name means "My God is Jehovah," appropriate to his mission to bring Israel back to God. He was first called by the Lord to warn King Ahab and Israel. He was a rugged and dramatic prophet from Gilead, from the city of Tishbe, the exact location of which is not known. His first attempt to awaken people to their need for the Lord and to teach them their duty to Him came during a drought and famine, which lasted nearly three years (1 Kgs. 17:1; 18:1). Elijah was provided with food miraculously during the drought, until the brook near where he lived dried up and he was told to move.

17:8-24 Arise, get thee to Zarephath, which belongeth to Zidon: . . . I have commanded a widow woman there to sustain thee

Jesus later observed, "Many widows were in Israel in the days of Elias. . . . But unto none of them was Elias sent" (Luke 4:25-26); he was making the point that no prophet is accepted in his own country. This widow in a neighboring land believed in the Lord and in Elijah, his prophet; she gave him food as he requested and was rewarded.

During the three years of drought, Elijah performed a miracle that is rare in the Old Testament: restoring life.

18:1-18 the word of the Lord came to Elijah in the third year, saying, Go, shew thyself unto Ahab

At length there was a crucial confrontation between Ahab and Elijah—and Israel and the Lord. Apparently almost all the Israelites had departed from the Lord, and Jezebel had had slain all the prophets of the Lord whom she could find. It is ironic that Ahab's own chief steward, Obadiah, hid and saved a hundred of them. Only after being persuaded that the Lord and Elijah would confront Ahab was Obadiah willing to take him before the prophet (1 Kgs. 18:15). Sarcastically Ahab asked if Elijah was the one who had troubled Israel; Elijah responded that the king and his family had troubled Israel by following Baal for evil.

18:19-40 Now therefore send, and gather to me all Israel unto mount Carmel, and the prophets of Baal . . . and the prophets of the groves

Hundreds of prophets of Baal and the fertility goddess Asherah (wrongly translated as "the groves") were called to this confrontation. The question for Israelites was "How long halt ye between two opinions?" which implied a dangerous double-mindedness (1 Kgs. 18:21a). It was Elijah's dramatic way of trying to turn the hearts of the children of Israel back to the covenants of the Lord with their forefathers. (Elijah's latter-day mission is similar; JS-H 1:39; BD, "Elijah".)

The drama became intense as the prophets of Baal called on their idol all morning, jumped on the altar, and slashed themselves until their blood gushed out—but all to no avail. Elijah taunted them that their god must be talking, busy, on a journey, or sleeping, because he did not respond. Then Elijah soaked the altar with water and prayed simply that it be made known that the God in Israel lived and had supreme power. His hope was that people might realize the Lord is God and turn from idolatry. When supernatural fire consumed the offering, rocks, dust, and water, the people fell prostrate and confessed that the Lord is God. With public opinion temporarily on his side, Elijah had the idolatrous prophets executed (1 Kgs. 18:40; Deut. 13:1-11; 17:1-7).

18:41-46 And Elijah said unto Ahab, Get thee up, eat and drink; for there is a sound of abundance of rain

In a further dramatic demonstration of the Lord's power and benevolence, Elijah had his servant watch while clouds rose and came inland from the sea, promising rain. Elijah ran before the chariot of the king, as if to show that Elijah and the Lord were at last guiding Ahab. The drought was broken, as rain indeed came.

19:1-18 Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done . . . Then Jezebel sent a messenger unto Elijah, saying, So let the gods do to me, and more also, if I make not thy life as the life of one of them

Elijah was disappointed that Jezebel's power over the king and people was unbroken. He felt he had failed and was discouraged to the point of giving up his life because the people had gained no real conviction by the miraculous demonstration. Apparently he wanted to return to the place where the dispensation of Moses had begun. He walked a hundred miles from Jezreel to Beersheba and then on into the desert southward.

The Lord interceded and twice sent an angel to urge Elijah to arise, eat, and drink. Thus strengthened, he went two hundred miles farther, to Horeb, or Sinai, where the divine law had been given to Moses six centuries before.

The dramatic forces of nature did not get through to him—neither strong wind, earthquake, nor fire. Only the "still small voice" caused him to hearken and respond. He repeated his lament, but he respected the Lord's continuing confidence in him and accepted His call to return to his mission. A new king was named for Syria, Jehu was to be anointed as king for Israel, and Elisha was to become a prophet with him as a companion for the remainder of his mission and then his replacement.

As for Elijah's fear that he was the only believer left in Israel, the Lord assured him that there were still thousands who had not bowed in faith or affection for Baal.

The trek from Horeb to Damascus would have been well over five hundred miles, and Elijah didn't undertake it immediately; Elisha anointed the kings later (2 Kgs. 8:7-15; 9:1-13.)

19:19-21 So he . . . found Elisha . . . and cast his mantle upon him

The temporary passing of Elijah's mantle to Elisha symbolized his calling; later it was permanently bestowed (2 Kgs. 2:8, 13-14). Note that Elisha was required to leave all that he had to perform his new calling (cf. Matt. 4:18-22).

20:1-43 Ben-hadad the king of Syria gathered all his host together: and there were thirty and two kings with him . . . and besieged Samaria, and warred against it

This chapter tells of two encounters between Israel against Syria and a coalition of others while Ben-hadad was still king in Damascus. Because of their unconscionable aggression and blatant confidence against the God of Israel, the coalition forces were repulsed, once by an Israelite army with a group of young princes at the head, and again a year later, even though Israel's armies were like "two little flocks of kids" compared to the enemy hosts. A prophet advised King Ahab of Israel on the first strategy, and "a man of God" reassured him it was the Lord's power being challenged in the second (1 Kgs. 20:28, 13, 22); therefore, victory came in both. But when Ahab chose to accept Ben-hadad's concessions, one of the "sons of the prophets" symbolically warned him he had done wrong in releasing an important prisoner of war and would suffer at his hand (1 Kgs. 20:35-43 and fn.).

21:1-29 Naboth . . . had a vineyard . . . hard by the palace of Ahab king of Samaria

Little comment is needed on this account of a covetous and petulant king, his aggressive and unscrupulous wife, and their confrontation with Elijah, the prophet of God.

Ahab is shown behaving like a spoiled child, frustrated by Naboth's insistence on his rights.

Jezebel was bold, sarcastic, and boastful in her action. Her plan to proclaim a fast and charge Naboth with blasphemy was cynical and diabolical, for by it she could get his land all in the name of piety. Naboth's vineyard would escheat to the king for lack of a living legal heir (1 Kgs. 21:15-16; but see 2 Kgs. 9:26). In her opinion, who could object?

Objection did come, however, by the word of the Lord through Elijah the prophet, for Jezebel's criminal acts were divinely known. In the confrontation, the king's exclamation and the prophet's response were in character for each. As the dynasty of the first despot of Israel, Jeroboam, had been eradicated, so too would be the dynasty of Jezebel and Ahab (1 Kgs. 21:17-24 and fn.).

The concluding statement is problematical, because Ahab, Jezebel, and their family did suffer as Elijah had predicted (1 Kgs. 21:25-29; 22; 2 Kgs. 9-10).

22:1-40 Jehoshaphat the king of Judah came down to the king of Israel

In Ahab's ambitious campaign to retake the city of Ramoth-gilead, beyond the Jordan River, it is surprising that he was joined by the pious king of Judah, Jehoshaphat. The reason for such an alliance is not evident, but it is noted later that Jehoshaphat's son married a daughter of Ahab and Jezebel. Perhaps Judah hoped to get northern Israel back into the old union; and perhaps Ahab hoped to subjugate Judah.

The difference between the ostentatious religion of Ahab and the humbler faith of Jehoshaphat was shown in the latter's seeking guidance from prophets. The true prophet Micaiah offered first only a sarcastic repetition of the false prophets' assurance to Ahab, but when pressed by Ahab for the truth, he did give him the Lord's message of doom. Micaiah used a metaphor portraying the Lord asking who would persuade Ahab to undertake this campaign and fall therein, explaining that a "lying spirit" was allowed in the minds of all Ahab's false prophets that they might do so (1 Kgs. 22:19-23). Ahab refused to believe Micaiah's prophecy and his explanation of the false prophets' message, and he sent Micaiah to prison until his return. Undaunted, Micaiah declared, "If thou return at all in peace, the Lord hath not spoken by me. . . . Hearken, O people, every one of you" (1 Kgs. 22:28). Despite problems in the account as transmitted, it is a valuable demonstration of the working of false and true prophecy.

Jehoshaphat's personal humility and faith must have qualified him for protection; else the Syrian captains dispatched to kill the king of Israel would not have bypassed anyone dressed in royal robes, whoever he was. Divine power also seems evident in their unknowingly striking Ahab with an arrow (1 Kgs. 22:32-36). Thus Israel's worst king died and "the dogs licked up his blood" as predicted (1 Kgs. 22:37-40; 16:30).

22:41-50 Jehoshaphat the son of Asa . . . reigned twenty and five years in Jerusalem. . . . And he walked in all the ways of Asa his father . . . doing that which was right in the eyes of the Lord

Only Jehoshaphat's failure to destroy the old "high places" of idolatrous worship was recorded against the good record of this king of Judah. A few more of Jehoshaphat's deeds are told, including his wise refusal to collaborate with King Ahaziah, son of Ahab, in a gold-seeking venture. Note how many relatively good kings ruled in Judah in contrast to Israel.

Jehoshaphat's death and the rise of Jehoram, his son and successor, are briefly noted here, but crucial events are recorded later from the few years Jehoram lived and reigned (2 Kgs. 8:16-24).

22:51-53 Ahaziah the son of Ahab . . . reigned two years over Israel

Three verses preview the short reign of Ahaziah in the ways of his father and mother and of the former king Jeroboam. More details are recorded in 2 Kings.

Events recorded in the first book of the Kings began with the prosperous times of Solomon, in which Israel had unlimited
