Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

SECOND KINGS

The second book of the Kings continues from the first book the account of the Lord's efforts through his prophets to turn the hearts of Israel back to a righteous way of life and their Abrahamic mission. The first thirteen chapters continue the accounts of the efforts of Elijah and Elisha, but the people failed to repent, except for brief periods, and in time Elijah and then Elisha passed on. The next four chapters tell of the degeneration, fall, and dispersion of the northern ten tribes of Israel, despite the early "writing prophets" Isaiah, Hosea, Amos, and Micah. Those four chapters, plus three more, record the reigns of several kings of Judah, a few of whom were relatively good and to some degree heeded such prophets as Isaiah and Micah (BD, "Chronology"). The remaining chapters tell of the degeneration, fall, and exile of Judah to Babylon, despite all the writing prophets, including Isaiah, Micah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel.

Commentary

1:1 Then Moab rebelled against Israel after the death of Ahab

An ancient inscription confirms that Ahab's father, Omri, did conquer Moab and exact tribute from that nation all his days (BD, "Mesha"; "Moabite Stone"). Ahab maintained that dominion, but at his death the Moabites sought freedom. The inscription makes it appear that Moab vanquished and practically destroyed Israel— an exaggerated claim compared to the biblical account of those events (2 Kgs. 3:4-27).

1:2-18 Ahaziah fell down through a lattice . . . and was sick: and he sent messengers, and said . . . Go, enquire of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron whether I shall recover

This dramatic episode shows how deeply apostate this Israelite king had become and how vigorously the Lord, through his prophet Elijah, tried to correct the presumption of such a king, even though it involved removing some servants of the king from this life. (Such action is not always warranted; recall Jesus' response to James's and John's request to employ it in his behalf; Luke 9:51-56.)

Because of his attitudes and actions, Ahaziah died after only two years of rule, as the true prophet had predicted. He was replaced by his brother Jehoram, since he had no son (2 Kgs. 1:17; BD, "Jehoram or Joram"; both Israel and Judah had kings with the same name during part of the same period).

The name of the idol god Baal-zebub appears as "Beelzebub" in the New Testament (Matt. 12:24), where he is referred to as "the prince of the devils." The name means "Lord of flies," and he was the Philistine god of both disease and healing.

2:1-18 And it came to pass, when the Lord would take up Elijah into heaven by a whirlwind, that Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal

Before Elijah departed, his loyal young companion and heir, Elisha, requested a double portion of Elijah's spiritual gifts, a request that may be understood in light of the law of inheritances (BD, "Inheritance"). The birthright son inherited a double portion of property as well as more responsibility than other sons; thus Elisha asked, in effect, to be made Elijah's spiritual heir. The "mantle" of Elijah, which had earlier been placed symbolically on Elisha, was now given to him (1 Kgs. 19:19; 2 Kgs. 2:13).

Little is known of Elijah's passage "by a whirlwind into heaven"; but he retained the calling and power to fulfill some exceptional missions back on earth (2 Kgs. 2:10-11; Mal. 4:5-6; Matt. 17:3, 11; John 1:21; JS-H 1:38-39; D&C 110:13-16).

Elijah is transliterated in the New Testament as Elias, from its Greek spelling. The name Elias is also used as a title for other servants (BD, "Elias"; "Elijah").

The "sons of the prophets" seem to have been subordinate to Elijah and Elisha (BD, "Schools of the Prophets").

2:19-22 the men of the city [of Jericho] said unto Elisha . . . this city is pleasant . . . but the water is naught, and the ground barren

In the first of many "good turn" miracles, Elisha "healed these waters" so that the city spring would be useful to the people and the land. Tourists still visit "Elisha's Spring" next to the ancient mound, or "tell," of Jericho.

Elisha worked much as Jesus later worked—with compassion to help people in need.

2:23-25 he went up from thence unto Bethel: and . . . little children . . . mocked him

Youths, rather than little children, disrespectfully challenged Elisha to ascend ("go up"), as they perhaps had heard that Elijah had ascended (2 Kgs. 2:23a). When he "cursed them in the name of the Lord" (2 Kgs. 2:24), he called upon the Lord to punish them (compare the imprecation in Jude 1:9); it is the opposite of blessing someone in the name of the Lord. The bears did not kill the offenders, as some commentaries assume, but "tare," or lacerated, them.

3:1-27 Jehoram the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah

When Jehoram, a son of Ahab, followed his brother Ahaziah as king, he did away with Ahab's Baal and in other ways did somewhat better than his parents had. His cleaving to the sins of Jeroboam means that he failed to eliminate the idolatrous shrines at Bethel and Dan, erected a century earlier by King Jeroboam.

In view of the heavy tribute that Israel required from Moab, it is not surprising that Moab sought to free itself at this moment of apparent weakness in Israel. Jehoram sought the aid of Jehoshaphat of Judah in the resulting conflict. It was for the righteous Jehoshaphat's sake that Elisha felt he could ask the Lord for a miracle when water was needed by the armies of Israel and Judah and their allies from Edom (2 Kgs. 3:13-14). Presumably the minstrel who played for them set a worshipful atmosphere for Elisha's supplication. Elisha hoped the people who benefited from the miracle would gain faith that if they qualified, the Lord could easily deliver the Israelite armies (2 Kgs. 3:15-18).

The miraculous supply of water appeared to the Moabites to be blood when they saw it from far away, and they thought their enemies had slain each other. The Moabites, hoping for plunder, attacked. Then Israel "rose up," decimated the Moabite army and laid waste their cities, farms, and wells. The sacrifice by the king of Moab of his son and heir upon the wall of a Moabite city made it unnecessary for Israel to continue the siege. They and their allies ceased further action and went home; however, the lifting of the siege may have been the "victory" of which King Mesha boasted in the inscription on the Moabite Stone (commentary on 2 Kgs. 1:1).

4:1-7 Now there cried a certain woman of the wives of the sons of the prophets unto Elisha

This compassionate miracle enabled a righteous widow to pay her debts and save her sons from slavery. In its creative nature and compassionate purpose, it also resembles some of Jesus' deeds.

4:8-37 it fell on a day, that Elisha passed to Shunem, where was a great woman

This is the second case of the rare miracle of the raising of the dead (recall 1 Kgs. 17:17-24). Charity, goodwill, and compassion characterize the prophet Elisha's response both to the good woman's generosity and to her sore vexation.

Elisha's mode of resuscitating the child is interesting, but the fact that he prayed first is vital (2 Kgs. 4:33-37).

4:38-41 Elisha came again to Gilgal: and there was a dearth

When Elisha stopped to visit a group of sons of the prophets in a time of dearth and they tried to prepare food, they unknowingly put a noxious gourd into their stew. Such a gourd, still known in the Jordan valley, can be used in small amounts as a laxative, but in large quantity it can cause death. Elisha knew how to remedy its effects.

4:42-44 there came a man . . . and brought the man of God bread of the firstfruits

Elisha was inspired to share the offering of twenty loaves with a hundred people and miraculously multiplied the bread to do so—as Jesus later did (2 Kgs. 4:42-44 and fn.).

5:1-27 Now Naaman, captain of the host of the king of Syria, was a great man . . . and honourable, because by him the Lord had given deliverance unto Syria . . . but he was a leper

This is the account of a captive Israelite maid whose compassion and faith instigated an international incident and an act of God in the healing of a Syrian captain. Note his qualities and her compassion and faith. But when Naaman went to Jehoram of Israel, Ahab's son, who had no faith in the Lord's power to heal, Jehoram "rent his clothes" in fear. Somehow apprised of King Jehoram's consternation and Naaman's need, Elisha intervened. Then when Naaman refused to bathe in the Jordan, his servants saw the wisdom of humbly obeying the prophet's command and persuaded the captain to yield. Of course the captain's gratitude knew no bounds when his flesh became as clean as a little child's. He even pleaded to be permitted to worship the Lord in Syria and to be forgiven when required to accompany his king to the Syrian house of worship of another god.

Tragedy developed in the matter, however, when the prophet's servant, Gehazi, could not resist an opportunity to enrich himself a little bit. Secretly and by deceit he did so; but he was exposed and punished by the prophet and the Lord. Gehazi would likely have lost his position with the prophet as a result; his appearance in a later account (2 Kgs. 8:4) may mean that the events are not compiled in chronological order. Of course, it could be that he repented and was forgiven and cleansed.

6:1-7 But as one was felling a beam, the axe head fell into the water. . . . And the man of God said, Where fell it?

In another helpful miracle, Elisha relieved the distress of one who lost the iron head of a borrowed axe in the water. Miraculously, the iron axe head floated and was retrieved.

6:8-23 Then the king of Syria warred against Israel, . . . And the man of God sent unto the king of Israel, saying, Beware

Presumably this event was in the days of a Syrian king other than the one of the previous chapter (2 Kgs. 5). Here the prophet Elisha functioned as a spy, able to inform the king of Israel of the movements of the enemy. He was also able to avoid capture by the Syrian invaders (cf. Alma 16:5-6; 43:23-24). Indeed, he was able to reassure his fearful servant by asking the Lord to let the servant see (spiritually) the superior defenses of the Lord. Then he led the enemy blindly right into the middle of Israelite headquarters in Samaria! And as if that were not enough, he recommended to the Israelite king that he feed the enemy and release them, overwhelming them with such kindness that these bands of Syria did not again go up against Israel. Attacks came from others, however (2 Kgs. 6:24).

6:24-7:20 after this . . . Ben-hadad king of Syria . . . went up, and besieged Samaria. And there was a great famine in Samaria

Ben-hadad's siege of Samaria was probably in a later time, as mentioned above.

The intense suffering of the people in the Israelite capital city of Samaria led to cannibalism (2 Kgs. 6:28-30; cf. Lev. 26:29). The king was horrified but blamed the prophet Elisha and the Lord. He angrily asked why he should wait for the Lord any longer and vengefully planned to punish the prophet (2 Kgs. 6:31, 33).

Despite the king's false assumptions and accusations, the Lord showed mercy upon the suffering people, announced the end of the siege through the prophet Elisha, and caused the Syrian attackers to flee. A miracle made them think that the Hittites from the north and the Egyptians from the south had been "hired" to attack them, and they fled (2 Kgs. 7:6-7).

Though the four lepers who found the abandoned supplies thought at first only of their own needs, conscience motivated them to share the goods, lest they suffer for their selfishness.

The king's messenger who doubted Elisha perished as Elisha had predicted (2 Kgs. 7:2, 17-20).

8:1-6 Then spake Elisha unto the woman, whose son he had restored to life, saying, Arise, and go . . . wheresoever thou canst sojourn: for the Lord hath called for a famine . . . seven years

The righteous woman of the earlier encounter was warned to go where food could be found during the famine (2 Kgs. 8:1a).

It is amazing that a king would be interested in Elisha's good deeds and that Elisha's former servant Gehazi would be interviewed about them. But it was obviously all brought about by the hand of the Lord, for out of these events the righteous woman was restored to her home and land.

8:7-15 And Elisha came to Damascus; and Ben-hadad the king of Syria was sick

Just why the accession of Hazael was prophesied by Israelite prophets under the direction of the Lord is not clear. Recall that Elijah was earlier called to go and "anoint Hazael to be king over Syria" (1 Kgs. 19:15). Whether he did so himself or passed that assignment to his successor Elisha is not recorded.

In any case, Elisha's message was ominous: the king could certainly recover but would surely die, and Hazael would be king. Hazael took part of the message to his master, Ben-hadad, and then committed murder to fulfill the rest of it. Elisha's further message that Hazael would one day oppress Israel was denied by Hazael, but it was nevertheless fulfilled by him later (2 Kgs. 8:12a) in a divine punishment of Israel's unrighteousness.

8:16-24 in the fifth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel . . . Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah began to reign

This brief review of the reign of Jehoram, son of Jehoshaphat, picks up his story from the point at which it was first raised (1 Kgs. 22:50). The earlier incident from Jehoshaphat's time (2 Kgs. 3:4-27) was recorded out of chronological order.

The names Joram and Jehoram are interchangeable. For a time Israel and Judah had kings of the same name. Joram of Judah was a brother-in-law to Joram of Israel, having married Athaliah, daughter of Ahab and Jezebel. Through that marriage the worship of Baal from Ahab's and Jezebel's family was introduced into the royal house of Judah.

8:25-29 In the twelfth year of Joram . . . king of Israel did Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah begin to reign

Ahaziah, when he became king of Judah, followed the ways of his mother, a daughter of Ahab and Jezebel. Athaliah is once called the "daughter of Omri," but Omri was her grandfather. That a Jehoram/Joram was succeeded by an Ahaziah in Judah at about the same time an Ahaziah was succeeded by a Jehoram/Joram in Israel adds to the confusion (BD, "Chronology," pp. 637-38).

Ahaziah of Judah went with Joram of Israel to war against Syria and then visited him in Jezreel while he recovered from a wound. There both of these descendants of Ahab were assassinated by Jehu (2 Kgs. 9:14-29).

9:1-37 Elisha the prophet called one of the children of the prophets, and said unto him . . . look out there Jehu . . . Then take the box of oil, and pour it on his head, and say, Thus saith the Lord, I have anointed thee king over Israel. Then open the door, and flee, and tarry not

Elisha gave careful instructions for the installation of a new king of Israel to replace the apostate dynasty of Ahab. But the young messenger did not follow instructions: after anointing the Israelite army captain Jehu, he charged him to "smite the house of Ahab" and repeated Elijah's former prophecy that "the dogs shall eat Jezebel" (2 Kgs. 9:5-10; 1 Kgs. 21:23). Jehu undertook that charge with vigor, conspiring against Joram of Israel and slaying him in the very field that Ahab and Jezebel had taken from Naboth (2 Kgs. 9:21; 1 Kgs. 21:1-24). Next, he overtook and slew the fleeing Ahaziah of Judah and went on to Jezreel to confront Jezebel. Knowing of previous assassinations of royalty by an army leader, Jezebel adorned herself as queen and warned him of the fate of Zimri, one of those army usurpers. Undaunted, Jehu called for allies in the royal house to cast Jezebel down, and he left her body to be consumed as had been prophesied, relenting only later to send someone to bury any remains.

10:1-11 And Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria. . . . Then he wrote a letter . . . saying . . . take ye the heads of the men your master's sons, and come to me to Jezreel

After writing one letter challenging those loyal to the house of Ahab to appoint another king of that house, Jehu wrote another letter telling them to behead all of Ahab's lineage and take the evidence to Jezreel. He used the heads as evidence that others were with him against Ahab's family.

Jehu's bloody purge was not by Elisha's command, although it did somewhat follow the charge disobediently added by the prophet's young messenger (2 Kgs. 9:1-3, 6-10). The prophet Hosea later prophesied vengeance upon Jehu's house for violent excesses (Hosea 1:4).

10:12-14 Jehu met with the brethren of Ahaziah king of Judah . . . And they took them alive, and slew them

Forty-two of the seed of Ahab through Athaliah, mother of King Ahaziah of Judah, were next in Jehu's purge.

10:15-28 call unto me all the prophets of Baal, all his servants, and all his priests

Taking Jehonadab, son of Rechab, as a witness, Jehu called together the prophets and priests of Baal for a great sacrifice and then made them the sacrificial victims. Thus Jehu sought to destroy Baal in Israel.

10:29-31, 34-36 Howbeit . . . Jehu departed not from after them, to wit, the golden calves that were in Bethel, and that were in Dan

It seems incongruous that this reformer, appointed by a prophet and proud of his zeal for the Lord, would fail to clear out the idolatry introduced in Israel a hundred years earlier by the first king of northern Israel. He purged the seed of Ahab, but how well did he serve the Lord? We do not have the book that chronicles his further acts and might. He reigned twenty-eight years and began another short dynasty in Israel.

10:32-33 In those days the Lord began to cut Israel short: and Hazael smote them

Hazael of Syria began his wars against Israel as prophesied by Elisha, who had anointed him (2 Kgs. 8:7-15).

11:1-3 when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she arose and destroyed all the seed royal

There was yet more bloodshed in Judah because of the house of Ahab. His daughter Athaliah, widow of King Joram of Judah and mother of King Ahaziah, seized the opportunity afforded by Jehu's having killed her sons. She killed all remaining heirs so that she might rule alone; only one little grandson, Joash, son of the dead King Ahaziah, was saved with his nurse by his aunt Jehosheba/Jehoshabeath, sister of King Ahaziah and wife of the high priest Jehoiada (2 Chr. 22:11). The terrible grandmother, Athaliah, reigned in Judah for six years, instituting some of the Baalism of her mother, Jezebel, and it was never completely destroyed thereafter.

11:4-21 And the seventh year Jehoiada sent and fetched the rulers . . . and shewed them the king's son

When Joash (also called Jehoash) was seven years old, the high priest Jehoiada aligned the military leaders for a coup, killed Athaliah and destroyed her ways (for a time), and restored the Davidic monarchy. It was a blessing for Judah that there were still enough faithful people to rally to the high priest for this reform.

12:1-21 In the seventh year of Jehu Jehoash began to reign; and forty years reigned he in Jerusalem

All the days of the good priest Jehoiada, the young king reigned in righteousness except for his failure to remove the old sacrificial altars on the common "high places." There people continued to burn incense and offer offerings—sometimes to the Lord but too often to idols.

King Jehoash/Joash, with the help of Jehoiada, also revised the system for channeling money-offerings at the temple into their proper use, for it was evident that the priests had not maintained the temple as they should have done (2 Kgs. 12:4-16; 2 Chr. 24:4-14).

Judah felt the rampaging power of Hazael of Syria when apostasy followed the death of the good priest Jehoiada. Despite his early righteous deeds, King Jehoash/Joash was eventually assassinated because of his unrighteous deeds. Nevertheless, his son was made king. More details are given in the books of Chronicles (see esp. 2 Chr. 24).

13:1-9 In the three and twentieth year of Joash . . . of Judah . . . Jehoahaz the son of Jehu began to reign over Israel

Although he was described as being like most of the kings of northern Israel, Jehoahaz did turn to the Lord under the oppression of Syria, and in His mercy the Lord gave Israel a "saviour," or deliverer. The king was spared, with a few horsemen, chariots, and a small army of foot soldiers; when he died, his son Joash/Jehoash succeeded him. (Note again that kings in Judah and Israel have similar names; BD, "Chronology.")

13:10-13 In the thirty and seventh year of Joash king of Judah began Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz to reign over Israel

Joash/Jehoash of Israel fought with Amaziah of Judah and did evil as usual. Yet he did recover some cities from Syria (2 Kgs. 13:12, 15; 2 Chr. 25:17-24).

13:14-21 Now Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness whereof he died. And Joash the king of Israel came down unto him, and wept

One wonders whether Elisha was the "saviour" sent in response to Joash/Jehoash's earlier prayer (2 Kgs. 13:5). The king did seem to feel respect for the old prophet and grief at his death.

Symbolic acts done by the king with arrows were interpreted by the prophet as harbingers of temporary triumphs over Syria but not of lasting peace. The great power given by the Lord to Elisha was exemplified a year after his death, when a man hastily buried in his tomb was revived again (2 Kgs. 13:21).

13:22-25 But Hazael king of Syria oppressed Israel all the days of Jehoahaz

This addendum to the first half of the chapter clarifies the Lord's reasons for helping Israel at that time and tells the fulfillment of Elisha's last prophecy (2 Kgs. 13:18-19).

14:1-6 In the second year of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel reigned Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah

Amaziah was another of Judah's kings who reigned righteously except for failing to take away the altars on the high places. He followed the principles of justice in dealing with those who assassinated his father (2 Kgs. 14:5-6; Deut. 24:16).

14:7 He slew of Edom in the valley of salt ten thousand, and took Selah by war

Judah vanquished Edom in the Arabah ("valley of salt") and recovered the rock-hewn city of Selah (Petra). There is much additional information in the parallel account in Chronicles (2 Chr. 25:5-13).

14:8-16 Then Amaziah sent messengers to Jehoash . . . king of Israel, saying, Come, let us look one another in the face

Judah's strange invitation to northern Israel to do battle was ill-advised and resulted in disaster for Judah's army; part of the city wall of Jerusalem and the temple were damaged. This was the only time Israelites plundered the temple of the Lord.

The death of Joash/Jehoash of Israel is again reported here (2 Kgs. 13:13; 14:15-16).

14:17-22 Now they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem

Assassination of a king in Judah did not result in a change of dynasty, though it usually did in northern Israel. It seems that in Judah there were always people who felt the Davidic dynasty should be preserved.

Here only the beginning of the reign of Azariah is told, including his recovery and rebuilding of the port of Elath; more is given later (2 Kgs. 15:1-7; 2 Chr. 26). Also called "Uzziah" (2 Chr. 26:1a), he reigned righteously for a number of years; but he usurped priestly authority, was smitten with leprosy, and was restricted to a separate house (2 Chr. 26:16-21). His son Jotham was "over the king's house, judging the people of the land" until Azariah/Uzziah's death, according to 2 Chronicles 26:21. That source also indicates that Isaiah may have been the recorder of some of this information (2 Chr. 26:22).

14:23-29 In the fifteenth year of Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel began to reign in Samaria

Although reproached with the usual charge of idolatry, this new Jeroboam, of a different family from the first, must have been fairly capable. He reigned longer than most of Israel's kings, and in his administration he restored parts of the borders of Israel with guidance from the prophet Jonah (2 Kgs. 14:25a). The book of Jonah does not report his service at home; it pertains only to his foreign mission to Nineveh.

The prophet Amos also did his work in the days of these kings, Amaziah/Uzziah of Judah and Jeroboam of Israel (Amos 1:1; 7:10-13).

15:1-7 In the twenty and seventh year of Jeroboam king of Israel began Azariah son of Amaziah king of Judah to reign

A few more details about the last years and the disease of Azariah are given here, but much more is recorded in Chronicles (2 Chr. 26).

The name Azariah means "Jehovah is my helper"; his other name, Uzziah, means "Jehovah is my strength."

15:8-12 In the thirty and eighth year of Azariah king of Judah did Zachariah the son of Jeroboam reign over Israel in Samaria six months

Zachariah, the fourth king of the house of Jehu, was assassinated rather soon, and thus the promise of the Lord was fulfilled (2 Kgs. 10:30; 15:12). None of the four kings was credited with righteousness or noteworthy contributions. We do not have the "book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel" (2 Kgs. 15:11, 15). Our books of Chronicles seem rather to be chronicles of the kings of Judah.

15:13-16 Shallum . . . began to reign in the nine and thirtieth year of Uzziah king of Judah; and he reigned a full month in Samaria

Again one who took the throne by the sword lost it by the sword. After one month, the assassin Shallum was himself assassinated, and Menahem reigned in his stead. The prophet Hosea said of these times: "By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery, they break out, and blood toucheth blood" (Hosea 4:2). The last phrase in Hebrew implies "violence upon violence." Consider areas in the world in the last days that could be similarly described.

15:16-22 In the nine and thirtieth year of Azariah king of Judah began Menahem . . . to reign over Israel, . . . ten years

King Menahem also committed "evil in the sight of the Lord," such as his mutilation of pregnant women in Tirzah. But he held the throne for ten years by exacting money from wealthy Israelite men and paying huge tribute to Pul (Tiglath-pileser), king of Assyria. Within fifty years the next king of Assyria would conquer northern Israel's ten tribes and carry them away captive when they failed to pay tribute.

15:23-26 In the fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah Pekahiah the son of Menahem began to reign over Israel . . . two years

Menahem's "dynasty" was also shortened by assassination. Pekah, one of the king's captains, killed Menahem's son King Pekahiah and replaced him.

15:27-31 In the two and fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah Pekah . . . began to reign over Israel . . . twenty years

Note how much longer the kings of Judah lasted, as a rule, than the northern Israelite kings. The Davidic monarchy was often more righteous and the government more stable.

The threat of Assyria grew ever more intense. The old enemies, Israel and Syria, were both threatened—and became allies. Israelites of the tribes in Gilead and Galilee were taken into captivity by Assyria some twenty years before the rest were taken.

The book of Isaiah reports that Pekah of Israel combined with Rezin of Syria to resist Assyria. They tried to persuade Judah to join the coalition and failed; and in the time of Ahaz, king of Judah, they threatened to overthrow him and put a king on the throne who would cooperate with them. Through Isaiah, the Lord assured Ahaz that the plot would fail, and the two threatening kings, whom he characterized as "tails of these smoking firebrands" would soon be taken away (Isa. 7:1-16).

During these times of political disruption, religious degeneration, and moral corruption, the great "writing prophets" of the Old Testament preached repentance and wrote their books. Some of them came before the fall of Israel, and some a hundred and thirty years later, before the fall of Judah. Their warnings and pleas for the people to repent, along with their assurance of the future fulfillment of God's purposes, have come down to us because of their special relevance for the last dispensation.

Among the earlier group were Hosea, Amos, Micah, and Isaiah. Hosea pleaded with the northern ten tribes to return to Jehovah and emphasized His loving concern for them. Amos, a shepherd from Judah, preached in Israel in the very court of the second King Jeroboam, condemning injustices done to the poor by powerful religious and political leaders. The eloquent Micah gave warnings for his times, as well as recording his visions of the birth of the Messiah and of the last days of the earth. But the dean of all the early writing prophets was Isaiah, who prophesied at Jerusalem, advising kings and commoners and addressing messages to both Judah and Israel. These prophets and their messages are discussed in commentaries on their respective books.

15:32-38 In the second year of Pekah . . . king of Israel began Jotham the son of Uzziah king of Judah to reign

This was the beginning of Jotham's reign proper, after his taking over during the last years of his incapacitated father, Uzziah (2 Kgs. 15:1-7). The pressure on Judah by Syria and Ephraim (northern Israel), mentioned above, is reported here (2 Kgs. 15:37). More of the works of Jotham in building defenses and in warfare are recorded in Chronicles (2 Chr. 27).

16:1-20 In the seventeenth year of Pekah . . . Ahaz the son of Jotham king of Judah began to reign

Ahaz was the worst of the Davidic kings. He had the great prophet Isaiah to advise him and would have done better by accepting his advice.

The phrase "made his son pass through fire, according to the abominations of the heathen" (2 Kgs. 16:3) does actually mean that he offered a son to a fire-belching idol. He also performed other idolatrous practices.

Ignoring both Isaiah's assurance about an attack by Syria and Israel and his warning about the growing dangers from Assyria (Isa. 7), Ahaz tried a pressure-play against the Syrians and northern Israelites by giving tribute to Assyria's king, even adopting his religion, to curry favor with him. This Ahaz, a descendant of David and Solomon, even removed the lavers from their bases and the "sea" (font) from the brazen oxen of the temple to satisfy the king of Assyria.

The Chronicles account expands the brief note about Ahaz's death to explain that he was buried in Jerusalem but not in the sepulchres with the other kings (2 Kgs. 16:20; 2 Chr. 28:27).

17:1-6 In the ninth year of Hoshea the king of Assyria took Samaria, and carried Israel away into Assyria

Hoshea, the last king of the northern ten tribes of Israel, conspired against King Pekah and slew him in the twentieth year of King Jotham of Judah; but Hoshea began reigning years later, in the twelfth year of the reign of Jotham's son Ahaz (2 Kgs. 15:30; 17:1). The account concedes that the evil he did was not as bad as the evil done by the kings before him. He paid Assyria tribute as three kings before him had done, but like Pekah before him, he could not keep Assyria appeased. When he tried to get Egypt's help against Assyria, Shalmaneser of Assyria imprisoned him and besieged the capital city, Samaria, for three years. Finally Shalmaneser took the city and sent thousands of Israelites into slavery in the areas listed. Thus they became "the lost ten tribes of Israel" (2 Kgs. 17:6b-c).

17:7-23 For so it was, that the children of Israel had sinned against the Lord their God . . . Yet the Lord testified against Israel, and against Judah, by all the prophets . . . saying, Turn ye from your evil ways, and keep my commandments

This summary of the reasons for the downfall of Israel shows clearly that the chosen people had failed to do what they had been chosen to do (TG, "Israel, Mission of"). Also summarized are the mission of the prophets, the reasons their mission did not succeed in saving Israel, and the reasons the Lord allowed the ten tribes to be taken into exile (cf. 2 Kgs. 15:27-31).

17:24-41 And the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon, and from Cuthah, and from Ava, and from Hamath, and from Sepharvaim, and placed them in the cities of Samaria instead of the children of Israel

A mixture of peoples became the "Samaritans"; doubtless some Israelites were also among them. The Israelite religion was nominally retained because when predatory beasts began to flourish after the human population was reduced, a mixed religion evolved: some inhabitants sacrificed to the Lord to protect them from predators but still served their own gods.

18:1-8 in the third year of Hoshea . . . Hezekiah the son of Ahaz king of Judah began to reign. . . . And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord

The contrast of Hezekiah of Judah with Hoshea of Israel is striking. They differed in their efforts to defend their countries, their religious attitudes, their response to the prophets, and in their fates, for Hezekiah was righteous.

18:9-12 in the fourth year of king Hezekiah, which was the seventh year of Hoshea . . . Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up against Samaria . . . And at the end of three years they took it

The writer of this passage reviewed the fall of Israel (2 Kgs. 17:7-23) and reiterated the reason for the fall: "Because they obeyed not the voice of the Lord their God, but transgressed his covenant" (2 Kgs. 18:12). The nations and cities named are those to which the Israelites were at first scattered.

18:13-37 Now in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah did Sennacherib king of Assyria come up against all the fenced cities of Judah, and took them

Ten years later Judah was tested again by Assyria, under a new king. For a time Hezekiah had to pay an enormous tribute out of the palace and temple treasures. Sennacherib's records on a stone cylinder found by archaeologists confirm the amount of gold as thirty talents but claim eight hundred talents of silver rather than the three hundred reported in the Bible (cf. BD, "Sennacherib").

During those years of crisis, Isaiah the prophet warned Judah against depending on the armed might of Egypt, recommending trust in the Lord instead (Isa. 30-31). When Sennacherib sent three of his leaders from besieging the fortress city of Lachish to persuade the people of Jerusalem to capitulate, Isaiah advised Hezekiah to resist and rely on the Lord (2 Kgs. 19; Isa. 36-37).

The Assyrian Rabshakeh's propaganda was diabolical. He taunted the people of Judah with offers of horses if they could find riders for them. He used vulgarity to frighten them with the horrors of famine. He promised to take them to a land better and more productive. He asserted that the Lord would not help them because Hezekiah had ordered altars on the high places destroyed—wrongly assuming that those altars were for worship of the Lord. He claimed that the Lord had sent Sennacherib to destroy Judah—in a twist on the warning of Israel's prophets that if the people did not repent they would be captured. He boasted that the Lord could not defend Jerusalem against Assyria even if he wanted to do so, citing the failure of gods of other lands to defend them. Obedient to the king, the people held their peace. Hezekiah's steward Eliakim, the scribe Shebna, and the recorder Asaph reported the pleas and threats to King Hezekiah, who turned to the prophet and the Lord and indeed received help (2 Kgs. 18:37; 19; Isa. 37).

19:1-7 when king Hezekiah heard it . . . he . . . went into the house of the Lord . . . And he sent . . . to Isaiah the prophet

In Jerusalem, the beleaguered king requested that the prophet ask the Lord to punish the blasphemy uttered by the Assyrian spokesman Rabshakeh. The reply of the Lord, through the prophet, was concise, precise, and reassuring: the attacker would suffer a "blast" from the Lord, hear a "rumor," return home, and fall by the sword there.

19:8-13 So Rab-shakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria warring against Libnah

Sennacherib had trouble, too. Rabshakeh found that the Assyrian army had left Lachish and was battering away at Libnah. (Both were important hilltop fortress cities about twenty-five miles west-southwest of Jerusalem.) News had arrived that the king of Ethiopia was coming to resist Assyria's empire-building war. So Rabshakeh was sent back to Jerusalem to try again to impress upon Judah that no gods had stood successfully against Sennacherib, this time delivering the message by letter to King Hezekiah.

19:14-19 And Hezekiah received the letter . . . and read it: and . . . went up into the house of the Lord, and spread it before the Lord

Faithful Hezekiah literally opened the letter to the Lord and humbly told him of Sennacherib's reproach and boasting. Hezekiah knew the Assyrian gods "were no gods," whereas the Lord alone is God; he therefore sought salvation from him.

19:20-34 Then Isaiah . . . sent to Hezekiah, saying, Thus saith the Lord . . . That which thou hast prayed to me against Sennacherib king of Assyria I have heard. This is the word that the Lord hath spoken concerning him

The Lord's answer through Isaiah the prophet was that He had indeed permitted the Assyrians to destroy some peoples (2 Kgs. 19:25-26; Isa. 10:5-19); but because of Sennacherib's reproach, he must be hooked, bridled, and taken away (2 Kgs. 19:28). The people of Judah were then to return to their lands, eat the volunteer crops for a year, and resume sowing and reaping; the people could again "take root downward, and bear fruit upward" (2 Kgs. 19:29-30). The boastful king of Assyria would neither shoot an arrow into Jerusalem nor build siege banks against the walls. His fate had already been pronounced by Isaiah (2 Kgs. 19:7).

19:35-37 And it came to pass that night that the angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand

The deliverance came as promised; a plague decimated the Assyrian forces and the remnant fled. The annals of Sennacherib, recorded on stone, confirm his departure from Judah without capturing Jerusalem; and though the Assyrian account boasts of the booty he took out, it does also confirm that after returning to Nineveh, Sennacherib was assassinated by two of his sons and replaced by a third.

20:1-11 In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. And the prophet Isaiah . . . came to him

King Hezekiah had an abscess and illness which, if allowed to run its course, would have caused his death; but just as any of us might do, the king prayed humbly and sincerely to be healed. He was found worthy to be healed, and the prophet Isaiah was directed to tell him so. The account here reports the king's asking what sign would assure him that the Lord would heal him and that he could go to the temple in three days; Isaiah's account reports that the king asked only what sign would show that he would indeed yet go up to the temple. Why he asked for a sign and did receive it is not indicated (2 Kgs. 20:8-11; Isa. 38:22).

20:12-19 At that time Berodach-baladan . . . king of Babylon, sent letters and a present unto Hezekiah: for he had heard that Hezekiah had been sick

The seemingly compassionate mission of messengers from Babylon may have had some strategic purpose. Babylon had been under Assyrian oppression, having been subdued by Sennacherib earlier, ca. 740 B.C.; so Judah's cooperation with Babylon in a rebellion against Assyria could help them both. In any case, Hezekiah unwisely showed the Babylonians his treasures and powers; when Isaiah heard of it, he prophesied that Babylonians would one day carry them away captive to Babylon. "Sons" in the Bible does not always mean immediate progeny (2 Kgs. 20:18); a century later, some third- and fourth-generation descendants of King Hezekiah would be captured and exiled or killed (2 Kgs. 24-25).

King Hezekiah was submissive and grateful that peace and truth would prevail in his days.

20:20-21 And the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, and all his might, and how he made a pool, and a conduit

In the brief summation of Hezekiah's other accomplishments is mentioned an engineering feat now called Hezekiah's tunnel (2 Kgs. 20:20; 2 Chr. 32:1-4, 30). That tunnel has been rediscovered and can be traversed by anyone who wishes to wade through its six hundred yards of cool waters, some places calf-deep and other places hip-deep. The "Siloam inscription"—named for the pool into which the water-course empties—engraved in the stone wall of the tunnel is an important and fascinating ancient Hebrew document. It describes how the workers started at each end of the proposed tunnel and worked until they met, deep under the old lower city of Jerusalem (BD, "Hezekiah"; "Hezekiah's Tunnel").

An earlier water course and pool in the time of Hezekiah's father Ahaz was a surface water system, remnants of which have also been found (Isa. 7:3; 22:11).

21:1-9 Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign, and reigned fifty and five years . . . And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord

Despite the virtues of Hezekiah and his religious reforms (told in more detail in 2 Chr. 29-32), Judah reverted to idolatry when he was dead. Hezekiah's son Manasseh, being so young when his father died, may have been influenced by factions who had smarted under the righteous regime of his father; perhaps they yearned for relaxed moral ways and the carnal fertility rites of the Baal cults. These had always attracted the less dedicated of the Lord's people, in spite of warnings by the prophets. Asherah, often translated as "grove," was not a grove of trees but a fertility goddess thought to dwell in, or be represented by, a tree. She was sometimes a female consort of Baal. Altars for the "host of heaven" were for constellation-based worship. The terrible worship of Moloch, which also was resumed, required infants to be cast into a fire-belching idol. Note also the people's superstitions.

Thus under Manasseh the people of Judah did more evil than the nations that the Lord had destroyed in the land, notwithstanding prophetic warnings about such behavior (Lev. 18:26-28). During the years from Manasseh to his great-grandson Zedekiah, those prophecies were all fulfilled (2 Kgs. 24-25).

21:10-15 And the Lord spake by his servants the prophets, saying, Because Manasseh king of Judah hath done these abominations . . . I am bringing such evil upon Jerusalem and Judah

The prophets of these times included Zephaniah, Habakkuk, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and others not named in the Bible, including Lehi of the Book of Mormon.

The metaphors about a line, a plummet, and a dish are eas-ily understandable—they involve straightness, uprightness,and cleansing—and the forecasts of the results of iniquity are plain. The summation that generations of Israelites since Moses had done so much evil is sobering and ominous to contemplate.

21:16-18 Moreover Manasseh shed innocent blood very much

Since the shedding of innocent blood was in addition to the other sins Manasseh engendered in Judah, the phrase may well refer to blood purges of hosts of those who opposed young Manasseh. Very little about his life and deeds for the fifty-five years of his reign is recorded. His death and burial in his garden, not in the tombs of the previous kings, is simply told.

In the Chronicles, an account not corroborated either here or in the prophetic books tells of Manasseh's being taken captive by captains of the army of the king of Assyria to Babylon, where he suffered and repented and then was returned to finish out a much more righteous reign in Jerusalem. That account raises some historical problems (see 2 Chr. 33:11-18).

21:19-26 Amon was twenty and two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned two years . . . And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, as his father Manasseh did

Amon was as bad as or even worse than his father, and his servants conspired against him and slew him (cf. 2 Chr. 33:21-24). Yet loyalty to the royal house of David was still strong, so people slew the conspirators and put Amon's young son Josiah on the throne.

22:1-20 Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned thirty and one years . . . And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord

The young son and grandson of wicked kings, Josiah was religious and righteous and became a great reformer in Judah. Early in his reign he arranged that the money collected at the door of the temple be used for its intended purpose to repair and maintain the temple.

Josiah's reforms increased after a scribe found the book of the law in the temple. When the king heard words from the book, telling what people should do and what would befall them if they did evil instead, he rent his clothes in repentance and asked his scribes and Hilkiah the priest to inquire of the Lord whether His wrath would fall upon all for their many violations. They may have read warnings in the books of Moses (Lev. 18:26-28; 26:21-46; Deut. 4:23-30; 28:58-68) and feared they were applicable to Israel in their time. Rather than making a direct inquiry by prayer or going to the holy place in the temple, the priest and scribes went to "Huldah the prophetess" for her interpretation. She confirmed that the wrath of God would surely fall if the people of Judah continued their wickedness; but because the young king was a true reformer, it would not happen in his reign. Huldah was a "wise woman" like those of earlier accounts (2 Kgs. 22:18-20; Judg. 4:4-5; 2 Sam. 14:2; TG, "Prophetess").

The prophet Jeremiah began his ministry in the thirteenth year of King Josiah, but no contact between them is mentioned in his early days (Jer. 1:2). The prophet Zephaniah also lived in that period (Zeph. 1:1).

23:1-30 And the king went up into the house of the Lord, and all the men of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem with him, and the priests, and the prophets, and all the people, both small and great: and he read in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant

With administrative skill, King Josiah launched a great reform involving all the people and the leaders. He led out by teaching them about their covenants with God and renewing them. He caused all the idolatrous facilities to be destroyed, including the infamous altar at Beth-el set up by the first king of northern Israel—thus fulfilling a prophecy about it (2 Kgs. 23:15; 1 Kgs. 12:25-29; 13:1-2). Yet in burning the bones of former idolatrous priests of the place, he identified and honored the bones of a man of God (1 Kgs. 13:23-32). In that same eventful year the Passover was celebrated as it had not been celebrated for centuries (2 Kgs. 23:22-23). Finally, the spiritualists and their abominations were put away, and the land was cleansed for the first time in centuries. But the pendulum swinging from evil kings to good kings had not stopped. The Lord knew that Judah would revert to evil after Josiah's death and be destroyed because of it (2 Kgs. 23:26-27).

It is tragic that the zealous Josiah lost his life in a vain attempt at intervention in international affairs. Perhaps he feared the rise of Egypt more than he feared the decadent Assyria against whom the king of Egypt was going to fight. As it turned out, Assyria was overthrown and Nineveh conquered by Babylon three years after Josiah's death (BD, "Chronology," p. 639.)

The death of young Josiah after thirty-one years of remarkable action must have been a bitter disappointment for the righteous people in Judah. It may well have hastened the resurgence of unrighteous forces that dominated the last two decades of that nation. Quite understandably, the prophet Jeremiah lamented the death of the righteous King Josiah (2 Kgs. 23:29-30; 2 Chr. 35:24-25).

23:31-34 Jehoahaz was twenty and three years old when he began to reign; and he reigned three months in Jerusalem . . . And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord

Josiah's first son and his immediate successor, Jehoahaz, was unacceptable to King Necho of Egypt, who dominated Judah after killing Josiah. He demanded tribute and took King Jehoahaz to Egypt, where he died.

Jeremiah of Libnah, identified as the father of Jehoahaz's mother, is not Jeremiah of Anathoth, the prophet (2 Kgs. 23:31; Jer. 1:1).

23:34-37; 24:1-7 And Pharaoh-nechoh made Eliakim the son of Josiah king in the room of Josiah his father, and turned his name to Jehoiakim . . . Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to reign; and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem

The new puppet-king's first name, Eliakim, means "El [God] shall establish," and his new name, Jehoiakim, means "Jehovah shall establish," but he was untrue to both names and sinned as had his forefathers (2 Kgs. 24:1-5; Jer. 36).

The Pharaohs' giving a new name to subjected people is not unusual, but it is noteworthy that they acclaimed the Lord (Jehovah) in this case. In some cases when the followers of a "powerful" god were conquered, the conquerors sought to appease that god by sacrifices or honors, lest he avenge himself. That may have been the reason for honoring Jehovah specifically rather than God generally by this change of name.

During the last three years of his stormy reign, Jehoiakim became a vassal of Babylon instead of Egypt, for Babylon expanded its domain throughout all the Fertile Crescent. Jehoiakim undoubtedly would have been purged by Babylon, but he died at an early age and was replaced by his son, Jehoiachin, who reigned for a few months.

24:8-16 Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem three months

The young King Jehoiachin was besieged almost immediately and was taken away—along with his mother, the servants, the princes, the craftsmen, and the treasures from the temple and palace—in the eighth year of Nebuchadnezzar's reign, about 597 B.C. (More is told about Jehoiachin and the treasures in Ezra 1:7-11.) This group of ten thousand exiles may have included young Ezekiel, who became a prophet in exile (Ezek. 1:1-2). Daniel had likely been taken earlier (ca. 605 B.C.; Dan. 1:1-2).

It is evident that the Babylonian policy of control was to carry away all the leading citizens and leave the common people to produce agricultural goods for tribute.

24:17-20 And the king of Babylon made Mattaniah his father's brother king in his stead, and changed his name to Zedekiah

The king's new name retained the name of the Lord, for Mattaniah means "gift of Jehovah" and Zedekiah means "righteous is Jehovah." It may be that declaring Jehovah just or righteous was also intended to honor him, as in the Egyptians' changing the name of their Judahite puppet-king from Eliakim to Jehoiakim.

Zedekiah's grandfather, Jeremiah of Libnah, was not Jeremiah of Anathoth, the prophet (2 Kgs. 24:18; 23:31).

Zedekiah was the last king of the Davidic line before the Messiah, who came six hundred years later (the Book of Mormon gives the date of his appointment as 600 B.C.; 2 Kgs. 24:18a). And yet, despite everything, Zedekiah also did evil in the sight of the Lord. Ignoring the advice of the prophet Jeremiah, he rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar and suffered for doing so (2 Kgs. 24:19a; 24:20a-b; 25:1-21).

As indicated in the books of Jeremiah and his contemporaries, the Lord sent prophets to warn the kings of Judah to repent and seek his help rather than try to free themselves. Ironically, when Babylonian oppression did become worse, the king and the people blamed, maligned, and punished the prophets of God (Jer. 1:18-19; Jer. 32; Jer. 38).

25:1-7 in the ninth year of his reign . . . Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came . . . And the city was besieged unto the eleventh year of king Zedekiah . . . And the city was broken up

So, as the prophets had warned, Judah was conquered after a two-year siege of Jerusalem, and its leaders, warriors, and people were killed or captured. Zedekiah was triply tortured as his sons were killed in his sight, his eyes were put out, and he was taken in chains to Babylon. Other sources record that his daughters were not carried off by the Babylonian conquerors but were taken to Egypt by a group of Jewish refugees, as was Jeremiah the prophet (Jer. 43:5-7). The Book of Mormon indicates that a son of Zedekiah named Mulek escaped by sea with a group that ended up in the western hemisphere (Omni 1:14-19).

25:8-21 And in the fifth month, on the seventh day of the month . . . he burnt the house of the Lord, and the king's house, and all the houses of Jerusalem

Just a month after the invaders broke in, the temple was destroyed. It had stood since King Solomon's time, nearly four hundred years before. It was the end of an epoch for Jerusalem. Only the poor of the land were left to produce crops.

Valuable brass and bronze works of the temple compound were broken up and taken to Babylon. Many fine vessels were taken intact, however, and eventually were returned to the second temple, which was built in Jerusalem some seventy years later (2 Kgs. 25:13-17; Ezra 1:7-11; 7:19; 8:24-36).

Certain religious leaders and others who had somehow been missed earlier were also taken and slain, but Jeremiah the prophet was sought out by Nebuchadnezzar's leaders of the siege and was permitted to do whatever he chose—perhaps because he had advised the kings not to fight against Babylon to save themselves (2 Kgs. 25:18-21; Jer. 39:11-14).

25:22-26 for the people that remained in the land of Judah, . . . Nebuchadnezzar . . . made Gedaliah . . . ruler

Gedaliah seems to have been a good man, but one Ishmael "of the seed royal" conspired against him; to the regret of most of the remnant of Judah left in the land, Ishmael slew him and many others. Much more detail was given by Jeremiah concerning that remnant, their fate as refugees in Egypt, and the future also of Egypt (2 Kgs. 25:26; Jer. 40-44).

25:27-30 in the seven and thirtieth year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, . . . Evil-merodach king of Babylon . . . did lift up the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah out of prison

The favor granted to the former king of Judah is unexplained, unless the new Babylonian king found it politic to make with him a sort of government-in-exile to help control the Jews in Babylon. A grandson of Jehoiachin named Zerubbabel (1 Chr. 3:17-19; Ezra 2:1-2; BD, "Zerubbabel") was later made governor of the Jews who were permitted by the Persians to return to Judah; and his lineage continued on down to Joseph and Mary (his name is spelled Zorobabel in Matt. 1:12). According to Chronicles, Jehoiachin was eight years old rather than eighteen, as recorded in Kings, when he was taken to Babylon (2 Chr. 36:9; 2 Kgs. 24:8). He would therefore have been either forty-five or fifty-five years old when he was freed from prison. He may have been divinely preserved to perpetuate the Davidic line into which the Messiah would be born.

It is evident from the book of the prophet Ezekiel and the book of Ezra that the Jews in Babylon were kept together, not scattered as had been the ten tribes of Israel taken captive by the Assyrians a century earlier.

Jeremiah had prophesied that the Babylonian captivity would last seventy years (Jer. 25:8-11; Dan. 9:2). Seventy years passed from the time the first captives were taken until the first company returned. Also, it was seventy years from the date of the destruction of the first temple in Jerusalem to the date of the dedication of the second.

There is much sobering historical information in the books of the Kings. Knowing the events traced therein can make more understandable the books of the prophets of Israel, provide background for the remaining historical books of the Old Testament, and enhance our appreciation of the New Testament, the Book of Mormon, and the latter-day scriptures.
