Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

FIRST CHRONICLES

The books of the Chronicles repeat some of the information in the books of Samuel and Kings but add details having particular religious significance. The chronicler emphasized the Davidic kingdom, so after the division of the kingdom, Chronicles deals predominantly with the nation of Judah (BD, "Chronicles").

The first nine chapters of 1 Chronicles review the genealogy from Adam to David and to Saul and also some details of such related lines as those of Levi, particularly of Aaron. The remaining nineteen chapters give historical information about King Saul's last battle, death, and burial and continue with the reign of David, often emphasizing items of spiritual or religious significance somewhat more than do the books of Samuel and Kings.

Sources of information are cited fairly frequently, showing that the Israelites were always "people of the book," who regularly kept records from which the chronicler drew or to which he referred from time to time.

Commentary

1:1-4 Adam . . . Noah

The ten patriarchs from Adam to Noah have the same Hebrew names as in Genesis, but in the English translation the spelling of some is slightly different. Only the genealogical lines leading to Abraham and Israel are given; hence, the descendants of Cain are not listed.

1:5-16 Japheth . . . [and] . . . Ham

The patriarchs of the Japhetic and Hamitic lines, and the nations that originated from them, are named.

1:17-54 the sons of Shem

The overview of some Shemite (Semitic) peoples includes the descendants of Abraham through Ishmael, the descendants of Abraham's sons by Keturah, and the descendants of Isaac's son Esau, including the Edomite kings.

2:1-2 These are the sons of Israel

The twelve sons of Israel (Jacob) are all listed, but the remainder of this chapter and the next deal only with the descendants of Judah.

2:3-55 The sons of Judah

Among the descendants of Judah, the most attention is given to the ancestry of David and Caleb, with some collateral lines.

The Kenites were descendants of Moses' brother-in-law. The word scribes is used to translate Sopherim, which should not be translated here; the Sopherim in this case were the three clans of Kenites who lived at Jabez. They were all of the house of Rechab, which was important in Israel in actions later on (1 Chr. 2:55b-c).

3:1-24 Now these were the sons of David

The ancestors of Jesse through David (1 Chr. 2:3-17) and on to David's descendants of the royal line are named, down to the last king to reign. The Davidic line continues through Jeconiah (or Jehoiachin) to Zerubbabel, who was made "governor" of the Jews that returned from Babylon (Ezra 2:2; 3:2, 8; 5:2). Several generations of Zerubbabel's descendants are then given. (Regarding his lineage down to Joseph and Mary, see 1 Chr. 3:19a.)

4:1-23 The sons of Judah; Pharez

Sons is usually used to translate the Hebrew word meaning "descendants"; thus, Pharez himself was a son and the rest were other descendants. In some cases the "father" of people who were the settlers of a place is given, such as "the father of Bethlehem" (1 Chr. 4:4; cf. 2:50-54).

4:24-43 The sons of Simeon

The Simeonites, who shared territory with Judah (Josh. 19:1, 9; Judg. 1:3, 19), are genealogically and geographically identified.

5:1-26 Now the sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel

A parenthetical explanation before the list of Reuben's descendants explains his loss of the birthright to the "sons of Joseph"; therefore, though his is the lineage of "the firstborn of Israel," it is not the birthright lineage (1 Chr. 5:1a-d). It is clarified that Judah's is the royal line, and Joseph's is the birthright line.

Descendants of Reuben, Gad, and half the tribe of Manasseh who lived east of the Jordan River went to war against the "Hagrites," descendants of Hagar and Abraham through their son Ishmael. The Israelites were helped by the Lord because they put their trust in him (1 Chr. 5:20). The chronicler drew a lesson from their later history, however, to explain that the Lord permitted the king of Assyria to exile them because they transgressed against Him.

6:1-81 The sons of Levi; Gershon, Kohath, and Merari

Though Kohath was not first in order of birth, he was probably first in importance to the chronicler because he was the forefather of Moses, Aaron, and Miriam; his descendants through the priestly line of Aaron are given (1 Chr. 6:2-15).

All of Levi's sons are listed again and some of the descendants through the firstborn, Gershom, along with the sons of the lastborn, Merari. Before detailing any of those, however, the chronicler outlined the Kohathite descent of Samuel the prophet, certifying his priestly lineage (1 Chr. 6:22-28 and fn.). Descendants of Merari who provided music and other services in the tabernacle are named (1 Chr. 6:29-48).

Again the writer returned to the line of Aaron and his descendants as far as Zadok, who officiated at the altars of sacrifice after the time of David (1 Chr. 6:49-53). Finally, a review is given of the Levitical cities where the priests and other Levites lived among all the tribes of Israel (1 Chr. 6:54-81 and fn.).

7:1-40 the sons of

In no particular order genealogically or geographically, information about six of the tribes of Israel is given, beginning with some families of Issachar and their "soldiers for war." Similar information is given about some families of Benjamin (1 Chr. 7:1-12). But only the immediate sons of Naphtali are listed, and some wives and families of the sons of Manasseh. Several of Ephraim's descendants, deeds, and dwelling places are named. Finally, Asher's sons, their descendants, and the number of men of war are given, as with the tribes of Issachar and Benjamin.

8:1-40 Now Benjamin begat . . .

The names of Benjamin's descendants and the movements and locations of some of their clans provide the lineage of Kish and the family of Saul, Israel's first king (1 Chr. 8:33-40).

9:1 So all Israel were reckoned by genealogies; and, behold, they were written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah

The "book of the kings of Israel and Judah" evidently are not the present books of 1 and 2 Kings, for they do not contain all the genealogies. Neither do the preceding chapters of 1 Chronicles, for Zebulun and Naphtali were omitted and others only briefly mentioned.

9:2-44 And in Jerusalem dwelt of the children of Judah, and of the children of Benjamin, . . . Ephraim, and Manasseh . . . , and of the priests

A few leaders from four tribes who were living for a time in Jerusalem are listed; then many priestly and Levite groups are named and their ecclesiastical work is identified. The remaining verses repeat information given before (1 Chr. 9:35-44; cf. 8:29-38); perhaps they were intended as an introduction to the chapter about the end of Saul's family.

10:1-14 Now the Philistines fought against Israel; and the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines

The account of Saul's final battle against the Philistines parallels the one in Samuel, except where that account is more detailed (cf. 1 Sam. 31:7, 10). At the close of the chapter, Chronicles gives as the reason for Saul's rejection and death his having asked counsel of one who had a familiar spirit. No mention is made of his having transgressed in offering an offering, decreeing the death of Jonathan, disobeying commandments regarding the Amalekites, seeking to kill David, and slaying all the priests at Nob because one of them had helped David. All those deeds are condemned to some degree in the books of Samuel (1 Sam. 13:12-14; 14:43-45; 15:9-24; 19-26).

11:1-9 Then all Israel gathered themselves to David unto Hebron . . . and David made a covenant with them in Hebron before the Lord; and they anointed David king over Israel

Chronicles here passes over the first seven years of David's reign, in which only Judah and part of Benjamin accepted him as king (2 Sam. 2-4), and goes directly to his making the covenant to become the anointed king over all Israel (but see 1 Chr. 13:23-40).

In this account of how David's forces penetrated and conquered Jerusalem, Joab "went first up, and was chief," which was not told before; other items in the account in Samuel were omitted here by the chronicler (1 Chr. 11:6-7; cf. 2 Sam. 5:7-9).

11:10-47 These also are the chief of the mighty men whom David had, who strengthened themselves with him in his kingdom, and with all Israel, to make him king

This passage may be a summary of the efforts of David's "mighty men," who helped him to become king of all Israel during the "seven years and six months" he reigned in Judah only (2 Sam. 5:5; 23:8). The rest of the account of David's mighty men parallels the previous accounts (1 Chr. 11:15-20; cf. 2 Sam. 23:8-39 and commentary).

12:1-22 Now these are they that came to David to Ziklag, while he yet kept himself close because of Saul

Most of this information was not given before (cf. 1 Sam. 27). It may account in part for Saul's military weakness during the times he pursued David. Some men of Benjamin, Saul's own tribe, are the first listed; then follow some of Gad, more from Judah and Benjamin, and some from Manasseh. Note the poetic statement of commitment (1 Chr. 12:18).

12:23-40 And these are the numbers of the bands that were ready armed . . . and came to David to Hebron, to turn the kingdom of Saul to him

The earlier account generalizes that "all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron; and king David made a league with them in Hebron" (2 Sam. 5:3; cf. 1 Chr. 11:1-9). The chronicler gave here more details about the number of armed men from all the tribes, including both halves of Manasseh and the priests and Levites. They all went to David, from both near and far, carrying supplies on their beasts of burden, "to turn the kingdom of Saul to him" (1 Chr. 12:23).

13:1-14 And let us bring again the ark of our God to us

This chapter resumes the history of David's reign, after the interruption listing his mighty men and the numbers of armed men from all the tribes (1 Chr. 11:10-12:40). David was concerned that taking the ark to Jerusalem "be of the Lord our God" and that all of Israel approve; specific mention that "the priests and Levites" should all be gathered has also been added (2 Sam. 6:1-2; cf. 1 Chr. 13:2-3).

14:1-17 Now Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and timber of cedars, with masons and carpenters, to build him an house

Information given here about trade with Tyre and the wives of David is also given in the account in Samuel (2 Sam. 5:11-25; cf. 1 Chr. 14). One chapter in Samuel records the two phases of moving the ark; two chapters record it here (2 Sam. 6; cf. 1 Chr. 13; 15).

15:1-29 And David made him houses in the city of David, and prepared a place for the ark of God, and pitched for it a tent

Concluding what was begun in 1 Chronicles 14:1 about David's buildings in Jerusalem, the first verse of chapter 15 resumes the account of moving the ark to Jerusalem to the tent prepared for it.

Material here adds to what was given in the account in Samuel (2 Sam. 6:11-12; cf. 1 Chr. 15:2-24) and explains that David arranged for "the children of Aaron, and the Levites" to carry the ark properly during the last part of the journey so that he would avoid such an offense as occurred while it was being transported on the cart (1 Chr. 13:9-14). On the other hand, less is said here about the friction between David and Michal (2 Sam. 6:20-23; cf. 1 Chr. 15:29). In Chronicles there is more of the commendable and less of the deplorable about David.

16:1-43 So they brought the ark of God, and set it in the midst of the tent that David had pitched for it: and they offered burnt sacrifices and peace offerings before God

The account in Samuel speaks only of David's making offerings to the Lord; according to the chronicler, all apparently participated (1 Chr. 16:1; cf. 2 Sam. 6:1-18). Nor does the account in Samuel mention the Levites appointed to minister before the ark of the Lord, to record events, and to thank and praise the Lord. A psalm written by David for the occasion is given here but is notin Samuel (1 Chr. 16:7-36; cf. 2 Sam. 6; but see Ps. 105:1-15). Additional information here tells of the priests and Levites appointed to officiate before the ark of the covenant.

17:1-27 David said to Nathan the prophet, Lo, I dwell in an house of cedars, but the ark . . . remaineth under curtains

This chapter is very similar to 2 Samuel 7. The differences are sometimes merely rhetorical; for example, a command here was a question there (1 Chr. 17:4; cf. 2 Sam. 7:5). But a related verse in a later chapter gives a reason why David should not build the temple: he had been a man of war and bloodshed; his son, a man of peace, would build it (1 Chr. 22:8-9).

18:1-17 Now after this it came to pass that David smote

First Chronicles 18 parallels 2 Samuel 8 but omits an enigmatic detail (v. 2 in both accounts) about certain Moabites' being put to death. That the brass booty David took was used by Solomon to make the "brasen sea" of the temple is told only here (v. 8 in both accounts). There are a few other differences in wording.

19:1-19 David sent messengers . . . So the servants of David came unto the land of . . . Ammon to Hanun, to comfort him

The accounts here of compassion, misapprehension, insult, and revenge are essentially the same as in Samuel, except for the record of mercenaries hired by the Ammonites when attack by Israel was imminent (2 Sam. 10:6; cf. 1 Chr. 19:6-7).

20:1-8 at the time that kings go out to battle, Joab led . . . the army, and wasted the country of the children of Ammon

This brief chapter corresponds to 2 Samuel 11 for part of the first verse, then omits the story of David and Bathsheba, and resumes the same wording thereafter (2 Sam. 11; 12:1-26, 30-31; cf. 1 Chr. 20:1-3). Chronicles omits all mention of the tragedy of Amnon, Tamar, and Absalom; Absalom's attempted usurpation and his death; and the aftermath of the tragedy of Amasa and Joab in the Sheba rebellion. The account of the famine and the resultant execution of four of Saul's descendants is omitted here; so is the pathetic story of Rizpah. After mention of a Philistine giant before whom David "waxed faint," the parallels resume (2 Sam. 13:1-21:17; then 21:18-22; cf. 1 Chr. 20:4-8). It is obvious that the chronicler had no desire to record incidents bearing on David's sins, failings, and weaknesses.

21:1-30 And Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number Israel

Nonetheless, this chapter does speak of one of David's "sins"—the census he ordered to determine his military strength—but the first verse essentially blames the sin upon Satan (cf. 2 Sam. 24:1). The account in Samuel says that because the Lord was angry at Israel he "moved David against them to say, Go, number Israel and Judah"; both accounts record David's repentant spirit (2 Sam. 24:1, 10; 1 Chr. 21:8, 17). The chronicler made both David and the Lord look better by selecting what to emphasize. But the lesson taught by both accounts is clear: governments that calculate their military might for vain purposes do indeed bring much suffering upon their people.

22:1-19 Then David said, This is the house of the Lord God, and this is the altar of the burnt offering for Israel

The acquisition of a site on a hill above the old city of David and the building of an altar there are attested in both accounts (2 Sam. 24:18-25; 1 Chr. 21:24-26). This chapter adds details about the preparation of materials and the briefing of David's son Solomon for his work on the temple.

Although no complete parallels to this chapter are found in the books of Samuel and Kings, some points there are elucidated here; see footnoted references to them (1 Chr. 22:16, 2a, 4a, 5a, 7a, 9a-b, 10a).

A poetic passage records a blessing of the Lord upon David's promised son Solomon; it has a nice play on the related Hebrew words translated as Solomon, peace, and quietness—Shlomo, shalom, and sheqet (1 Chr. 22:9-13).

23:1 So when David was old and full of days, he made Solomon his son king over Israel

This single verse sums up an event detailed in 1 Kings 1 and 2. The spiritual confirmation of the appointment of Solomon is told in much detail in 1 Chronicles 29, but Adonijah's attempted coup was not recorded by the chronicler.

23:2-32 And he gathered together all the princes of Israel, with the priests and Levites

The remainder of this chapter sets forth the divisions of priests and other Levites as they were organized to work in the temple, somewhat as they had served in the old tabernacle of the congregation. It overviews the work of the descendants of Levi's sons Gershon, Kohath—including a rare mention of descendants of Moses (1 Chr. 23:12-20)—and Merari. Finally, some assignments made "by the last words of David" (1 Chr. 23:24-32) are noted.

24:1-19 Now these are the divisions of the sons of Aaron

Two sons of Aaron died without children, so the descendants of the two remaining sons, Eleazar and Ithamar, represented respectively by Zadok and Ahimelech, are here recounted. Their twenty-four periods of service were determined by lot—sixteen periods being covered by descendants of Zadok and eight by those of Ahimelech.

24:20-31 And the rest of the sons of Levi were these

Other descendants of Kohath, the forefather of Moses and Aaron, are listed, starting with the descendants of Kohath's son Amram (1 Chr. 24:20; cf. 23:12) and continuing with other sons of Kohath's brother Merari (1 Chr. 24:26-30; cf. 23:21). These Levites also cast lots for the order of their service.

25:1-31 Moreover David and the captains of the host separated to the service of the sons of Asaph, and of Heman, and of Jeduthun, who should prophesy with harps, with psalteries, and with cymbals

Prophesy is used here in its ancient sense of inspired utterance in song or otherwise of praises, admonitions, chastisements, or, occasionally, predictions. Only in modern English does prophesy mean only "to predict."

The inspired musicians for temple service were identified by name and then allocated by lot to the periods of service in twenty-four courses, as were the priests.

26:1-32 Concerning the divisions of the porters: . . . treasures, . . . outward business

"Porters" were keepers of the "ports," or gates and doors, of the temple compound. They too were Levites, and their assigned places were also determined by casting lots.

Also accounted for are those chosen as officers over the temple treasuries and those over "the outward business," which is understood to have been procurement of materials. Some were assigned to tribes west of Jordan; others, to the two and one-half tribes east of Jordan.

27:1-34 the chief fathers and captains of thousands and hundreds, and their officers that served the king

The military defense services were organized into twelve "courses," so each group of twenty-four thousand served for one month of the year.

Why the "ruler" of Gad and Asher is omitted from the list of the tribal rulers is not known. But the reason David's census did not count those under twenty years of age is recorded (1 Chr. 27:23-24).

Various other officers are named, such as those over the king's treasures, the cultivated fields, vineyards, olive trees, herds (cattle), camels, and flocks (sheep and goats).

David's counselors or advisers, including those with responsibility over his children, were named. Finally, Joab was named as general of the king's army (1 Chr. 27:32-34).

28:1-8 And David assembled all the princes . . . and the captains . . . and the stewards . . . with the officers, and with the mighty men, and with all the valiant men, unto Jerusalem

The king explained to all the leaders how he, whom the Lord had chosen out of the chosen tribe of Judah to be king, had wanted to build a temple and was forbidden to do so but was promised a son who would reign and would build it. That king and his people would prosper and be preserved if they were obedient to the Lord.

28:9-21 And thou, Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind

The old king charged his son with the work of the kingdom and instructed him on "the pattern of all that he had by the spirit, of the courts of the house of the Lord, and of all the chambers round about" (1 Chr. 28:12). David claimed divine revelation as the source for the instructions—"all in writing by the hand of the Lord upon me, causing me to be wise in understanding all his task" (1 Chr. 28:19, translation mine).

David charged Solomon in the words the Lord had spoken to Joshua: "Be strong and of good courage" (1 Chr. 28:20; Josh. 1:6, 9) and challenged him to work with every willing and skillful man.

29:1-9 for the palace is not for man, but for the Lord God

The "palace" is the temple to be built under Solomon's leadership; palace is used here to translate a Persian word meaning "great house."

David continued to describe precious things he had gathered in preparation for building the temple. He challenged tribal leaders and other people to contribute; they responded with good hearts and offered willingly to the Lord—for which the king rejoiced.

29:10-19 Wherefore David blessed the Lord before all the congregation

This little psalm makes a significant theological statement: it speaks of the Lord God as "father, for ever and ever," great in power, glory, and majesty, head of the kingdom, exalted above all, the source of all riches, honor, and strength. It asserts that humility is becoming to mortals, for they are "strangers"—that is, temporary sojourners—on the Lord's earth.

David humbly offered with an upright heart all that he and the people were giving to the Lord and supplicated him to keep uprightness "for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, and prepare their heart unto thee." He then asked that the Lord give Solomon "a perfect heart" to keep the commandments and do all things well, including the building of the temple (1 Chr. 29:17-19).

29:20-25 And all the congregation blessed the Lord God of their fathers, and bowed down their heads, and worshipped the Lord, and the king.

This was surely the highest point of righteous resolve ever reached by Israel. Solomon's reign should have been a golden age in implementing the mission of Israel, for many peoples of the world would know of King Solomon of Israel and could have seen what living a pure religion led by the true and living God could do for people. But little of Israel's mission is seen in the record of Solomon's reign.

Worshipped translates a Hebrew word that means the people "prostrated themselves before" the Lord and his newly appointed king (1 Chr. 29:20).

Because Solomon had been proclaimed and accepted as king previously, he was here confirmed "the second time," and "anointed . . . unto the Lord" as Israel's earthly leader; Zadok, the chief priest, was Israel's spiritual leader. The record concludes with a brief statement of the golden age that followed—for a time (1 Chr. 29:22-25; 23:1; 1 Kgs. 1:33-39).

29:26-30 Thus David the son of Jesse reigned over all Israel. And . . . he reigned over Israel . . . seven years in Hebron, and thirty and three years . . . in Jerusalem

David's good qualities—and none of his sins—are eulogized, in keeping with the tone of the rest of the Chronicles accounts. It would be interesting to have the source-books named, in addition to the book of Samuel, for further details.
