Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

SECOND CHRONICLES

The second book of the Chronicles, like the first book, is concerned with events of religious and ecclesiastical significance. Indeed, "the two Books of Chronicles are counted as one in the Hebrew canon" (BD, "Chronicles"). Historical interest centers on the Davidic dynasty, so the record here deals mostly with the kingdom of Judah after the division of the kingdom; the northern kingdom of approximately ten tribes of Israel is mentioned only in reports of interaction with Judah.

Source books used by the writer of Chronicles continue to be cited, but of them only the books of Kings are now known. Even though Chronicles is historical information chosen for discernible purposes and the source books cannot be examined, it is also a valuable religious and historical resource that complements the books of Kings and provides background on the times and people of the Book of Mormon prophet Lehi.

The first nine chapters of 2 Chronicles deal with achievements of Solomon in his reign over the united kingdom of Israel, with emphasis on the building of the temple, the work of the priests and Levites, and the reinstating of the Mosaic sacrifices and rituals. The remaining chapters cover the reigns of Solomon's descendants from Rehoboam to Zedekiah, ending with the commencement of the Babylonian captivity. The closing verses anticipate the return of many Judahites to their homeland from Babylon by the grace of God through the sympathy of King Cyrus of Persia. Thus the book anticipates its sequels, the books of Ezra, Nehemiah, and Esther.

Commentary

1:1-6 Solomon the son of David was strengthened in his kingdom, and the Lord his God was with him, and magnified him

After notifying all of Israel, the new king and all the congregation went about six miles northwestward from Jerusalem to Gibeon, to the centuries-old tabernacle of the congregation, which had been "made in the wilderness" and used in Moses' time. It had been erected first at Shilo and used there throughout the time of the judges (Josh. 18:1). Later, according to this Chronicles account only, it was established at Gibeon (2 Chr. 1:3). The ark of the covenant, however, had been taken to Jerusalem by David and placed in a tent he prepared for it (2 Sam. 6:17; 1 Chr. 15:l). Solomon and his people offered "a thousand burnt offerings" on the brasen altar of the ancient tabernacle, being still at the "great high place" at Gibeon (2 Chr. 1:6; 1 Kgs. 3:4).

1:7-12 In that night did God appear unto Solomon, and said unto him, Ask what I shall give thee

These verses relate Solomon's vision and his humble request for wisdom, knowledge, and judgment, and the resultant blessing slightly more concisely than the account in 1 Kings 3:6-13.

1:13 Then Solomon came from his journey to the high place that was at Gibeon to Jerusalem

The words from his journey have been added in the English translation; they do not translate anything in the Hebrew text, but there are problems in the narrative if the Hebrew is translated literally, and the addition harmonizes this account with that in Kings (1 Kgs. 3:15).

1:14-17 And Solomon gathered chariots and horsemen: and he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen. . . . And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn

Chronicles again gives more information than does Kings about the prowess of the new king and the great numbers of horses and chariots, even though such were forbidden by the law of Moses (Deut. 17:14-17; 1 Kgs. 4:26).

The Hebrew does not mention linen yarn, but says, literally, "And he brought out the horses which were for Solomon from Egypt and from Kue [Cilicia]; the purchases of the king from Kue he received at a price." (2 Chr. 1:16-17; 1 Kgs. 10:28a).

2:1-18 Solomon determined to build an house for the name of the Lord, and an house for his kingdom

The chronicler omitted the account of Solomon's decision concerning two mothers' dispute over a baby (1 Kgs. 3-4). He also omitted accounts of the king's reorganizing his country into twelve districts, the tallies of supplies required for the royal officials, and the statements about the king's worldly wisdom and went immediately to the account of the building of the temple. On this subject, however, Chronicles gives more information than does the account in Kings, especially concerning negotiations with the king of Tyre (cf. 1 Kgs. 5).

3:1-17 Then Solomon began to build the house of the Lord at Jerusalem in mount Moriah, where the Lord appeared unto David

The chronicler did not tell how many years had passed since the Exodus, as did the author of Kings, but told more about the place in which the temple was built on Mount Moriah (2 Chr. 3:1a-d). In general this account is briefer (cf. 1 Kgs. 5-6).

4:1-22 he made an altar of brass . . . Also . . . a molten sea . . . for the priests to wash in

This chapter contains important information about the "sea," or font (2 Chr. 4:6; cf. 1 Kgs. 7:23-25). Its purpose is simply stated in Hebrew: "and the sea [was] for washing, for the priests, in it." Commentary from the ancient rabbis indicates that it was indeed used for immersions, such as the Torah prescribes for purification. Washing facilities were also needed for the cleansing of various illnesses. The font may have been used in ordinances such as those on the Day of Atonement (Lev. 15; 16:23-24; BD, "Fasts," paragraphs about the Day of Atonement; "Purification").

See the commentary on 1 Kings 7:13-51 regarding baptism.

5:1-14 Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, and all the heads of the tribes . . . unto Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of the Lord out of the city of David, which is Zion

The report is virtually the same here and in Kings regarding the moving of the ark and its precious contents to its new shrine in the temple of Solomon. Descriptions of performances by singers and other musicians are not found in Kings, however. The sign of the presence of "the glory of the Lord" manifested in the cloud is recorded in both (cf. 1 Kgs. 7:51; 8:1-11).

As observed before, the name Zion was eventually applied to all Jerusalem and was so used by the prophets. Only in more recent times has it been used specifically for a place outside the southwest corner of the "old city" of Jerusalem.

6:1-42 Then said Solomon . . . I have built an house of habitation for thee, . . . And the king . . . blessed the whole congregation

This account adds one item about the Lord's having chosen Jerusalem and one about Solomon's "brasen scaffold" upon which he knelt down upon his knees in prayer. This, with its parallel (2 Chr. 6:13; cf. 1 Kgs. 8:54), is the first time kneeling in prayer has been mentioned. His supplications in the closing verses are added, but some important words of the dedicatory prayer are not found in Chronicles (cf. 1 Kgs. 8; and commentary).

7:1-3 Now when Solomon had made an end of praying, the fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt offering

This miraculous manifestation is not recorded in Kings. Recall the similar manifestation when the temple site was first secured by David (1 Chr. 21:26). Manifestations of the glory of the Lord are known also in the latter days (cf. D&C 109:12, 37).

7:4-11 Then the king and all the people offered sacrifices before the Lord

These spiritually awesome and festive events took place in the seventh month (2 Chr. 5:3; 7:10). The first twenty-three days of the month are "high holy days" in Judaism (Num. 29).

Much of this information is found also in Kings (1 Kgs. 8:62-66; 9:1; and commentary).

7:12-22 And the Lord appeared to Solomon by night, and said unto him, I have heard thy prayer, and have chosen this place . . . for an house of sacrifice

In this second night-vision granted to Solomon by the Lord (recall 2 Chr. 1:7), he was assured that his supplications had been accepted and the blessings he had sought would be given according to Israel's needs and worthiness (compare promises with requests; 2 Chr. 7:13-15; 6:26-31). The rest of the assurances and warnings are like those in Kings (cf. 1 Kgs. 9:3-9).

8:1-18 And it came to pass at the end of twenty years, wherein Solomon had built the house of the Lord, and his own house, That the cities which Huram had restored

This overview has fewer details about the mundane and more about the religious. An interesting difference may be seen in the mention of the special house built for Solomon's wife from Egypt. The Chronicles account declares it was built because "the places are holy, whereunto the ark of the Lord hath come," perhaps implying that she who had worshipped the deities of Egypt ought not dwell in holy places near the temple (2 Chr. 8:11; 1 Kgs. 9:24).

The items that pertain to worship practices and priesthood services have no counterpart in Kings. For other items of significance, see the commentary on 1 Kings 8-9.

9:1-12 And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came

This incident is also reported in Kings, but it is somewhat different there. The account in Kings indicates that "when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon concerning the name of the Lord, she came to prove him with hard questions." Chronicles does not mention her interest in "the name of the Lord" but is explicit that she indeed praised the God "which delighted in thee to set thee on his throne, to be king for the Lord thy God" (1 Kgs. 10:1; cf. 2 Chr. 9:8).

9:13-28 And king Solomon passed all the kings of the earth in riches and wisdom

The parallels with Kings continue, with reiteration of the opulence and power of King Solomon and a reflection of Solomon's fulfillment of the Lord's promise to Abraham about the land to be occupied (2 Chr. 9:26; 1 Kgs. 4:21; Gen. 15:18).

9:29-31 Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, first and last, are they not written in the book

Citing three books in which the rest of Solomon's deeds were recorded and going directly from the summation of his greatness to the brief account of his death, the chronicler did not include any of some forty verses of 1 Kings 11 about the king's seven hundred wives and three hundred concubines or the shrines made for their gods and goddesses and the worship of them. Neither did he tell of the Lord's castigation of Solomon and the resultant troubles as enemies rose up against him, nor of the rise of Jeroboam, nor of the division of the kingdom prophesied by Ahijah the Shilonite, nor of Solomon's heir Rehoboam losing the kingship of ten of the tribes of Israel to Jeroboam (cf. 1 Kgs. 11:28-31). And, unfortunately, the three other books that are cited about the deeds of Solomon are not now known.

10:1-19 And Rehoboam went to Shechem: for to Shechem were all Israel come to make him king

All the events of this chapter are recorded in Kings (1 Kgs. 12:1-19), though not verbatim. It appears that the chronicler did not protect Rehoboam's image as he usually did Solomon's.

11:1-4 he gathered . . . fourscore thousand chosen men . . . that he might bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam. But the word of the Lord came to Shemaiah the man of God

Beyond these four verses, the corresponding chapters in Kings and Chronicles have little in common (1 Kgs. 12:21-24; and commentary).

11:5-17 And Rehoboam dwelt in Jerusalem, and built cities for defence in Judah

The chronicler concentrated on Rehoboam's administration and his building of defenses and on the virtues of the work of the true priests, many of whom left the northern kingdom and went to Judah, rejecting the ways of Jeroboam, who had set up apostate shrines and a false priesthood mentioned here but detailed in Kings. The migration of "the priests and Levites that were in all Israel" to the southern kingdom augmented that kingdom to include all of Judah and Levi, most of Simeon, and part of Benjamin (2 Chr. 11:13-14; cf. 1 Kgs. 12:25-33; and commentary).

11:18-23 And Rehoboam took him Mahalath . . . to wife, and Abihail . . . And after her he took Maachah the daughter of Absalom; . . . he took eighteen wives, and threescore concubines. . . . And Rehoboam made Abijah the son of Maachah the chief, to be ruler among his brethren

This account would have genealogical importance if it was certain that Maachah, the mother of Abijah, was indeed the daughter or granddaughter of Rehoboam's uncle Absalom, but the name of Abijah's mother and the name of her father are given later as "Michaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah" (2 Chr. 13:2). About the many wives of Rehoboam, see 2 Chronicles 11:23b.

12:1-16 when Rehoboam . . . had strengthened himself, he forsook the law of the Lord, and all Israel with him

Religious instability developed in both the king and the people. The account of this apostasy in Judah, the warnings of Shemaiah the prophet, the attack by Shishak of Egypt, and the resultant loss of treasures of the king's house and the temple are told in more detail here (cf. 1 Kgs. 12:21-31).

The death notices identify Rehoboam's son and heir as Abijah here but as Abijam in Kings. It is more than a slight spelling variant: Abijah means "my father is Yah" (a short form of Yahweh, or Jehovah); but Abijam means "my father is Yam" (a Canaanite god of the sea). It is not surprising that the chronicler used the faithful name rather than the idolatrous one. The evaluation of Rehoboam does contain both positive and negative elements, however.

13:1-22 Now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam began Abijah to reign over Judah

This picture of King Abijah is very different from the one in Kings (cf. 1 Kgs. 15:1-8), in which he was shown to be sinful like his father and engaged in war all his years as king. Here he is depicted as a valiant champion of the Lord, calling on Jeroboam and northern Israel to repent and return to the true priesthood and worship of the living God. Then when Jeroboam would have overwhelmed him by a stratagem and by superior numbers, the priests sounded the trumpets and the men of Judah shouted a battle cry (the same Hebrew word used in Josh. 6:16), attacked the enemy before and behind, and won a victory with the Lord's help (2 Chr. 13:13-18). Thus the chronicler left a lesson from the life of true Abi-jah, not false Abi-jam.

The conclusion also claims Abijah recovered some northern Israelite areas unto Bethel and its environs in his short and war-filled reign of two or three years.

14:1-15 So Abijah slept with his fathers . . . and Asa his son reigned in his stead. And Asa did that which was good and right

Three whole chapters here give far more credit to Asa and his worthy actions than the mere sixteen verses in Kings, which tell only briefly of his religious reforms and deal mostly with his war with northern Israel's king Baasha (1 Kgs. 15:9-24).

Chronicles reports Asa's removing idolatrous facilities and practices, strengthening Judah's northern borders, and fighting a defensive war against "Zera the Ethiopian" (Heb., Cushi; probably an Arabian tribe rather than the distant Ethiopians of the Nile), which he won after a humble prayer. The tally of troops involved is told in huge round numbers. A question may arise concerning the troops of Judah smiting cities and taking spoil; it may be that only cities occupied by Zera's forces or by other invaders were thus taken.

15:1-19 And the spirit of God came upon Azariah . . . And he went out to meet Asa, and said unto him . . . the Lord is with you, while ye be with him . . . but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you

This prophetic call renewed the spirit of reform in Judah and Benjamin, reminding the people that the parts of Israel that had forsaken the true God were without true priests and without law.

King Asa's religious reforms resulted in an important historical development: not only people of Judah and Benjamin but also people of Ephraim, Manasseh, and Simeon came out of Israel in great numbers when they saw that the Lord was with good King Asa. Simeon already shared an inheritance with Judah (Josh. 19:9; Judg. 1:3); but Ephraim and Manasseh were Judah's neighbors to the north. These migrations in the late 900s B.C. could account for the presence in Jerusalem in the late 600s of such descendants of Joseph as Lehi, Laban, and Ishmael (1 Ne. 5:14-16; 6:2; 2 Ne. 3:4; Alma 10:3). This migration is historically significant, for the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh were among the northern Israelites conquered, exiled, and "lost" by Assyria more than a century before Lehi's time (TG, "Israel, Joseph, People of"; BD, "Joseph").

A summary of the religious conversions in Judah tells of the people's renewal of the covenant with the God of their fathers and the good results of it; however, some became extremists and put to death any who would not join.

16:1-16 In the six and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa Baasha king of Israel came up against Judah, and built Ramah

This event is related also in Kings (1 Kgs. 15:16-24), but Chronicles adds that Hanani, a seer, chastised King Asa for employing Syrians to fight for him rather than trusting in God as he had in previous wars. It is sad to see that in his old age Asa resented prophetic advice, became angry, imprisoned the seer, and oppressed his people. Three years after the war began, Asa contracted a disease and, failing again to return to his former faith in the Lord, he perished. His vanity may be seen in his being buried in a sepulchre that he had had made for himself.

17:1-6 And Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead . . . And the Lord was with Jehoshaphat

Jehoshaphat was another king of Judah more honored in Chronicles than in Kings. Besides the usual phrases describing good behavior, it is said that "his heart was lifted up in the ways of the Lord"—a good description of the inner exaltation a righteous person may feel.

17:7-11 Also in the third year of his reign he sent . . . Levites . . . and with them Elishama and Jehoram, priests

This mission to all the cities of Judah by nine Levites and two priests, who had the book of the law of the Lord with them, resembles missions undertaken from time to time among peoples of the Book of Mormon (cf. Alma 21:16ff.; 37:8-10; Hel. 15:4-10). The results for Judah's internal and external peace and security were phenomenal.

18:1-34 Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honor in abundance, and joined affinity with Ahab

The accession of Jehoshaphat is barely mentioned in Kings (1 Kgs. 15:24; 2 Kgs. 3:7, 12). While King Jehoshaphat was ruling righteously and productively in Judah, as recorded only in Chronicles, Elijah was ministering in northern Israel, as recorded only in Kings (1 Kgs. 17-22). Perhaps Elijah's mission is not reported in Chronicles because he was sent to the northern tribes under King Ahab to call them to repentance.

In any case, with slight differences in the introduction, the account of the war with Syria is similar in both books (cf. 1 Kgs. 22).

There are helpful changes here concerning the problem of the Lord sending a "lying spirit" (2 Chr. 18:21-22 and fn.).

Neither here nor in Kings was the righteous prophet Micaiah further identified nor his fate revealed.

The death and burial of Ahab and the succession to his throne are told in more detail in Kings; see the commentary on 1 Kings 22:34-40.

19:1-11 And Jehoshaphat the king of Judah returned to his house in peace to Jerusalem

Jehoshaphat returned "in peace," but he was reproved for helping the unrighteous Ahab by "Jehu the son of Hanani the seer," who served as a prophet in both Israel and Judah (1 Kgs. 16:1-4; 2 Chr. 16:7-10). Nevertheless, he did commend the king's righteous deeds, which included a great mission tour from south to north (Beer-sheba to Ephraim), in which he regulated the functions of judges, Levites, and priests according to the law and the principles of justice, reverence of the Lord, and courage. These accounts resemble some in the Book of Mormon, such as those concerning King Mosiah and Alma.

20:1-30 It came to pass after this also, that the children of Moab, . . . Ammon, and with them other beside the Ammonites came against Jehoshaphat to battle

This account also is like accounts in the Book of Mormon, in the writings of Nephi, Mosiah, Alma, or Helaman. There is no equivalent in Kings.

Note the faith of the king and the people and the prayer of the king. He recalled God's promises from the time of the patriarchs until Solomon and the mercy shown Moab and Edom in the time of the migration of Israel under Moses and then supplicated the Lord's help. The spirit of prophecy enabled a certain Levite to deliver the Lord's reply, and for it the king and the people gave thanks and praise to the Lord. King Jehoshaphat's faithful admonition the next day and his appointment of singers to lead the people in worship were appropriate responses.

Apparently residents of the area under attack came out of ambush and confused the enemy so that various peoples among the invaders fell upon each other as in Gideon's day (2 Chr. 20:22-23 and fn.). Thus King Jehoshaphat and his people were saved; and with the goods they took from the enemy dead, they returned to Jerusalem, thanking the Lord.

20:31-37 And Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah . . . twenty and five years . . . And he walked in the way of Asa his father

This summary notes that like Asa, Jehoshaphat did mostly commendable deeds; but one aberration is recorded. As with his help for Ahab, so here his collaboration with Ahab's successor Ahaziah was recompensed with a loss (2 Chr. 20:36-37; but see 1 Kgs. 22:48-49).

21:1-20 Now Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers . . . And Jehoram his son reigned in his stead

The death of Jehoshaphat and his replacement by Jehoram are mentioned. Among the accounts of the deeds of Elisha is the account of Jehoshaphat's collaboration with Israel's King Jehoram (1 Kgs. 22:50; 2 Kgs. 3; 8:16-25).

Jehoshaphat was liberal in giving wealth to his sons, and he was too liberal in another sense when he secured a daughter of Ahab and Jezebel as a wife for his heir. Jehoram murdered his brothers and fostered idolatry. A miraculous but fateful warning in writing came "to him from Elijah the prophet," who had been translated before this time (2 Chr. 21:12-15; 2 Kgs. 2-3).

There were attacks and plundering by Arabians and remnants of the Philistines, and finally, as predicted, death came by a degenerative disease. His eight-year reign brought suffering to Judah; and his wife, a true daughter of Jezebel and Ahab, brought even more death and suffering (2 Chr. 22:10-12; 23).

22:1-9 And the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah his youngest son king in his stead

Ahaziah (also called Jehoahaz, which has the same meaning; 2 Chr. 21:17a) was made king by the people. He was the son of the wicked King Jehoram and a part-Canaanite woman, Athaliah, and grandson of the terrible Ahab and Jezebel (2 Chr. 22:2 and fn.). But he didn't last long as king; his affinity for the ways of the house of Ahab and for his cousin Jehoram/Joram of Israel brought about his death within a year. This account in Chronicles of his life and death differs from the longer account in Kings, but both show how the house of Ahab was eliminated by the hand of Jehu (2 Chr. 22:5-9; 2 Kgs. 8:25-29; 9:27-29; 10:12-14).

22:10-12 But when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she arose and destroyed the seed royal of the house of Judah

This terrible grandmother killed her grandchildren and others to eliminate all the Davidic heirs and reign by herself for about six years; however, one baby boy, Joash, was saved by his aunt Jehoshabeath, wife of Jehoiada the priest (2 Chr. 22:11-12). According to 2 Kings 11:1-3, she was a daughter of King Joram of Judah and hence "the sister of Ahaziah."

23:1-15 in the seventh year Jehoiada strengthened himself . . . and gathered the Levites . . . to Jerusalem. . . . And all the congregation made a covenant with the king in the house of God

The chief of the priests and the Levites carefully made plans, removed Athaliah, and crowned a descendant of David to assume the throne of Judah. Note the proper anointing, the crowning, and the charge (2 Chr. 23:11a).

Athaliah had seized the throne by treason and violence, but at her removal she cried treason. Her terrible acts had been unjust; her removal was just, though violent.

The accounts here and in Kings differ in some details but complement each other. The main difference is that in Kings Jehoiada is reported as working through military leaders; in Chronicles they appear to be armed Levites, who could act within the restricted temple areas (2 Chr. 23:6-7; 2 Kgs. 11:4).

23:16-21 And Jehoiada made a covenant between him, and between all the people, and between the king, that they should be the Lord's people

This account details the removal of idolatrous shrines and functionaries and the reinstatement of proper religious and civil leaders. Since "all the people rejoiced," there must have been virtually no supporters of the rule of Athaliah, the only non-Davidic ruler in the history of Judah (cf. 2 Kgs. 11:17-20).

24:1-27 Joash was seven years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years . . . And Joash did that which was right in the sight of the Lord all the days of Jehoiada the priest

The account in Kings is more explicit that the young king did that which was right "all his days wherein Jehoiada the priest instructed him" (2 Kgs. 12:2). But after all the work of organizing the people, collecting the proper contributions, and refurbishing the temple was finished, and years had passed, Chronicles records that Jehoiada died, the evils returned, and Jehoiada's son Zechariah was killed "in the court of the house of the Lord" by command of the king (2 Chr. 24:15-22; 2 Kgs. 12:19-20). A similar crime involving a similar name is referred to in Matthew 23:35 and Luke 11:51; but they are not the same (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938], p. 261).

Chronicles explains more fully than Kings that the servants of King Joash slew him after his apostasy and his treachery to Zechariah, son of his mentor and champion Jehoiada (2 Kgs. 12:19-20).

25:1-28 Amaziah was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem

This account corresponds with that in Kings about Amaziah beginning his reign commendably by observing the law in punishing the guilty but sparing their innocent family members (2 Chr. 25:1-4; 2 Kgs. 14:1-6; Deut. 24:16).

Chronicles then records an event that is not given in Kings, showing how Amaziah's military might was built from Judah, Benjamin, and a hired army from Ephraim against the advice of a "man of God." When, at last, he heeded that prophet's warning and sent the Ephraimite army back, they became angry and raided some cities of Judah on the way home.

Another report not in Kings tells of an apostate innovation by King Amaziah in honoring the gods of Edom, perhaps to appease them because he had conquered Edom (2 Chr. 25:14-15). He then disregarded a prophet's warning, which accounts in part for his vain challenge and disastrous war against northern Israel (2 Chr. 25:14-24; 2 Kgs. 14:8-14). Israelites even plundered the temple in that war.

The remainder of Amaziah's life, in which he was unfaithful to the ways of the Lord and was slain through a conspiracy, are related both here and in Kings.

26:1-23 Then all the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in the room of his father

Again the people of Judah maintained some stability by keeping the Davidic dynasty when they overthrew a bad king. Young King Uzziah did mostly that which was right, while a prophet was able to influence him (2 Chr. 26:4-5). His name means "the Lord is my strength"; he was also called Azariah, meaning "the Lord is my helper"; so his names were appropriate to the good aspects of his life (2 Kgs. 14:21-22; 15:1-7). Supplementing the brief account in the book of Kings, Chronicles tells of his successes against old enemies, his building projects, his promotion of agriculture, and his development of defenses "invented by cunning men" (2 Chr. 26:15).

But then came the old scenario so common here and in the Book of Mormon: "when he was strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction: for he transgressed against the Lord his God" (2 Chr. 26:16). His transgression was like that of King Saul; he assumed priestly prerogatives and burned incense upon the altar. When he was corrected, he flew into a rage and was punished with leprosy. For the rest of his life the government was in the hands of his son Jotham, who later succeeded him as king (2 Chr. 26:15-23).

The note about Isaiah the prophet having written an account of the rest of the acts of Uzziah is important information about another service of one of the great writing prophets (2 Chr. 26:22; Isa. 1:1; 6:1).

27:1-9 Jotham was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem

The sixteen years of Jotham's rule included his time as regent during his father's years of banishment because of leprosy. Chronicles mentions Jotham's building projects in the hills and forests of Judah; the books of Kings and the book of Isaiah describe the beginning of attacks on Judah by northern Israel and Syria, who later tried to force Judah into their coalition against the great threat of Assyria (2 Kgs. 15:37; Isa. 7:1-9).

Prophecies in these times were written in the books of Hosea, Amos, Micah, and Isaiah. Jonah had been sent by the Lord on a mission to Assyria before the others began their work at home (2 Kgs. 14:25). Usually, each prophetic book gives the names of the kings in whose times the prophet served.

28:1-15 Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem

These years were crucial for Judah. The chronicler stated that Ahaz "did not that which was right"; indeed, had he reigned any longer than sixteen years, Judah may well have been conquered by Assyria when northern Israel was. Both Kings and Chronicles attest that he even sacrificed children to his idols (2 Chr. 28:3; 2 Kgs. 16:3).

In due time the Lord allowed Syria and Israel to attack Ahaz (2 Chr. 28:5-8; 2 Kgs. 16:1-9), but their stated intent was to force Ahaz into their alliance against Assyria.

The remarkable episode of women and children being taken captive by Israel after an attack and then returned because of the admonitions of the prophet Oded was not reported by the other books. It is typical that Chronicles bears testimony of the effects of prophetic admonitions in Israel (2 Chr. 28:8-15).

The accounts here are brief but show how desperately Ahaz tried to save his kingdom from the relatively minor threat of Syria and Ephraim (a name sometimes used for all of northern Israel); but in doing so he subjugated his kingdom to Assyria, a much greater danger. He made bad choices politically, morally, and religiously; the prophet Isaiah tried to dissuade him from that course, but to no avail (Isa. 7:1-9).

It was providential for Judah that King Ahaz died and was replaced by his son Hezekiah, who responded to Isaiah's prophetic guidance; thereby, Judah was saved from captivity by Assyria (2 Chr. 29-32; 2 Kgs. 18-20; Isa. 36-39).

29:1-36 Hezekiah . . . in the first year of his reign . . . opened the doors of the house of the Lord, and repaired them

Some details about the temple and worship not recorded in Kings are preserved here (cf. 2 Kgs. 18). Hezekiah corrected evils and innovations of his father, King Ahaz. He caused the doors of the temple to be opened again and repaired, the priests and Levites to be gathered and sanctified, the temple compound to be cleansed of "filthiness," and the people to be prepared to renew their covenants with God (2 Chr. 29:3-11). When that was all done, the rulers, priests, and people came to the temple with their offerings and musical instruments. Festive worship services and sacrifices were conducted. When all was set in order, the king rejoiced with all the people.

30:1-27 And Hezekiah sent to all Israel and Judah . . . that they should come to the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, to keep the passover unto the Lord God of Israel

This chapter records events comparable to those in the lives of Mosiah and Alma in the Book of Mormon. It has no parallel in Kings. This Passover must have been kept before Israel was conquered by Assyria, during the time that Hoshea ruled Israel and Hezekiah ruled Judah (1 Kgs. 18:1; 17:6).

Some two hundred fifty years had passed since the division of the northern Israelite tribes from the tribes of Judah and others in the south when King Hezekiah and the true priesthood leaders courageously attempted to reconcile all of Israel with the Lord.

It is a delight to read about the counsels of the king, princes, priests, and people and the letters of invitation sent out by proclamation to all Israel from Dan to Beer-sheba. There were appeals and admonitions for a righteous return to the Lord. Chronicles realistically reports the responses, unfavorable in some areas but favorable in Asher, Zebulun, and Manasseh as well as Judah. Priesthood service was extended to the multitude from Ephraim, Manasseh, Issachar, and Zebulun, so that all might be properly cleansed and participate in the Passover, the Feast of Unleavened Bread, and the prayers of supplication to the Lord. The Lord graciously healed the people, and the king commended the Levites who had "taught the good knowledge of the Lord" (2 Chr. 30:22).

The rejoicing, peace offerings, and confessions continued another seven days beyond the normal Passover time. Joy and blessings prevailed such as had not been seen since Solomon's time.

31:1-21 Now when all this was finished, all Israel that were present went out to the cities of Judah, and brake the images in pieces, and cut down the groves, and threw down the high places and the altars out of all Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim also and Manasseh, until they had utterly destroyed them

Having thus destroyed Baalism and other idolatry for a time, Judah and some repentant neighbors among the tribes to the north were organized by the king for proper worship. Chronicles details Hezekiah's reformation, whereas Kings provides only generalizations (2 Chr. 31:20-21; cf. 2 Kgs. 18:4-7).

32:1-8 when Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib was come, . . . He took counsel with his princes and his mighty men

Preliminary to this threat, as the book of Kings relates, Hezekiah had rebelled against paying the tribute to Assyria that had been begun by Ahaz before him (2 Kgs. 16:5-10; 18:7, 13-14). The Assyrian King Sennacherib came to subject Judah as Tiglath-pileser and Shalmaneser had subjected the nations to the north and east (BD, "Chronology," p. 638, displays the century of Assyrian threats and conquests of their neighbors, including Syria and Israel).

Hezekiah's work in preparing his people, both spiritually and temporally, against Assyria is quite impressive. Disparagement of trusting in "the arm of flesh" rather than trusting in the power of God is found also in the book of Jeremiah and in the Book of Mormon, whose writers came out of Jerusalem a little over a century after Hezekiah's time and in the time of Jeremiah (2 Chr. 32:8; Jer. 17:5; 2 Ne. 4:34; 28:31).

32:9-23 After this did Sennacherib . . . send his servants to Jerusalem . . . saying . . . Whereon do ye trust . . . ?

Sennacherib's propaganda attack on the people of Judah in their own language is told more vividly, with all the indelicate details, in other biblical records (2 Kgs. 18:17-36; Isa. 36; and commentary). There was a second propaganda attack; Isaiah's two responses and the blasphemy against the Lord are noteworthy, and it is surprising that Chronicles gives only a hint of the prophet's involvement (2 Chr. 32:20-21; cf. 2 Kgs. 19; Isa. 37). It does summarize how the Lord helped in the days of Hezekiah and how the people showed their gratitude.

32:24-26 In those days Hezekiah was sick to the death, and prayed unto the Lord

The king's illness, his prayer, the answer by the prophet, the "sign" given him, and his recovery are more detailed in the other accounts (Isa. 38; 2 Kgs. 20:1-19; and commentary).

32:27-30 This same Hezekiah also stopped the upper watercourse of Gihon, and brought it straight down to the west side of the city of David

While applauding Hezekiah's honors and riches, these verses also give credit for a remarkable engineering feat—a tunnel that may still be seen and traversed (commentary on 2 Kgs. 20:20).

32:31-33 Howbeit in the business of the ambassadors of the princes of Babylon

On the king's unwise indulgence of visitors, Chronicles says little compared to Isaiah 39 and 2 Kings 20:12-20. The incident was evaluated by the chronicler as a test, "to try him."

The note about the king's death is about the same in Kings; it is not mentioned in the book of Isaiah.

33:1-10 Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty and five years . . . But did . . . evil in the sight of the Lord, like unto the abominations of the heathen

This evil king of the line of David could not be overlooked, but the chronicler left only a brief record (cf. 2 Kgs. 21:1-16 and commentary) that includes nothing of the dire warnings given by the prophets.

33:11-20 Wherefore the Lord brought . . . the captains of the host of the king of Assyria, which took Manasseh

This surprising account is only in Chronicles; it tells of a king of "Assyria" going to Judah, taking Manasseh captive to "Babylon," and after a period of suffering and repentance, letting him return to Jerusalem. Who it could have been and what made such a circumstance possible are unknown. The account was attested in a "book of the kings of Israel" (2 Chr. 33:18), but it is not our present book of Kings. The Apocrypha of the Old Testament contains a beautiful prayer of repentance and supplication called the Prayer of Manasseh. Its origins are also not known.

In any case, the evil done by Manasseh began an evil way of life in Judah that never abated, though one good king tried to overcome it. The decadence thus begun resulted in the captivity and exile of Judah.

33:21-25 Amon was two and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned two years in Jerusalem

This wicked king emulated none of the late reforms accredited to his father but followed all his predecessor's evil ways instead (2 Chr. 33:2-10, 22-23). It is surprising that his father's reign lasted fifty-two years but no surprise that Amon's lasted only two.

After the pendulum had swung from relatively good kings to the bad king Ahaz, to the good king Hezekiah, to the bad kings Manasseh and Amon, it came back to one last good one—Amon's young son Josiah.

34:1-32 Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem one and thirty years. And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord

Since it was "the people of the land" who made Josiah king at age eight (2 Chr. 33:25), perhaps they also provided him advisers and motivation for good. In the eighth year of his reign, he began to seek the Lord. Thus, at age sixteen he was getting a religious base, and by age twenty he began to "purge Judah," including Jerusalem and cities round about, in Simeon, and even northward into former territories of Ephraim, Manasseh, and Naphtali, and "throughout all the land of Israel" (2 Chr. 34:3-7). Because Assyria had taken the ten tribes of northern Israel into captivity some eighty years earlier (BD, "Chronology," p. 638), Josiah's cleansing in the north must have been undertaken among whatever Israelites there were among the other peoples Assyria had sent in (2 Kgs. 17:22-24).

After this detailed introduction to the life and work of young King Josiah, Chronicles essentially parallels the other account (2 Kgs. 22-23 and commentary); there are some differences in order and in emphasis, however. The emphasis in Chronicles is on the king's part in getting the people to renew their "covenant of God," turn from all abominations, and serve him (2 Chr. 34:31-33; cf. 2 Kgs. 23:3).

35:1-19 Moreover Josiah kept a passover unto the Lord in Jerusalem

This Passover is summarized in three verses in the account in Kings (2 Kgs. 23:21-23). The Chronicles account characteristically gives more details, including the names and functions of many of the priests and Levites who conducted the revival of this important high holy day. It is evident from this account that the Levites still performed their teaching functions and other duties in the worship services.

35:20-27 After all this . . . Necho king of Egypt came up to fight against Carchemish by Euphrates: and Josiah went out against him

Some thirteen years later the good King Josiah met his doom at the hands of the forces of Pharaoh Necho of Egypt, for he held the great Passover in the eighteenth year of his reign and reigned thirty-one years in all (2 Chr. 35:19; 34:1). Before reporting Josiah's death, the book of Kings summarizes his contributions (2 Kgs. 23:24-25). Chronicles adds the significant observation that Jeremiah the prophet "lamented for Josiah" (2 Chr. 35:25); well might he do so, for during the twelve years of the subsequent reigns of two of Josiah's sons, a grandson, and another son, Jeremiah and other prophets received little response. These were the times of the prophet Lehi (1 Ne. 1).

36:1-4 Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and made him king

This son of Josiah reigned only three months before Necho deposed him and took him in "bands" to Egypt, where he died (2 Kgs. 23:31-34).

36:5-8 Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years . . . and he did . . . evil

Appointed by Egypt, King Jehoiakim, another son of Josiah, was deposed by Babylon after three years and taken away to Babylon. There is no mention of this exile in Kings, and neither account tells of his burial; but Jeremiah condemned him and prophesied for him an ignominious death and burial (Jer. 22:18-19). He was succeeded by his young son, Jehoiachin.

36:9-10 Jehoiachin was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned three months and ten days

Even the short reign of this one grandson of good King Josiah was "evil in the sight of the Lord." Perhaps he merely assumed the throne, for Nebuchadnezzar took him and other prominent people, along with some precious materials, to Babylon. There he was later raised up as a sort of king in exile (2 Kgs. 25:27-30).

36:11-21 Zedekiah was one and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned eleven years . . . And he did that which was evil . . . and humbled not himself before Jeremiah the prophet speaking from the mouth of the Lord

Zedekiah was not the brother (2 Chr. 36:10) of Jehoiachin but his uncle (2 Kgs. 24:17-18). The account in Kings records that his name was changed from Mattaniah to Zedekiah. Like most of his predecessors, he resisted the warnings and advice of the prophets, such as Jeremiah (2 Chr. 36:12, 14-16; cf. Jer. 21; 37:1-10; 38).

Jeremiah prophesied that the Babylonian exile of Judah would last seventy years (2 Chr. 36:21b).

36:22-23 Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the Lord spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished, the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus

The writer of Chronicles anticipated the decree by Cyrus of Persia at the end of the ensuing seventy years and after Babylon's overthrow. Details of that decree are told in the books of Ezra and Nehemiah. The seventy years of captivity may be calculated either from the time the first group of exiles left Judah until the first group returned or from the time of the destruction of the temple until it was rededicated after being rebuilt.

The books of Chronicles have much value and relevance to our own latter day, for they contain examples of the blessings that follow obedience to the Lord as well as vivid warnings against disobedience to him in their record of the kings of Israel and Judah.
