Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

ESTHER

Once it happened that the crafty was taken in his own trap, the falsely condemned were saved, and the worthy were rewarded. It is not always so. Perhaps this story has endured because it has given the comfort of hope to other oppressed people. Although God is not expressly mentioned in the book of Esther, there appears to be evidence in it of the God whom Job describes, who can "set up on high those that be low; that those which mourn may be exalted to safety. He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise" (Job 5:11-12). There was, in a crisis, fasting, which can imply prayer. And divine foreordination may be implied by the challenging question: "Who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this?" (Esth. 4:14).

The first chapter of Esther sets the stage for Esther's dilemma. The second tells how she became a queen in Persia and how her cousin and guardian, Mordecai, attained honorable status. The adversary, Haman, is introduced in the third chapter, and the development moves quickly toward a crisis. The fourth chapter tells how Queen Esther was faced with a challenge and rose to meet it. The fifth and sixth chapters become tense as Esther's plan and Haman's plot progressed simultaneously and Esther barely managed to execute her plan in time to save her people from Haman's plot. The last chapters show how he who planned to destroy others was himself destroyed, and the Jews gained a victory over those who had sought to destroy them. The festival of Purim, still celebrated by Jews to this day, was thereby originated, according to this account.

Numerous commentaries are available on the book of Esther; it has been the subject of much criticism as well as much commendation. There are more differing versions of it, more Targums of it, and more Midrashes on it than on any other book in the Bible. Yet it is the only Old Testament book not found in the Dead Sea Scrolls.

Commentary

1:1-8 Now it came to pass in the days of Ahasuerus . . . In the third year of his reign

The name Ahasuerus is an English transliteration of the Hebrew spelling of the Persian king's name—Khshayarsha; the common Persian-to-Greek-to-English transliteration of it is Xerxes (BD, "Ahasuerus"; "Xerxes"; "Chronology," p. 640). He is thought to have reigned 486-465 B.C. If so, he lived earlier than the commission of Ezra (458 B.C.) and Nehemiah (444 B.C.).

He is introduced as a vain king, showing off "the riches of his glorious kingdom," at a royal feast for the realm's princes, nobles, and their servants in a celebration lasting one hundred eighty days! Added glamour and opulence were shown in a "feast unto all the people that were present in Shushan the palace, both unto great and small, seven days." Yet a quality of justice in the king was shown in that he compelled no one to imbibe.

1:9-22 But the queen Vashti refused to come at the king's commandment

Queen Vashti had her own standards and refused to be displayed before the reveling royal guests. The crisis that ensued is almost humorously related as it tells how the principals and counselors made urgent plans to avoid a wifely rebellion throughout the realms. Accordingly, the queen was banished, that she might "come no more before king Ahasuerus"; and her royal estate was given to someone "better than she." 2:1-20 Then said the king's servants . . . Let there be fair young virgins sought . . . And let the maiden which pleaseth the king be queen instead of Vashti

A queen-contest was held to seek Vashti's replacement. Young women were gathered from all realms by government officers. There is no indication that Esther's guardian, Mordecai, offered her, but she also was taken into the contest.

Mordecai was a great-grandson of Kish, a Benjamite "who had been carried away from Jerusalem with the captivity . . . with Jeconiah king of Judah," ca. 598 B.C., some one hundred twelve years before. He regarded his fair cousin as "his own daughter" (Esth. 2:5-7).

No reason is given for Mordecai's advice that she hide her Jewish identity, but disclosure of it at a crucial time in the events became vital. Mordecai's own Jewishness was known, however, and that became a critical factor.

The process of Esther's being chosen queen needs little analysis or explanation. Questions may arise about a good Jewish girl being taken in marriage by a gentile king, but it may have been because the Lord was preparing her opportunity to save her people.

Esther's name is interesting. Her Hebrew name was Hadassah, which is also the name of a hardy, perennial ground cover plant called myrtle. It bears five-petal flowers that are like little blue or white stars; Esther is an English rendition of a Persian word meaning "star." That name also appears sometimes as Ishtar, the name of the goddess-companion to Marduk, which name has the same root as Mordecai. Some symbolism therein may be significant.

An eminent Jewish women's organization for social and civic service is called by the name "Hadassah."

2:21-23 two of the king's chamberlains . . . sought to lay hand on the king . . . the thing was known to Mordecai, who told it unto Esther . . . and Esther certified the king thereof in Mordecai's name

This incident became a vital link in the later elevation of Mordecai as a hero and the degradation of Haman as a villain.

3:1-15 After these things did king Ahasuerus promote Haman . . . the Agagite. . . . And all the king's servants . . . bowed, and reverenced Haman. . . . But Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence

Potential for conflict is suggested in Haman's identity as an "Agagite" (recall 1 Sam. 15:9, 33) and Mordecai's descent from "Kish, a Benjamite" (recall 1 Sam. 9:1; 10:21); for Israel's first king, Saul, was a son of Kish, a Benjamite, and his downfall came after he spared Agag, a king of Israel's inveterate enemy the Amalekites. Whether the names are metaphors in the book of Esther, or indicate actual genealogical descent, the parallelism is symbolic.

Mordecai's refusal to bow and "reverence" Haman may not have been a gratuitous affront. It could have been Mordecai's obedience to the first of the Ten Commandments and the reason that he "had told them that he was a Jew" (Esth. 3:4).

Haman has become the prototype of many who have sought "to destroy all the Jews," both because his pride was damaged and because he hoped for material and political gain thereby. Evaluate both Haman's rationales in acquiring the king's consent and the king's unquestioning concession. Haman generalized reasons why a certain people should be destroyed but did not identify them. He promised great contributions to the king's treasuries without disclosing sources of the treasure, though it might have been assumed he planned to kill men, women, and children and "take the spoil of them for a prey." To determine an auspicious day for such a deed, a lot (pur) was cast. Annually, to the present day, Jews have commemorated Purim on the thirteenth and fourteenth day of the twelfth month, Adar (Esth. 3:7, 13; 9:26-32).

4:1-17 Mordecai rent his clothes . . . and cried with a loud and a bitter cry; . . . Then was the queen exceedingly grieved

At first Queen Esther was troubled only by Mordecai's deep mourning, for she did not know the cause, and she sent clothing so that he could go to her and explain. Then came the dread surprise and challenge. She had to appeal to the king for her people, facing whatever personal danger there was in approaching the throne without the king's invitation.

Religious faith and commitment in the characters of both Mordecai and Esther are implicit in his challenge to her and in her response (Esth. 4:13-17).

5:1-14 Now it came to pass on the third day, that Esther put on her royal apparel, and stood in the inner court of the king's house . . . when the king saw Esther . . . she obtained favour . . . and the king held out to Esther the golden sceptre that was in his hand

Note Esther's procedure of entering, approaching as properly as possible, extending a disarming invitation to both Haman and the king to a banquet, using her opportunity to ask a favor by asking only for another opportunity to please, and awaiting the strategic moment for her ultimate appeal.

Note also the continuing rise in Haman's anticipations and his wife's complicity with him for a time (but see Esth. 6:13). Anyone reading this narrative for the first time might well begin here to suspect that Haman's vainglorious enjoyment of his status, along with his anticipation of totally gratifying his ire and avarice, would one day be frustrated.

6:1-14 What shall be done unto the man whom the king delighteth to honour?

The next development was ironic, as the sleepless king happened to hear again of Mordecai's unrewarded service and Haman happened to be the one who was asked by the king what might be done for someone deserving honors. With overwhelming frustration Haman learned that it was not himself but his adversary who would be honored—and he, Haman, must conduct the ceremony on the very day he would have sought permission to hang Mordecai. With unexplained insight, Haman's wise men and his wife had foretold that "if Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews," Haman would indeed perish (Esth. 6:13).

To a literary analyst these ironic and fateful developments might seem only to be elements of good storytelling; but to a believer in God, they may appear as evidence of divine intervention, even though it is not declared explicitly in this book.

7:1-18 the king said again unto Esther on the second day . . . What is thy petition, queen Esther? . . . Then Esther the queen answered . . . let my life be given me at my petition, and my people at my request

The countermoving actions collided in a dramatic climax. The king could scarcely contain himself when he realized it was death for all his favorite wife's people that Haman had planned. Recall what had been asked and granted (Esth. 3:4-11). Haman added insult to injury, begging the queen's mercy by prostrating himself on her reclining couch; the already enraged king saw that as a desperate assault. When a chamberlain revealed that Haman had built gallows fifty cubits high for Mordecai, the sentence was instant: Haman must hang thereon.

8:1-17 And Esther spake yet again before the king, . . . to put away the mischief of Haman . . . and his device . . . against the Jews

Though Mordecai had been advanced to the post once held by Haman, it was Esther who again risked approaching the king to save her people; for any edict issued in the king's name could not be revoked and they had to devise a way to give the Jews authority to fight for their lives against those who might still try to implement the first edict on the thirteenth day of Adar. So a second edict was sent out to all. Note a superficial "conversion" effect, as "many of the people of the land became Jews; for the fear of the Jews fell upon them" (Esth. 8:17); however, the word translated with the phrase "became Jews" occurs here only, and since it is not the word usually used to describe religious conversion, it may simply mean that some "judaized" themselves by sympathetic actions.

9:1-19 the Jews had rule over them that hated them

Considerable carnage ensued as the Jews and the people who helped them stood against "the enemies of the Jews." Five hundred were slain in the palace compound, three hundred in the rest of Shushan, and seventy-five thousand throughout the other provinces. The sons of Haman were slain, perhaps to avert their later organizing for vengeance; but the hanging of their bodies the next day (Esth. 9:13) would not have been justified by the Law or the Prophets (Deut. 24:16; Ezek. 18:19-21).

In contrast to the intent of Haman to "take the spoil of them for a prey" (Esth. 3:13), no plunder was taken by the Jews who "stood for their lives" in Shushan and in the provinces (Esth. 9:15-16).

"Sending portions one to another" was, and remains, one of the customs of the Jews in the season of Purim.

9:20-32 And Mordecai wrote . . . that they should keep the fourteenth day of the month Adar, and the fifteenth day . . . , yearly . . . Wherefore they called these days Purim after the name of Pur

The festival of Purim commemorates the day that was appointed by lot (pur) for the destruction of Jews in Persia and was reversed to become a day of salvation and joy.

10:1-3 And all the acts of his power . . . and the declaration of the greatness of Mordecai . . . are . . . written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Media and Persia

The book ends with a brief summary of the relationship of Mordecai to the king and the people, showing forth Mordecai's greatness and benevolence.

The book of Esther is a dramatic paradigm of commitment, courage, redemption, and the overthrow of evil.
