Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

PROVERBS

The book of Proverbs contains much that is attributed to King Solomon. It is a treasured collection of Hebrew wisdom literature derived mostly from the experiences of humankind and written by wise and faithful men and women to epitomize rules of good behavior and to commend their virtues. The book contains less material accredited as divine revelation and more attributed to human observation than do the books of the Prophets; but some inspired advice is included, and ways of thought, speech, and action pleasing to the Lord are commended. Much of it no doubt originated with men and women inspired by the Lord, and in that sense they were prophetic.

Solomon was credited with God-given wisdom and understanding exceeding that of "all the children of the east country, and all the wisdom of Egypt"; it is recorded that "he spake three thousand proverbs, and his songs were a thousand and five" about relationships between nature, man, and God (1 Kgs. 4:29-43).

Three sections of the book of Proverbs are labeled as the proverbs of Solomon. Whether these are all of his compositions, or whether all that are attributed to him are really his, are matters of some speculation, but no doubt much that is in this book was written by Solomon. Other authors are identified in the headings.

The book of the Proverbs is divided into five parts. The first part, Proverbs 1 through 9, is called "the Proverbs of Solomon" (Prov. 1:1); it contains didactic poems longer than the two-line couplets that make up the body of Proverbs proper. The poems are largely advice from father to son; they include some dissertations on wisdom.

The second section, Proverbs 10 through 24, is also—and perhaps more aptly—entitled "the Proverbs of Solomon" (Prov. 10:1); it contains formal, pithy, poetic couplets. There is no evident organization of most of the subjects of the verses and chapters of this section; but there is a collection of short aphorisms, one or more verses in length, that is introduced by an explanatory admonition and covers a variety of moral and social matters (Prov. 22:17-24:34).

The last three sections together are shorter than either of the first two. Proverbs 25 through 29, the third section, is introduced as "also proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah king of Judah copied out" (Prov. 25:1); it contains proverbs, maxims, and other aphorisms. The fourth section, Proverbs 30, is called "the words of Agur the son of Jakeh, even the prophecy" (v. 1); it too contains a variety of moral and religious observations and admonitions. The fifth section, Proverbs 31, is called "the words of king Lemuel, the prophecy that his mother taught him" (Prov. 31:1); it is a renowned poetic summary of the virtues of a good woman and wife.

The Hebrew title of the whole book, Mishlei, is a plural form of mashal, whose root means "to represent, be like, be similar." Many proverbs do indeed treat similarities using parallel clauses with a synonymous, antithetic, or synthetic relationship.

Commentary

1:1-6 To know . . . To receive . . . To give . . . To understand

The title and purpose of the compilations are stated, together with some values for those who receive them.

1:7-9 The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge

Fear in this context means "humility, reverence"; reverent humility is a state of mind in which a person can be taught, retain what is learned, and apply that learning in wise ways. Many useful rules are found in these verses.

1:10-19 My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not

The first of many admonitions to youth warns against joining gangs for bloodshed and pillage.

1:20-23 Wisdom crieth without; she uttereth her voice in the streets

The parent or teacher laments when the naive, the scorner, or the foolish reject wisdom, instruction, and reproof.

1:24-33 Because I have called, and ye . . . set at nought all my counsel, . . . I also will laugh at your calamity

This passage of Proverbs is one that contains the Lord's words. When and why he will not respond to prayers is made clear.

2:1-9 My son, if thou wilt receive my words, . . . and apply thine heart to understanding; . . . Then shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God

Father-to-son advice in these verses provides a preventive for loss of the Lord's help (cf. Prov. 1:24-33).

2:10-22 When wisdom entereth into thine heart, and knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul; Discretion shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee

True wisdom will safeguard one from "the way of the evil man" and the "strange" woman (Prov. 2:12, 16a); it will lead one in the way to good, whereas the wicked will suffer destruction.

3:1-12 My son, forget not my law; but let thine heart keep my commandments . . . So shalt thou find favour and good understanding in the sight of God and man

Fatherly advice in this case corresponds with divine instruction and commends a way of life that many humble people have applied with confidence and comfort (Prov. 3:5-6). When all does not go well, divine catharsis is available (Prov. 3:11-12).

3:13-26 Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that getteth understanding

Wisdom is personified in this segment of Proverbs 3; metaphors state some truths effectively and beautifully. The declaration about the Lord's own use of wisdom, understanding, and knowledge in creating and controlling earth and heaven is good theology (Prov. 3:19-20; cf. TG, "God, Intelligence of"; "God, Omniscience of"; "God, Wisdom of"). Wisdom also helps mankind to acquire the blessings of the Lord (Prov. 3:21-26).

3:27-35 Withhold not good from them to whom it is due

Miscellaneous maxims and admonitions against parsimony, mischief, belligerence, envy, perverseness, scornfulness, and other wicked ways finish this chapter. Several types of parallelism are skillfully used.

4:1-27 Hear, ye children, the instruction of a father. . . . Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men

A father teaches gems of wisdom about the family, getting wisdom and understanding, and retaining instruction. Positive recommendations make up the first half of this chapter; warnings against negative ways, the second half. Poetic metaphors and similes convey wise teachings (all fn.).

5:1-23 My son, attend unto my wisdom, . . . For the lips of a strange woman drop as an honeycomb, . . . Drink waters out of thine own cistern

This whole chapter has one topic: avoiding harlotry and adultery (Prov. 5:1-14) and retaining fidelity in proper, loving, marital relationships (Prov. 5:15-21). Some of the language is graphic, but not vulgar, in commending connubial life and denouncing illicit pleasures. As is usual in the wisdom literature, the poetry is beautiful in all of its wordplay.

6:1-5 if thou be surety for thy friend

The dangers in guaranteeing a loan or a promise for someone else have led the speaker to suggest immediate and searching measures to make sure the risk is warranted.

6:6-11 Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways, and be wise

This famous passage commends industry, foresight, and preparation, with the busy ant as exemplar. Somehow one smiles even while accepting its advice and reading the poetic ascent to the climax in the last three verses.

6:12-15 A naughty person

There is wry humor in the characterization of the "naughty person"; he is "a good-for-nothing," according to the Hebrew term used; his perverseness (Prov. 6:12a) is implemented by expressions, gestures, and motions calculated to disarm, deceive, drive wedges of doubt, and sow discord. For all this he is to be punished.

6:16-19 These six things doth the Lord hate: yea, seven are an abomination unto him

Seven is a number that symbolizes completeness; this list covers most abominable attitudes and acts, including pride, lying, murder, malicious thought, eagerness for evil, false testimony, and raising dissension. These generate most of the ills of society.

6:20-35 My son, keep thy father's commandment, and forsake not the law of thy mother

The safeguard against social and moral evils as well as the sin and crime of adultery is obedience to the commandments of the father and the instructive guidance (Heb., torah) of the mother. The parents are the first to discipline the child by the "lamp" of the commandments, the "light" of the law, and the reproofs of discipline; but they will be effective only if the immature keep them in mind constantly, as a guide in the walks of life, a guard during sleep, and counsel in planning (Prov. 6:20-24).

This lesson goes from the abstract and general to the specific and anecdotal: the safeguards are "to keep thee from" hazards such as the "woman of evil" and "the smoothness of tongue of the [female] alien" (Prov. 6:24, translation mine). The warnings are not against females in general; they are specifically against whoredom. Stealing may be understandable and is remediable; but adultery affects "precious life," displays a lack of understanding, damages the soul with a wound and dishonor, and may beget the violence of vengeance.

7:1-27 My son, keep my words . . . That they may keep thee from the strange woman

The father next presents a dramatic anecdote by which he seeks to forewarn the naive "simple ones" and the uninitiated, who are "void of understanding." The commandments and the law should be as precious as the pupil of the eye. Wisdom and understanding should be cherished as a sister or kinswoman would be in order to keep one from women of infidel intents and ways. The example of what happens to a youth if he remains "void of understanding" is easy to understand and to believe. See the footnotes and references for more on unfamiliar words or idioms. Contemplate the poetry of such passages as Proverbs 7:9, 22, 23, and 27.

8:1-36 Doth not wisdom cry? and understanding put forth her voice? . . . Unto you, O men, I call; and my voice is to the sons of man

Anyone who understands that the Son of God was in the beginning with the Father will perceive that wisdom is identified with the Son of God (Prov. 8:22-36; cf. TG, "Jesus Christ, Creator"). This passage also certifies wisdom as a divine attribute. The trio of understanding, wisdom, and righteousness has been emphasized through the centuries by classical Judaism.

This chapter should be studied as a whole (and all fn.).

9:1-18 Wisdom hath builded her house, . . . she crieth upon the highest places of the city, Whoso is simple, let him turn in hither

Wisdom is personified as a gracious hostess inviting the "simple" to "forsake the foolish" and to gain "understanding" (Prov. 9:1-6). A few aphorisms contrast the responses of the scorner or foolish with those of the humble and wise. Reverence, "the fear of the Lord," is the attitude out of which wisdom can spring and flourish.

A contrasting hostess, personified as a foolish woman, entices the simple and offers them not wisdom but forbidden indulgences (Prov. 9:17). The rewards of foolishness are death and hell, whereas the rewards of wisdom are life and understanding. The first segment of the book of Proverbs ends here.

10:1-32 The proverbs of Solomon

The central collection of Proverbs begins here, and with only a slight change of literary structures (beginning at Prov. 22:17), continues to the end of chapter 24. It is noteworthy that the first of these couplets in antithetical parallelism treats matters of the home—the joys that come from righteous children contrasted to the burdens caused by the rebellious or foolish. The joys extend outward, represented by the father, who is more in public life than the mother; but the burdens weigh heavily within the home, which is the mother's chief domain.

11:1-31 A false balance is abomination to the Lord: but a just weight is his delight

The first proverb of the chapter does not necessarily characterize the chapter, except in its emphasizing an attribute of all biblical morality: it begins with God, not with the experiences and observations of man. It makes the point that the Lord cares about such matters as honesty in a person's behavior. Notice the broad scope of these lessons on morality in the number of different topics covered by these thirty-one verses.

12:1-28 Whoso loveth instruction loveth knowledge: but he that hateth reproof is brutish

Intelligence, truth, honesty, justice, and mercy in dealings with man and beasts are commended by these proverbs. See in the footnotes how many topics these verses cover.

13:1-25 A wise son heareth his father's instruction: but a scorner heareth not rebuke

The essential family concerns of parental instruction and children's response are emphasized in Proverbs 13:1, 13, 18, 24.

Literary art and beauty may be found in such verses as 12 and 14; the enigmatic, in such verses as 7 and 25.

14:1-35 Every wise woman buildeth her house: but the foolish plucketh it down with her hands

This chapter begins with the virtue of wisdom at home and ends with the value of righteousness and wisdom in the nation. In between is the promise of "strong confidence" and a place of refuge for all who revere the Lord. A broad spectrum of wise virtues is recommended.

15:1-33 A soft answer turneth away wrath: but grievous words stir up anger

Several proverbs about peaceful and profitable communication are noteworthy, such as Proverbs 15:2, 4, 10, 12, 14, 18, 22, 28, 31, and 32.

An enigmatic proverb (Prov. 15:11) attests that since even "hell and destruction" (Heb., sheol and abaddon) are not hidden from the Lord, surely the hearts of men are not hidden from him.

16:1-33 The preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of the tongue, is from the Lord

In Hebrew, this proverb contains two complete clauses: "To man belong the meditations of the heart; but from the Lord come the utterances of the tongue" (translation mine). Anyone who has felt inspiration during a lesson, sermon, or blessing will understand how such collaboration of the mind and spirit works.

Many gems may be found in Proverbs 16; see especially verses 6, 7, 18, 20, 24, and 32. No one at any one time could appreciate all of the good ones; but each will be found to be good for someone or some situation at some time.

17:1-28 Better is a dry morsel, and quietness therewith, than an house full of sacrifices with strife

Again the first proverb of a chapter pertains to home life. The point is that the simplest fare in a humble home where love and peace abide is more wholesome than a sumptuous meal of meat in a home full of strife. The last phrase, translated literally from the Hebrew, may be rendered "than a house full of sacrifices of strife." To understand the phrase, one must know that flesh was not common fare. It was used for sacrifices on holy days and for food on festive occasions. When used in the home, it was like a kind of sacrifice, and if the spirit of the home was one of conflict and contention, discord and dissention, the sumptuous meal would be, ironically, "sacrifices with strife."

Other proverbs in this chapter also pertain to home management and a good atmosphere; see in particular Proverbs 17:2, 6, 9, 17, 19 through 22, and 25. But of course those may be applied otherwise also, and many others are good for both home and community.

18:1-24 Through desire a man, having separated himself, seeketh and intermeddleth with all wisdom

This proverb is so concise in Hebrew as to be cryptic. It can mean that out of lust one secludes himself and there rationalizes and violates the dictates of wisdom. It is one of those kernels of wisdom that can have many applications according to one's understanding and experience.

The proverb quoted above relates to isolation, but others inculcating communication may be complementary to it (Prov. 18:6-8, 13, 19, 21, 23-24) as well as having other applications.

Proverbs 18:5, 9, 10, 12, and 22 are also gems.

19:1-29 Better is the poor that walketh in his integrity, than he that is perverse in his lips, and is a fool

Typically in the book of the Proverbs, there is praise for integrity, knowledge, wisdom, discretion, prudence, obedience to law, compassion, reverence, and justice; and rebuke for ignorance, foolishness, perfidy, slothfulness, and contemptuousness. Being poor is no shame if it is not the result of slothfulness; and being rich is no honor if riches come only by inheritance—and worse than dishonor if acquired by injustice.

Who would deny that a prudent wife is a blessing from the Lord? (Prov. 18:22; 19:14).

20:1-30 Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging: and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise

Intoxication makes one a scorner and a brawler and is, of course, condemned. So also is the provoker, sluggard, braggart, cheater, deceiver, talebearer, and the disobedient to parents. Again commended are such virtues as peacemaking, fairness, good works, knowledge, and trust in the Lord.

21:1-31 The king's heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water: he turneth it whithersoever he will

The proverb in verse 2 of Proverbs 21 complements the one in verse 1, for it deals with the Lord's cognizance of what is in a man's heart and what is best for humankind; the third proverb, about administering justice acceptable to the Lord, is related to both. With help from the footnotes, verse 4 may be understood thus: "Haughty eyes, and a proud heart—the cultivating of wickedness—is sin" (Prov. 21:4a, c).

Among the remaining proverbs concerning the usual virtues and vices are two more pertaining to home life; verses 9 and 19 are quite hyperbolic about a contentious spouse. Humor is rare in scripture, but these verses display it. There are also other teachings on a variety of matters, such as hypocrisy in worship (Prov. 21:27).

22:1-29 A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches, and loving favour rather than silver and gold

Some of the best-known proverbs of all are given in Proverbs 22. One, of course, is about the value of a good reputation and the virtue of "loving favor." Another concerns educating children early for good behavior all their lives (Prov. 22:6); and yet another recommends a "rod of correction" against foolishness (Prov. 22:15).

A number of verses deal with types of rich and poor (Prov. 22:2, 4, 7, 22-23).

Warnings against sexual aberrations are common in Proverbs (as in Prov. 22:14). Prostitutes are called "strange women," because their ways were not the ways of righteous Israelites but the ways of strangers to the covenant.

The two-part proverbs end with Proverbs 22:16. Longer aphorisms begin at verse 17 with three verses on hearkening to the wise; others, one to three verses in length, deal with refraining from defrauding the poor, emulating an "angry man," guaranteeing others' debts, or removing property landmarks, and being diligent is urged as a great virtue. These rules and sayings continue to the end of chapter 24.

23:1-35 When thou sittest to eat with a ruler—

Some fourteen different topics are treated in the thirty-five verses of Proverbs 23. Warnings against striving to be like the ruler or the rich occupy the first section. Many common topics of the book of Proverbs are treated, including warnings against those having an "evil eye," against dealing with the foolish, against taking advantage of the fatherless, against permissive raising of children, and against excessive drinking of wine. The joy of raising righteous children is a positive statement. Then warnings against participation in prostitution are repeated. A longer preachment against alcoholic indulgence ends the chapter.

24:1-34 Be not envious against evil men

The topic of Proverbs 24:1, refraining from envying the wicked, is bolstered by related topics in verses 8, 19, 20, 24, and 25. A number of familiar admonitions include a counterpart to the Golden Rule, reproach of the slothful or lazy, and disparagement of sleeping on the job (cf. Prov. 6:9-11).

The last verse of this chapter ends the second segment of the book of the Proverbs.

25:1-28 These are also proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah king of Judah copied out

The third segment of the book of Proverbs begins with chapter 25 and continues to the end of chapter 29. These chapters contain more of the paired phrases properly called proverbs.

Two "men of Hezekiah" involved in writing projects were "Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the recorder" (2 Kgs. 18:18, 37; 19:2); however, the copying of a selection of proverbs of Solomon is not mentioned. King Hezekiah was himself a man of letters, as evidenced in his poem of gratitude to the Lord for his recovery from a near-fatal illness (Isa. 38:9-20).

Some rules for kings are given in Proverbs 25:1 through 7. A series of items follow on privately settling problems with neighbors and other items involving communication. Many are clever, picturesque, and poignant in their uses of similes and metaphors.

26:1-28 As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, so Honour is not seemly for a fool

A fool (Heb., ksil) is one uninformed or uneducable in moral judgment and proper behavior, and a dozen proverbs consider what to do and what not to do with such a person (Prov. 26:1-12). The rest reproach the lazy, the practical joker, the talebearer, the deceiver, and the flatterer.

27:1-27 Boast not thyself of to morrow; for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth

As usual, the first verse of Proverbs 27 is a single proverb that does not represent the subject matter of the whole chapter, for it contains a miscellaneous collection of observations and advice. Most of the proverbs are easily understandable, but some, such as verse 10, do need scrutiny. That verse seems to recommend depending upon a nearby friend rather than on a distant relative when calamity strikes. Another verse recommends no empathy for one so foolish as to be surety for a stranger or for a strange woman; and still another proverb about a contentious woman is recorded here (Prov. 27:15 and fn. a-b). One proverb compares reflection of a face in water to reflections, heart to heart, between friends. Another uses irony and hyperbole to admonish disciplining the eyes. And one returns to the hopelessness of reforming "foolish" people. At the close are a few observations on the reliability of the prudent life on a farm.

28:1-28 The wicked flee when no man pursueth: but the righteous are bold as a lion

The first verse of Proverbs 28 is a dramatic statement of the worth of a clear conscience. Many other proverbs in this chapter are readily understandable, but several are enigmatic.

Rulers who violate their land and their trust and any who lack understanding are frequently replaced—and there are many of them; but individuals of understanding and knowledge enjoy stability and longevity (Prov. 28:2, 16, 18).

One proverb about ill-gotten wealth being passed on to righteous charities is problematical; it seldom happens (Prov. 28:8).

"To have respect of persons" (Prov. 28:21) is an idiom meaning to treat people unequally for personal reasons; the second clause suggests that one who will do so can be bribed. "An evil eye" is an eye for evil; a "bountiful eye" is an eye for good (Prov. 28:22; cf. 22:9).

29:1-27 He, that being often reproved hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy

Naturally, he who resists correction and never repents will come to destruction in this world or the next; and without repentance, such a person is without forgiveness.

Like the other chapters of this section of the book of Proverbs, there are many topics and quite a number of problem passages in chapter 29. In verse 4, the word gifts may be read as bribes. The meaning in English of another problem verse is clearer in Hebrew, which can be read, "Men of blood [or violent men] hate the wholesome; and as for the upright [man], they seek his soul" (Prov. 29:10, translation mine). Retranslation may also help in verse 13: "If the poor and the deceitful meet each other, the Lord will enlighten the eyes of both"; in other words, each will discover someone in worse condition than he is himself. The word servant may be understood as slave in verse 19; the point is that out of resentment, a slave will not respond to verbal correction.

Verses 2 and 18 are two well-known truths that apply to our political and religious life.

Thus ends the second segment of the book of Proverbs, and each of the next two chapters is a section by itself.

30:1-33 The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, even the prophecy

None of the people whose names are given in the title of Proverbs 30 are now known. The prophecy of Agur is more literally translated from the Hebrew as burden, which means "a message lifted up"; it is not necessarily a revelation from God. The introduction disclaims any worldly wisdom to give answers only God can give but also testifies that God's words are pure truth, a safeguard to them who trust him, and should be accepted unaltered. Note in verse 4 a possible reference to God and his Son, rare in the Old Testament.

In a humble prayer the author asked that he never become vain, that he be neither too poor nor too rich but have proper nourishment, and that he keep a good relationship with the Lord, becoming neither haughty nor desperate and sinful.

Early in the author's teachings are described four classes of undesirable people who are, unfortunately, quite common in any generation, including ours (Prov. 30:11-14). Next are listed four insatiable things, along with the parasite called the horseleach; the point seems to be that some needs and demands in this world are unending (Prov. 30:15-16). The judgment of one who sees with such perversion as to mock his father and despise obedience to his mother will be exploited by moral scavengers, who care as little for their victim as do ravens or young eagles; it is a subtle metaphor (Prov. 30:17). Four marvels of nature may be a humorous commentary on courtship (Prov. 30:18-19).

Then one as insatiable, perverted, and incomprehensible as the nine just illustrated is identified: an adulterer who denies any wickedness.

Next are named four things that are disquieting on the earth. This is another passage that is humorous but true! (Prov. 30:21-23).

Four little creatures, each with some surprising power or attribute, are described in the next quatrain; doubtless the point is that power is not determined by size (Prov. 30:24-28). In some cases the author used cumulative rhetoric, "three . . . , yea four"; here he applied that figure to the grace in movement and invincibility of a lion, a hound, a ram, and a king (Prov. 30:29-31).

A final curious quatrain has two admonitions—to repent of pride and evil thoughts—and two examples of agitation, with a warning not to raise wrath lest it bring strife (Prov. 30:32-33).

Thus ends the "prophecy" of Agur.

31:1-31 The words of king Lemuel, the prophecy that his mother taught him

Proverbs 31 is the fifth and last section of the book of Proverbs. Neither its author nor his mother is known in scripture. The Hebrew word rendered prophecy here is the same as in the foregoing chapter.

In the first part of Proverbs 31, Lemuel's mother rhetorically asked three times what she should advise her son and then proceeded to warn against harlotry, intoxication, and injustice for the "dumb" (those who cannot speak in their own defense) as well as the poor and needy (Prov. 31:2-9).

One of the best-known passages in all of the book of Proverbs is this mother's description of desirable virtues and capabilities of a good wife. Indeed, it appears in the course of the list that there would be little left for the husband and father to do. In any case, this passage commends the capabilities and energies of an intelligent, caring, and reverent woman and to urge that they be recognized. The Hebrew word rendered virtuous here is khayil, "to be firm, strong, efficient" (Prov. 31:10).

Few of the activities listed are part of a homemaker's work in developed countries today, but they may be taken as representing the creative and administrative work women do. Indeed,they typify many cultures in which most of the food production, preparation, and serving is done by women while bearing and rearing the young, for whom they must also provide clothing and shelter.

So ends this collection of wisdom literature called Proverbs. Its contents include some prophetic and inspiring teachings and many rules and admonitions that if followed can engender a good life.
