Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

ECCLESIASTES

The book of Ecclesiastes is a report of a man's lifelong search for something enduring in this world "under the sun," where most things seemed to him transitory, evanescent, and ephemeral. One may be inclined to agree with some of his observations about what is "in vain" and what has lasting value; but it is evident that he lacked knowledge of the divine plan of redemption and eternal life and erred sometimes as a result.

The first two chapters introduce "the Preacher" and his problem; they report his observations on what he found transient and what of enduring worth. Then he declared that though there is a time for everything, many things are done out of time and place, and much injustice exists. The report continues in the same vein, after a few proverb-like admonitions, reporting some common frustrations and inequities of life. A short section discusses wisdom and a certain grace engendered thereby. The last chapters present the author's parting advice to the young, with his surprise summation of "the whole duty of man" and his solid conclusion about the ultimate justice of God.

There are many analyses and interpretations of Ecclesiastes, but one might as well study it out for oneself, checking the cross-references to related scriptures, and seeking the Spirit to perceive the truth and applicability of its teachings (BD, "Ecclesiastes").

Commentary

1:1 The words of the Preacher, the son of David, king in Jerusalem

Preacher is used to translate koheleth, whose root kahal means "to gather, convoke, or call together." Ecclesiastes is a Greek word meaning "assemblyman." Why the author of these lifetime experiments so identified himself is not known. Neither is it known whether the author really was Solomon, or whether he merely chose and discussed experiences and values typical in a life like that of Solomon. Perhaps who he was does not matter, for he can represent a person of any era; he lived in our world, and for the worldly, much is still the same today as it was then.

1:2-11 all is vanity. What profit hath a man of all his labour which he taketh under the sun?

The word vanity means, essentially, "emptiness, uselessness, transitoriness" (Eccl. 1:2b); it translates a Hebrew word hevel, which means "a mere breath, a puff, a whiff, that which is here and gone." It is used in that sense in other scripture (Job 7:16; Prov. 13:11; 21:6; Ps. 39:6). It appears many times in Ecclesiastes.

In his opening statement, the Preacher observed that many things and processes tend to be transient but repetitive in this mortal world, the world "under the sun" (Eccl. 1:9).

1:12-18 I gave my heart to seek and search out by wisdom concerning all things that are done under heaven

Further introducing himself and his findings are his initial evaluations, made according to his "wisdom." His most gloomy views are not mere "pessimism"; he was apparently trying to be realistic while observing the whole spectrum of human activity, but his observations were mostly frustrating to himself (Eccl. 1:13b, 14b).

2:1-11 I said in mine heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth, therefore enjoy pleasure

Next the Preacher reported his adventures in seeking satis-faction from wealth, beauty, and sensuality; but these too were temporary. He was looking for lasting values, things that would endure (Eccl. 2:18).

2:12-23 And I turned myself to behold wisdom, and madness, and folly

Among such abstractions as wisdom, madness, and folly, he found some were superior to others; but at that point he had to ask what remains after the death of either the fool or the wise. He decided that neither wisdom nor wealth would be of any ultimate worth to a mortal person. Here his lack of information about life after death and the perpetuation of knowledge and wisdom, and the fruits thereof, is evident. It is evident again later that the author, in his early life, was speaking only about values in the mortal world; he perceived simply that there is not any perpetuation of these intangibles in the grave—in the dead body. Later he realized that there are eternal values (Eccl. 9:10; 12:7, 13-14).

2:24-26 There is nothing better for a man, than that he should eat and drink, and that he should . . . enjoy good in his labour. This also I saw, that it was from the hand of God

The Preacher could at this point report one positive finding: one who labors can eat and drink and have enjoyment from his toil; and if he pleases God, God will give him wisdom, knowledge, and joy. On the other hand, the sinner works and accumulates wealth but with no satisfaction, for he leaves his material gains to people who survive. That, as he said, is as useless as "feeding on wind" (Eccl. 2:26; cf. 1:14b).

3:1-8 To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven

It is not certain whether the Preacher's concept of "a time to every purpose under heaven" implies a fixed, determined, set time, as if predestined, or a proper and propitious time or season based on cause-and-effect sequences in nature. His idea that there is a time or season for everything may have been derived from his observations of the cyclical alternation in birth and death, hurting and healing, building up and breaking down, laughing and weeping (Eccl. 1:2-10; cf. 2 Ne. 2:11). The opposites are indeed there so that we may learn to discern between good and evil and choose intelligently. It would be a gross distortion to think that God created some as villains to perpetrate killing, hatred, or warfare; such deeds are done by people who, for their own reasons, choose to do them.

3:9-15 What profit hath he that worketh in that wherein he laboureth?

The Preacher's concept of the reward of work is largely positive. The translation of one item distorts the answers to questions he asked, and a plainer rendition is possible (Eccl. 3:9-11b). The Hebrew word ha'olam is better translated by the phrase "the eternal," as it is elsewhere in the Old Testament, or by the phrase "for ever," as it is in Ecclesiastes 3:14. Only in Mishnaic and modern Hebrew has a connotation of "the world" been attributed to ha'olam. Furthermore, the phrase "so that" should be rendered "without which" (Eccl. 3:11b).

The Preacher, in the course of his observations and meditations, had realized that there is much beauty in life that humankind can appreciate only by the spark of the eternal within, which inspires the heart of mortals. His positive identification of something worthwhile in the joy of work, nourishment, and rest reiterates what he had begun to see before. That view was enhanced by perceiving it as God's gift; for what God does "shall be for ever," and He is concerned about what man does (Eccl. 3:12-15; cf. 2:24).

3:16-22 moreover I saw under the sun the place of judgment

The Preacher observed that in this world "under the sun" there is much miscarriage of justice and also that where there should be righteousness is much iniquity. But he knew that God will bring all to His judgment. The things of this world will end in death for beast and mankind, because all bodies must return to the dust. Concerning their respective spirits, he simply asked, "Who knows whether the spirit of man goes upward and the spirit of the beast downward?" (Eccl. 3:18-21, translation mine). At this point in his life's study, the Preacher did not know much about life after death. Recall that in the Book of Mormon, Alma did not learn about "the state of the soul between death and the resurrection" from either the plates of brass or other past revelations; he learned of it through prayer to God and a direct answer through an angel (Alma 40:9-14).

4:1-7 So I returned, and considered all the oppressions

The oppressed "had no comforter"; workers were envied for their gain; and the "fool" who did no work hastened his own death by failing to provide. All of this was so frustrating that the Preacher observed that the dead are probably better off than the living—and the unborn better off still (Eccl. 4:3; cf. Job 3:11-13; 10:18-19). He was back to his original feeling that everything in mortality is in vain.

4:8-12 There is one alone . . . Two are better than one

One alone, with no child or brother, was seen to labor in vain, and that appeared to be "sore travail" (Eccl. 4:8 and fn.b). But two working together, sustaining and helping each other and keeping each other warm, was more tolerable.

4:13-16 Better is the poor and wise child than an old and foolish king, who will no more be admonished

A poor child, wise enough to be admonished still, has more potential than a king who is old and unteachable; for even if the poor be put in prison, he may be wise enough to be admonished and eventually rise up to reign. But the "old and foolish king, who will no more be admonished," may well lose his hereditary throne. That there is such instability generation after generation was still to the Preacher a "vexation of spirit" (Eccl. 4:15-16; cf. 1:14).

5:1-8 Keep thy foot when thou goest to the house of God, and be more ready to hear

On a more positive note, the Preacher still felt that reverence for God and keeping covenants was better (and safer) than unfaithfulness, lest God be angry. He perceived that though leaders of a province oppress the poor and pervert judgment and justice, there is a higher judge. He implied that God is aware, and either some higher earthly judges or God himself will restore justice.

5:9-17 the profit of the earth is for all: the king himself is served by the field

The statement about resources introduces a section of proverbs and axioms concerning silver, goods, abundance, and riches; but all of them are lost at death: "naked shall he return to go as he came." This also was frustrating, because all that a man suffered counted for nothing.

5:18-20 it is good and comely for one to eat and to drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labour

Again the Preacher concluded that to enjoy the fruits of honest labor, with peaceful sleep thereafter, is "the gift of God." By means of it "God answereth him in the joy of his heart" (Eccl. 5:19-20; cf 2:10, 24; 3:22).

6:1-12 If a man beget an hundred children, and live many years, . . . and his soul be not filled with good, . . . I say, that an untimely birth is better

The Preacher was convinced that it was not what a man's life produced or his progeny that counted but the filling of his soul with good; but he was not yet ready to identify what is really good or what will remain after death.

7:1-10 A good name is better than precious ointment; and the day of death than the day of one's birth

This strange couplet, containing a moral truth and a pessimistic assumption, is the first of another set of proverbs and maxims. They commend soberness and even sorrow over laughter, rebuke by the wise, the end rather than the beginning, patience over anger, and a warning against the common assumption that "the former days were better."

7:11-22 Wisdom is good with an inheritance: and by it there is profit to them that see the sun

Starting off with two aphorisms in appreciation of wisdom, this segment presents a variety of other admonishments and observations. What God has made can't be changed, so one should enjoy days of prosperity before the inevitable days of adversity, for no one knows what the future will bring. Like Job, the Preacher perceived that the righteous sometimes suffer while the wicked prosper, but he recommended a middle course, to be neither too righteous nor too wise, nor yet overly wicked or foolish (Eccl. 7:15-17).

All in all, said the Preacher, fear God and use wisdom; no one on earth is completely just, doing good and sinning not. And do not listen to everything lest you hear something said against you—remember what you have said at times against others (Eccl. 7:18-22).

7:23-29 All this have I proved by wisdom: I said, I will be wise; but it was far from me

With a review of his life's quest and a tentative report of partial failure, the Preacher observed with discouragement a woman's seductiveness and the victims of it (though he that pleases God could escape). He concluded that only one man in a thousand could he commend for righteousness, and no women. His gloomy conclusion was that God had made man upright, but man's many "inventions" had spoiled God's intent.

8:1-17 I counsel thee to keep the king's commandment, and that in regard of the oath of God

Again, the Preacher commended reverence and obedience. His admonitions are good regarding retaining the presence of God and avoiding evil. He warned that no man has power to retain his spirit or the power to stave off death; and though the sinner does evil and thinks he will get by, the Preacher was still confident that the future would deal better with the reverent before God than with the wicked and irreverent, despite common injustices in this world. So once again he commended living happily, enjoying the fruits of labor that God has given, though even a wise man cannot understand with his mortal mind all the works of God (Eccl. 8:17a-b).

9:1-18 For all this I considered in my heart even to declare all this, that the righteous, and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of God

So, the Preacher still knew of much injustice "under the sun" and nothing of justice, reward, punishment, or any further work, in or after death. Yet he felt that a humble living person could do more than an heroic dead one, a change from his previous view (Eccl. 9:4; cf. 4:2). Hence he again recommended enjoying life's everyday rewards of labor and the joys of love at home; he also recognized some value in keeping clean and well groomed (Eccl. 9:7-10). He was still frustrated when the swift did not win the race nor the strong win the battle, and he observed that men may be caught by snares like fish or birds. Furthermore, though a poor but wise man save a city, yet no one will remember him; still, it seemed that wisdom is better than might and the weapons of war (Eccl. 9:11-18).

10:1-20 Dead flies cause the ointment of the apothecary to send forth a stinking savour: so doth a little folly him that is in reputation for wisdom and honour

Knowing that an apothecary was a perfumer (Eccl. 10:1a) helps make this simile meaningful; the little dead flies and the little folly are parallels, and so are their devastating effects.

The Preacher felt that a wise man's "heart" (the seat of understanding) is at his right hand (ready for use), whereas the foolish man's capacity for understanding is not readily available ("at his left").

A few more proverbs are provided on wisdom versus folly, resisting foolish but imperious rulers, mischievous and malicious deeds, the woe of childish and self-indulgent rulers and the danger of voicing any complaint about them, the dangers of sloth, and, perhaps ironically, the power of money. A kind of negative Golden Rule concludes the chapter.

11:1-10 Cast thy bread upon the waters: for thou shalt find it after many days

Even though the recipient of your charity be unknown to you, be generous in giving—"to seven, and also to eight" (Eccl. 11:2) means going beyond the norm—and be hopeful that someone will be charitable to you in future, unforeseen times of need. Perhaps his observation that when clouds form it rains and where a tree falls it lies is a kind of persuasion to live in charitable ways, suggesting that certain laws of cause and effect are constant.

He warns about being too cautious or hesitant (Eccl. 11:4).

He left a masterpiece about the miracle of birth as an illustration of God's inscrutable good works around and within us (Eccl. 11:5).

A few more proverbs are offered on industriousness, accepting joys of the light but enduring the days of darkness—knowing that all things here are transitory—enjoying life in youth, and not harboring sorrows, keeping in mind both that youth is transitory ("vanity") and that there is immanent and imminent judgment with accountability to God (Eccl. 11:6-10).

12:1-14 Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth

A bit of poetry continues the counsel to youth to be cognizant of the divine source of all good while enjoyment is still possible—while the "light" of opportunity is not yet darkened and physical and emotional capacities not yet impaired—long before the "silver cord" of divine sustenance be loosed and the "golden bowl," "pitcher," and "wheel" of corporeal, mortal capacities (for perception, conception, and action) be broken (Eccl. 12:1-6).

The surprise in this last chapter is this: at this point in his lifelong quest for what endures, it was revealed to the Preacher that the "spirit" lives on and does return to God when the mortal body returns to its constituent "dust" (Eccl. 12:7). A survey of his lifelong observations of transitoriness in mortal life equipped him to make his knowledge and advice available to others in suitable words (Eccl. 12:8-10). Wise words can become "goads" to urge people on and "nails" to secure certain truths, "which are given from one shepherd" (the Lord, no doubt). So the young are urged to study, though there be no end of books and much study be "weariness of the flesh" (Eccl. 12:11-12).

Then, to his primary revelation that life endures in the spirit, was added the concluding revelation to the Preacher: work in the body is not all vanity; the works of everyone shall be brought to judgment and identified as good or evil; therefore the Preacher's final admonition to his son was a basic principle: "Fear God, and keep his commandments," for they are a complete guide for every one for good living (Eccl. 12:13-14).

For some students of Ecclesiastes, "the conclusion of the whole matter" is not logically a conclusion the Preacher could have reached from the experiences reported, given his pessimistic attitude about life. That view is not necessarily so, as may be seen by a review the Preacher's positive observations and admonitions. They tell of the value of wisdom over foolishness, of reverence, of doing good, enjoying the fruits of honest labors, God's gifts of wisdom and knowledge, timely industriousness, divine inspiration, the beauty of God's creations and the eternity thereof, the dependability of God's justice, proper worship (including sacrifice), fidelity, man's filling his soul with good, soberness, restraint, patience, the dependability of God's rewards, the potentials for good in life, cleanliness and good grooming, enjoyment of good home life, righteousness in government, generosity in giving to the needy, appreciation for God's creative hand in the miracles of procreation, light versus darkness, the joys of youth, and the opportunities to partake of them (Eccl. 2:13, 24, 26; 3:2, 11-14, 17; 5:1-7, 18; 6:3; 7:1-11; 8:2, 12; 9:4, 8-9; 10:16-17; 11:1-10; 12:1-7). Is that not adequate evidence of the Preacher's faith in God, appreciation of His ways, and conviction that good in life is possible through Him?

Probably anyone who has experienced lifelong progress in developing an understanding of the virtues of life, or anyone who has seen the miracle of conversion, can also perceive realism in the Preacher's report of his lifetime of searching. Thus, in spite of his early errors and insufficient information, it is possible for the reader to appreciate his progress and commend the consistency of his final conclusions.
