Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

JEREMIAH

Jeremiah began to prophesy to the nation of Judah about a hundred and ten years after Isaiah began prophesying to Judah and northern Israel. Jeremiah's call from the Lord came to him near the middle of the reign of the last good and righteous man to reign in Judah, King Josiah, in the thirteenth year of his reign (Jer. 1:2; ca. 626 B.C.). When the righteous King Josiah was killed in battle against Pharaoh Necho in the valley of Megiddo, Jeremiah was one of those who lamented him (2 Chr. 35:20-37). Well might he have done so, for the last righteous king and religious reformer was gone and bitter days were ahead (BD, "Jeremiah").

Jeremiah lived on through the lives of the last four kings, and into the time of the Babylonian exile because the captain of the guard of the Babylonians loosed him from the chains with which he had been bound when Jerusalem was taken and allowed him to choose whether to go with the Jewish captives to Babylon or to remain with Gedaliah and the people left in Judah to till the land (Jer. 39:11-14; 40:1-6). He chose to stay with the remnant of Judah. After Gedaliah was assassinated by a royalist (Jer. 41-42), the prophet advised the remnant Jews to abide in Judah and not go to Egypt, as some wanted to do. They rejected the advice, refusing to believe it was really from the Lord, and went to Egypt, taking Jeremiah with them. There he prophesied that Babylon would also conquer Egypt (Jer. 43; 46). He prophesied that the Jewish remnant there would perish not only because they had rejected the Lord's word but because many believed they had been better off when they worshipped "the queen of heaven" (Jer. 44:17-19). They turned again to worshipping idols in Egypt (Jer. 44:8, 15, 23). Only a small number would survive and escape back to Judah to bear witness of Jeremiah's words (Jer. 44:28-30).

The fate of the prophet thereafter is not known, though legends in the British Isles have asserted that he and the daughters of Zedekiah (Jer. 41:10; 43:6) migrated there from Egypt. It is further said that those daughters married there, and their lineage is still shown in certain royal genealogies.

Commentary

1:1-3 The words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah, of the priests that were in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin: To whom the word of the Lord came

Jeremiah, like Ezekiel, was a priest (Jer. 1:1; Ezek. 1:3). Anathoth was one of thirteen cities appointed by Joshua for the priests of Aaron among the forty-eight cities designated for the Levites (Josh. 21:18; BD, "Levites"; "Priests"; "Aaronic Priesthood").

The span of the reigns of kings mentioned would point to a mission of forty years for Jeremiah (ca. 626-586 B.C.; Jer. 1:2-3); how long he lived before and after that period is not told.

1:4-19 Then the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations

This passage is one of the few clear revelations about foreordination in the scriptures. It tells of Jeremiah's being sanctified for special service and ordained to be a prophet in his premortal life—in the spirit world, for it happened before his body was even formed (Jer. 1:5 and fn.). Nevertheless, like Moses and Enoch before him, Jeremiah felt inadequate for his calling (Jer. 1:6a). The Lord assured him he would be able to go where divinely sent and speak what he would be commanded to speak, but he must not be afraid. The Lord touched Jeremiah's mouth and assigned him six difficult tasks as a reformer (Jer. 1:6-10 and fn.).

As a reminder that the Lord would fulfill Jeremiah's prophecies, the almond tree was given as a symbol; the Hebrew letters of its name (shqd) are the same letters as the word for "be alert, wakeful"; thus whenever Jeremiah saw that tree (which is the earliest tree to bloom in Israel), he would be reminded of the promise that the Lord would be attentive to his prophecies and fulfill his words (Jer. 1:11-12; BD, "Almond").

As a symbol of the main threat of invasion at the time, the Lord showed the prophet a cooking pot, facing north. Babylon, with the nations already conquered and pressed into her service, would come from the upper Euphrates valley and attack Judah from the north, by way of Damascus. Jeremiah was to warn of invasion and remind Judah that the only way to safety was through repentance and prayer to the Lord (Jer. 1:13-16).

The prophet was challenged to be bold and was promised the Lord's protection though he be set against kings, princes, priests, and people, and they against him; for they would not be allowed to "prevail" (Jer. 1:17-19). As noted later, however, he was not shielded from opposition and persecution.

2:1-37 Israel was holiness unto the Lord. . . . What iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me

Israel had been quite well prepared in Joshua's time to enter the promised land and become a "kingdom of priests, and an holy nation" as the Lord and Moses had intended (Ex. 19:4-6; Josh. 1). But in the nine hundred years thereafter, their spiritual condition had been up and down many times. During Hezekiah's reign and Isaiah's ministry, northern Israel was conquered and exiled; Judah, however, hearkened to the king and the prophet and was saved by the Lord from Assyria's siege (2 Kgs. 17-20).

The "fathers" mentioned in this prophecy may have been those of the long, idolatrous reign of Hezekiah's son Manasseh and grandson Amon (ca. 697-640 B.C.; 2 Kgs. 21; cf. Jer. 15:4). Many of the evils Jeremiah condemned and fought against throughout his mission were the religious and social sins made common in that fifty-seven year period. The reforms of King Josiah no doubt had some good effects; but just as good character grows like a tree and evil multiplies like weeds, so did Judah slip back into evil ways after Josiah's death.

In his opening charge, the prophet Jeremiah reprimanded Judah for forgetting past blessings and for failing to turn to the Lord for future blessings needed. Negligent priests and false prophets were partly to blame, but so were the people.

Jeremiah ridiculed idolatry and chided Judah for having "changed their gods." In this matter they had been more fickle than the idol-worshipping people who clung to their "gods." His metaphor equated the true God and his blessings to a spring of living waters and idolatry to a cistern (a container for water storage)—indeed, a broken cistern. A spring ("fountain") produces water, but a cistern can only give out what has been put in, and a broken cistern would lose even that (Jer. 2:11-13).

He ridiculed Judah's turning to decadent Egypt or to Assyria for help. Had the Israelites forgotten the Lord's defense of them during all the centuries past? Had they forgotten his planting them in the promised land, expecting them to bear fruit? Could they ever wash sin away with harsh cleansers, turn from idolatry and from indulging their sensual urges, cease from enjoying carnal things? Evidently not, for they showed love of strangers' ways and said "after them will I go" (Jer. 2:14-25).

He ridiculed the Israelites' considering wood or stone as fathers or creators and challenged the people to turn to those wooden or stone "gods" for help. He pleaded with them to repent, turn to the Lord, and not contend with Him. Yet, though they suffered, they would not return.

With a metaphor likening idolatry to adultery, Jeremiah ended this discourse by calling attention to Israel's perfidy as the Lord's bride. He showed evidence of their infidelity and their denial of guilt. Their hope of aid from Egypt or Assyria against Babylon was fruitless; they would go out of their lands as exiles, with their hands bound over their heads (Jer. 2:31-37).

3:1-11 thou hast played the harlot with many lovers; yet return again to me, saith the Lord

Although a husband seldom returns to a divorced wife, yet if Judah repented and called upon God, He would take her back. The Lord would not retain his anger forever, even though she had "spoken and done evil things" (Jer. 3:1-5). In a sense, northern Israel was less blameworthy than "her treacherous sister Judah," for Judah had the example of Israel's apostasy and exile as a warning. Even in King Josiah's reforms, Judah had not turned to the Lord sincerely but only superficially.

3:12-25 Go and proclaim these words toward the north, and say, Return, thou backsliding Israel, saith the Lord; . . . and I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion

The Lord turned the prophet's attention from his failing nation to the future Israel, proclaiming in the direction of northern Israel's exile an invitation to return through repentance. Although but "one of a city, and two of a family" responded, "Zion" would commence to be built (Jer. 3:12-14). Family can mean the extended family, or clan, and thus be a very large unit; it is often used in that way (e.g., Jer. 1:15; 8:3; 25:9).

In the future Zion, the Lord's shepherds ("pastors") will do what Israel's leaders anciently should have done, but the ark of the covenant and worship procedures associated with it will not be revived. All nations will be gathered unto the Lord, and thus the mission of Abraham will be fulfilled. Judah and the ten tribes of Israel will again be united, and all will worship the Father forever. In anticipation and yearning for that day, Jeremiah again lamented the apostasy ("as a wife treacherously departeth from her husband"), heard her voice of weeping, and declared that salvation is only through the Lord. He even spoke for Israel a confession of error, disobedience, and shame (Jer. 3:20-25).

4:1-18 If thou wilt return, O Israel, saith the Lord, return unto me

The prophet's appeal for repentance and renewal of covenants continued. People must recultivate their minds and cease sowing "among thorns"; using another metaphor, Jeremiah urged them to circumcise their hearts, symbolizing a cleansing and recommitment. The alternative was to assemble defenses, for the destroyer was on his way and defenders would faint before him. Under that option the prophet spoke with irony about the Lord's promises of peace to earlier Israel, for surely the invader would be like a dry wind from the east, which destroys. Once again the prophet pleaded for repentance from the ways and doings that had procured such destruction for them.

4:19-31 I am pained at my very heart; . . . Destruction upon destruction is cried; . . . I beheld the earth, and, lo, it was without form, and void; and the heavens, and they had no light

Jeremiah saw the decline and fall of Judah as a vision of the end of the world, a return to chaos as it was before the earth was organized (Jer. 4:23a-b). But the Lord assured him this would not yet be "a full end." In the closing verses, the prophet related his vision of ultimate destruction to the immediate ills and their results. The people of Jerusalem would be fleeing before the Babylonian invader and crying out in agony like a woman in travail, because of violence and bloodshed; but death, not life, would come of it.

5:1-31 Run ye to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and know, . . . if there be any that executeth judgment, that seeketh the truth; and I will pardon it

The Lord's challenge to Jeremiah to find a righteous person in Jerusalem resembles the impossibility faced by Abraham over Sodom thirteen centuries before, when he hoped to save Lot's family, pleading with the Lord to save that city if even ten righteous people could be found in it (Jer. 5:1a). The Lord, in mercy, did save Lot and some of his family; and in Jerusalem of the time of Jeremiah and Lehi, He guided a few righteous souls to safety, but because too few could be found to preserve the city, Jerusalem would be destroyed (Jer. 5:1, 7, 10-11, 19-21, 25-27; cf. 1 Ne. 1:4-7, 18-20). In Jerusalem of Jeremiah's day, negligent judges ignored injustices, false prophets mollified the people, and priests took authority by their own hand—and the people liked it so.

6:1-30 this is the city to be visited; she is wholly oppression in the midst of her. As a fountain casteth out her waters, so she casteth out her wickedness: violence and spoil is heard in her

The theme of chapter 6, stated in verses 6 and 7, introduces a multifaceted condemnation of Jerusalem and Judah. First, the people of Benjamin were addressed; they lived in the suburbs of Jerusalem and in areas toward the northwest, west, and southwest.

In the face of the great destroyer coming from the north, Jerusalem would be as "a comely and delicate woman." A brief symbolic dialogue characterized the invasion, and decrees were issued against Jerusalem because of her evils. The thoroughness of the gleaning was depicted. Those most blameworthy in causing, or in failing to halt, the decay were again identified as the false prophets and priests who reassured the people of "peace, peace; when there [was] no peace." And these were "not at all ashamed" (Jer. 6:1-15).

The people were also blamed for refusing to stand in the old ways and to seek good ways; they rejected the watchmen who did arise to warn them. So unto all was the punishment of Jerusalem. Offerings would not stop it, and escape from the great invading nation coming out of the north country would be impossible.

Finally, the Lord urged His errant people to lament, for though the prophet had been set as a tower to warn and a fortress to defend them, the fire of the smelter of His chastisement had not purified them; they were as rejected silver, and so the Lord must reject them.

7:1-16 Thus saith the Lord . . . Amend your ways and your doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place

The variety of appeals and declamations following one upon another in Jeremiah's book make it evident that it is a collection of his speeches from time to time and place to place during the years of his ministry. There was no one time and place when he could once and for all present the charges against his decadent people, call them to repentance, and proffer them God's merciful desires to take them back. He had to warn them of the terrible alternatives, and he tried again and again.

This time, the prophet was asked to "stand in the gate of the Lord's house" and proclaim his message to temple worshippers to amend their ways and doings and become just. They could not assume that by going to the temple and making perfunctory sacrifices in it, they could be excused from repenting. They must learn to do good and cease to do evil. They must not make the temple "a den of robbers" and hope to hide in it, thinking it would not be destroyed. They should remember that the tabernacle at Shiloh had not saved Israel from the Philistines but was destroyed for Israel's wickedness. If the people would not change, Judah would be cast out, just as Ephraim (northern Israel) had been cast out (Jer. 7:1-15, 12a).

7:17-28 Seest thou not what they do in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem?

The Lord called the prophet's attention to the people's worship of the "queen of heaven" and to their continuing failure to perform the proper sacrificial ordinances. Hence they must feel the outpouring of His anger.

7:29-34 O Jerusalem, . . . take up a lamentation . . . for the children of Judah have done evil in my sight

Jeremiah urgently appealed for repentance from Judah's gross apostasy and idolatry in offering their sons and daughters in human sacrifice at Tophet, in the valley of Hinnom southeast of Jerusalem. The Lord had never required human sacrifice. For this evil Judah would be destroyed as if by predators. If the Lord withdrew from them, all joy and mirth would cease and the land would be desolate.

8:1-22 bring out the bones . . . out of their graves: And they shall spread them before the sun, and the moon, and all the host of heaven, whom they have loved . . . and whom they have worshipped

The dire predictions of the previous chapter continue. Even the dead will be dishonored by the invaders, and that dishonor will not be ameliorated by the idol gods they have worshipped. For the survivors, death will be more to be desired than life.

The Lord asked why this people of Jerusalem were perpetually backsliding. A man who falls may rise, and one who turns away may return; why would not the wicked repent? Birds know the season to return home; why not people? Why do not the wise and learned in the law know what they must do? They must lose their homeland because false priests and prophets take the dangers lightly, saying "Peace, peace; when there is no peace." Such have not done their duty and "shall be cast down" (Jer. 8:1-12; cf. 6:14).

Lacking justification to save them, the Lord would "consume them." The leaderless people would seek refuge in vain. They had unrealistically looked for peace and health, though the Lord had told them how near the trouble was. The prophet was pained at heart because it was so, for he knew they could have turned to the Lord before the harvest was past and the summer ended—before it was too late to repent. The Lord and the prophet were grieved because of them; they had not used the healing balm of repentance, and their leaders had not been physicians concerned with helping them recover their spiritual health.

9:1-26 Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people

Speaking for himself and for the Lord, the prophet uttered an elegiac lament; tears were inadequate to express the tragedy of it all. The lies, mistrust, slander, and deceit should not have prevailed among this people; but they did prevail, and none repented. Idolatry flourished, and bitter experiences would come when the people would be exiled. Because the Lord and the prophet could not persuade the people to repent, the mourners were summoned, for death would come into their windows, even into palaces, destroying children and young men in the houses and in the streets and also in the fields.

None of that terror was what the Lord wanted, but it had come in spite of Him; hence He desired that none would glory in wisdom, might, or riches but only in learning that His way is to "exercise lovingkindness, judgment, and righteousness"; in such things He delights. But what became of Judah is what will become of all the wicked world at last.

10:1-25 the customs of the people are vain: for one cutteth a tree out of the forest. . . . They deck it with silver and with gold; they fasten it with nails . . . that it move not

"Learn not the way of the heathen" the prophets from Moses on had preached; but such idolatrous vain-glory as the decorated tree (or idol) here described always attracts worshippers. It was amazing to Jeremiah, as it is to us, that speechless and powerless idols can replace the living God in the hearts of human beings. The contrast between the true God who "is the living God, and an everlasting king" and the "gods that have not made the heavens and the earth" should have decided that contest in all the ages past, but even to the present it has not done so. Therefore, because of vanity and mockery, people lose their heritage (Jer. 10:1-18).

The prophet lamented the loss of homes and people, the failure of leaders, and the imminent invasion. He uttered for the land a supplication for guidance, correction, justice—and hoped that at last the Lord's wrath would turn upon the heathen.

11:1-23 The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying, Hear ye the words of this covenant

In contrast to the previous castigations, calls for repentance, and forecasts of calamity, the prophet reminded Israel of the Lord's covenants and promises and His help in bringing them out of Egypt unto the land of their inheritance, a land "flowing with milk and honey." He reminded them also of prophetic admonitions and warnings since then in their land, so often ignored by the people. He told them the Lord had revealed to him their "conspiracy" of evil and intent to turn back to the idolatrous ways of their forefathers, and he disclosed the evils that would come upon them as a result of their idolatrous worship. Prayers for them and temple worship by them would be futile. They had been the Lord's "beloved" and his "green olive tree," but because they had neither reciprocated nor produced, they would be destroyed.

The prophet told of a plot against him, revealed to him by the Lord. He had been "like a lamb or an ox that is brought to the slaughter" without knowing that the people of his own home city, Anathoth, had planned to kill him. He left vengeance to the Lord, who promised that they who had forbidden him to prophesy, lest he die by their hand, would themselves die by the sword and by famine in Anathoth in "the year of their visitation" (Jer. 11:18-23). Compare Jesus' words about His rejection in Nazareth (Matt. 13:54-58).

12:1-17 Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper? Wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously?

Jeremiah's guarded question about the apparent material prosperity of the wicked is not an uncommon question, even among prophets (Jer. 12:1-4; cf. Job 24; Ps. 35:17-28; Hab. 1:2-4: D&C 121:1-6; 122:5-9). The answer is not comforting: in this world of agency for every soul, some will find ways to get gain unjustly. But if one is dismayed by the small things, he may not survive the deeper and the larger problems. The prophet's disturbed feeling about the prosperity of the wicked was transcended by the Lord's sorrow over the prevalence of wickedness among His people and especially among their leaders. Their wickedness made it necessary to let the "spoilers" come upon the land. Yet again, the Lord gave assurance of ultimate justice, including removal of the oppressors and restoration of repentant people to their heritage. Any others who will covenant in His name may "be built in the midst" of His people.

13:1-27 Take the girdle . . . go to Euphrates, and hide it there in a hole of the rock. . . . it came to pass after many days that the Lord said unto me, Arise, go to Euphrates, and take the girdle from thence, . . . and, behold, the girdle was marred, it was profitable for nothing

Euphrates, which is used here to translate the Hebrew Prath, was possibly a city of that name north of Jeremiah's home, but the name could symbolize the great Euphrates valley, nearly three hundred miles away, where Judah would be in bondage for many years. The symbolism of the demonstration is clear.

With another metaphor, the Lord decried the existing social and religious decadence of Judah and warned the people, king, and queen to humble themselves and repent lest they suffer.

If the prophet and those who heard him wondered why destruction could not be avoided, the reply was that repentance and change for the better is as difficult as changing the color of a man's skin or a leopard's spots.

14:1-22 The word of the Lord that came to Jeremiah concerning the dearth

A cyclical drought must have been particularly severe at some time during Jeremiah's ministry, for this chapter records his supplicating "the hope of Israel, the saviour thereof" for relief. It reports the Lord's negative response because of the people's unworthiness.

One cause of the people's ambivalence had been false prophets who prophesied comforting lies in the name of the Lord, although he had "sent them not." The Lord assured Jeremiah that such prophets would themselves be consumed by famine and the sword along with their followers, but their destruction was also a cause for the Lord to mourn and lament.

Apparently there were some yet in Jerusalem who listened to the messages of the Lord and the true prophet, for they sought the Lord's forgiveness and salvation from drought and famine—for they knew no power among the gentiles could save them.

15:1-9 Then said the Lord unto me, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be toward this people

Responding to the supplications of the prophet and some of the people of Jerusalem that they might be spared, the Lord told the prophet that regardless of the appeals—even if joined by such former prophets as Moses and Samuel—Judah could not thereby be saved. Both Moses and Samuel had in their times gained a reprieve for their people (Ex. 32:30-35; 1 Sam. 7), but their people had repented; few—if any—were genuinely repentant in Jeremiah's time. Seeking blessings through the merits of renowned leaders is justifiable only for humble, worthy people.

Part of the blame belonged to wicked King Manasseh for having reversed the reforms of his father, Hezekiah. The people's responsibility lay in their having gone backwards in their way of life; that is, instead of teaching others, they had learned and lived the ways of the people among whom they dwelt (Jer. 15:1-6; cf. Isa. 1:4; 2 Kgs. 21; and commentary). As a result, they would be fanned like grain at threshing time and carried away as useless chaff is carried away by the wind. Many would be widowed, and sadly, as always, widowed mothers would suffer from the terrors of military actions.

15:10-21 Woe is me, my mother, that thou hast borne me a man of strife and a man of contention

The prophecy about the widowed mothers seems to have led the prophet to lament his own mother's having borne him to see such suffering and to suffer persecution himself at the hands of those whom he had tried to save. The Lord assured him the enemy (Babylon) would treat him better than his own people had, though for others the "iron and the steel" of that invader would not be soft. His people's substance and treasure would become spoil, and they would pass into unknown lands. That warning is phrased as if it pertained to the prophet's own substance and treasure, but that meaning is corroborated nowhere else. The Hebrew of the passage is difficult, and so the translation is debatable.

So depressed was Jeremiah that he seems to have retired for a time from the work. He sought more comfort from the Lord, reviewed his efforts and its negative results, and spoke of his "perpetual" pain. The Lord had promised him protection when he called him as a prophet, and he frankly wondered whether the promise would be fulfilled. To this the Lord responded that if he would return to his work and separate "the precious from the vile" in his thoughts and spirit, he would continue as the Lord's prophet and would be sustained as he had been promised (cf. Jer. 1:17-20).

16:1-13 The word of the Lord came also unto me, saying, Thou shalt not take thee a wife, neither shalt thou have sons or daughters in this place

Another sacrifice was required of Jeremiah: he would live and work alone, without a wife for a companion or children for comfort in the future. In so doing, he would emphasize the warning that many sons and daughters, wives and mothers, would "die of grievous deaths," with none to lament or bury them when the invader came. He might have had a family and they could have received supernatural protection, but that kind of charmed life is seldom provided for prophets (Jer. 16:1-4; cf. TG, "Suffering"; "Prophets, Rejection of").

A horrible picture of death, decay, bereavement, and despair had to be communicated to the people. If the people asked why such horrible events should come, the prophet was to recite their guilt and that of their forefathers and give them the ultimatum.

16:14-21 it shall no more be said, The Lord liveth, that brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; But, the Lord liveth, that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from all the lands whither he had driven them

Yet glorious hopes for the future were extended to Judah by the Lord through Jeremiah. Seldom are dire prophetic predictions given and a hopeless picture left without the future hope also being extended. That gives hope to those who believe and testifies to those who doubt that the Lord's program for earth will eventually be implemented.

"The land of the north" was the unspecified area to which the departing exiles went. It became a name for the lands of the lost tribes, and modern revelation so uses it; nevertheless, prophecies make it clear that Israel will be gathered from east, west, north, and south, and from islands of the sea (TG, "Israel, Gathering of"; D&C 133:18-30, esp. v. 26). The gathering, one by one, by "fishers" and "hunters" searching the mountains, hills, and holes in the rocks (Jer. 16:16 and fn. a) is the mode of operation for missionaries of the latter-day restored Church.

The conversions of "Gentiles" as well as the blood of Israel will bring fulfillment of the mission of Abraham's seed (Jer. 16:19-21; TG, "Abrahamic Covenant").

17:1-11 The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond: it is graven upon the table of their heart, and upon the horns of your altars

Instruments for engraving on metal had metaphorically engraved the hard hearts and the altars of apostate Israel, and because they continued their idolatry, they were losing their land and spiritual heritage (Jer. 17:1-4; on the craft of engraving, see 1 Ne. 3:3; BD, "Engraving").

Trusting in man, or the arm of flesh, rather than trusting in God brought no safety or salvation. Trust in the Lord, or faith in him, is the way to obtain hope, blessings, sustenance, and inner peace. Symbolic language conveys that assurance (Jer. 17:5-11; TG, "Trust Not in the Arm of Flesh").

17:12-18 O Lord, the hope of Israel, all that forsake thee shall be ashamed . . . Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed; save me, and I shall be saved

This lovely prayer by Jeremiah is filled with good thoughts and expressions useful to any in praying and worshipping the Lord.

17:19-27 Thus saith the Lord; Take heed to yourselves, and bear no burden on the sabbath day

An admonition on keeping the Sabbath day holy—fidelity to which commandment indicates fidelity to the Lord and his law—is like the teachings of Isaiah and of modern prophets. Naturally, the results of desecrating the Sabbath are also noted (Isa. 58:13-14; D&C 59:9-24; TG, "Sabbath").

18:1-17 Arise, and go down to the potter's house, and there I will cause thee to hear my words

The metaphor likening the potter's shaping pliable clay to the Lord's trying to shape His people is simple and vivid; the correlative fact is implicit that pottery, once dried and fired, cannot be reshaped. This denunciation of Israel is resumed in the next chapter (Jer. 18:6-12; 19:11; cf. Isa. 45:9). The symbolism of forsaking the pure waters from on high is also vivid (Jer. 18:14-15; cf. 2:13; TG, "Living Water"). The warning of exile and scattering is plain.

18:18-23 Then said they, Come, and let us devise devices against Jeremiah

The reasons for rejecting the prophet Jeremiah were the usual ones: his teachings were different from those of the priests, "wise" men, and popular "prophets." Jeremiah's bitter reactions may have been intensified by the threats and oppression under which he lived (Jer. 18:19ff.; cf. 20; 26; 37; 44; 1 Ne. 1:4, 13, 18-20).

19:1-15 Thus saith the Lord, Go and get a potter's earthen bottle, and take of the ancients of the people, and of the ancients of the priests; And go forth unto the valley of the son of Hinnom

The pottery jug is breakable, for it is no longer pliable clay. The valley of Hinnom was the place where idolatrous altars and images had long been established, and the worst of Israel's apostate practices were enacted there. It was also a place for dumping refuse, sometimes called Tophet (BD, "Hinnom, valley of"; "Gehenna"; "Topheth").

Jeremiah took with him certain elders to hear his condemnation of human sacrifice, a horror never to be resorted to, much less used in worship of the Lord (Jer. 19:1-7, 5a). The prophet made dire predictions of parallel horrors to develop under siege and broke the pottery jug as a sign that neither it nor the idolater could be reshaped, hence they would be broken and cast away. Grim predictions of starvation, death, and conflagration followed; and history shows that all those horrors came with the Babylonian invasion. Why did the Lord not prevent it? He could not do so and preserve principles of agency and law in His world. With their agency, the people had "hardened their necks, that they might not hear [his] words" (Jer. 19:8-15).

20:1-18 Then Pashur smote Jeremiah the prophet, and put him in the stocks that were in the high gate of Benjamin, which was by the house of the Lord

A senior officer at the temple was brazen enough to "smite" the prophet, confine him in a device that holds the body in a distorted position, and keep him there overnight in a public place—all because of his prophecies. Undaunted, Jeremiah renamed him "terror all around"; the name Pashur appears to have meant something like "prosperity all around"—quite the opposite of his new name (Jer. 20:3a). He prophesied Pashur would suffer terror with the exiles and die in Babylon; the royal house would fare no better (Jer. 20:4-6).

Jeremiah's integrity held throughout the rejection and physical abuse he suffered, but he was not happy in his lonely and stressful calling. He had been reluctant to undertake it but had been persuaded by the Lord to do so (Jer. 20:7a; cf. 1:17-19). He felt that he had aroused only reproach and derision, yet his convictions were so strong that he could not forbear preaching repentance. In response he heard plotting and "fear on every side" (the same words in Hebrew as the new name he gave Pashur); and people watched for a reason to take revenge on him (Jer. 20:8-10). On the other hand, he was confident that the Lord would defend him and avenge his suffering; therefore, he praised and thanked the Lord, even though he lamented at times as Job had (Jer. 20:11-18; cf. Job 3:3-4).

This masterpiece in the biblical prophetic literature displays pressures and afflictions experienced by a prophet.

21:1-14 The word which came unto Jeremiah from the Lord, when king Zedekiah sent unto him Pashur the son of Melchiah . . . saying, Enquire, I pray thee, of the Lord for us; for Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon maketh war against us

This account seems a surprising change from the narrative of the preceding chapter, but this Pashur is of a different family. Furthermore, it will be seen later that the king of Judah really wanted information from the prophet but was afraid to let his court know about it (cf. Jer. 37).

The king's receptiveness was not seen by the prophet as repentance unto salvation, however, and the message from the Lord was that He would "fight against" the king and deliver him and his people into the hand of the invaders. The only way to save their lives at this juncture was to surrender to the Chaldeans (Babylonians) and not try to resist.

The last part of this prophecy was addressed to the royal house and to Jerusalem, though the metaphors are unusual; the "inhabitant of the valley" and the "rock of the plain" may have symbolized both the lowly and the high and mighty. The admonition to the government to do justice and deliver the oppressed was the same message as usual—and so were the consequences if the leaders would not heed the admonishment (Jer. 21:11-14).

22:1-30 Hear the word of the Lord, O king of Judah

Amplification of a previous message to the "house of David" is provided in a review of prophetic warnings to three kings of Judah who succeeded King Josiah and reigned in sequence before Zedekiah (Jer. 22:2-9; cf. 21:11-14). A prophecy to Shallum (or Jehoahaz, son of Josiah) had warned that death was to be desired rather than exile, but he was gone and could never return. Next is the warning that had been given to Jehoiakim, second heir to the good King Josiah. He was reprimanded for a life of opulence and failure to do justice in a time of need, and his ignoble end was predicted (Jer. 22:13-19; cf. Jer. 36). Last is the prophecy about the third king after Josiah, who was not a son but a grandson called Coniah, Jeconiah, and Jehoiachin. He was young and inept and mercifully was not killed but was taken alive to Babylon, where he lived many years. He was even elevated later to be a kind of leader in exile. The prophet said there was no way to save him or his kingdom in his time and lamented him as "childless" because no son of his would reign in Jerusalem. Nonetheless, his lineage would be preserved and become the ancestry of Joseph and Mary the mother of Jesus (Jer. 22:20-30; 52:31-34 cf. 2 Kgs. 24:8-16; 1 Chr. 3:17-24; Matt. 1:11-12; TG, "Jesus Christ, Davidic Descent of").

The fourth and last king of Judah was Josiah's son Zedekiah.

He was placed on the throne after young King Jehoiachin was exiled, but his reign is not covered by this chapter.

23:1-40 Woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my pasture! saith the Lord

After the first declaration of woe to the bad shepherds of Jeremiah's times, the Lord promised a future restoration with good shepherds and a righteous Branch of the royal line as King. The prophet titled him JHVH Tzidkenu, "Jehovah is our righteousness," and promised restoration of both parts of Israel as a kingdom of peace and safety. This will be the kingdom of the Lord. So phenomenal will the last gathering and restoration be that the deliverance from Egypt under Moses will be eclipsed as the lost tribes gather from the north country and elsewhere (Jer. 23:1-8).

Jeremiah lamented his own times, in which false prophets and priests fostered such wickedness, adultery, lies, and collaboration in evil as had flourished in Sodom and Gomorrah. False prophets promised "peace," but they and the people faced destruction. If they had really taught the Lord's words, they could have saved the people. The Lord is a God near at hand, and He knows what people and prophets do, both false and true.

True prophets will give to the people "wheat," not "chaff," but the Lord's words from them can be like a fire to burn or a hammer to break. False prophets get messages from each other and claim the Lord spoke them. They have dreams not from God and cause people to err by reason of them.

If anyone asked the true prophet, "What is the burden of the Lord?" he would reply with warnings against their wickedness. No other priests, prophets, or people were to present any other "burden" and pretend it was from the Lord (Jer. 23:34-40; burdens are messages of doom "lifted up" against a people).

24:1-10 The Lord shewed me, and, behold, two baskets of figs were set before the temple of the Lord, after that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon had carried away captive Jeconiah

The time of this message was about 598 B.C., which was about two years after Lehi's group escaped from Jerusalem and ten years after King Jehoahaz was killed and Daniel and his friends were taken to Babylon. During that time Jehoahaz's brother Jehoiakim, the father of Jehoiachin, had also been dethroned and killed and young Jehoiachin (Jeconiah) installed. Within the year of the prophecy recorded here, Jehoiachin and yet another group were taken to Babylon, so this prophecy was addressed to the people left in Jerusalem. Those people may have felt that they were good enough to have been spared, but in truth they were likely not good enough to be carried off, for the Babylonian leaders took away the best people of a nation—those with the capacity to organize and to produce. That practice reduced the power of a captive nation and gave the captors more valuable servants (see Dan. 1 and commentary). Thus the vision of two contrasting baskets of figs: the first taken were the best; those remaining were not to feel superior or secure, because they also would go out in time (Jer. 24:8-10).

25:1-38 The word that came to Jeremiah . . . in the fourth year of Jehoiakim . . . , the first year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon

The date of this revelation would be 604 B.C. (BD, "Chronology," p. 639), an ominous year for Judah and for all nations in the path of the Babylonian empire. Note that the prophecies of Jeremiah have not been arranged chronologically; this revelation was received before the preceding four from Zedekiah's time.

The difference between the more familiar Nebuchadnezzar and the variant Nebuchadrezzar is in the transliteration of the Babylonian name Nabu-kudur-usur (BD, "Nebuchadnezzar").

Although the rise of Nebuchadnezzar was threatening, the prophet had little hope that the people of Judah would hearken to his warning because they had not done so during the preceding twenty-three years of his ministry. Indeed, all the prophets of the Lord were sent well in advance of events ("rising early and sending them") to warn the people, but the people had refused to heed his words.

Jeremiah prophesied precisely that Judah and other lands would be subjected to Babylonia for "seventy years" (Jer. 25:8-14); that period ended at the time Cyrus of the Medes and the Persians overthrew Babylon, ca. 536 B.C.). The prophet's vision was then extended to the terrors of the universal reign of wickedness among all nations in the last days. He addressed all nations then known, listing them from south and west to north and east; Sheshach was a code name for Babel. The "city which is called by my name" was the city of the temple, Jerusalem; and from thence the destruction would proceed to all nations (Jer. 25:15-29; cf. D&C 112:25-26).

In keeping with his justice and mercy, the Lord will "plead with all flesh" to repent before destruction comes; but it will be universal. The "shepherds," or leaders of the nations, shall "howl" in desperation, with no place to turn or to flee when the power of the Lord cleanses the earth (Jer. 25:30-38).

26:1-24 In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim . . . came this word from the Lord, saying . . . Stand in the court of the Lord's house, and speak unto all the cities of Judah, which come to worship in the Lord's house, all the words that I command thee

The first of twenty historical chapters that relate many of the prophet's experiences and the persecution he suffered as he continued his mission, chapter 26 dates to five years before the previous chapter, being "in the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim," or 609 B.C. Jeremiah delivered this message from the Lord on the temple grounds, so that the worshippers might repent and be saved. If they would not do so, they might know that they would be overcome and the temple itself destroyed, as was the tabernacle at Shiloh in Eli's time (Jer. 26:6a; BD, "Shiloh"). Again false "priests and the prophets" led the people in objecting to the true prophet, and they actually sought his life; the "princes" of Judah listened as Jeremiah stated his message and made his appeal. With astounding insight, they defended him (Jer. 26:10-19a).

The king had put one prophet to death for such prophesying (see Jer. 26:20a, on the similar danger to Lehi, another prophet of this same time); however, Ahikam, son of Shaphan the scribe of the days of good King Josiah, successfully defended and saved Jeremiah (Jer. 26:20-23a, 24a).

27:1-22 In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim . . . came this word unto Jeremiah from the Lord, saying . . . Make thee bonds and yokes, and put them upon thy neck

Symbolic "bonds and yokes" were to be prepared by the prophet about eleven years before Zedekiah's time and sent to the neighboring nations with the warning that the Lord was permitting Babylon as His "servant" to dominate them for a time (Jer. 27:6-8). The false "prophets" who promised them safety, or said the vessels taken earlier from the temple would soon be returned, were not to be trusted. The way for Zedekiah of Judah to survive was to submit to Babylon. Otherwise, the temple would be destroyed and its vessels, font, and pillars taken away (Jer. 27:9-22; cf. 39; 2 Kgs. 25).

28:1-17 in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah . . . in the fourth year . . . Hananiah the son of Azur the prophet . . . spake unto me in the house of the Lord, . . . I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon

The dramatic exchange between the true prophet and a false one happened at a time when Judah and other nations were considering rebelling against Babylon, who had already invaded them twice, once in 609 B.C. and again in 598. Note the false hopes of Hananiah, the restrained reply by Jeremiah, the dramatic breaking of Jeremiah's symbolic yoke by Hananiah, and then the hard and forthright declaration of Jeremiah. The outcome was conclusive; Hananiah died as Jeremiah had prophesied.

29:1-32 the words of the letter that Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem unto the . . . elders which were carried away captives, and to the priests, . . . prophets, . . . and . . . people . . . carried away captive from Jerusalem

As will be noted in other prophetic books of the time, the Lord did not neglect those in captivity in Babylon: Daniel and Ezekiel were there, and Jeremiah also communicated with the captives. This conciliatory letter was addressed to the exiles, including King Jeconiah and many leading citizens, who were taken to Babylon in 598 B.C. It was sent along with the messengers of Zedekiah to the king of Babylon. It recommended that the captive peoples maintain positive attitudes and actions. It warned against false prophets and predictions, and it promised a return after seventy years. Meanwhile, the exiles would be nourished by the word of the Lord and by "thoughts of peace, and not of evil" (Jer. 29:8-12). A promise (familiar as an aria in Felix Mendelssohn's Elijah) states that any who seek the Lord with all their hearts shall surely find him; indeed, he will gather them.

The prophet warned the people, both at home and in exile, to beware of prophets and priests who were not of the Lord. People still in Jerusalem who were deceived by them would soon find themselves under siege. These had suggested that Jeremiah be put in stocks for telling the people that their captivity would be long and for urging them to seek normal ways of life in Babylon. Jeremiah gave them a revelation from the Lord against false prophets and against false priests (Jer. 29:15; 20-32).

30:1-24 The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying, . . . Write thee all the words that I have spoken unto thee in a book. For lo, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will bring again the captivity of my people Israel and Judah, . . . and I will cause them to return to the land that I gave to their fathers, and they shall possess it

We have such ancient prophetic books as the book of Jeremiah because the Lord commanded that they be written; in them are recorded prophecies for the latter days so that the people who had sinned and were exiled would know that their latter-day descendants would fulfill the mission of Abraham and Israel and that the Lord's purposes would be accomplished.

Jeremiah spoke of Israel and Judah as if they were two peoples, because they had been two nations since the division of the kingdom after Solomon's reign on through the loss of the ten tribes and the captivity of Judah and they would be separate until the latter-day gathering.

The times of "trembling, of fear, and not of peace" before the day of deliverance are in the latter days. The time of peace and salvation is to come in the messianic kingdom. Humankind could not cure their own ills, and Israel's idol gods, far from being any help to anyone, had been a major cause of their rejection. Their sorrows would be incurable but for the Lord; He will heal and restore the outcasts whom people denigrate, scoffing at their "Zion."

"I will bring again the captivity" means, "I will return the captives." The city of Jerusalem, its dwellings, and citadel shall be restored. A lovely picture of joy and thanksgiving in those timesis given when all shall have a renewed relationship with the Lord. It is contrasted with an opposite picture of the fate of the wicked in the latter days.

31:1-40 At the same time, saith the Lord, will I be the God of all the families of Israel, and they shall be my people

This statement, which ends the previous chapter in the Hebrew scriptures (to avoid its ending with negative predictions), expresses the theme of chapter 31. It anticipates divine loving kindness, the gathering of Israel and Judah, the establishment of Zion, the restoration of spiritual fruitfulness, and the establishment of a new covenant. Pure joy in the restoration of Zion is symbolized by the virgins, the young men, and the old—all singing and dancing. Abundant sacrifices in thanksgiving respond to goodness from the Lord.

The next section harks back to the tragic times of the apostasy and loss of the northern ten tribes. "Ramah" is a point south of Jerusalem, looking toward Bethlehem; it is still called Ramat Rachel ("height of Rachel"), in memory of the death of Rachel, wife of Jacob, because she bore her last baby near that point and died. The original concept of her mourning for her children arose from the captivity of the ten tribes (whose leader was the birthright tribe of Ephraim, son of Joseph, son of Rachel and Jacob). This prophecy ends with anticipation of their return. Matthew adapted the words to characterize the lamentation in nearby Bethlehem after the slaughter of the innocents by Herod (Jer. 31:15-17; Matt. 2:1-2, 16-18).

Following Ephraim's "bemoaning himself," the prophet indicated that the Lord is aware of both their sorrow and their repentance and will speed the return of Ephraim and the others. The righteousness of those latter-day generations of Israel shall exceed that of the former who departed.

Judah too appeared in the prophet's vision of the return. With an anticipation of the new place of the true government and temple of God, the prophet "awoke" from the vision that must indeed have been sweet to him.

Then Jeremiah recorded the Lord's promises to "sow" Judah and Israel again with people and animals. At last the prophet could enjoy the other part of his mission—"to build, and to plant." The adage that the children suffer for the parents' deeds will no longer be heard; all will know that they are accountable only for their own sins.

The new covenant of the latter days will not be a set of standards imposed externally but an internal set, with individuals' minds and hearts committed to right and justice.

In conclusion, the prophet foresaw the establishment of the kingdom of God on earth for a time of peace forever, and ordinances of the new covenant will remain like the ordained motions of sun, moon, and stars.

32:1-44 The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord in the tenth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, which was the eighteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar. For then the king of Babylon's army besieged Jerusalem

Significant incidents occurred in the life of the prophet at the beginning of Babylon's last siege of Jerusalem (ca. 587-586 B.C.; Jer. 37). Jeremiah had been remanded to "the court of the prison" for continually predicting Judah's inevitable overthrow by Babylon unless the king and people repented. A cousin of Jeremiah asked him to redeem some property of his family in Anathoth. After asking the Lord about it, Jeremiah did so as a symbolic act, signifying that though the Lord had said Judah would be captured, yet "houses and fields and vineyards shall be possessed again in this land" (Jer. 32:1-15).

With many avowals of faith that the Lord could do anything, the prophet asked for reassurance, and the word of the Lord came again, reaffirming that indeed nothing is "too hard" for the Lord. Though He would give Judah into the hands of the Chaldeans (Babylonians), He would bring them back to be His people again, and He would be their God. Then fields shall indeed be bought again, as symbolized by Jeremiah's act. The whole land shall be inhabited and productive at last.

33:1-26 Moreover the word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah the second time, while he was yet shut up in the court of the prison, saying, . . . I will cause the captivity of Judah and the captivity of Israel to return, and will build them, as at the first

Some words from Jeremiah while in prison, and some from an earlier prophecy, seem to have inspired part of the third verse of the latter-day hymn "How Firm a Foundation" (Hymns [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985], no. 85; Jer. 30:10-11; 33:7).

The theme of restoration continues, promising the gathering of Judah and Israel and their establishment as a unified, righteous kingdom at last, with a divine "Branch" descended from David as King to "execute judgment and righteousness" (Jer. 33:7-18). The promise of these actions is as sure as the sequences of day and night and the order of the heavens and earth.

34:1-22 The word which came unto Jeremiah from the Lord, when Nebuchadnezzar . . . and all his army, and all the kingdoms of the earth of his dominion, and all the people, fought against Jerusalem, and against all the cities thereof

These are prophetic words and political actions from the last days of Jerusalem, 588 to 586 B.C. Jeremiah gave the king one more warning and promise as the siege was being prepared against his fortress cities—Jerusalem, Lachish, and Azekah. The king and people were by that time fearful enough that they made a token repentance, freeing their fellow Hebrews who were in bondage to them, as the law of Moses required. Society had become polarized into the rich and the poor. If a poor family could not pay their rent and taxes, part or all of the family could be taken into servitude for the debt.

Then Jerusalem had a little respite from the siege when Babylon heard that Egypt was sending an army to oppose their further advance. It may have been this respite that permitted the rich and powerful in Jerusalem to void their repentant acts and take their servants back (Jer. 34:1-16; 37:5; Ex. 21:1-6; Deut. 15:7-15). Consequently, a more stringent prophecy was issued by the Lord through the prophet, who declared, ironically, "Behold, I proclaim a liberty for you": they would have liberty from serving the Lord and would go "to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine." Alluding to the covenant of Abraham under which they should have been living, the Lord declared that His protection of them was voided; Judah would be "a desolation without an inhabitant" (Jer. 34:16-22, 18a-b).

35:1-19 The word which came unto Jeremiah from the Lord in the days of Jehoiakim . . . saying, Go unto the house of the Rechabites, and speak unto them

This revelation came much earlier than those preceding (see Jer. 27, which records a revelation from Jehoiakim's time).

The Rechabites, here presented as an example for Judah, were descendants of Hobab, the brother-in-law of Moses. He served as a guide to Israel in the wilderness, and his people were given an inheritance in the promised land with Israel. The Druze people of Lebanon, Syria, and Israel have traditions connecting them back to those ancient people (Jer. 35:2a; BD, "Kenites").

The Rechabites' exemplary behavior was their obedience to the teachings of the law and of their forefathers. They would not drink wine, even wine offered them in the temple. They had abandoned their traditional tents and come to Jerusalem because of the Babylonian threat; but on account of their integrity, they were given a prophetic promise of preservation.

In contrast, neither northern Israel nor Judah had kept the law, nor had they hearkened to the prophetic messages from the Lord. They had therefore forfeited divine protection and were doomed to exile in Babylon.

36:1-32 in the fourth year of Jehoiakim . . . this word came unto Jeremiah from the Lord, saying, Take thee a roll of a book, and write therein all the words that I have spoken unto thee against Israel, and against Judah, and against all the nations, . . . from the days of Josiah, even unto this day

This event is also from an earlier time. The fourth year of Jehoiakim would have been about 605 B.C. This chapter provides an example of the way Jeremiah's revelations and historical sketches were written and preserved (TG, "Scriptures, Writing of"; "Scriptures, Preservation of"; BD, "Canon). It tells that the prophet used the services of a scribe and indicates the materials used; it also shows the period covered by his writings to this point—about twenty-three years (Jer. 1:1-2; 36:1-2, 18). It tells the purposes of the prophetic writing and shows Jeremiah's situation as he dictated the revelations. It records the response of the servants and princes and the response of the king. Finally, it shows how the copies of revelations destroyed by the king were restored through the prophet.

37:1-21 And Zedekiah the king sent Jehucal . . . and Zephaniah . . . to the prophet Jeremiah, saying, Pray now unto the Lord our God for us

This incident and prophetic warning came in the days of King Zedekiah, at a time of a break in the Babylonian siege (ca. 588 B.C.; Jer. 35:1-5; 34:10-11). It seems surprising that the king would finally ask the prophet to pray in behalf of Judah; it is possible that he hoped the Babylonians would be beaten by the Egyptians and the temporary lifting of the siege would become permanent. Neither Judah nor the king was worthy of such a blessing, however, and the answer from the Lord was another condemnation and message of doom.

When the prophet sought a little respite out of the city, he was apprehended, accused of deserting to the enemy, flogged, and imprisoned. Oddly enough, when the king heard of the incident "many days" later, he sent for the prophet and secretly asked again for the word of the Lord. Even though the word was still that he would be overthrown by Babylon, he granted the prophet's request that he not be returned to the dungeon. Jeremiah remained in protective custody (with food provided) in "the court of the prison," where he was involved in events discussed in earlier chapters (Jer. 37:11-21; 32:1-2; 33:1).

38:1-28 Therefore the princes said unto the king, We beseech thee, let this man be put to death: for thus he weakeneth the hands of the men of war that remain in this city

Because Jeremiah continued to assert that the Lord would not save Jerusalem and Judah from Babylon and that anyone who wanted to survive must surrender, the leaders insisted that he be put to death. This time King Zedekiah yielded to his evil counselors, and Jeremiah was put in a pit, possibly a cistern, with no water but only some residual sludge in the bottom.

The faith and courage of the Ethiopian Ebed-melech (which means "the king's servant"), is noteworthy, and his practical way of rescuing the prophet admirable. Miraculously, the king allowed the rescue, which must be attributed to divine intervention.

The pitiable king's last consultation with the prophet drew from him the same divine edict: unworthy of protection, he could only surrender. The promise was merciful, for he could thereby live and the city would not be burnt, but the king had no faith in that promise. He feared Jewish defectors among the Babylonians, despite the prophet's reassurances. The interview did end with a plan being made that would keep the prophet out of the hands of his adversaries until the city fell.

39:1-18; 40:1-6 In the ninth year of Zedekiah . . . came Nebuchadrezzar . . . against Jerusalem, . . . And in the eleventh year . . . the city was broken up

The commentary on another account of this event (2 Kgs. 25) gives some details of the tragic devastation of Judah and Jerusalem and demolition of the great temple there—the temple of Solomon, which had been there some four hundred fifty years.

Note again the fate of the leaders and of the king's family. In contrast to their fate, note that the poor, who had often been taken into servitude by the leaders and rich land owners, were given "the vineyards and the fields" by the Babylonian captain of the guard (Jer. 34:8-11; 39:1-10, 6b; 41:10; 43:6). The Babylonians treated the prophet well, as had been promised (Jer. 15:11); further details are given in Jeremiah 41.

Gedaliah, who was appointed by the Babylonians to rule over the Jews remaining in the land, was the son of the same Ahikam who had defended the prophet earlier (Jer. 39:11-14; 26:24; 40:2-5).

An earlier prophecy to Ebed-melech, promising him deliverance, is mentioned (Jer. 39:15-18).

The "testimony" of Nebuzaradan is noteworthy, as is his consideration for the prophet (Jer. 40:1-6).

40:7-16; 41:1-18 Then they came to Gedaliah

Gedaliah was accepted as the leader of the remnant of Judah, and he was fair and conciliatory; the Lord must have brought about his appointment by Nebuzaradan. Even Jews who had taken refuge in neighboring nations to avoid captivity gathered to him. Indeed, when told that an enemy had arisen to destroy him, Gedaliah was such a good and trusting man that he would not believe it (Jer. 40:14-16).

The wicked prevailed, however; with a false show of friendship, Elishama "of the seed royal," with some princes, ate with Gedaliah and then rose up to slay him. All who were with him, and even some who were coming to worship at the ruins of the house of the Lord, were ruthlessly slain.

Nothing is known of the pit "which Asa the king had made," though it may have been part of that good king's defenses of Jerusalem (1 Kgs. 15:21-23). Whatever it was, it gave the assassins time to escape detection for a while. The royalist Ishmael even seized the surviving daughters of King Zedekiah but did not harm them (Jer. 41:10a). The true friends of Gedaliah were unable to catch the killers, but they did rescue those who had been taken captive. It is understandable but unfortunate that the survivors chose to go to Egypt for refuge (Jer. 41:11-18; Jer. 42).

42:1-22 pray for us unto the Lord thy God, even for all this remnant . . . That the Lord thy God may shew us the way wherein we may walk, and the thing that we must do

Johanan and Jezaniah, who had been faithful friends to Gedaliah, appeared to be humble, faithful, and receptive to divine guidance when they asked counsel of the Lord through the prophet; but Jeremiah knew their minds and asked for their promise that they would do what the Lord directed. They said, perhaps intentionally, "pray to the Lord thy God," but he countered, "I will pray unto the Lord your God" (Jer. 42:1-6).

The counsel came that they should not take refuge in Egypt but trust the Lord's promises of safety and mercy in Judah and strongly warned against their plan to flee. The Lord and the prophet knew that Johanan and Jezaniah had not sincerely asked for advice but merely desired consent or confirmation in doing what they had decided to do (Jer. 42:20). The prophet told them that they would die if they pursued their willful way.

43:1-13 Then spake Azariah . . . and Johanan . . . and all the proud men, saying unto Jeremiah, Thou speakest falsely: the Lord our God hath not sent thee to say, Go not into Egypt

Refusing to heed the revelation, the leaders and people chose to go to Egypt. They blamed the prophet's scribe, Baruch, for instigating Jeremiah's opposition to the move. Surprisingly, the prophet and his scribe were taken along by the refugees, as were "the king's daughters." They stopped at Tahpanhes, a fortified border town on an eastern branch of the Nile in the delta (Jer. 43:1-7, 6a). Though the translation is not certain about the meaning of the stones to be hidden outside the entry to the royal house there, Jeremiah's prophecy was essentially about Babylon's coming conquest. Egypt's armies, idols, and people would all suffer the invasion of Nebuchadnezzar (Jer. 43:8-13).

44:1-30 The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the Jews which dwell in the land of Egypt

There were four places in which Jews already dwelt in Egypt; evidently many refugees had fled there before the little group that included Jeremiah. The revelation to them about their faults and sins is similar to a review of evils in Israel written a century and a quarter earlier, at the time of the fall of the northern ten tribes. It is evident that these exiles had not been faithful, were not humbled by their circumstances, and still refused to observe the divine laws (Jer. 44:2-14; cf. 2 Kgs. 17:6-23).

Far from being repentant, the spokesmen among them in Egypt were quite defiant and justified their wives in worshipping "the queen of heaven." They claimed that even in Jerusalem they had had more food when they sacrificed to her.

The prophet responded with a stinging reprimand of them and their forefathers for their idolatry and their perfidious justification of it. He essentially affirmed their excommunication from God and his goodness. Only a small remnant would return to testify of their fate. The prophet gave them, as a certification of his word, a prophecy that Pharaoh Hophra would be conquered by Nebuchadnezzar as Zedekiah had been (Jer. 44:20-30).

45:1-5 The word that Jeremiah the prophet spake unto Baruch

The prophet's faithful friend and scribe, who was also taken into Egypt by the Jewish refugees (Jer. 43:6), lamented their situation there. What "great things" he had hoped for himself is not clear, but the Lord had told him he would come through all trials with his life as his trophy (Jer. 45:3, 5; cf. D&C 9:3-6).

46:1-28 The word of the Lord which came to Jeremiah the prophet against the Gentiles

It was part of the mission of several of the prophets of Israel to warn and instruct other nations ("gentiles") as well. Indeed, it was a small beginning in their role as the seed of Abraham. Much more is yet to be done, for God is concerned with all nations, all peoples.

Jeremiah's messages to other nations are compiled in the next six chapters. In Hebrew, they are mostly in poetry. Some information pertinent to Israel is included within them.

The first message came about five years after King Josiah was killed in opposing the Egyptian armies passing through Israel to do battle against Assyria. It anticipated Egypt's later campaign against Nebuchadnezzar at Carchemish, about 605 B.C., prophesied Pharaoh Necho's defeat there, and anticipated the eventual fall of Egypt to Babylon (Jer. 46:1-12).

The second message may have been received after Jeremiah's arrival in Egypt, ca. 587 B.C. It anticipated Nebuchadnezzar's invasion of Egypt and was a message of doom foretelling the vanquishing of Egyptian forces and the captivity of many of its people: although they were numerous as the trees of a forest, they would be cut down. After a poetic portion on lower Egypt, one prose verse spoke of upper Egypt and another promised that Egypt would be inhabited again (Jer. 46:13-26).

The two closing verses of chapter 46 are a slightly revised repetition of a prophecy of the gathering and return of Israel after her correction and punishment (vv. 27-28; cf. Jer. 30:10-11).

47:1-7 The word of the Lord that came to Jeremiah the prophet against the Philistines

The date of this prophecy is not known. The anticipated destructive forces rising "up out of the north" as a flood were undoubtedly those of Nebuchadnezzar, which would also destroy the Philistine allies, Tyre and Zidon (Jer. 47:4; 25:22). Caphtor (Crete) was the place of origin of the Philistine people. Gaza and Ashkelon were two major Philistine cities along the coast of southern Israel.

48:1-47 Against Moab thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Woe unto Nebo! for it is spoiled

The prophetic prediction of the downfall of Moab is longer than the messages to any other neighboring nation; recall that Isaiah's prophecy concerning Moab was also long, occupying two chapters (Isa. 15-16), and several verses by Jeremiah are similar (Jer. 48:1-47 and fn.). The prophecy includes a lament and some poetic phrases of pity, but it condemns Moab's idolatrous worship of the dread idol, Chemosh (Jer. 48:7, 13, 46). In addition to Nebo (the name of a deity, a mountain, and a city), many cities and places of Moab were appointed for destruction.

The Moabites were the descendants of Lot and one of his daughters (Gen. 19:37), but many other peoples had no doubt blended with them in the intervening thirteen hundred years. In the days of the judges, the family of the Israelites Elimelech and Naomi went to Moab to survive a famine. Later, their Moabite daughter-in-law, Ruth, accompanied Naomi back to Bethlehem and became an ancestress of David (Ruth 1:1-2; 4:17). Later still, when David was being pursued by King Saul, he sent his parents to the king of Moab for safety (1 Sam. 22:3-4). Though there were many other interactions through the years in which Moab and Judah were adversaries, some empathy for the Moabites was expressed by the prophets who pronounced doom upon them (Jer. 48:5-6, 9; 31-40; Isa. 15:1, 4-5; 16:1-5, 9-11).

At the close is a positive view for the latter days, as there was also in Isaiah's prophecy of doom for the Moabites (Jer. 48:47a-b).

49:1-6 Concerning the Ammonites, thus saith the Lord

Like the Moabites, the Ammonites were identified with the family of Lot, nephew of Abraham (Gen. 19:36-38). Their territory was part of what is now the nation of Jordan, whose capital, Amman, retains the ancient name Ammon; it is on the site of ancient Rabbah. Scholars have wondered why a non-Israelite people would be called "backsliding"—a term usually applied to apostasy in Israel; but it is possibly an allusion to their loss of the faith once held by their forefathers. After the prophet's condemnation and prediction of doom, a message of hope for return was given them (Jer. 49:6).

49:7-22 Concerning Edom, thus saith the Lord

Edom was another neighbor and a related people, identified with Esau, brother of Jacob (Jer. 49:7a; BD, "Edom"). Their territory was south of Ammon and Moab, in the valley and on the tablelands south of the Dead Sea. Jeremiah's message is much like that of Obadiah, a contemporary of his, whose short book concerns Edom's doom. Jeremiah offered no comfort to Edom. In spite of her cliff-ringed fortress (possibly the area called Selah, or Petra, meaning "rock"), desolation was predicted for her cities. Idumea is derived from a Greek spelling of the Hebrew word usually rendered Edom. It was later used to symbolize "the wicked world" (BD, "Edom"; "Idumea"; "Selah").

49:23-39 Concerning Damascus . . . Kedar, . . . Hazor, . . . Elam

A short prophecy for three other neighboring peoples and one distant nation completes this chapter.

Damascus, capital of Syria, which had been conquered by Assyria just before the fall of northern Israel, elicited Jeremiah's pity. Part of this prophecy was expressed as if Syria's former inhabitants were speaking (Jer. 49:23-27). Kedar was part of Arabia; Hazor may have been also, although another city by the same name was north of Galilee. Nebuchadnezzar is identified as the destroyer of both (Jer. 49: 28-30, 28a).

Elam was in the south of the Median empire, near the Persian Gulf, and had little contact with Israel or Judah. The prophecy came early in the reign of Zedekiah and, like a few others, ended with a promise of a return of her scattered peoples in the latter days. There must be something symbolic about it and about setting up the Lord's throne in Elam, but that remains to be clarified (Jer. 49:34-39).

50:1-46 The word that the Lord spake against Babylon and against the land of the Chaldeans by Jeremiah the prophet

The land of Babylon, wicked though it was, had been allowed to be the instrument of the destruction of other wicked nations, much as Assyria had been a century and a quarter earlier. It is never implied that because these nations thus served as instruments of the Lord's punishment of others, their own wickedness was condoned. Like Isaiah's prophecies, this chapter clearly points out that truth. The instrument of Babylon's punishment was also a nation to the north: the Medes and the Persians. The return of Judah from Babylon was clearly envisioned, and the gathering of Israel was prophesied. A brief interlude sings praises to the Redeemer of Israel.

Then the implements of Babylon's destruction are named: the sword, drought, and wild beasts would leave her as desolated as Sodom and Gomorrah. Her overthrow by the powerful people from the north (Persia) is described here almost as dramatically as it is in the book of Isaiah (Jer. 50:35-46; Jer. 51; Isa. 13-14).

51:1-64 Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will raise up against Babylon, . . . a destroying wind

This long chapter continues the prophecy on the destruction of Babylon, told in even greater length here than in Isaiah.

The picture of the downfall of Babylon is clear. Some verses have implications for the ultimate destruction of the wicked world in general (e.g., Jer. 51:7-10).

The assembly of nations associated with "the kings of the Medes" were called anciently to do to Babylon what she had done to others. Those who could flee Babylon (or who can get out of the ways of the wicked world) were urged to do so.

A copy of this long prophecy was made to be sent with Seraiah, a brother of Jeremiah's faithful scribe, Baruch, to take into Babylon when Zedekiah was taken. There the prophecy was to be read, and then, with a stone attached, it was to be cast into the Euphrates, symbolizing the ultimate sinking of Babylon, never to rise again (Jer. 51:59-64).

52:1-32 it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadrezzar . . . came . . . So the city was besieged unto the eleventh year of king Zedekiah

This review of the fall of Judah is more detailed than that in Kings (Jer. 39; 2 Kgs. 25; and commentary).

Faithful Jewish people still observe a fast on the ninth day of the month named Ab (in late July to early August) to commemorate the destruction of the first temple (and to remember also the destruction of the second temple).

Although the beautiful temple was broken up and the wood thereof burned, many sacred vessels were taken to Babylon, and preserved during the remaining fifty years of Babylon's continuance. Many of the vessels were returned under Cyrus and Darius, and the temple was rebuilt within seventy years (by 519 B.C.; Ezra 1:7-11; 8:24-30, 33-34).

More details, including dates and numbers of people, were given by Jeremiah about the three groups of exiles taken away by Nebuchadnezzar. Jeremiah, in the midst of all these events, may have known more about them than did the scribes of the books of Kings.

The account of the release of the former King Jehoiachin from prison after thirty-seven years and the status accorded him at the royal house in Babylon is repeated (Jer. 52:31-34: cf. 2 Kgs. 25:27-30).

So ends the book of the great prophet Jeremiah, but this is not the end of his words, for the five elegiac chapters of the Lamentations of Jeremiah follow.
