Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

EZEKIEL

The book of the prophet Ezekiel, from the different world of a prophet among the exiles in Babylon, covers some topics from a different perspective. In the midst of Babylon, he received some vital revelations about the faults of his people and of the future world, and he indicated ways to change to achieve better things for them and for the future kingdom of the Lord with a glorious temple in a peaceful world (BD, "Ezekiel").

Commentary

1:1-3 Now to came to pass . . . as I was among the captives by the river of Chebar, that the heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God

The first vision of Ezekiel, in which he was called to become a prophet of the Lord, came in what was probably the "thirtieth year" of the reigning dynasty in Babylon. Nabopolassar, father of Nebuchadnezzar, started it in 625 B.C. (BD, "Chronology," p. 639); thus, 595 B.C. is a plausible date for the beginning of Ezekiel's mission.

The place was "by the river of Chebar" (Heb., Nehar-kevar, cognate with the Babylonian word for "great river," Euphrates). Excavations at Nippur, along that river, provide evidence that it may indeed have been the center of the ancient Jewish community in exile.

The vital event in Ezekiel's call as prophet was the opening of the heavens, providing him with "visions of God." Ezekiel, Jeremiah, and Isaiah all had distinctive revelations calling them to the work of the Lord and the awesome experience of being personally called of God to become prophets. Thus, at the time of his call and on several later occasions, the prophet felt "the hand of the Lord was there upon him."

Ezekiel, like Jeremiah, was of the priestly lineage; however, no indication is given that either of them officiated in Aaronic ordinances.

1:4-28 a great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a brightness was about it, and out of the midst thereof as the colour of amber . . . came the likeness of four living creatures

Thus begins Ezekiel's attempt to describe, in the inadequate words of this earth, the glories of a heavenly vision. The details of the heavenly chariot-throne are marvelous, but it must have been nearly impossible to describe. The account of Ezekiel's vision and divine visitation is much more complicated than Isaiah's general description, but they both saw the Lord. With words of reverence, Ezekiel testified, "upon the likeness of the throne was the likeness of the appearance of a man above upon it." He struggled with words to tell of the glory of that Being, surrounded, as it were, by "the appearance of fire." Using the spectrum of the rainbow as a simile for light and color, he testified, "This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the Lord. And when I saw it, I fell upon my face, and I heard a voice of one that spake" (Ezek. 1:26-28).

2:1-10 And he said unto me, Son of man, stand upon thy feet, and I will speak unto thee. And the spirit entered into me when he spake unto me. . . . And he said unto me, Son of man, I send thee to the children of Israel

Thus Ezekiel received the calling and authority to become a prophet—a spokesman for the Lord. He was consistently called "son of man" (Heb., ben-adam, "human") by the Lord, as if to emphasize that he was the human agent to transmit the divine messages. The phrase "son of man" occurs many times throughout this book and is nowhere else as prominent; however, in the New Testament, Jesus chose to call himself "Son of Man."

Ezekiel was called to teach some of the same people whom Jeremiah was teaching, so the demands he made and the warnings he gave were similar. The people in exile in Babylon should have been humbled by their experiencing the fulfillment of some of Jeremiah's prophetic warnings, but there is little indication of it.

The first half of Ezekiel's book contains messages that were addressed in part to people still in the land of Judah and in the city of Jerusalem who had not yet been taken captive. Some of them evidently thought they had been spared because they deserved to be (cf. Jer. 24 and commentary).

The new prophet was presented with a "roll of a book" to ingest as a symbol that he would get his information from the Lord and be His spokesman (Ezek. 2:9-10; Ezek. 3).

3:1-14 Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, eat that thou findest; eat this roll, and go speak unto the house of Israel

Ezekiel's mental and spiritual ingestion and digestion of the messages of the Lord were sweet to him; nevertheless, in the messages to the people, there would also be "lamentations, and mourning, and woe," and he was made aware that people would be not receptive but "impudent and hard-hearted." Therefore, like Jeremiah, he was made strong and fearless to stand against them. He was sent to speak to "them of the captivity"; and whether they would hearken or not, they would be without excuse, for a prophet had been sent to warn them (Ezek. 3:4-11; 2:5, 10; cf. Jer. 1:17-19).

At this point Ezekiel's first vision ended, and the Spirit conveyed him away from the divine presence. The chariot-throne with its wheels, as well as the beings and the "voice of a great rushing," were "behind" him for a time. Understandably, he left that divine Presence with reluctance (Heb., lit., "bitterness," which connotes "deep sorrow, distress"). Ezekiel responded and went, feeling the hand of the Lord upon him, for he did not resist the power and authority of the Lord (Ezek. 3:12-14).

3:15-21 Then I came to them of the captivity at Tel-abib, that dwell by the river of Chebar, . . . and remained there astonished among them seven days

In preparation for his second vision, Ezekiel was taken "to them of the captivity at Tel-abib, that dwell by the river of Chebar," and he "sat where they sat" for a week, silent and observing. Then the word of the Lord came again: "Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel." As their watchman, if he gave them no warnings and they died in their wickedness, he would be responsible. If he warned and taught them but they refused to repent, they would die in their sins but he would be blameless. If a righteous man turned to evil and was not warned and instructed, the watchman would be blameworthy; but if the watchman helped him to remain honorable and good, both the person and the prophet would be saved. Thus ended the prophet's second charge (repeated with some amplifications later, in Ezek. 33). There was another break before his third revelation began.

3:22-27 And the hand of the Lord was there upon me; and he said unto me, Arise, go forth into the plain, and I will there talk with thee

Ezekiel was instructed to go out alone to an uninhabited place. There the glorious experiences of his first vision were repeated for him, and he prostrated himself in deep obeisance as his third vision began.

He was again raised up and filled with the Spirit, but he was warned that he was not to go out and begin preaching on his own initiative (cf. D&C 11:15-16). The people would naturally reject him as one of them; the Lord was not making him merely "a reprover" but His spokesman, to speak when inspired and commanded to do so and to deliver the messages of the Lord. There should then be no arguments; the people could either hear or forbear to hear; it would be the Lord and not the prophet whom they would be accepting or rejecting.

4:1-17 son of man, take thee a tile, and lay it before thee, and pourtray upon it the city, even Jerusalem

As a mode of communicating with his people, Ezekiel was to use symbolic objects, illustrations, and acts. Some of them are described in this and the next chapter. It was fitting that Ezekiel, who was called and instructed by spectacular visual revelations, was also to use visual aids to instruct the people (Ezek. 4:1-8).

A portrayal on a clay tablet and a small model demonstration were used to show the Babylonian siege of Jerusalem, which was to occur nearly ten years after Ezekiel's call. How these drawings were shown to the people is not told.

Next, the prophet was shown symbolically that he had to counter the rebelliousness Israel had shown for three hundred ninety years (from the division of the kingdom under Jeroboam until the Babylonian captivity); he was also to combat the rebelliousness the Jews had shown for forty years. Just how the prophet could symbolically lie on his left side for three hundred ninety days and on his right side for forty days is not clear.

Ezekiel's third demonstration was to prepare and eat a small amount of mixed-grain bread (about one-half pound) and a small amount of water (about one quart) each day for a period of time to symbolize the defiled and limited food they would eat in captivity. The polluted fuel for baking the bread was so repulsive that he objected and was given a less objectionable option. The message was that lack of proper food and drink was part of the price the people paid for infidelity.

5:1-17 And thou, son of man, take thee a sharp knife, . . . a barber's razor, and cause it to pass upon thine head and upon thy beard: then . . . divide the hair

A fourth demonstration of the fate of the exiled chosen people required the prophet to cut his hair and beard and divide the hair into three parts. One-third was to be burnt, one-third to be smitten with a sword, and one-third to be scattered. The symbolism is fairly evident: the hair of the head (chief adornment of a chief part of the body) represented Israel in her former status. Death by fire or the sword or exile from the homeland were the results of her iniquity.

The guilt of Israel was worse than that of other nations because of the advantages Israel had enjoyed in her divine calling with divine laws and prophetic guidance. Even if she had done exactly what other nations did, she was more blameworthy, because others had not been taught as she had.

6:1-14 Son of man, set thy face toward the mountains of Israel, and prophesy against them

The phrase "mountains of Israel" can have a dual meaning as the "high places" where idolatrous worship had taken place and as a representation of the high and mighty leaders of Israel. The term Israel rather than Judah indicates that all of Israel had been guilty of the idolatry here denounced; Judah was the part of Israel that remained identifiable at the time.

It was starkly symbolic that where the bones of animals sacrificed to idols had been strewn, the bones of the slain idolaters would lie. But a hope-filled future view was also shown with reference to all Israel, a scattered remnant of whom would be among all the nations. Eventually they would remember the Lord and remember the anguish he had suffered by Israel's infidelity. That remembrance could bring resumption of their mission, for a future restoration was promised.

Once more there was a review of Israel's guilt and punishment, at which the prophet was to express dismay: "Smite with thine hand, and stamp with thy foot, and say, Alas for all the evil abominations of the house of Israel" (Ezek. 6:11-14).

7:1-27 Also, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord God unto the land of Israel; An end, the end is come upon the four corners of the land

Ezekiel did not write in measured lines of poetry as did Isaiah, Jeremiah, and others of the prophets, but he certainly employed structured, emphatic prose in effectively crafted phrases, such as those about the end and the evils which had come. Contrasted, but related, is his declaration about the coming of the morning, the day, and the time of trouble.

"The rod hath blossomed" recalls the rod of Aaron, which blossomed in the wilderness to certify his priesthood leadership after the mutiny of Korah (Ezek. 7:10; Num. 16; 17:5-8); but the contrasting line in the time of the exile was "pride hath budded." The result of budding pride was that "violence is risen up into a rod of wickedness." That is poetic language, regardless of meter or strophe (Ezek. 4:2-12).

Resuming the consequences of evil, the prophet listed the follies of commerce in view of imminent invasion, the futility of fleeing, and the paradoxical worthlessness of priceless things. Even the precious, sacred things of the temple were "for a prey" (Ezek. 7:12-22).

Whether the prophet was to "make a chain" to symbolize the sequences he was uttering or his utterance was the "chain," he indeed spoke of the sequence of crime, violence, destruction, mischief, rumor, and lack of direction. The "vision of the prophet," "the law," and the "counsel from the ancients" would not be available to people always. The guilty leaders would suffer "according to their deserts" and come to know the justice of the Lord (Ezek. 7:23-27).

8:1-18 the spirit lifted me up between the earth and the heaven, and brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem

This vision came a year and two months after Ezekiel's first vision and allowed him to perceive the flagrant idol worship right in the temple at Jerusalem. He saw again the Being he had seen in his first vision, felt again the divine hand, and beheld again the glory he had beheld during his call by being transported in the spirit to Jerusalem (Ezek. 8:1-4 and fn.).

He was shown idols and idolatrous worship at the north gate and in secret chambers (with elders participating); he saw also at the door of the north gate that women supplicated a nature god and eastward in front of the temple men worshipped the sun god while turning their backs on the temple. With a now unknown obscene gesture involving a branch and the nose, they spurned the Lord. It is evident that virtually everyone had turned to other gods for help, knowing that the living God was against them (Ezek. 8:5-18).

9:1-11 And the glory of the God of Israel was gone up from the cherub . . . to the threshold of the house

Next, in a vision of the temple, Ezekiel saw the beginning of the withdrawal of the glory of the Lord from the now desecrated place (cf. Ezek. 10). The coming death of the remnant in Jerusalem, except the few marked to be spared, was symbolized as if accomplished by angels of death; in fact it was brought about within five years by the army of Nebuchadnezzar. The few righteous "marked" for divine protection included, at that time, such men as Jeremiah, Ebed-melech, and the faithful scribe, Baruch (Jer 39:11-18; 45; and commentary). The symbolic marking of those to be saved has future prophetic ramifications (Ezek. 9:4a; Rev. 7).

10:1-22 Then the glory of the Lord departed from off the threshold of the house

Verse 18 summarizes the theme of chapter 10. When the Spirit of the Lord has departed from a temple, it becomes a common house; thus the once glorious building was destined for destruction. The dread drama had spiritually begun before.

The vision Ezekiel had seen in his first vision reappeared, and fire from the heavenly altar was taken to be scattered over the city. The awesome withdrawal of divine Glory continued, as the cherubim, symbols of God's omniscience and omnipotence, departed when the Glory of God departed.

11:1-16 Son of man, these are the men that devise mischief, and give wicked counsel in this city

Yet, before his vision of Jerusalem closed, the prophet was shown twenty-five of the chief leaders responsible for the rebellious attitude in that city; they were denying that any crisis was near and advising business as usual. The Lord's message about them was that their counsel would increase the number who would fall in the siege. Instead of the leaders being as the sacred flesh protected in a caldron, they would be taken out and subjected to just punishment (Ezek. 11:3, 9-11).

Even as Ezekiel had prophesied, one of the leaders, Pelatiah, died. The prophet wondered whether that instant punishment signaled the beginning of the end of the "remnant of Israel." The Lord replied that though they were cast off among the heathen and scattered "among the countries," yet he would remain "to them as a little sanctuary in the countries where they shall come" (Ezek. 11:13-16). That promise that some people would have a little sanctuary of faith in God in all lands was an important statement of an aspect of the mission of Abraham through the scattering of Israel.

11:17-25 Thus saith the Lord God; I will even gather you from the people, and assemble you out of the countries where ye have been scattered, and I will give you the land of Israel

As is usual in connection with prophecies of the scattering and exile of Israel, the Lord renewed his promise of the latter-day gathering. It must have given some comfort to the faithful to know that the plans of the Lord would not be thwarted and in time would be fulfilled. For faithful people who know the prophecies in the last days, it is reassuring still.

Some important corollary promises were added: the former abominations in idolatrous worship will exist no more, for the people will be of "one heart"; a "new spirit within" will be given. The unreceptive attitude called "the stony heart" will be replaced by a receptive and sensitive "heart of flesh." True worship of the true God will then resume.

This marvelous vision of Ezekiel concluded when the cherubim and the wheeled throne-chariot bearing the Glory of the Lord moved up and away from the midst of the city, to hover for a time over the mount (of Olives) east of the city and then depart. Then the Spirit returned the prophet to Chaldea to those in captivity, and he related to them the marvelous vision.

12:1-28 Son of man, thou dwellest in the midst of a rebellious house, which have eyes to see, and see not; they have ears to hear, and hear not: for they are a rebellious house

There must have been a lingering resentment among the first exiles, knowing that they had been taken captive and others had not, for a saying had arisen: "The days are prolonged, and every vision faileth." The many prophetic predictions of the complete fall of Jerusalem had seemed never to be fulfilled. After all, ten years and more had passed since the exile to Babylon of the captives of Jehoiachin's time. Therefore, for the people who had not seen or heard or who perhaps had simply not believed, Ezekiel was instructed to dramatize the refugees' future situation by packing a few belongings, digging through a wall, crawling through the hole in the wall, hiding his face, and slipping away through the twilight with his belongings on his shoulders. In the morning, when the people asked what he was doing, the prophet was to explain that as he had done, so would the people and "the prince" (Zedekiah) have to do. Zedekiah would be taken to the land of the Chaldeans (Babylon), yet never see it. Jeremiah reported the fulfillment of that prophecy; for the last thing that King Zedekiah saw was the execution of his sons, after which his eyes were put out and he was taken into captivity (Ezek. 12:3-13; Jer. 39:7; 52:11).

Another prophecy of the scattering of Israel "toward every wind" concluded this revelation to Ezekiel.

In yet another demonstration, Ezekiel was to eat food and drink water furtively, with evident anxiety, to show the captives in Babylon how it would soon be among the people back home. Then he was to tell them plainly that it was wrong for them to keep saying that the days passed and the prophecies and visions were never fulfilled; moreover, the vain and "flattering" false prophecies, claiming that all would be well back home, would cease. True messages from the Lord were to be taken seriously and would be fulfilled.

13:1-23 Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of Israel that prophesy, and say thou unto them that prophesy out of their own hearts, Hear ye the word of the Lord

The prophetic message to the false "prophets of Israel" was "Woe unto the foolish prophets, that follow their own spirit and have seen nothing!" Like a wily fox that dashes here and there to protect itself, the false prophet neither stands in the breach to warn the people nor does he prepare a defense to help them stand in the day of trial. He prophesies in lies, claiming that the Lord has instructed him when He has not. The sinister effect was that such prophets assured the people of "peace; and there was no peace"; thus any "walls" they built up against danger were subject to crumbling. For those reasons, the true prophets had to try to break down the false security thus established.

Ezekiel also had to counter some magical arts practiced by daughters of the chosen people. Apparently, one of the objects of such arts was the procurement of a little food, saving lives that should not be saved, and letting people die who should not die. All such activities would also end in the coming disaster (Ezek. 13:17-23 and fn.).

14:1-11 Then came certain of the elders of Israel unto me, . . . And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, these men have set up their idols in their heart

Ezekiel not only had false prophets to deal with but also elders that were unfaithful to their divine responsibilities of leadership. In the patriarchal system of government, they were the leaders of the families and clans. But far from preserving the faith of the fathers, these apostate elders were idolatrous at heart, given to magic and mystics, and willing to accept guidance from such sources rather than from the Lord. The Lord was not willing to be supplicated by such people except on condition of their repenting and returning to him.

14:12-23 Son of man, when the land sinneth against me by trespassing grievously, then will I stretch out mine hand upon it, and will break the staff of the bread thereof, and will send famine upon it, and will cut off man and beast from it

Continuing the theme of his refusal to accept the supplications of the apostate elders except upon repentance, the Lord asserted that the status of the one praying does not persuade him to bless those for whom the prayer is said; rather, the faith and needs of those seeking the blessing influences him. Noah was righteous but could save his people from the deluge only if they hearkened and repented (Gen. 6:5, 11-13; Moses 8:16-30). Job was righteous, but other factors were involved, and because of them, his prayers did not keep the catastrophes from coming. Daniel was famous for his fidelity to the Lord right in the court of the Babylonian kings and the first of the Medo-Persian rulers, but his prayer for his own people went up unto the Lord only after they had been humbled and prepared for seventy years to return to their homeland (Dan. 9).

In short, four examples were offered of cases wherein the Lord would bless people with salvation only on condition of worthiness. Then hopes for the future were declared.

15:1-8 Therefore thus saith the Lord God; As the vine tree among the trees of the forest, which I have given to the fire for fuel, so will I give the inhabitants of Jerusalem

That is the essence of this short chapter, but there is also an unstated implication that Israel should have been a fruitful vine, not merely a "vine tree among the trees of the forest"; such a vine has no value for fruit or wood but only for fuel.

16:1-63 Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations, And say, Thus saith the Lord God unto Jerusalem; Thy birth and thy nativity is of the land of Canaan; thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite

This long chapter is not about the biological genealogy of Israel but about the sources of her apostate spiritual life. As Isaiah earlier had said, the Israelites had "gone away backward"; they should have taught others about the true God and his ways but instead they had learned the ways of the Canaanites, Amorites, and Hittites who lived before them in the land. They had adopted their gods and supplicated them for help (Ezek. 1:1-3; Isa. 1:4; Jer. 44:15-19; TG, "Israel, Mission of").

By means of a long allegory about Israel as a foundling baby girl, cleansed and brought up to marriageable age by the Lord, adorned and blessed but in time patently unfaithful as a bride, the prophet again demonstrated why Israel had been carried into exile.

Judah had behaved like her sister Samaria (northern Israel) and her "sister" Sodom before. Indeed, because Judah had the examples of Sodom and Samaria before her, she would be more severely punished for sinning knowingly. Nevertheless, the constant hope of redemption was offered for the time when Judah would remember, repent, and realign herself with other repentant "sisters" (Ezek. 16:60-63).

17:1-24 A great eagle . . . came unto Lebanon, and took the highest branch of the cedar: He cropped off the top of his young twigs, and carried it into a land of traffick; he set it in a city of merchants. He took also of the seed of the land, and planted it in a fruitful field . . . by great waters

This "riddle" or "parable" clearly symbolizes several facets of the exile of Judah, beginning with young King Jehoiachin in Babylon (Ezek. 17:3-6). The next great wave of exiles, under Zedekiah, was also described and the interpretation of the parable given (Ezek. 17:7-20). A third group of exiles involved taking one "of the highest branch of the high cedar," even "from the top of his young twigs a tender one." The Lord proposed to "plant it upon an high mountain and eminent; in the mountain of the height of Israel will I plant it" (Ezek. 17:22-23, 22a-b). Consider the possibility that Zedekiah's son Mulek and his company, who came to the western hemisphere, may have been this group.

18:1-32 What mean ye, that ye use this proverb concerning the land of Israel, saying, The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge? . . . ye shall not have occasion any more to use this proverb in Israel

This revelation corrected a misunderstanding of a phrase in the Decalog about "visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me" (Ex. 20:5-6). It also confirmed another teaching of the Lord through Moses that "the fathers shall not be put to death for the children, neither shall the children be put to death for the fathers: every man shall be put to death for his own sin" (Deut. 24:16). While it is true that the sins of parents may affect children—may cause them to suffer and may lead them also to sin—yet the Lord will not impose punishment on children on behalf of fathers or forefathers.

He made clear to Ezekiel through a series of examples that a man who is just and does what is lawful and right "shall surely live" (that is, be protected or saved). A son who is the opposite, who breaks all the commandments and does no good "shall surely die; his blood shall be upon him." A son of the wicked who rejects wickedness and does good "shall not die for the iniquity of his father, he shall surely live," though his wicked father "die in his iniquity."

Thus the clarification to the question "doth not the son bear the iniquity of the father?" The sinner is punished, the righteous rewarded, and neither for the other. As used here, "to live" is to be blessed, whereas "to die" is to be punished. In eternal terms, to live is to be blessed in the presence of God and to die is to be shut out of his presence. The Lord's reasons are vital: he has no pleasure at all that the wicked should die but desires that they should repent and live (Ezek. 18:23).

Then two other cases were propounded: if a righteous man changes and becomes wicked, his former righteousness will not protect him from punishment, even though people may think that unfair; but if a wicked man repents and does what is lawful and right, "he shall save his soul alive" (Ezek. 18:27-28). Obviously the way a person develops and what he becomes is the criterion for judgment. The important admonition is to seek a new heart and a new spirit (Ezek. 18:31).

19:1-14 a lamentation for the princes of Israel

This very brief lament (compared to Jeremiah's whole book of lamentations) is for the last "young lions" of the royal house of Judah and for the nation of Judah. The metaphor of the lion may be derived from the patriarchal blessing bestowed by Jacob upon the head of Judah (Gen. 49:8-12). The "mother" of the lions, in the manner of speaking here, was the nation Judah.

The first king was Jehoahaz, who was removed by Egypt after the last good king, Josiah, was killed in battle at Megiddo by Pharaoh Necho (Ezek. 19:3-4 and fn.). The other young lions are summarized in one, because all were killed, taken to Babylon, or both. They were Jehoiakim, killed; his son, Jehoiachin, taken to Babylon but left alive; Zedekiah, half brother of Jehoiakim, blinded, taken to Babylon, and killed (Ezek. 19:5-9 and fn.).

The "mother" was at first like a fruitful vine, but she became "exalted" and "the east wind [Babylon] dried up her fruit," plucked her up, and planted her in the wilderness of exile. The "fire" that went out of "a rod of her branches" was the rebellious Zedekiah, who refused to hearken to the advice of Jeremiah and brought on the devastating siege by Nebuchadnezzar (Ezek. 19:10-14 and fn.).

One fact lamented was that no more earthly kings of the line would ever rule. Ezekiel knew of the divine King of David's line who would yet rule, but he treated that topic in another place.

20:1-49 certain of the elders of Israel came to enquire of the Lord . . . son of man, wilt thou judge them? cause them to know the abominations of their fathers

This long revelation on the scattering of Israel and the reasons for it is also about Israel's repentance and return to the Lord and the establishment of a new covenant. A short addendum addressed the process of the downfall of Judah in Ezekiel's time.

Regarding the Lord's reluctance to hear the prayers of those "elders of Israel," recall a previous attempt spoken of in Ezekiel 14.

This chapter reviews Israel's opportunities and failings since the deliverance from Egypt; it mentions the covenants and commandments revealed in the wilderness, which the Israelites often failed to keep but by which they were eventually established; it reviews their opportunities and failings in the promised land; it reiterates the Lord's intent to gather and restore Israel; and it promises his counting them into the fold again ("cause you to pass under the rod") so that they might come again "into the bond of the covenant"; it clarifies the purging of the righteous from among the rebels; and finally it promises acceptance of, and blessings to, those free from "wicked ways" and "corrupt doings."

This prophecy was given "in the seventh year" (Ezek. 20:1) of the captivity of the group of which Ezekiel was a member, several years before the last siege of Jerusalem; hence, these last verses were addressed "toward the south" (Ezek. 20:46), to Judah, warning about the fire that would consume her.

The prophet complained that the people rejected his revelations because they were in "parables," or figurative language.

21:1-32 Son of man, set thy face toward Jerusalem, and drop thy word toward the holy places, and prophesy against the land of Israel

The prophecy against Judah was continued in this chapter; in fact, in the Hebrew scriptures the five preceding verses are the first part of this chapter.

It was hard for the people to believe that the Lord would let "the holy places" ever be destroyed (Ezek. 21:2; Jer. 7:1-16). But He let them know that Babylon's swords and fire would be as the sword of the Lord drawn from its sheath to destroy them; wherefore, all ought to fear and tremble, knowing there would be no escape from that which was coming.

With many complicated poetic figures, Ezekiel elaborated the concept of the sword being sharpened and polished, ready to fall upon the people, both small and great, both in Judah and in Ammon; and the "wicked prince" (King Zedekiah; Ezek. 21:25-26) would lose his crown and diadem. The throne of Israel would be "overturned"—vacated completely—"until he come whose right it is; and I will give it him." This is clearly a messianic promise (Ezek. 21:27a-c; Gen. 49:10c).

The king of the Ammonites, who were included in this devastating prophecy against Judah, had conspired with Ishmael, who slew Gedaliah, the good man appointed to rule over the remnant of Judah left behind. It was prophesied that Ammon also would suffer at the hand of Babylon (Jer. 40:14-16; 41:1-15; Ezek. 21:20, 28-32).

22:1-31 Now, thou son of man, . . . wilt thou judge the bloody city? yea, thou shalt shew her all her abominations

Another inventory of Judah's sins and violent crimes should surely have let the exiles in Babylon with Ezekiel know why their homeland had been invaded and why it would be destroyed. Whether some of those prophecies were somehow sent back to Jerusalem as final warnings is not known, but it does seem likely.

In the first segment Ezekiel listed bloodshed, idolatry, rule by violence, dishonoring parents, oppressing foreigners, desecration of the holy things and the Sabbath, violence by perfidy, lewdness, violation of privacy, adultery and incest, bribery, usury, and extortion (Ezek. 22:3-12).

In the second segment, the Lord demonstrated dismay at all the dishonest gain and bloodshed committed by the leaders and people and warned of the results thereof, which were fast approaching. The people would be scattered, and their only inheritance would be what was within themselves. They were as an amalgam of metals and would have to be purified by the smelter of suffering (Ezek. 22:18-22).

In the third segment, the word of the Lord through Ezekiel specifically condemned the land not cleansed, for the popular prophets were false, priests failed their duty, princes shed blood for gain and power, and the "prophets" confirmed them in their acts. The people, too, turned to oppression and robbery, taking advantage of the poor, the needy, and the foreigner. No wonder there was not a righteous man found for whose sake the nation could be spared (Ezek. 22:23-31).

23:1-49 Son of man, there were two women, the daughters of one mother: . . . the names of them were Aholah the elder, and Aholibah her sister: and they were mine, and they bare sons and daughters. . . . Samaria is Aholah, and Jerusalem [is] Aholibah

This long allegory of the two sisters, Israel and Judah, daughters of the same mother (that is, united Israel), delineates the moral and religious decline and downfall of the first sister (northern Israel); and then with amazement observes the same moral and religious decline and downfall of the second sister (Judah).

The prophet knew by revelation and history that Israel never did rid herself of the idolatrous and immoral practices learned from the Egyptian culture. Another fact not made as explicit by other prophets is that the idolatrous practices, the ritual immorality, personal debauchery, modes of dress, and pompous finery of powerful Assyria had been eagerly adopted by Israelites before Assyria conquered them. The nation of Israel had been attacked because their last king refused to pay the tribute levied by the Assyrian rulers, but they were conquered because the Lord could not help them when they had refused to turn to him.

Similarly, the younger sister, Judah, adopted practices of vanity, idolatry, and immorality from the Babylonians and suffered invasion and eventual captivity because of that wickedness; the triggering incident was Judah's leaders refusing to pay the tribute and be subject to the overlordship of the Babylonian rulers.

Aholah ("her tent") stands for the dwelling place or people of northern Israel; and Aholibah ("my tent is in her") stands for Judah, in whose capital city, Jerusalem, the house of God stood. Judah's greater sin lay in her failure to learn from Israel's experiences and her failure to use the temple sanctuary properly or even to protect it from abuse.

A most heinous combination of these evil elements was idolatrous, ritual adultery resulting in illegitimate children, who were then sacrificed to an idol (Ezek. 23:37; 2 Kgs. 16:3).

The chapter ends with the familiar warning of captivity and the end of pleasure through sinful practices (Ezek. 23:45-49).

24:1-14 in the ninth year, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, . . . even of this same day: the king of Babylon set himself against Jerusalem this same day

After many prophetic warnings, Ezekiel was told to symbolically announce, by a "parable" (a symbol) of a pot with meat in it, the Babylonian conquest of Jerusalem. Tevet is the tenth month, which corresponds on modern calendars to late December and early January; the tenth day of Tevet is remembered by a fast. In the pot, choice meat with the bones was first to be boiled and then burned to powder and the pot melted. The pot represented Jerusalem and its once choice inhabitants who were destroyed in and with their city by the Babylonian siege; it was "purified" by fire. It must have been a terrifying message for the exiles that day.

24:15-27 Also the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, behold, I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes with a stroke: yet neither shalt thou mourn nor weep . . . So I spake unto the people in the morning: and at even my wife died; and I did in the morning as I was commanded

The terrible news to the prophet and people was emphasized for Ezekiel and symbolized for the people by the prophet's personal loss—the sudden death of his beloved wife, "the desire of [his] eyes." His restriction from carrying on the usual mourning in dress, demeanor, or ceremony was to teach the people that in their irretrievable losses they should not lament the past but go on with hope into the future.

25:1-17 The word of the Lord . . . against the Ammonites, . . . Moab and Seir, . . . Edom . . . [and] the Philistines

The indictments and the warnings for Judah and Jerusalem were finished. In this revelation about their nearest neighbors, the prophet began his series of prophecies about other nations, which make up eight chapters.

As in the chapters of Jeremiah and Isaiah addressed to other nations, the nations that were nearest Israel were addressed first and those who invaded from afar, next. Some of the smaller prophetic books, such as Amos, have similar lists; the smallest books, such as Obadiah and Nahum, address one foreign nation each.

As observed before, the Ammonite king and people had exulted in Judah's downfall, participated in looting, and had aided and abetted the plot that destroyed the good governor Gedaliah after the exile of most of the people of Judah. The fulfillment of the prophet's forecast of Ammon's downfall came soon thereafter (Ezek. 25:2-7; cf. 21:20, 28-32; and commentary).

The other related peoples, Moab and Seir (Edom), were similar to Ammon in their history of depredations against Israel and were somewhat involved in taking advantage of the downfall of Judah. None of them survived the invasions of the series of empire builders that began with Assyria and continued with Babylon.

Israel's old nemesis, the Philistines of the coastal plains of Israel, had been vanquished in turn by Saul, David, and Solomon; but survivors had remained as thorns in Israel's side. Having risen against the Israelites at every opportunity, they were castigated by Ezekiel. The name Cherethim reflects their origin in Crete.

26:1-21 Son of man, because that Tyrus hath said against Jerusalem, Aha, . . . I shall be replenished, now she is laid waste

Somewhat unaccountably, a long reprimand of Tyre and Sidon was delivered by the prophet (Ezek. 26-28). From the times of David and Solomon, mutually profitable commercial relationships had existed between those Phoenician ports and Israel, and there had been no threats or invasions by them. Perhaps the revelations were given in part as a warning to them of the fate that awaited them in the face of the Babylonian imperialism. Ezekiel's message to and about them is, in part, a lamentation.

No sympathy for Jerusalem and Judah, as a former trading partner, was evident in Tyre; and it is somewhat surprising that she would see Judah as a fallen competitor, because Israel was never a notable sea power.

In any case, Nebuchadrezzar (as the Babylonian king's name is sometimes rendered) would come in from the north and east and proceed toward the coastal and island strongholds. Other islands and "princes of the sea" would be dismayed at the siege (which lasted thirteen years). They would lament that imperial forces could conquer such a strong city. The complete ruin that Ezekiel foresaw was not accomplished by Babylon but came about by the hands of others during the centuries following.

27:1-36 Now, thou son of man, take up a lamentation for Tyrus

The prophet perceived and vividly described the "multitude of the wares" involved; his lists of trading items and trading partners is impressive (Ezek. 27:2-25 and fn.).

The seafaring men and those dependent upon them would naturally be the most affected and have cause to lament. Other seafaring peoples would "hiss" (Heb., lit., "whistle" in amazement, not, as in English, in disdain) at Tyre's downfall.

28:1-26 Son of man, say unto the prince of Tyrus, Thus saith the Lord God Because thine heart is lifted up, and thou hast said, I am a God, I sit in the seat of God, in the midst of the seas; yet thou art a man, and not God

As the prophet's message to Tyre continued, a chief reason for her downfall was declared: it was pride, reaching unto blasphemy. The ironic statement "thou art wiser than Daniel" (Ezek. 28:3) may be understood in light of the young prophet Daniel's status at court in Babylon, where Nebuchadnezzar himself is quoted as saying to Daniel, "no secret troubleth thee" (Dan. 4:9; cf. 2:46-48). The intent was to humble the "prince" (king) of Tyre.

The lamentation upon him has an air of irony also, withreferences to his "wisdom" and perfection of "beauty." He had been, metaphorically speaking, "in Eden the garden of God," and hyperbole is used to describe him. Thus, with a multitude of charges against his pride and opulence, he was condemned (Ezek. 28:6-19).

Tyre's sister city, Zidon, of lesser grandeur, was sentenced to violence and pestilence (Ezek. 28:20-23).

Then, almost as an appendix to the three chapters, a brief prophecy of the restoration, gathering, and ultimate blessing of Israel was given. In context here, it has the feeling of the peace and calm that follow a storm.

29:1-21 Son of man, set thy face against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and prophesy against him, and against all Egypt

With this charge began messages of doom and lamentations for Egypt, occupying four chapters.

The first indictment is a double one: Egypt's Pharaoh (no doubt Hophra) had been as guilty as Tyre's king in claiming godly powers (Ezek. 29:2-9; Jer. 44:30). For all his vaunted power he had proved an undependable ally to Judah. The language of this charge is appropriate to Egypt, as that of Tyre was to it. The Pharaoh was called by the metaphor "dragon" (Heb., tannin, probably a "water monster" such as the crocodile); his capture and death and those of his people were portrayed by similar metaphors.

Warnings repeated without figures of speech indicated devastation along the entire length of the land (Ezek. 29:10a); but a promise of some return in forty years and resumption of national life at a lower standard was given. Israel should not trust in Egypt but in the Lord.

Some seventeen years later (according to Ezek. 29:1, 17), the prophet indicated Egypt became a prize as compensation to Babylon in lieu of Tyre, which, according to some evidence, was besieged for thirteen years without success.

Lastly, a brief prophecy was again given of Israel's restoration. The prophet used a phrase common in Egyptian rituals in behalf of the dead, assuring resumption of life: "I will give thee the opening of the mouth."

30:1-26 The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying . . . the sword shall come upon Egypt

Prophecies of the doom of Egypt and her idols continue. Some neighbors who "uphold Egypt" were also warned (Ezek. 30:5-6, 9). This segment contains a detailed list of shrine cities and their idols, all of which would suffer from the invasion of Nebuchadnezzar. A general picture of the captivity and scattering of the Egyptians was drawn.

31:1-18 Son of man, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, and to his multitude; Whom art thou like in thy greatness?

Although this revelation continued the reprimand of Egypt, only the introductory and concluding verses directly address the Pharaoh and his land; the rest constitute an elaborate simile, recalling the last king of Assyria and his land in their decline and fall, likening it unto Egypt.

Thus the Assyrian king (Sennacherib; cf. Isa. 36-37) "was a cedar in Lebanon" (v. 3) with many branches, great height, and great strength; and many birds (other nations) were within his boughs. In hyperbolic metaphors, he exceeded "the cedars in the garden of God" (v. 8) who envied him (Ezek. 31:3-9).

Briefly the Pharaoh was addressed in second person, because he had also lifted himself up; and then in third person the description of Sennacherib continues concerning his pride, his fall, and his death. The nations he had subdued were shaken; left without leaders or viable ways to survive, many perished, and the remnant went to the next empire builder. Thereupon, the Pharaoh was again asked who he thought he was like "among the trees of Eden"; and he was relegated to the same end as the Assyrians (Ezek. 31:10-18).

32:1-32 in the twelfth month, in the first day, . . . the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, take up a lamentation for Pharaoh king of Egypt

All of these revelations concerning Egypt came at about the time of the Babylonian siege of Jerusalem; this one was after its fall, perhaps 584 B.C. It is a song of doom, not a lament with any pity for Egypt. The beginning of it should be retranslated thus:

Like a young lion of nations thou didst make thyself; But thou art like a monster (crocodile) in the seas.

It is curious that the Hebrew word translated as dragon in Ezekiel 29:3 has here been translated whale. It is an ancient and mysterious word and is rendered according to context.

In this metaphorical warning, Pharaoh as a great sea creature and his people as fish would be taken with a net and left to die and decay in strange fields and rivers; many peoples who saw their destruction would be amazed (Ezek. 32:2-10). A plain-spoken warning of Babylon's conquest of Egypt followed. "The daughters of the nations" would lament "for Egypt, and for all her multitude" (Ezek. 32:11-16).

Fifteen days later, the prophet was told by the Lord to bewail not only the demise of the Egyptians but also their relegation to the nether world where they would be with such nations as Assyria, Elam, Meshech, Tubal, Edom, Zidon, and others "uncircumcised" with whom Pharaoh and his slain multitude would have to "be comforted" (Ezek. 32:17-32).

33:1-10 So thou, O son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel

After eight chapters about neighboring nations, this one returns to the prophet's messages to Israel.

The first message reviews the heavy responsibility of Ezekiel as a watchman appointed by the Lord (Ezek. 33:2-9; cf. 3:17-21). It continues with a reiteration of answers to the question of how there was hope for humankind if their sins and transgressions remained upon them. Hope arises because the Lord takes pleasure not in punishing the guilty but in their repenting and qualifying to "live." But again the righteous are warned that by turning to sin they can lose their status. The Lord is concerned with what they have become, and mere man should not declare him inequitable (Ezek. 33:11-20; 18:20-32).

33:21-29 one that had escaped out of Jerusalem came unto me, saying, The city is smitten

This message is dated three years after the final siege began; upon hearing it, the prophet was again overwhelmed (Ezek. 33:21-22; 24:1-2, 27).

The people of the captivity were complaining that because the land was promised to their ancestor for his seed, they, his many descendants, should have it. The answer was as always: they had sinned in their infidelity and depended upon their own might to defend them while living in sin, and the land was desolated.

33:30-33 Also, thou son of man, the children of thy people still are talking against thee by the walls and in the doors

Finally, in this review chapter, the prophet was reassured by the Lord. Though his people talked against him, heard his words but would not do them, showed "much love" but acted contrarily, listened as if to a "lovely song of one that hath a pleasant voice" but obeyed not—yet when all his words about the desolation of the homeland came to pass, they would know a prophet had been among them.

34:1-31 Woe be to the shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves! should not the shepherds feed the flocks? . . . I will feed my flock, and I will cause them to lie down, saith the Lord God

The Israelite leaders were given this classic statement about bad shepherds versus the Good Shepherd. The bad leaders had profited by their position and status and had failed to teach and keep their people worthy for the Lord's protection; therefore, the flock was scattered, and those shepherds were held culpable (Ezek. 34:2-10).

The Lord, as the Good Shepherd, will search for his sheep and seek them out, gather them, and feed them in good pastures on the high mountains of Israel. He will restore them, give them security, and heal them. He will judge the flocks and discern the bad from the good—those who use well the good pasture and those who tread it under foot and foul the deep waters (Ezek. 34:11-19a).

And as for the leaders who made some fat and some lean, thrust some aside and cared not for the sick, and brought about the scattering of Israel—they would all be replaced with true shepherds, servants of the Lord: "I the Lord will be their God, and my servant David a prince among them; I the Lord have spoken it" (Ezek. 34:20-24a-d).

Restoration of "a covenant of peace" was also promised, along with fruitfulness, security, and providential productivity (Ezek. 34:29a).

Ultimately, the flock is the Lord's, the pasture is his, and he is the true Shepherd (Ezek. 34:25-31; recall 34:15).

35:1-15 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, O mount Seir, I am against thee, . . . and all Idumea, even all of it . . . shall know that I am the Lord

Thus begins and ends this revelation that is seemingly out of place (as one of those against neighboring nations, Ezek. 25-32). It is a message of doom to ancient Edom (also called by the name of its mountains, Seir; and in the last verse by an equivalent to Edom, "Idumea"). Edom had been an inveterate enemy of Israel, and after the Babylonian siege she had hoped to take over the territory of northern Israel and Judah. Hence Edom was condemned to disappear (Ezek. 35:9-15; cf. 25:12-14).

Because of its enmity against Israel throughout the generations, Edom, or Idumea, became symbolic of the wicked world (D&C 1:36; BD, "Edom"; "Idumea"). Hence, the last verse of this prophecy makes the whole chapter a fitting sequel to the revelation on the coming of the Good Shepherd; for the commencement of his peaceful reign brings an end to the wicked world ("Idumea"), and all shall know the Lord (Ezek. 34; 35:15).

36:1-38 thou son of man, prophesy unto the mountains of Israel, and say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord

This revelation, in turn, is a sequel to the two chapters above, being a preview of latter-day Israel making the name of the Lord known to "the heathen," even to "flocks of men." Observing that "the enemy" had long enough taken the land for themselves, and that Israel would have borne derision and the shame of the heathen long enough, the Lord promised that the days of prey and derision would pass (Ezek. 36:1-7).

The waste places of Israel are to be fruitful again and thrive. The land that has for years devoured peoples shall sustain the people Israel (Ezek. 36:8-15).

As for the people of his time, the prophet reminded them that they were in exile because they defiled the promised land and profaned the Lord's name. Yet because of his name (and the covenant promises made in his name), he will work with later generations and bring them back in covenant relationships (Ezek. 36:16-24).

The cleansing preparation for making the covenants anew will be a ceremonial washing, after which "a new heart" and "a new spirit" will govern their walks and ways (Ezek. 36:16-24). With all uncleanness done away, the people and land will become fruitful and productive; indeed a "garden of Eden" state (paradisiacal glory) will result. These restoration phenomena and the future work of the Lord's people will impress the unbelievers (Heb., lit., "heathen") and they shall also know the Lord (Ezek. 36:25-38).

37:1-14 The hand of the Lord was upon me, and carried me out in the spirit of the Lord, and set me down in the midst of the valley which was full of bones

Another restoration prophecy follows. Using the symbolism of the resurrection of dry bones, it bears a double meaning. The prophet did not know the dead bodies could be resurrected until the Lord told him (Ezek. 37:3). He described the reassembly and revivification processes, the reentry of the spirit and resumption of breathing; and then the double meaning was made clear: it represented both the reassembly of Israel and the resurrection of the body from the grave to house again the spirit.

37:15-28 Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his companions

Yet another restoration prophecy was given with a double meaning. This one involved two symbolic pieces of wood. Commonly translated stick, the Hebrew word used is etz, a generic word meaning "wood" (there are other words meaning "stick," "staff," "branch," or "scepter"). This was wood upon which it was possible to write. Babylonian writing tablets of wood have been found hinged together and faced with wax, with writing engraved on them. Two wooden tablets represent the scriptures from Judah (the Bible) and Joseph (the Book of Mormon) to "be one in mine hand" (Ezek. 37:15-19 and fn.). With the two labeled wooden tablets in hand, the prophet was to show his people that the children of Israel will be gathered from among the heathen to become one nation, with one king, never to be "divided into two kingdoms any more at all" (Ezek. 37:18-22).

United Israel will not turn to idols again, for the people will be cleansed to become the people of the Lord, with one King and Shepherd. His new "covenant of peace" with Israel "shall be an everlasting covenant." The Lord's sanctuary shall be "in the midst of them" and his "tabernacle also shall be with them." Then all other peoples (the "heathen") will understand why the Lord has consecrated Israel to his eternal service (Ezek. 37:23-28).

38:1-23 And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, set thy face against Gog, the land of Magog

After the gathering but before the kingdom of peace shall be established, one last mighty attack will be mounted against the Lord's potential kingdom. The attackers will come from all sides. Gog, "chief prince of Meshech and Tubal," is evidently of the Japhetic peoples of the Caucasus and northward, as are Gomer and the house of Togarmah (Gen. 10:2; BD, "Gog"). Persia comes from the east, Ethiopia the south, and Libya the west; thus, they may represent all nations (Ezek. 38:2-7; Zech. 14:1-3).

Ezekiel prophesied against these latter-day attackers. Speaking to Gog, the leader from the north, he foretold his mustering troops for service and plotting with "an evil thought" against undefended villages to take spoil and prey from the gathered of Israel. Merchant nations will take interest in the contraband (Ezek. 38:8-13).

But when all these forces come "out of the north parts" against Israel "as a cloud to cover the land," the Lord will be glorified, not Gog. Addressing Gog with a rhetorical question about His coming to fulfill prophecies, the Lord warns that His fury and fervor ("jealousy") will arise, and there will be earthquakes, swords, pestilence, and storms of rain, hail, fire, and brimstone against the invaders. They will find out that they have not attacked an undefended people but the people of the Lord (Ezek. 38:14-23).

39:1-29 Therefore, thou son of man, prophesy against Gog, and say, Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal. And I will turn thee back

The prophecy continues, foretelling destruction of the attacking forces, leaving only one-sixth of them alive. Their bodies will be carrion, and their homelands will be burned (Ezek. 39:2-7). Cleanup operations will take seven years and the burial of the remains of the armies seven months, even though scavenging birds and animals will have done their work (Ezek. 39:8-20). Then the unbelieving nations (the "heathen") will know that divine power and judgment are at work, and Israel will know the Lord again. All nations will know that only because of disobedience, sin, and iniquity will people suffer who have made covenants with the Lord (Ezek. 39:23-24). Then, after the justice of punishment is finished, the mercy of compassion will bring a restoration. The people will come to know by their experience that the Lord is God and that in righteousness he will not abandon them (Ezek. 39:25-29).

Note that this battle with Gog from the land of Magog is to be before the Millennium (cf. D&C 29:20-21). Another conflict will come after the Millennium, when "Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, And shall go out to deceive the nations which are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle" (Rev. 20:7-8).

40:1-49 in the fourteenth year after that the city was smitten, . . . the hand of the Lord was upon me, and brought me thither. . . . and, behold, there was a man, whose appearance was like the appearance of brass, with a line of flax in his hand, and a measuring reed; and he stood in the gate

Ezekiel's last great vision came in the twenty-fifth year of his residence among the captives in Babylon, the fourteenth year after Jerusalem was conquered and the temple destroyed. He was taken in vision to the future land of Israel, to the top of a very high mountain from which he could see "the frame of a city on the south." His angelic guide met him at the gate and conducted him to a great enclosure five hundred cubits square (as calculated from the measurements of the gates, the temple, the altar, and the spaces between. Ezek. 42:16-20 renders the measurement as five hundred "reeds" but that may be in error). The guide showed him the measurements of the outer gatehouses, porches, and chambers of the east, north, and south sides and the seven steps that led up to each gate. Then the guide showed him three inner gatehouses with their courts and chambers and the tables for preparation of sacrifices (Ezek. 40:2-43), the chambers for the singers and for the priests, the sons of Zadok (Ezek. 40:44-46), and the central court for the great altar that stood in front of the temple proper. Finally, the guide showed him the porch of the temple, its great posts and gates (Ezek. 40:48-49).

By correlation of these descriptions and those in the chapters that follow concerning the temple facilities and their uses, it is possible to sketch the ground plan and floor plan; such a sketch may be found in most Bible encyclopedias.

41:1-26 Afterward he brought me to the temple

Ezekiel's spiritual guide conducted him through the temple proper, showing him measurements of the door to the holy place, the walls, and the side chambers. These were in three stories, each being widened by rebatements as the wall went up (Ezek. 41:1-11). The guide showed the prophet a space west of the temple, the outer measurements of the temple, the windows, and decorations of cherubs and palm trees (Ezek. 41:12-21). Then he showed him the inner altar of incense, the table, doors, windows, and chambers (Ezek. 41:22-26).

42:1-20 Then he brought me forth into the utter court. . . . and over against the pavement which was for the utter court, was gallery against gallery in three stories

The guide showed Ezekiel the chambers north of the temple proper, but the description given is difficult to visualize. Evidently there were also chambers to the south of the temple. The priests' ceremonial and preparatory activities in those chambers were briefly indicated (Ezek. 42:1-14). The prophet was also shown dimensions of the outer walls. As indicated above, the outer walls were probably five hundred cubits on each side, even though they are here described as five hundred "reeds" (Ezek. 42:15-20; cf. Ezek. 40; and commentary).

43:1-27 Afterward he brought me to the gate . . . that looketh toward the east: And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the east

The high point of the final revelations to Ezekiel is described in this chapter and the next. He saw the return of the Glory of the Lord to the future temple in some of the same imagery he had seen in his call and in the departure of the Spirit of the Lord from the temple (Ezek. 43:1-6; 1:4-28; 3:22-23; 10; 11:23).

During this vision, the prophet was promised that the Lord will come to dwell in His house on earth forever, but the voice of the Lord reminded him about the inimical acts and attitudes of former Israelite kings, which had caused His Spirit to withdraw before. Ezekiel was told to communicate these things and teach Israel the modes of worship and the law of the future temple (Ezek. 43:6-12). After being told some specifications about the altar, he was taught the ordinances that the future priests, "the seed of Zadok," would conduct (Ezek. 43:13-27).

44:1-31 Then he brought me back the way of the gate . . . toward the east . . . Then said the Lord unto me; This gate shall be shut, . . . and no man shall enter in by it; because the Lord, the God of Israel, hath entered in by it. It is for the prince; . . . he shall sit in it to eat bread before the Lord; he shall enter by the way of the porch

The Lord explained that the east gate of the temple compound will be restricted to access by the Lord, who will meet there with the "prince," who will there "eat bread before the Lord" (Ezek. 44:1-3a). No further information was recorded about the future government, but it is described elsewhere (TG, "Kingdom of God, on Earth").

Ezekiel saw that "the glory of the Lord filled the house of the Lord" (Ezek. 44:4), and he fell upon his face in awe, whereupon the Lord again told him to remind the rebellious of Israel of their lack of reverence and obedience, which had separated them from Him in the past. No unworthy people will have temple privileges in the future, and only worthy priests will minister in it (Ezek. 44:5-16). The proper clothing and conduct of the ministering priesthood was then reviewed (Ezek. 44:17-31 and fn.). This was not the end of the great vision and revelation on the temple.

45:1-25 when ye shall divide by lot the land for inheritance, ye shall offer an oblation unto the Lord, an holy portion of the land

This chapter begins the description of the divisions of the Holy Land of the future. An immense rectangle is first specified, in the midst of which was a square like that previously described (in Ezek. 42:16-20) to be allocated for the temple. Allocations within the great rectangle were made for the priests, Levites, other Israelites, and for "the prince" (Ezek. 45:1-8; Ezek. 48).

The rest of this chapter specifies future offerings by the "princes of Israel." Some are like former offerings, and some are new (Ezek. 45:9-25 and fn.).

46:1-24 Thus saith the Lord God; The gate of the inner court that looketh toward the east shall be shut the six working days; but on the sabbath it shall be opened, and in the day of the new moon it shall be opened. And the prince shall enter by the way of the porch . . . and shall stand by the post of the gate

Further specifications were given for the use of the eastern gate (Ezek. 46:1-3; cf. 43:4; 44:1-3). Apart from the way the "prince" will have access to the area, the people may enter by the north gate and leave by the south, or enter by the south and leave by the north. Offerings are specified for the prince and people (Ezek. 46:4-15). Regulations are given concerning inheritances for descendants of the prince and for the servants (Ezek. 46:16-18).

The divine guide conducted the prophet to the chambers of the priests and the place where trespass offerings and other offerings are to be boiled or baked (Ezek. 46:19-24).

47:1-23 Afterward he brought me again unto the door of the house; and, behold, waters issued out from under the threshold of the house eastward

The guide had yet more physical and spiritual marvels to teach the prophet. Water flowing from the right side of the temple by the altar into the valley (Kidron) toward the sea (Dead Sea) is to become an ever-greater river as it goes, bringing life along its course and healing (making fresh) the salty water of that sea. Fish shall abound and trees bear fruit for food every month and leaves for healing. Similar revelations have been given to other prophets (Ezek. 47:1-12, 1b; note that Zechariah saw the healing waters go toward both the east and the west seas). The concept is evident that "living water" shall flow forth from the presence of the Messiah and indeed bring life and healing as it flows, renewing the whole world.

The remainder of the chapter sets out the boundaries of the future promised land and promises portions to all twelve tribes, with a brief note to indicate that Joseph's two tribes will help make up the twelve portions. It is made explicit in the next chapter (Ezek. 48) that the tribe of Levi has a special portion in connection with the temple area. The boundaries of the future promised land can be compared to those of the original by referring to the cross-references cited in the footnotes (Ezek. 47:13-21; Num. 34-35; Josh. 14-17).

Note the Mosaic laws regarding treatment of "strangers" (Ezek. 47:22-23).

48:1-35 Now these are the names of the tribes. From the north end to the coast

The north border is again identified; then an equal portion is prescribed for each of seven of the tribes (Ezek. 48:1-7; cf. 47:13-21). Further details are given about the large tracts for the temple, the priests and Levites, and the "prince." The portions for the remaining five tribes are then listed (Ezek. 48:8-29; cf. 45:1-8).

The city walls and gates are also described. The length of each side may be calculated (cf. Ezek. 40:5c). Compare those descriptions to the future city seen by John the Revelator (Ezek. 48:30-35; Rev. 21:12-27).

In the conclusion to his great vision, the prophet was told "the name of the city from that day shall be, The Lord is there" (Heb., JHVH Shamah) or, according to latter-day revelation, "the name of the city from that day shall be called, Holy; for the Lord shall be there" (JST Ezek. 48:35).

For this prophetic book by Ezekiel—about the end of the ancient Israelite kingdoms, the departure of the Spirit of the Lord from the first temple in Jerusalem, and the destruction of that temple—the last nine chapters fittingly detail the prophet's visions of a glorious future temple, to which the Lord will come to rule the world amidst peace and beauty at last.
