Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

HOSEA

Hosea was among the earliest of the writing prophets in the last centuries of northern Israel's history. His book is first among the twelve minor (meaning "small") prophetic books. Though they may be smaller in size, these books are not of minor importance; their doctrines are as true and their messages as vital as those of the major ("large") books. Minor describes the quantity rather than quality of prophetic content.

All of the prophets whose work is recorded in the Old Testament taught some of the same basic concepts, doctrines, warnings, and promises. Their teachings are in the books of Moses, the so-called historical books, and in the sixteen prophetic books. In particularly critical times, the Lord sent prophets to urge his chosen people to repent, return to spiritual and moral fidelity, and fulfill their covenants with God; to warn the Israelites and others of the consequences of failing to repent; to remind people that the Lord does not forsake them, though they sometimes forsake him; to let future generations of Israel and others know that if they are faithful to the true and living God, he will fulfill his covenant promises; and to let all people know of a brighter destiny for all humankind through the grace of the divine Redeemer. As Isaiah said, "Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end" (Isa. 9:7).

Prophets of God are spokesmen for God. Some of the writing prophets were called to warn the people during crisis times when Israel was threatened by the Assyrians; others, when Judah was threatened by the Babylonians; two, at the time of the return of Judah to rebuild Jerusalem and the temple; and one, at the end of the Old Testament period. Nevertheless, despite the warnings the Lord sent to the people by his "servants the prophets . . . they would not hear, but hardened their necks, like to the neck of their fathers, that did not believe in the Lord their God" (2 Kgs. 17:12-14).

According to the opening of Hosea's book, he received and recorded his revelations during the time of the second King Jeroboam in Israel and of the kings Uzziah to Hezekiah in Judah. Those were the same kings of Judah during Isaiah's and Micah's ministry, but the part of Hosea's service during the reign of Jeroboam would have been earlier than the service of Isaiah and Micah. Both Amos and Jonah prophesied in the time of the second Jeroboam of Israel, so part of their ministry was contemporary with Hosea's. (For an overview of Hosea's life and work and a chart of his place among the other prophets and the kings of the Old Testament, see BD, "Hosea"; "Chronology," p. 638.)

Hosea has been called a "prophet of love" because he showed forth the Lord's love of His people in his teachings and in his feelings for Israel.

Commentary

1:1-11 And the Lord said to Hosea, Go, take unto thee a wife of whoredoms and children of whoredoms: for the land hath committed great whoredom, departing from the Lord

After describing the setting of his ministry, Hosea described his call in symbolic terms. Whether the woman of unfaithfulness was that way when Hosea married her or became that way later is not stated, but Israel was certainly unstable religiously and morally when the Lord took her out of Egypt. She was faithful at times thereafter, but her faithfulness rose and fell throughout a long series of repenting and backsliding before her fall to conquering nations. Thus the strange, symbolic marriage of Hosea to Gomer represented the long, undulating covenant relationship of Israel with the Lord. The woman's name, Gomer, means "one who finishes, one who ends," but whether that has anything to do with the end of northern Israel near the end of Hosea's life is not told.

The name of the first child of Hosea and Gomer was Jezreel, the name of the valley where King Jehu had put many people to death in violation of the Lord's law of justice (Hosea 1:4a). Jezreel means "God shall sow" or "scatter abroad." As a name for their first child, it doubtless alluded to the imminent overthrow and scattering of Israel, which came in 722 B.C., only about seventy years later. The name of the second child, Lo-ruhamah, or "not pitied," warned that the mercy of God would not rob justice to save northern Israel, though Judah still qualified to be saved. The name of the third, Lo-ammi, "not my people," is a lament over the broken covenant relationship. Then the prophecy immediately turned to the future gathering of both Israel and Judah and a happier time when "it shall be said unto them, Ye are the sons of the living God" (Hosea 1:10). Israel shall again be united and serve God under one King.

Thus were launched both the account of Hosea's symbolic marriage and family and the themes of his prophetic mission.

2:1-23 Say ye unto your brethren, Ammi; and to your sisters, Ru-hamah. Plead with your mother, plead: for she is not my wife, neither am I her husband

The allegory of the prophet's marriage to an unfaithful wife and their family of symbolically named children continues in this chapter. The application of the allegory to the Lord and his covenant relationship with unfaithful Israel is made clear. The prophet and people were urged to remember the covenant of the Lord with his people (Ammi); then they could receive his mercy (Ruhamah). The prophet pleaded for Israel to put away whoredoms and adultery and return to the true God, the provider of all good. The alternative was to be stripped, shamed, abandoned, humiliated, and exiled.

The warning of dire conditions in captivity was intensified. There would be "thorns" of frustration, lifeless idols to supplicate for sustenance, no providence from the true God, and no recourse to comforting Sabbaths and feast days for the sustaining worship of the Lord.

The message turned to the loving offer of the Lord to guide Israel "into the wilderness," reminiscent of the escape from Egypt to the wilderness and then to the promised land. The Achor ("trouble") of Israel's former entry into the promised land will become a future "door of hope" (Heb., Petah-tiqvah; Hosea 2:15a). The Lord is to become the true Husband (not the "Baal") of Israel upon renewal of the covenant (Hosea 2:16a-c), and that renewal of the covenant is to last forever. Finally, only loving kindness, mercy, and faithfulness will characterize the relationship, and Israel will "know the Lord." In that day heaven and earth will respond to each other, and good things shall be created. The pathetic negative names will be reversed (Hosea 2:14-23 and fn.).

3:1-5 Then said the Lord unto me, Go yet, love a woman beloved of her friend, yet an adulteress. . . . So I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of silver, and for an homer of barley, and an half homer of barley

It seems evident that this was the same wife, Gomer, thus symbolizing the Lord's redeeming Israel. Hosea's paying half the price of a slave, plus an homer and a half of barley (perhaps equivalent to the other half of the price), may suggest partly the betrayal money paid to Judas Iscariot and partly the suffering of the Redeemer in his work of atonement (cf. Zech. 11:12). In order that mercy might not utterly rob justice, the redeemed wife was to repent and abide with the husband "many days" and not "play the harlot"; that would also symbolize Israel's repentance and return to "the Lord their God, and David their king; and shall fear the Lord and his goodness" (BD, "Fear").

4:1-19 the Lord hath a controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery, they break out, and blood toucheth blood Herewith begins a series of prophetic teachings about the nature and results of Israel's sins in Hosea's time.

What a trilogy of deficiencies: no truth, mercy, nor knowledge of God! The result was the flourishing of all the evils well-known in their last days—and in ours. The prophet succinctly outlined the results of such a lack of true values in society. He spoke vehemently for the Lord against the related sins of idolatry and adultery.

Though Hosea was a prophet chiefly to northern Israel (sometimes called Israel and sometimes Ephraim), he had warning words also for Judah. Anyone who has tried to lead a calf or to keep a lone lamb in a large area can understand Hosea's similes here; certainly everyone can understand the prophet's castigation of the evils of both women and men. The leaders loved indulgence too well to change, though turmoil and disaster faced them.

5:1-15 Hear ye this, O priests; and hearken, ye house of Israel; and give ye ear, O house of the king . . . ye have been a snare on Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor

The priesthood and the government were blameworthy both in causing and in allowing moral decay. Mizpah was an important mountain in Judah; and Tabor, in Israel. They represent the places where the watchmen (leaders) should have been conscientiously watching for dangers. They had not done so but had instead continued their useless and sinful apostate sacrifices. All this was known to God and to them, but they would not change and return to God. So Ephraim (northern Israel) was on the way out. Meanwhile, warnings from high places in Judah and Benjamin (Gibea and Ramah) might help Judah, though Ephraim be desolated; but faulty leadership in both nations was fostering decay. One foolish thing that both nations had done to win respite was to appease the approaching invaders, and both would suffer for it (Hosea 5:13-14; cf. 2 Kgs. 15-25). Judah, however, repented during the onslaught of Assyria, under the guidance of the Lord through Isaiah, and that nation was spared for a century.

Sometimes even the Lord retreats from efforts to save recalcitrant people until their suffering humbles them and makes them more receptive.

6:1-11 Come, and let us return unto the Lord: for he hath torn, and he will heal

This gentle persuasion was coupled with promises of redemption. Note therein a symbolic prophecy of the first resurrection and attendant restorations through an allusion to the resurrection of the Savior after three days. But because his people would not respond to persuasion, the Lord spoke to them like an exasperated parent. He had tried to hew (shape) them by the prophets to know that such values as mercy and knowledge were what he wanted, not empty ritual offerings (Hosea 6:4-6; cf. 1 Sam. 15:22). Ever since Adam, many of His children had broken covenants and committed sins, and some of Israel's priests had been the worst offenders.

7:1-16 When I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered

A recitation of the ills of Ephraim and all northern Israel includes all the well-known evils—burning lust, inebriation, political corruption, unfulfilled duty. Like a half-baked cake (not adequately prepared) or like a "silly dove" (lacking understanding), Ephraim was easy prey for Assyria. Ephraim had invited dangerous alliances sometimes with Egypt, sometimes even with Assyria, so it was destined for destruction. They who turned to God only in desperation did so without heart and quickly returned to mischief; therefore they must go into captivity.

8:1-14 They have set up kings, but not by me . . . Thy calf, O Samaria, hath cast thee off

Of the eighteen kings of northern Israel since the division of the kingdom after Solomon's death, only two had any semblance of being "set up" by the Lord; most had taken the throne bythe sword. The Levites and Aaronic priests had been immediately displaced by the first king Jeroboam and had fled to Judah. Little wonder that apostasy was rampant two hundred and thirty years after the division. The Lord had sent Elijah and Elisha and some of the "sons of the prophets" to serve northern Israel, but they had been able to accomplish precious little.

This revelation heralds the invader who was allowed to come upon a people who had transgressed their covenants and trespassed the law. Their self-made kings and manmade idols ("calf") had caused Israel to be cut off from the Lord (Hosea 8:1-6). Thus, because of many individual wrongs committed, a great national catastrophe, a "whirlwind" of invasion, was coming. The kings had tried to pacify Assyria with gifts and bribed other nations to no avail (Hosea 8:7-10 and fn.). They had worshipped in wrong ways, supplicated the wrong gods, and built unhallowed temples; therefore, they were on their way to bondage ("Egypt").

Judah was not without fault and would also be invaded but not taken captive at that time (Hosea 8:11-14).

9:1-17 Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy, as other people: for thou hast gone a whoring from thy God

The rebuke and chastisement of northern Israel continued. The people should expect no pleasures in the festivals of the harvest in "Egypt" (bondage) but would eat improper foods and dwell among "nettles" and "thorns" (Hosea 9:1-6). Eventually they would see that they had followed the wrong "prophets," just as they had in the early days at Gibeah and earlier at Baal-peor, though the Lord sought for the firstfruits of righteousness from them (Hosea 9:7-10 and fn.).

Because they brought up children with false ideas and wicked ways, the prophet prayed they might not beget, bear, nor rear children any more. Their wickedness "in Gilgal" may have been the lust for possessions exemplified by Achan, who kept valuable things at the fall of Jericho while Israel was encamped at Gilgal. Because of that misdeed, Israel failed in the siege at Ai (Josh. 5:10; 7:16-26). And because of more such wickedness, they would be smitten and scattered among the nations.

10:1-15 Israel is an empty vine, he bringeth forth fruit unto himself: according to the multitude of his fruit he hath increased the altars

In the vineyard of the Lord, the fruit of the Lord's people should be the good they bring into the lives of others, rather than each seeking "fruit unto himself" (Hosea 10:1c). Worshippers of the Lord should not be "divided" in their loyalties (Hosea 10:2a). Hence northern Israel would be exiles without a king. Like their ancestors who offered offerings to golden calves, they would be forsaken and fearful. Bethel means "house of God," but the Israelites had worshipped a calf-image there; so Hosea called it Beth-aven, "house of Sin" (Hosea 10:3-4, 5a, 8). The law of the harvest applied: as the first Assyrian invaders had done in Galilee ("Beth-arbel"), so Israel's sins at Beth-el would let invaders do to them, and their king would be cut off early (Hosea 10:6-15 and fn.).

In Gibeah, Israel had once nearly destroyed one tribe, Benjamin, because of sin; now all tribes but one would be destroyed for sinning ever since. Light work would not be found in captivity, but heavy toil (Hosea 10:9-11).

11:1-12 When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my son out of Egypt

As the chapter heading and the footnotes to the first verse indicate, the love of God in bringing young Israel out of Egypt became a symbol of his future bringing of the child Jesus back out of Egypt. The Lord had led Israel in the spirit of love when He gave young Jeroboam of Ephraim leadership of the ten tribes; but because of their apostasy since that beginning, their evils would take them back to bondage not in Egypt but in Assyria; they had been called to the most High but failed (Hosea 11:2-7; 1 Kgs. 11:28-36; 12:12-33; 13).

The love of God was shown in his lament, "How shall I give thee up, Ephraim"; he sorrowed to see them destroyed like the cities with Sodom and Gomorrah (Hosea 11:8a-b). He would not totally destroy "Ephraim," however, and in time the ten tribes will come to the Lord when he sends them a signal as strong as the roaring of a lion (Hosea 11:8-11).

In a brief summation, the Lord again chastened Ephraim but recognized some faithfulness in Judah.

12:1-14 Ephraim feedeth on wind, and followeth after the east wind

"Feeding on wind" symbolizes seeking and ingesting useless ideas and ways. The "east wind" is the dreaded khamsin, a desert wind bearing heat, dust, and destruction; here it symbolizes attempts to mollify the power of the east (Assyria), and Judah was not without fault in that regard. A symbolic overview of Israel's history follows.

At birth, Jacob's hand on Esau's heel was a sign that he would take his brother's place (Hosea 12:3a); when he wrestled with the angel and received the name Israel and when he covenanted at Bethel, he was blessed and gained good status with the Lord (Hosea 12:4-6 and fn.). On the other hand, Israel became an unfair "merchant," became rich, and turned from the Lord, who had brought the people out of bondage in Egypt and had given them the prophets. Northern Israel had turned to iniquity and vanity.

Jacob, as the patriarch, had worked for a wife in Syria (Haran) and been blessed; Israel as a nation had been saved from Egypt by the Lord through a prophet (Moses) and been blessed; but many times Ephraim and the rest of the ten tribes had provoked the Lord and had to bear their guilt.

13:1-16 When Ephraim spake trembling, he exalted himself in Israel; but when he offended in Baal, he died. . . . Yet I am the Lord thy God from the land of Egypt, and thou shalt know no god but me: for there is no saviour beside me

These statements point up the two major themes of the prophet Hosea: Israel, with Ephraim as her leader, began humbly and righteously, but her flagrant sins were causing the nation to go into bondage. Yet all was not lost forever; in the end they would know no other God and their Savior would triumph. The prophet summed up their sins and again stated the desires of the Lord to save them. The Lord threatened punishment, using powerful symbols of predatory beasts that consume and destroy. He lamented the deterioration of the kingdom of Israel and renewed His promise to be their ultimate King. Finally, in one of the few Old Testament prophecies of the literal resurrection of the dead, Hosea promised ransom and redemption from the grave by the Lord (Hosea 13:14a-c).

The phrase "repentance shall be hid from mine eyes" should be part of the next verse. (Remember that versification is a modern modification of the ancient text.) Thus the final statement would be another lament that Israel's sins had been so prevalent that it was too late for repentance. Though once fruitful, Israel would be blasted by that "east wind" (Assyria) and would be desolated, "for she hath rebelled against her God" (Hosea 13:15-16 and fn.).

14:1-9 O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God; for thou hast fallen by thine iniquity. . . . I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely

The final appeal by the prophet Hosea sought for Israel's repentance and return to true worship. He told Israel how to confess and worship the Lord; true prayer would be more acceptable than perfunctory sacrifice (the translation of verse 2 is inept). Israel should recognize that the power of Assyria and their horses and the power of the gods made by human hands were nothing. In the hands of the Lord, the fatherless can hope for salvation (Hosea 14:1-3).

In beautiful expressions the Lord promised through his prophet healing, love, and redemption. Then Hosea summed up the glorious future redemption of Israel under Ephraim's leadership. He challenged readers of his words to understand them through wisdom and prudence and to walk according to them, though "transgressors shall fall therein" (Hosea 14:4-9).

Hosea has been called a prophet of love, for in spite of all of Israel's sinning, he clearly conveyed to them the reluctance of the Lord to let them go, emphasizing His eagerness to redeem them.
