Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

AMOS

The book of the prophet Amos is the report of the mission of a farmer and shepherd from Judah, called to preach in the northern state of Israel in the time of "Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel" (Amos 1:1). He proclaimed to all Israel for the Lord, "You only have I known of all the families of the earth: therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities" (Amos 3:2); the principle is that where much has been given, much is required (cf. D&C 82:3). His nine chapters are one unit; perhaps they are the speech he delivered "at Bethel . . . the king's chapel" (Amos 7:10-13).

The prophet opened his record with a remarkable overview of inhumanity to fellow humans, as shown in five nations surrounding Israel (Amos 1:3-2:3). Then he chastised his own homeland of Judah for despising the law of the Lord (Amos 2:4-5). Finally, in great detail and biting vigor, he dealt with all the evils in northern Israel in particular and all Israel in general. He foretold Israel's being captured and scattered (Amos 2:6-9:10). Then at last he left a brief but beautiful preview of the great day of restoration in the last days (Amos 9:11-17).

In reprimanding Israel, Amos told why the Lord sends prophets (Amos 3:7). Later, in replying to the charge of the king's court priest, he gave an account of his own divine call to be a prophet and declared the purpose of it (Amos 7:10-17).

The time of Amos's mission "in the days of Uzziah king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam . . . king of Israel" (Amos 1:1) was approximately 790 to 740 B.C., a little earlier than Isaiah's ministry and overlapping the first part of the mission of Hosea. How long he served is not now known. A good brief introduction to this prophet, his times, and his book is given in the Bible Dictionary ("Amos").

The book of Amos is acclaimed for its religious and humanitarian teachings and also for its literary excellence in Hebrew. A farmer and shepherd from a small town in Judah, Amos wrote as divine inspiration worked in and with his clear and active mind.

Commentary

1:1-2 The words of Amos, who was among the herdmen of Tekoa, which he saw concerning Israel in the days of Uzziah king of Judah, and . . . Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel

Amos was evidently a common man of the land (Amos 7:14-15), called by the Lord about seventy years before northern Israel's exile. He warned the leaders and the people of imminent destruction and sought to save them, saying, "Seek good, and not evil, that ye may live" (Amos 5:14). The word saw in verse 1 is used to translate the Hebrew chazah, which denotes divine vision, not ordinary sight. The metaphor of a lion roaring in warning, "The Lord will roar from Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem" (v. 2), was also used by other prophets (Amos 1:2a; Joel 3:16). The temple in Jerusalem was a place for the Lord's communication with them. There is symbolism also in warnings going out from the mountain of the Lord's house in Judah, addressed to the high, beautiful, and productive Mount Carmel in northern Israel. The withering of Carmel's top represents the deterioration of the highest political and religious leaders of northern Israel who were the cause of many of her ills.

The earthquake mentioned by Amos and again by Zechariah (Amos 1:1c) two and one-half centuries later must have been a notable event in the days of King Uzziah.

1:3-15; 2:1-5 Thus saith the Lord; For three transgressions . . . and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof

Though the message of Amos was to northern Israel, he began by showing the Lord's concern with evils in nations all around. The formula "For three transgressions . . . and for four" (Amos 1:3) is a Hebrew way of saying they were full to overflowing with atrocities. Three symbolizes fullness, and four, excess. His introduction thus confirms that God is concerned with the evils of man's inhumanity to his fellowman everywhere. In Israel, this prophet who knew all the evils done by his neighbors may have seemed to be a prophet worth hearing—until he turned the condemnation upon the people of Israel themselves.

Note the merciless violence done, and the inevitable punishment to follow, in each nation named. They are Damascus, meaning Syria's leaders; Gaza and the other Philistine cities of Ashdod, Ashkelon, and Ekron; Tyre, which might imply all of Phoenicia; Edom, with its major cities Teman and Bozrah; Ammon, with its capital city Rabbah; and Moab, including "the palaces of Kerioth."

Then the prophet turned to his homeland, the southern Israelite kingdom of Judah. Those people and their king were more blameworthy than their neighbors, for they knew the law and the commandments of God but failed to keep them (Amos 2:4-5).

2:6-16 Thus saith the Lord; For three transgressions of Israel, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof

The prophet began the reproof of northern Israel with the formula applied to the other six nations, but he continued to reprimand them—not in three or four verses but throughout most of the remaining chapters of the book. The enslavement of poor children, dispossession of the poor, immorality, ignoring compassionate principles and practices, and indulgence in confiscated wines were among the range of Israel's sins and crimes cited by the prophet (Amos 2:6-8).

Israel's ingratitude for the promised land after deliverance from bondage in Egypt was a general charge, introducing many others (Amos 2:9-10).

The calling of the Israelites, as heirs of the mission of Abraham, was to serve the Lord as dedicated messengers and exemplars before other nations (TG, "Abrahamic Covenant"; "Israel, Mission of"). That duty in service is symbolized here by the calling of Nazarites (people consecrated to the service of the Lord); but Israel was not giving consecrated service nor heeding the prophets, the spokesmen of the Lord. They had strayed far from being a dedicated people; indeed, they had violated true Nazarites and cast out the prophets. The result was that the Lord himself was oppressed and burdened by their wickedness and failure to serve Him. Therefore He would let them be punished (Amos 2:11-16, 11a).

3:1-15 Hear this word that the Lord hath spoken against you, O children of Israel, against the whole family which I brought up from the land of Egypt

Where much had been given, much was required; that principle was as logical as the laws of cause and effect—which the prophet illustrated by several examples (Amos 3:3-6). Yet the Lord will not take action without warning, and Amos was giving the warnings. Why would the people not hearken? (Amos 3:7-8, 7a-d).

With irony, the prophet invited the peoples of Ashdod (Philistines) and Egypt to assemble upon the mountains of Samaria, the capital of Israel, to see the tumult and oppression among the Lord's people, who "know not to do right" and "store up violence and robbery in their palaces" (Amos 3:9-10). Because of such sins and crimes in Israel, adversaries would surely be allowed to come into the land and plunder it. The remnants would be like a few bones and a piece of the ear of a lamb remaining after an attack by a lion. Of the luxurious trappings in their winter houses, summer houses, and "houses of ivory," only the corner of a bed or the leg of a Damascene couch would be left by the plunderers (as the Hebrew of v. 12 states). Idolatrous altars, such as the one built by the first King Jeroboam at Bethel, would be destroyed (Amos 3:11-15, 14a-b; 1 Kgs. 12:28-33).

4:1-13 Hear this word, ye kine of Bashan, that are in the mountain of Samaria, which oppress the poor, which crush the needy, which say to their masters, Bring, and let us drink

It is a lesson of history that when the women of any culture are as corrupt as the men, all is lost, for there is no one then to raise the children as a viable society. The prophet addressed the women of the upper classes in Israel as "cows of Bashan" (Amos 4:1a). Bashan was upper trans-Jordan pastureland, now called the Golan Heights, where cattle ate their fill and grew fat. The metaphor was a way of reprimanding women's self-indulgences. They and their "masters" (Heb., lit., "husbands") would be taken away as captives with "hooks" and "fishhooks." Indeed, an ancient bas-relief shows prisoners of war tethered in long, pitiful queues.

Scathing irony was in the prophet's words as he invited Israelites to continue their rituals of worship at idolatrous altars such as those at Bethel and Gilgal. Their reward would be famine—typified by "cleanness of teeth" and "want of bread"; for the Lord would send them drought and famine. Yet the Lord knew they would not repent and return to him—not by reason of famine, drought, crop diseases, nor pestilence. Therefore he gave them an ominous warning: "Prepare to meet thy God." The Lord, the Creator, knows even man's thoughts (Amos 4:12-13).

5:1-27 For thus saith the Lord unto the house of Israel, Seek ye me, and ye shall live

A lament over the fall of "the virgin of Israel" (Amos 5:2), followed by an invitation to return, opens this revelation. She, who had been sustained and defended by the Lord in former times when she was deserving, would not be defended in the coming invasion but must fall if she did not seek the Lord and live. Of cities that sent out a thousand to battle, a hundred would be left; of those that sent a hundred, ten would be left. Nevertheless, the prophet and the Lord never gave up hope of saving some of Israel; they repeatedly entreated Israel to seek the Lord, seek the Creator, seek good and not evil, hate evil, love good, and establish justice (Amos 5:4, 6, 8, 14, 15). The final appeal to foster justice and righteousness is poetically beautiful and religiously correct (Amos 5:24).

The Lord was cognizant of the people's rejection of the prophets, their oppression of the poor, their injustices, their hypocritical and token offerings, and their honoring of idols. Therefore, unless Israel repented, evil times were upon them. The "day of the Lord" would be a dark day for them, for they would go into captivity northward "beyond Damascus" (Amos 5:26-27).

6:1-14 Woe to them that are at ease in Zion, and trust in the mountain of Samaria

Zion often refers to Jerusalem, and Samaria was northern Israel's capital city. Woe was pronounced upon these erstwhile leaders because of their accelerating decadence; they were no better than Syrian or Philistine palaces. Those who were "at ease in Zion" assumed the day of reckoning would yet be far away and continued to enjoy luxurious, indulgent living, but they would be among the first in captivity (Amos 6:1-7).

Ironically the "excellency of Jacob" had turned into pride in palaces and possessions, which was, of course, abhorrent to the Lord. In the invasion, nine of ten people in a great house would die; survivors and relatives who came to dispose of the bodies would not dare to mention the name of the Lord any more because of the oppressor that had come to the land, terrorizing homes great and small (Amos 6:9-11).

It would be as illogical for the Lord to bless Israel in those times as for horses to run upon a rock or oxen to try to plow it; for the Israelites had rejoiced in idols and boasted in their own strength. Therefore, an invading nation (Assyria) would be raised up to afflict the land from its northern to its southern outposts (Amos 6:12-14).

7:1-9 Thus hath the Lord God shewed unto me; . . . grasshoppers . . . fire . . . a plumbline

Recorded here are three of five visions about impending destruction, which the prophet supplicated the Lord to hold back a while, hoping that the people might repent. The first vision was of a plague of grasshoppers that would destroy the second crop of grass to be mowed for hay, but the Lord did allow Israel time to repent (Amos 7:3a). The second was of a terrible fire that would destroy "Jacob," but the prophet prayed for time, which was granted (Amos 7:6a). In the third vision, the Lord was holding a plumbline, metaphorically to determine the uprightness of Israel. This time the verdict was that he would not grant any more time; the "high places" used for sinful worship since the days of Isaac and all other idolatrous "sanctuaries" would be laid waste, for the Lord would let the house of Jeroboam suffer the sword of the invaders (Amos 7:7-9).

7:10-17 Then Amaziah the priest of Bethel sent to Jeroboam king of Israel, saying, Amos hath conspired against thee

In this autobiographical segment, the prophet related his confrontation with Amaziah, a court "priest." Presumably it was over the prophet's frank statement that the Lord himself would "rise against" the king (cf. Amos 7:9, 11). Surprisingly, the king did not condemn Amos to death; and the priest commanded him to go back to his homeland of Judah to prophesy and make his living ("there eat bread") and not prophesy again in "the king's chapel, and . . . court" (Amos 7:13).

Amaziah's implication that Amos was a prophet like those of the priestcrafts of northern Israel, earning his "bread" by prophesying, aroused the resentment of the true prophet. He made it plain and clear that his work, his calling, and authority were from the Lord—not a profession. Instead of Amos's compliance, the court priest Amaziah received a prophecy in dire detail about himself and his family (Amos 7:14-17).

The account of the call of Amos shows who may be called on a mission by the Lord and by what authority a true missionary works.

8:1-14 And he said, Amos, what seest thou? And I said, A basket of summer fruit. Then said the Lord unto me, The end is come upon my people of Israel

An object was shown in this fourth vision (the first three are recorded in Amos 7:1-9), the name of which remind the prophet of the imminence of Israel's fall. Indeed, if the translation were slightly varied to "a basket of fall fruit; . . . the fall is come upon my people of Israel," the original wordplay in Hebrew would be preserved. The prophet foresaw more than the capture and scattering of the ten tribes of northern Israel, for he spoke of lamentation in the temple and "dead bodies in every place"; evidently, the fall of Judah (to come one hundred thirty years after northern Israel's exile) was included in Amos's general vision of the "fall" of the people Israel (Amos 8:1-3).

Reasons for the fall included all the wrongs Amos had so often denounced: oppression of the needy and the poor, merchants impatiently waiting through Sabbaths and festival days for resumption of commerce—and dishonest commerce at that, and rich people subjecting the poor and the debtors to involuntary servitude. A cataclysm of nature was anticipated: "I will cause the sun to go down at noon, and I will darken the earth in the clear day." Astronomers have long known that a total eclipse of the sun did occur on 15 June 763 B.C., which could have been in Amos's lifetime. The meaning of the prophecy may be extended, however, to anticipate the dark hours at midday at the death of the Savior and also to the remorse of some people, when they recognized that they had crucified the Lord (Amos 8:4-10, 9b, 10c; D&C 45:47-54; Zech. 12:10-12; Matt. 26:45).

The prophet then foresaw a long-range spiritual famine of "the word of the Lord." That famine continued from the last of the Old Testament prophets on, except for the period of the Savior's ministry, until the latter-day restoration. In Amos's application of this prophecy to his own times, he voiced a warning from the Lord that the spiritual thirst felt by the young people of the time was already at hand in Samaria, in Dan, the location of one of the golden calves of the first King Jeroboam (Amos 8:14b), and in Beer-sheba, known as a shrine for idolatrous worship in Amos's time.

9:1-15 I saw the Lord standing upon the altar: and he said, Smite the lintel of the door, . . . he that fleeth of them shall not flee away

This chapter records the fifth vision in the sequence. The context indicates it was given at the altar at Bethel, where the Lord symbolized destruction of the doorway so that none worshipping there could escape. Others in the community would be unable to hide anywhere, high or low (Amos 9:1-4). The land would be cursed and its dwellers would mourn, for Israel would become like the other nations around it (Amos 9:5-7).

In the future, however, the Lord will "sift" the Israelites who are scattered among all nations, to gather the good grain, not the least of which will "fall upon the earth" and be wasted, but the sinners shall perish (Amos 9:8-10). In that day, the Lord will restore the temple, and the remnants of the world ("Edom"), or the "heathen," who have been converted ("which are called by my name") shall live in his kingdom (Amos 9:11-12). The earth will be renewed and made productive, with harvest time running on into seed (planting) time. The descendants of the exiles of Israel will be gathered to "build the waste cities, and inhabit them," to plant vineyards and gardens, and enjoy the produce thereof. Peoples will be "planted" in their homelands, no more to be disinherited (Amos 9:13-15).

So ends the record of the prophetic teachings of Amos. At the last day his people will "hate the evil, and love the good, and establish judgment [justice] in the gate," and surely "the Lord God of hosts will be gracious" unto all (Amos 5:15).
