Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

OBADIAH

Nothing is known about Obadiah's background or mission but his name means "One serving Jehovah," which is appropriate for his calling. And all that is known of Obadiah's prophetic works is this short message from a vision of Edom's doom (BD, "Edom"; "Idumea"; "Obadiah"). The Edomites were the descendants of Esau, brother of Jacob, or Israel. Edom was virtually always an enemy to Israel and Judah, however, and as a result, the very name of Edom (or Idumea) came to symbolize "the world" (D&C 1:36; cf. Isa. 34:5a).

The particular occasion of Obadiah's prophecy was evidently the time of the Babylonian conquest of Judah. As with most of the prophecies to Israel, this one also extends far beyond the immediate, reaching to ultimate events in the earth's destiny. Much of what Obadiah prophesied can be found in other books of the Prophets, especially Jeremiah (see fn.), but there is one gem of information at the end that is unique (Obad. 1:21).

Commentary

1:1-9 The vision of Obadiah. Thus saith the Lord God concerning Edom

Obadiah declared that he had heard "a rumor" (Heb., lit., "communication") from the Lord encouraging an attack upon Edom by other nations. Edom's location was in the Arabah, south of the Dead Sea, with abundant ravines, cliffs, and caves (as at Petra). That terrain had given her a false sense of security. But she was about to be plundered more thoroughly than thieves could do, stripped more bare than harvesters in a vineyard would do, and utterly vanquished.

1:10-16 For thy violence against thy brother Jacob shame shall cover thee, and thou shalt be cut off for ever

In the prophet's view, the historical violence between the descendants of Edom and Jacob had been topped by the Edomites' willful participation in the Babylonian capture of Judah. The prophet mentioned their casting lots upon Jerusalem, jeering at the captives, exulting, plundering, and blocking the flight of refugees.

In the "day of the Lord" all "heathen" (people who will have chosen to remain out of the Lord's kingdom) will suffer according to their ways and deeds. In a dramatic characterization, Obadiah declared for the Lord that as they had "drunk upon my holy mountain," they and other "heathen" would "drink" themselves into oblivion.

1:17-21 But upon mount Zion shall be deliverance, and there shall be holiness

In contrast to those who have chosen to be out of the Kingdom, those within it shall inherit the earth after it is cleansed by fire (Obad. 1:18a; cf. Mal. 4:1-2). Israelite possessions in the former lands of Edom and Canaan are briefly outlined (cf. Ezek. 48).

The promise of "deliverance" in Obadiah 1:17 is enlarged upon in verse 21. Under the Spirit of holiness, "saviours" (Heb., moshi'im, "those bearing salvation") on Mount Zion will make deliverance available to all who are judged worthy (Obad. 1:21 and fn.). "Mount Zion" is the place of the temple, and so the ordinances of salvation there are implied. On the function of judging (Obad. 1:21c), allusion is made to the law that goes forth from Zion (cf. Isa. 2:3).

If only for the message of the last verse, this little book of prophecy would have been worthy of preservation through the ages.
