Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

MICAH

Micah was a prophet at the same time as Isaiah and part of the time of Hosea (BD, "Micah"). Isaiah and Micah gave similar prophecies on the rise of Zion in the latter days (Isa. 2:1-5; Micah 4:1-5), but Micah recorded some prophecies not found elsewhere. He foretold, for instance, the place of the anticipated birth of the Messiah (Micah 5:2). Some of his teachings are distinctive, too, such as his succinct summary of what the Lord requires of man: to do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with him (Micah 6:6-8).

Little is known about Micah's place of origin as a "Morasthite." Two places with related names are mentioned in Micah's first chapter, "Moresheth-gath" and "Mareshah" (Micah 1:14-15). Both places are in the hill country about fifteen miles northwest of Hebron, near Lachish. Like Amos, Micah was evidently from a small town in Judah; but though we know that Amos preached in northern Israel, we do not know where Micah preached. His messages cover things "which he saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem" (Micah 1:1) that also concern peoples of other times, including the latter days.

Commentary

1:1-16 The word of the Lord that came to Micah the Morasthite in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, . . . which he saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem

Except for the introductory statement, the whole prophetic book is in good Hebrew poetry. That adds to its literary beauty but also contributes to obscurity in some passages.

Samaria was the capital of northern Israel and Jerusalem the capital of Judah; his salutation thus indicates that his book addresses both nations. Indeed, his announcement addresses everyone everywhere and commends the witness of the Lord to them—and against them. It is evident that Micah, as a spokesman for the Lord, intended his messages to be applied by anyone in the world experiencing such conditions of evil as he was about to describe and denounce in his own country.

That perspective continues in the general announcement that the Lord is coming down in ultimate judgment upon "the high places of the earth" (Micah 1:3). Like the melting of mountains and the splitting of valleys, he saw judgment poured down.

More immediately, because of the "transgression of Jacob" (meaning all Israel), judgment was coming to his land, and those most responsible for the people's transgressions were the leaders in Samaria and Jerusalem (Micah 1:5). The responsibility of the leaders for conditions in society is frequently expressed in the prophetic books.

The message to Samaria predicted total destruction of the city with its graven images, its merchandise in harlotry, and all the evils of both. Some of those evils had come also to Judah, even to Jerusalem (Micah 1:6-9).

Turning to Judah, Micah pronounced a series of dirges against cities, not all of which are now known. The dirges are expressed poetically in puns or other forms of wordplay, quite impossible to reproduce in translation but by using its name to typify its fate, these figures of speech imply that each place would suffer an end appropriate to the meaning of its name (Micah 1:10-16, 10b).

2:1-13 Woe to them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds! when the morning is light, they practise it, because it is in the power of their hand

This prophecy also concerns all Israel, but more generally, it may apply to any leader or person who imposes suffering and injustice upon the poor and humble. A general application of Micah's observation is that an evil mind thinks at night of evil deeds to do, and an evil one rises up in the light to do them. Examples of such deeds follow, and their results are depicted. The prophet foretold the regrets and complaints of evildoers, especially those who were Israel's leaders, when they lost their heritage and no one cast lots for redistributing it to them. Naturally, such people did not wish to hear such prophecies, so prophecy would cease—and so also would the opportunity to repent.

To the people's complaints, the prophet replied with challenges to the whole "house of Jacob," asking whether the Spirit of the Lord can be restricted or a limit placed on his actions. People should change their own ways and walk uprightly; thus, these prophetic words would accomplish some good (Micah 2:7).

The prophet told more of the people's evil ways, such as taking the clothes off the very backs of unsuspecting souls, leaving them like refugees, and taking homes away from women and children, denying them their heritage. They should repent of ways of life that could only destroy them.

True prophets they did not like, but lying prophets, telling of new indulgences in alcohol, they did like (Micah 2:6, 11).

The concluding prophecy of the chapter has been interpreted as a contrasting forecast of the gathering and the restoration of Israel, but it could also be a bitter warning that because of corruption, the Lord would lead the people of Israel (or let them be taken) out through the broken city walls and gates into captivity with their king.

3:1-12 Hear, I pray you, O heads of Jacob, and ye princes of the house of Israel; Is it not for you to know judgment?

Again addressing the leaders of Israel, the prophet characterized them as butchers and cannibals in their callous injustice to their own people. It was terribly shocking symbolism, but the prophet wanted them to know that because of their lack of justice in taking advantage of people, in their own time of need the Lord would "hide his face from them" and not listen to their pleas.

He turned again to the false prophets, who consumed what the people gave them and proclaimed "peace" unto them but "prepared war" against any who would not give what they demanded. To such "prophets" the "night" was approaching in which they would not know what to prophesy but be ashamed and confounded; they certainly would not get any enlightenment from God (Micah 3:5-7).

In contrast, the true prophet, who was full of the power of the Spirit of the Lord, having judgment and might, proclaimed Israel's sins and transgressions. He charged the leaders with miscarriage of justice and equity: causing violence by taking profit from their work (an evil called "priestcraft" in the Book of Mormon). Yet they falsely claimed the protection of the Lord. In one withering prophecy, he described their erstwhile "Zion" as plowed and wrecked, with the temple mount looking like a wilderness.

4:1-13 But in the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, . . . and people shall flow unto it

In contrast to the destruction prophesied for his times, Micah foretold, as Isaiah had, the latter-day establishment of the house of the Lord "in the top of the mountains" with people flowing unto it from many nations to learn the ways and walk in the paths of the God of Israel (Micah 4:1). His word and his law shall go forth from the Zion in the mountains and from Jerusalem. "Strong nations" (Micah 4:3) will be judged and rebuked, weapon makers will make tools for farming, war will cease, peace will be in each home and nation, and the only government will be that of the Lord. Because these were events that the prophet Isaiah "saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem," and Micah recorded almost the same words without saying they were revealed to him, it may be that Micah quoted them from Isaiah (Micah 4:1-3 and fn.; Isa. 2:1-4; BD, "Zion").

Micah added statements, from the Lord, that people will have their own homes and orchards and be true to the Lord, people who have been afflicted or exiled will become a strong nation, the Lord shall reign over them, and the kingdom "shall come to the daughter of Jerusalem" (Micah 4:4-8).

Briefly, the prophet looked again at the pitiable Jerusalem of his century. Except for one good king in Micah's own time (Hezekiah) and one a century later (Josiah), there would be "no king in thee," and Judah would be taken captive to Babylon.

Again he considered the failed "Zion" of his times, with enemies looking greedily at her. He knew that they could not know the intent of the Lord for the future, and he wished for the great day when a future "daughter of Zion" shall "arise and thresh" and consecrate the harvest of peoples "unto the Lord of the whole earth" (Micah 4:9-13).

5:1-15 But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting

That passage states the theme of this chapter. Verse 1 belongs to the end of the previous chapter and the attack on Jerusalem there prophesied (Micah 4:11-5:1).

Micah prophesied the birth of our Savior. He was the only Old Testament prophet to name Bethlehem as the birthplace of the divine Messiah. It was, of course, the place of David's origin, and Isaiah referred to the Messiah as the "stem of Jesse" (Isa. 11:1). All the prophets knew he would be born of the royal line of Judah (TG, "Jesus Christ, Davidic Descent of"), which originated in Bethlehem. This divine Ruler's "goings forth," or origins, had been from the beginning, from days of eternity (TG, "Jesus Christ, Antemortal Existence of"). This prophecy was Micah's great "good news" for Israel and the world, but the immediate bad news was that the Israelites would be given up in their wickedness into the hands of conquerors and remain in exile until the messianic times.

The gospel hope was pronounced: the Messiah shall feed his flock and provide for their needs everywhere. He will do it "in the strength of the Lord," since he is the Lord. All the earth will know of his majesty, and he will maintain the peace when a latter-day "Assyrian" (adversary) attacks his people. He will have many leaders; "seven . . . and eight" is an idiom implying a complete roster, and more. They will "waste" (destroy) the enemy forces (Micah 5:4-6).

Then, in the time of peace, "Jacob" (or the chosen) will be a blessing to all peoples. "Israel," meaning the Messiah's latter-day people from whatever lineage they come, will be leaders in the midst of other peoples "as a lion among the beasts of the forest" (Micah 5:8)—invincible. They will vanquish all forms of evil. The struggle is told in terms of ancient wars, and one could wish it were told in more ideal descriptions of the triumph of truth, goodness, and peace over evil crafts, idolatrous practices, and destruction. The climax is that the Lord will at last be the true Ruler (Micah 5:7-15). The resurrected Lord cited these prophetic words to the Nephites and applied them to the overthrow of evil in the last days (3 Ne. 16:15; 21:12-18).

6:1-16 the Lord hath a controversy with his people, and he will plead with Israel

This message went back again to the situation existing in the prophet's own times. The Lord called to those on high and those at the foundations of the earth to be witnesses of what he had done to redeem his people and what they had done to provoke him, even as he brought them from bondage in Egypt and up to the promised land.

Then Micah posed some rhetorical questions about what the Lord really required of true followers: would it be burnt offerings, calves, great numbers of animals, great amounts of oil, even their firstborn children? After all those hyperbolic questions, his answer was one of pure peace and the essence of true religion: What is good in the eyes of the Lord? What is required by him? "To do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God." That is a classic, succinct summary of good religion (Micah 6:6-8).

Immediately the prophet again challenged his people to hearken to the Lord's words; he urged them to be aware of the "rod" that the Lord had provided (Micah 6:9; 1 Ne. 11:25). Unrighteous gain, dishonest dealing, and violent and deceitful negotiations were among the common evils of the time. Therefore, the Lord would let his people be smitten with hunger, miscarriage, and death—and with failure of their crops (Micah 6:13-15). Because northern Israel had never forsaken all the ways of kings Omri and Ahab, and of Jezebel, they would be desolated, and they had to bear their reproach (Micah 6:16a-c).

7:1-20 Woe is me! for I am as when they have gathered the summer fruits, as the grapegleanings of the vintage: there is no cluster to eat. . . . The good man is perished out of the earth: and there is none upright among men

Somewhat in the manner later used by the prophet Jeremiah (cf. Lam. 3), Micah concluded his prophetic writings with words of lament about the Israelites. His words are straightforward and clear about the lack of goodness in Israelite society (Micah 7:2-4). His characterizations of family relationships indicate pathetic conditions. Under such situations, there is nowhere for a good person to turn for help but to God (Micah 7:5-7). Speaking for the people, however, he recommended that the enemies should not rejoice or consider Israel vanquished altogether, for under the Lord there is always hope for redemption. Continuing to speak for Israel, he also resolved to bear the just punishment until worthy of defense by the Lord; and he expressed hope for punishment of the injustices done by enemies (Micah 7:8-13).

The prophet prayed for the providential times of the Messiah to come. The "rod" here is the shepherd's staff with which the shepherd protects his flock. The prophet anticipated "marvellous things" the Lord would show the world. He anticipated the amazement of the nations in seeing the redemption of the Lord, falling down before Him in "fear" ("reverence"; Micah 7:14-17).

Micah uttered his own words of praise and gratitude for the Lord's mercy shown through His forgiveness and redemption, assuring the people of the Lord's compassion in subduing their iniquities and casting their sins into the sea (Micah 7:18-19). He closed his work with the assurance that the Lord will implement truth and loving kindness to "Jacob" and "Abraham" (the people of His covenant), according to His promises (Micah 7:20a-b).

This prophet's name is a short form of Micayah, a phrase asking "Who is like Jehovah?" Like the names of some of the other prophets and patriarchs, it is appropriate to the life's work of this man, who prophetically demonstrated in many ways that no one indeed is like Him, and everyone should strive to live His ways. No other power is like His power, and no king like this King.
