Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

NAHUM

Nahum gave his book the title "the burden of Nineveh," and its source of information, "the vision of Nahum the Elkoshite." Burden designates it as a message "lifted up" against Nineveh. Vision is used here to translate chazon, which denotes divine vision, not ordinary sight. Nahum means "full of comfort" and could relate to the comfort he brought to Judah in the knowledge of the end of the threat of Assyria. The meaning or location of Elkosh is not known, but tradition holds that ancient Capernaum was the home of this prophet; its Hebrew name, Kephar-Nahum, means "village of Nahum."

Nineveh was the capital city of Assyria, which had been a threat to Israel since at least 850 B.C. Assyria finally conquered and exiled northern Israel in 722 B.C. and threatened Judah until Sennacherib's forces were divinely decimated at the end of that century (2 Kgs. 19:20-37). Nahum may have lived about 642 B.C. (BD, "Chronology," p. 639).

Fulfillment of Nahum's prophecy came a short time after he gave it, about 614 to 606 B.C., when the mother city of Assyria, Asshur, was destroyed; then Nineveh, the capital city, fell; and finally the rest of the empire capitulated to Nabopolassar, king of the rising empire of Babylon (BD, "Chronology," p. 639).

Nahum was another poetic prophet; his language is picturesque and full of symbolism. In his first chapter, he wrote a partially acrostic poem to describe both the destructive might and the abundant goodness of the Lord. At the end of it, he foretold the end of wickedness and heralded the era of peace on earth in words similar to Isaiah's (cf. Isa 52:7). In his second chapter, Nahum graphically and dramatically described the invasion and overthrow of Nineveh; and in the third, he told why that destruction was deserved and decreed (BD, "Nahum").

Commentary

1:1-15 The burden of Nineveh. The book of the vision of Nahum the Elkoshite

At first glance, it might appear that Nahum depicted only the destructive powers of the Lord in these fourteen verses; but he chose the symbolic third and seventh verses to characterize His patience, power, justice, and control of nature and then told of His goodness, helpfulness, and awareness of the faithful.

In the introduction to this prophecy of what the Lord would do to once-mighty Nineveh, the prophet told of the Lord's zeal (not His "jealousy"; recall Ex. 20:5) in destroying evil. He characterized the Lord's powers over nature, man, and armies. Those who imagine opposition to the Lord shall be vanquished. And though His people have been afflicted, they shall be afflicted no more when He reigns and breaks the yoke of the oppressors and enemies of righteousness. One Assyrian king who experienced something like this "burden" was Sennacherib, whose might was decimated by the Lord about a century before the fall of Nineveh (Nahum 1:11-14; cf. Isa. 36-37).

Nahum's vision of the herald of "good tidings" upon the mountains could have been a comfort to Jerusalem after the evil years of King Manasseh and before the rise of the Babylonian threat a few years later, but it is particularly applicable to humble believers in the latter days, who believe in the messengers who preach repentance and preparation for the Messiah (Nahum 1:15a).

2:1-13 He that dasheth in pieces is come up before thy face

These words were addressed to the Assyrians of Nineveh; they were ironically advised to prepare their defenses. It was true that "the excellency of Jacob," or Israel, had before been emptied out and marred at times, but the time had come for Nineveh to be emptied. The prophet continued, describing the Babylonian attackers, the agitated defense efforts in the besieged city, the opening of the sluice gates of the city moats, and perhaps the capture and exile of the queen, followed by the destruction and plunder of Nineveh. Finally, using metaphors of a lion pack, Nahum depicted the end of the terrible king and the end of his dynasty.

3:1-19 Woe to the bloody city! it is all full of lies and robbery; the prey departeth not

According to their own records, many of which have been unearthed and deciphered, as well as the biblical account, the Assyrian armies were violent, guilty of many atrocities. This chapter is a kind of taunt-song, reciting their vices and telling of equivalent violence to be wrought on Nineveh. No-amon and her allies had been overthrown by Assyrians half a century earlier (Nahum 3:8-10, 8a), but the time had come that Nineveh's defenders would be as dazed as the drunken. The strongholds would be like fig trees ready for harvest and the people in the midst of Nineveh as vulnerable as women. The gates would be opened and the bars burned. The prophet, in satirical phrases, told them they could prepare for siege but it would be in vain. Like the insects of a plague, her merchants, her crowned heads, and their armies had done their damage and would fly away.

Then, in a ten-stich (Hebrew) poetic epitaph, the prophet laid Nineveh's shepherds and nobles to rest, predicting applause for their downfall. Thus ends the burden of Nineveh.

Although it is a taunt-song, rejoicing over the vanquishing of an inveterate and violent enemy, this prophetic book teaches some religious truths: The Lord is patient, great, and just; he is good, dependable, and helpful; and the time is coming when all wickedness shall cease and He shall reign in peace (Nahum 1:3, 7, 15).
