Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

HABAKKUK

"The burden which Habakkuk the prophet did see" is somewhat like the "burdens" in the other prophetic books; they are typically pronouncements of doom upon peoples deserving punishment. This prophet saw (Heb., chazah, "envisioned") wickedness among his own people going unpunished while the righteous suffered. Then, in answer to his query about the justice of that, he was shown the Babylonians ("Chaldeans") being allowed to come in to administer the punishment. That compounded the problem, and again he remonstrated with the Lord.

The second chapter gives the Lord's terse reply, expressed in a couplet containing two principles of justice, followed by a pronouncement of woe upon a cross-section of all evildoers.

The third chapter is a psalm giving thanks to the Lord for righteous principles and for his powers to create, protect, and save. It ends with the prophet's promise to rejoice in the Lord no matter what may come, for He brings salvation.

Nothing is known about Habakkuk beyond what is given in his little book. His name, meaning "embraced," gives no clue. He seems to have lived after the fall of northern Israel and before the fall of Judah (BD, "Habakkuk").

Commentary

1:1-17 the law is slacked, and judgment doth never go forth: for the wicked doth compass about the righteous; therefore wrong judgment proceedeth

Habakkuk was a prophet with a problem. It was one that many others, including the first prophet of our own dispensation, have shared: Why do the wicked seem to prosper while the righteous suffer in this life? (Hab. 1:2a; Job; Ps. 10). The answer is never obvious, for the cause is inherent in the principle and operation of agency among all children of God. Minds operating freely are allowed to choose evil or good and promulgate what they choose long enough to demonstrate what they have willed to become. Some choose to impose evils upon others, and that is allowed for a time.

Habakkuk's questions elicited the Lord's reply that the Chaldeans would soon come and the wicked of Judah would suffer at the hands of wicked Babylon. To that answer, the prophet managed a barely restrained reply, conceding to Deity the wisdom of eternity but protesting that his justice and purity were surely too great to allow that "the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous than he." The prophet protested, "Thou . . . makest men as the fishes of the sea"; all would be caught in one net taken up by ignorant fishermen who would rejoice over their catch, sacrificing and burning incense to the very implements of their prosperity and continually repeating their undiscerning process.

2:1-20 I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and will watch to see what he will say unto me, and what I shall answer when I am reproved

Habakkuk knew he had boldly questioned the Lord's ways, and he frankly expected reproof. Instead of reproof, however, he was taught a principle to be made plain for any to read and apply: the arrogant is not upright; the just lives by faith. The Hebrew word amunah means "strong faith, faithfulness, firmness." The Lord's answer admonishes humility with the patience and trust to wait for justice; it will come in its time.

There was also an answer from the Lord about Babylon, personified perhaps as the king of Babylon, berated and condemned. The prophet had asked how long he must cry for justice, and the reply repeated the question "How long," implying "How long indeed!" He "that ladeth himself with thick clay" is one insulated against compassion or pity, as the oppressive Babylonian leaders had been. But the oppressed will not have to suffer forever, for someone will "rise up suddenly that shall bite" the oppressor or a remnant of the oppressed will eventually spoil him in turn (Hab. 2:5-8).

The revelation of woe to perpetrators of wickedness continued, denouncing all wrong principles and practices. It castigated greed and covetous actions, such as forcing enslaved people by violence to labor in wood and stone and in brick-kilns to build cities for a tyrant's transient glory. That will change when "the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord" (Hab. 2:9-14).

This sermon also condemned intoxicating a neighbor to use him immorally. There is no "glory" in that, but shame; and justice will cover such evildoers with their own filthiness. There was condemnation of the flagrant wasting of the forests and animals of Lebanon, as well as all the human violence committed there by Babylon's tyrant.

One more woe was uttered, condemning the costly, useless, and blasphemous business of idolatry. By contrast, the prophet characterized the sublimity of true worship: "the Lord is in his holy temple: let all the earth keep silence before him" (Hab. 2:20).

3:1-19 A prayer of Habakkuk the prophet

Habakkuk's prayer, like Job's after the Lord's responses to him, confessed humility and awe and a willingness to abide the Lord's management of things (cf. Job 40:3-5; 42:1-6). He recalled the Lord's manifestations during the Exodus and on into the conquest of the promised land (Hab. 3:3-16 and fn.).

The prophet testified that these revelations were a humbling and overwhelming experience. He pledged he would never doubt the Lord's management again; even though crops fail or herds perish, he averred: "Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation" (Hab. 3:18). Then he closed with words of praise and thanksgiving like the closing of a psalm:

Jehovah, my Lord, is my power: he makes my feet like the antelope's, and to my exaltation he directs me. (Hab. 3:19, translation mine)

The vehicle of Habakkuk's message may be complicated, but the content of it is plain: if in this world injustices seem to predominate, have patience and humbly do what you can; then trust the overall management to the Lord's hands. While allowing agency to everyone, he will help those who trust him when they need help. He "is in his holy temple" and does not need suggestions to see that justice will be done.
