Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

ZEPHANIAH

Zephaniah was another prophet who warned Judah about impending invasion and exile, but his prophecies were expressed in terms that refer as much or more to the impending "day of the Lord" (Zeph. 1:7) in the last days. His time was in "the days of Josiah" (Zeph. 1:1), about 639 to 608 B.C. That was the period of the overthrow of Assyria and the rise of Babylon. King Josiah was a righteous king but the son and grandson of idolatrous and evil-doing kings. He was also a great-grandson of the righteous King Hezekiah. The prophet himself was a great-great-grandson of one Hizkiah (the same as Hezekiah in Hebrew), and it is entirely possible that he also was of the royal line.

Like much of the prophetic literature, Zephaniah's book is all in Hebrew poetry. Warnings and predictions of doom upon Jerusalem and Judah as well as similar messages for several other nations are expressed in terms relevant to the final destruction of the wicked world. The last chapter contains some particular condemnations of Judah's princes, false judges, and false prophets, but those are followed by anticipation of the time of restoration. The chapter concludes with a joyous heralding of the messianic time, when the Lord will be King (Zeph. 3; BD, "Zephaniah").

Commentary

1:1-18 The word of the Lord which came unto Zephaniah . . . in the days of Josiah . . . king of Judah

The message contained in this revelation may well have come before King Josiah's great reform (2 Kgs. 22:8-23:25), but it seems also to anticipate the religious and moral degeneration that followed his death. Zephaniah condemned the rampant idolatry that would rise again and warned that "the day of the Lord is at hand" (Zeph. 1:7).

Punishment of "the princes, and the king's children" no doubt anticipated that members of the royal family would be taken to Babylon. That prophecy was fulfilled at the death of Josiah's son Jehoiakim and at the captivity of young King Jehoiachin, Josiah's grandson (2 Kgs. 24; Dan. 1:1-6).

Zephaniah also foretold the lament of survivors in Jerusalem. The pillage and plunder of the city would arouse yet more weeping and lament (Zeph. 1:8-13 and fn.). That "great day of the Lord," which was nigh unto the people of that time, prefigured the ultimate day of the Lord at the end of times. In neither event would silver, gold, or other worldly wealth avail anyone of salvation.

2:1-15 Gather yourselves together, yea, gather together, O nation not desired . . . Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth . . . seek righteousness

The word translated here as nation is the Hebrew goi; it is a generic word meaning "any or all people." Thus this chapter, which contains condemnations of various peoples other than Israel, begins with an invitation to people not before chosen ("desired") to respond to the call of Abraham and "seek . . . the Lord . . . seek righteousness, seek meekness" (Zeph. 2:3). It was an invitation little heeded before Babylon's invasion but one that will be heard and implemented in the days before the fall of spiritual Babylon.

Zephaniah then warned certain troublesome neighbors all around Judah of their woes to come. First were four city-states of the Philistines on the coastlands of the west and south. Next he addressed Judah's related peoples east and south in Ammon and Moab; their territories included the area of ancient Sodom and Gomorrah, and the prophet warned that their fate could be the same as the fate of those infamous places. Although "Ethiopians" (Heb., Cushim) were addressed, the nearer west-Arabians may have been intended (Zeph. 2:12a). Finally, the prophet addressed Assyria, to the north and east, which was to fall; he used words like those of Nahum's prophecies of Nineveh's doom.

3:1-7 Woe to her that is filthy and polluted, to the oppressing city!

Once more the prophet addressed Judah and Jerusalem, whose princes, judges, and false prophets had not accepted correction nor obeyed the Lord's messages. They had heeded, rather, their favorite "prophets," who were "light and treacherous persons" (Zeph. 3:4). Recall that these were also the years of Lehi's ministry in Jerusalem (1 Ne. 1:4, 13, 18-20).

The justice of the Lord would fall upon all unjust princes, judges, and prophets—and upon the nation. The Lord had given them assistance before, and he had corrected them before, all to no avail.

3:8-20 Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, . . . for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy

In conclusion, the prophet turned more specifically to the final cleansing of the earth by the fire of the Lord's zeal (the Hebrew word qinati, means, more accurately, "my zeal" rather than "my jealousy" with its bad connotations). Zephaniah prophesied of the gathering of the righteous thereafter and foretold a great contribution to peace and understanding on earth, when the Lord will restore "to the people a pure language, that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent." That unique prophecy from Zephaniah is one of great significance and worth; its fulfillment is greatly to be desired. The whole family of man has not been blessed with one pure language with which to communicate since Adam and the early patriarchs (Zeph. 3:8-9 and fn.; cf. Moses 6:5-6).

From the farthest reaches of the then-known world, the prophet foresaw worshippers of the Lord gathering. None shall be ashamed of their affiliation, and none shall be haughty because of it. The meek of the earth among the "afflicted and poor people . . . shall trust in the name of the Lord" (Zeph. 3:12; Matt. 5:5). Israel, no longer sinful, will dwell in safety among the peoples.

The prophet's final vision was a glorious one, showing the true Zion people rejoicing in the Lord, with no more enemies and unrighteous kings; "the king of Israel, even the Lord, is in the midst of thee: thou shalt not see evil any more." No more will they need to fear, and they who had sorrowed in exile will be gathered to a solemn assembly of the righteous, including the lame and the scattered remnant from all lands. All the Lord's people will be known and praised in every land; the days of captivity shall be at an end.

Zephaniah saw some special aspects of the great day of the Lord. Whatever the value of his prophetic teachings in the last days of Judah under kings of the line of David, their value can be greater still in the crisis times before the eternal Son of God, the Messiah, returns to reign.
