Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Saint Commentary on the Old Testament ( 1993)

MALACHI

The name Malachi means "my errand-bearer" or "my messenger." It is such an appropriate label for a prophet that some have wondered whether it could be his title and not his name. It makes no difference, but it is quite common in the Old Testament for a proper name to have meaning related to the work of the one who bears it.

Neither the time and place of Malachi's work nor his origin and background are known. He was aware of priestly duties, and his first two chapters concern unacceptable offerings, unacceptable priests, and unacceptable behavior of the Lord's people. But those are all topics appropriate to many a prophet's mission and do not necessarily suggest his time as a prophet. It is commonly assumed that his work was after the time of Haggai and Zechariah, after the second temple had been built and some malpractices had again set in (BD, "Malachi").

Malachi's last two chapters anticipate a forerunner to the Savior; they also deal with tithes and offerings, the second advent of the Savior, and the restoration of priesthood power to seal on earth and in heaven blessings in eternal covenants. Indeed, the whole book of Malachi has much relevance for the latter days. Moroni, herald angel of the last dispensation, cited some prophecies by Malachi (JS-H 1:36-39), indicating that their fulfillment would come in this dispensation. There are many references to the book of Malachi in the Doctrine and Covenants.

Other ancient historical works, such as the books of the Maccabees from a later century, might well have been included in the Old Testament canon; but since they are not, the testimony of Malachi is its prophetic capstone.

Commentary

1:1-14 I have loved you, saith the Lord. Yet ye say, Wherein hast thou loved us?

The mode of teaching characteristic of Malachi is to pose a question or make an assertion from the Lord and then give his diagnosis and prescription. In this case the Lord, through Malachi, invoked the well-known history—why Israel ("Jacob") had been blessed with many blessings whereas Edom had not. Those were the facts behind the shocking rhetoric, "I loved Jacob, And I hated Esau," attributed to the Lord. That treatment was based not upon favoritism for the individual but upon the principle that blessings result from obedience to God's laws. Jacob's blessings were pronounced upon him while he was still unworthy (as is true of many of us), and fulfillment of them came only when he fulfilled the law upon which they were based (BD, "Jacob"). Esau and Edom went another way. The Lord does not exalt people who live even on "the border of wickedness" (Mal. 1:4; TG, "Blessing"; "Obedience"). More specifically to the point, the prophet revealed that through the years the Lord was not content with Israel's rituals of worship. They did not honor God as either father or master, even offering "polluted bread" and blemished animals as sacrifices.

Malachi tried to teach the Israel of his time the reasonable principles of cause and effect, asking whether they thought God would be gracious to them simply because of who they were. Then he reasoned, when one opens or shuts a door, it is for a purpose; when one kindles a fire on the altar, it is for a reason; just so, one must have a sincere purpose in mind when offering sacrifices and do it righteously or the Lord will neither accept the offerings nor bless the worshipper.

The prophet tried to shock Israel with the future righteousness of converted people of other nations ("the Gentiles") in contrast to Israel's profaning his holy name by offering "contemptible" offerings, all the while protesting that worship was "a weariness." Among the heathen, said he, the name of the Lord would be more revered than by any Israelite who saved a good animal for himself and sacrificed a blemished one (Mal. 1:11-14). To do so was to show contempt for "the table of the Lord." In latter days comparable contempt could occur in the perfunctory paying of tithes and offerings, thoughtless sacrament worship, or unthinking performance of temple ordinances.

2:1-10 And now, O ye priests, this commandment is for you. If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my name, saith the Lord of hosts, I will even send a curse upon you

The Lord had a covenant with Levi, a covenant for life, and a covenant of peace; but it required the Levites' reverent and dedicated performance of their duties. With the ideal priest, "the law of truth was in his mouth" and he was to act in peace and fairness, so that he might teach and turn many away from sin. He was to be knowledgeable, so that people could learn from his words as a spokesman for the Lord. But the priests had departed from such demeanor and duties, corrupting their covenant and causing many to stumble; therefore, priests had lost their reputation "before all the people" (Mal. 2:6-9).

In conclusion, the prophet taught excellent theology and ethics: we all have one father, even God, and are brothers and sisters; why then would we "deal treacherously" with each other, profaning the covenants that teach us good behavior? This passage is an Old Testament gem of religion and humanity (Mal. 2:10).

2:11-17 Judah hath dealt treacherously, and an abomination is committed in Israel and in Jerusalem; for Judah hath profaned the holiness of the Lord which he loved, and hath married the daughter of a strange god

The prophet began his lesson on fidelity and commitment by recalling treachery committed in Judah and Israel by those who had "profaned the holiness of the Lord" by marrying "the daughter of a strange god" by idolatry. He warned that the Lord will "cut off the man that doeth this, the master and the scholar." Weeping and covering the altar of the Lord with tears in false devotion to cover one's aberrations will not gain blessings.

Malachi spoke then of the covenant of Israel with God as if it were a covenant of marriage of a man with the wife of his youth, against whom he has dealt treacherously even though she is his companion and the wife of his covenant. The metaphor reflected both the infidelity of individual men and the apostasy of Israel. But the prophet illustrated the latter point more poignantly by details of the marriage covenant and commitment. The translation is difficult, but it could be rendered from the Hebrew thus: "And not one hath done so who had a remnant of the Spirit! For what one, seeking a godly seed, if ye take heed in your spirit, would deal treacherously with the wife of your youth?" (Mal. 2:15). Then he declared that the Lord himself "hateth putting away." The assertion that one guilty of infidelity "covereth violence with his garment" and the admonition to "take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously" are applicable in all latter-day marriages, and especially in temple marriages (Mal. 2:16).

It is a masterpiece of understatement to assert that one has "wearied the Lord" who says, "Every one that doeth evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delighteth in them; or, Where is the God of judgment?" (Mal. 2:17) To say so is to question the justice of God and question his caring—or even his existence.

3:1-6 Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple

As is evident from the many cross-references to the verses of this segment of Malachi's prophecies, a messenger prepared the way for the coming of the Lord in both his first advent and his anticipated second advent. But it is also evident that it will be in his second advent that the Messiah's coming will be as a refiner's fire, to "purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver," so that they may function again at the altars and their offerings will be acceptable to the Lord (Mal. 3:3; D&C 13; 84:33-34; 124:39; 128:24). The Judgment before the Millennium will condemn sorcerers, adulterers, false swearers, and oppressors of hirelings, widows, and orphans. Only spiritually true sons of Jacob, the "seed of Abraham" either by birth or by conversion (Abr. 2:10) will not be consumed, for the Lord will not change his standards.

3:7-18 Even from the days of your fathers ye are gone away from mine ordinances, and have not kept them. Return unto me, and I will return unto you, saith the Lord of hosts

First among the exhibits of ways Israel had not kept the covenants was their "robbing" God of tithes and offerings. The method of teaching Malachi used should have shocked even the guilty. The generous promises, on the other hand, should have impressed them—and us—to repent and tithe honestly (Mal. 3:7-12).

The second charge was also serious: they had doubted God's justice because they had kept the ordinances and claimed to have walked soberly and humbly before the Lord, but they observed that the proud seem happy, the wicked prosper, and they that test God seem to get away with it (Mal. 3:13-15; cf. 2:17). For the truly humble and faithful among them, there was reassurance as they comforted each other, for the prophet taught them about a "book of remembrance" in which the deeds of the righteous are recorded. They shall be part of the Lord's royal treasure and be saved; the same Hebrew word rendered jewels here is also rendered peculiar treasure (cf. Ex. 19:5 and commentary). Thus, though injustices appear in this world, justice with due rewards and punishment will come later (Mal. 3:16-18 and fn.).

4:1-6 For, behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them up

The topic of the last part of the foregoing chapter is continued with a terrible forecast of the fate of the wicked at the end of the wicked world (Mal. 4:1 and fn.).

When the Lord reigns on earth, all who revere and serve him will go forth under his watchful care. The "Sun of righteousness" is also written "Son of Righteousness"; but either way, it refers to the Savior (Mal. 4:2 and fn.).

The metaphor of treading down the wicked refers to the overcoming of all wickedness; the imagery comes from treading over the ashes of the wickedness that has been cleansed by fire (Mal. 4:3a). The way to qualify for salvation and triumph over wickedness, ultimately, is to keep the commandments, ordinances, and regulations; they help one steadily resist evil (Mal. 4:4a-b).

Elijah's latter-day mission is the ultimate extension of his earth-life mission: to turn hearts to God, to family, and to the promises made to the fathers (Mal. 4:5-6 and fn.; cf. 1 Kgs. 18:37). The description of Elijah's mission as given here (and in 3 Ne. 25:5-6) is understandable, but it was clarified by Moroni (JS-H 1:36-39; for fulfillment, see D&C 110:13-16). Through the gospel teachings and ordinances, the Lord will prepare a nucleus of true servants to help in teaching his gospel and in administering his kingdom now and when he comes. Then all who will listen will hear the gospel, and the earth will not be smitten with a curse of confusion and rebellion; rather, it will be renewed and restored to its paradisiacal glory.

Such are the prophecies of the last prophet of the Old Testament, who was also a herald of restorations in the last days, leading to the time when "the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple" (Mal. 3:1).
