Kate looked at the kitchen table covered with dirty dishes, trying to decide where to start. “It’s hard to believe our school vacation is almost over,” she sighed as she started to stack the plates.

“I know what you mean,” Becky said. “It’s our last week of vacation, and we still haven’t gone to the new water park. Do you think Mom will take us there if we ask?”

“Maybe,” Kate said as she carried the plates to the sink. “But I know Mom’s really busy this week. And we’ve done a lot of fun things during our vacation. We just didn’t go to the water park.”

Becky followed Kate back to the table. She watched her sister gather up the glasses and utensils. “Yes—if you call driving all day to get to a family reunion fun,” she muttered.

“It was fun,” said Kate. “You’re just being ornery.” She picked up four glasses and headed back to the sink. Becky followed.

“It was all right,” Becky agreed, “but I bet we’re the only kids in our whole school who haven’t gone to the water park.”

Losing patience, Kate turned to Becky. “Will you please stop complaining and help me with the dishes?”

Rolling her eyes, Becky started to fill the sink as their mom came in.

“Thank you for doing the dishes,” Mom said. “I appreciate all the work the two of you do.”

“No problem, Mom.” Kate smiled.

“Yeah,” Becky agreed. “We were just saying it’s too bad we never made it to the new water park.”

“That is a shame,” Mom said. She thought for a moment, then said, “I’ll make you a deal. I have some errands to run tomorrow morning. If you two will clean your rooms while I’m gone, I’ll stop and buy tickets to the water park, and we can go when I get home.”

“That would be great!” Becky exclaimed.

“It’s a deal,” Kate said.

The next morning Kate jumped out of bed. Mom had already left. “Good morning,” Kate greeted her grandmother.

“Good morning. Are you ready for breakfast?” Grandma asked.

Kate nodded. “Becky and I are going to clean our rooms. Then Mom is going to take us to the new water park.”

“That’s what your mother told me,” said Grandma. “Would you go wake Becky?”

“What’s the big hurry?” Becky grumped when Kate tried to talk her into getting up.

“We need to eat breakfast and start cleaning.”

“No, we don’t. You heard what Mom said. She’s picking up the tickets while she’s out. After she has already bought the tickets, she won’t tell us we can’t go. So we really don’t need to clean our rooms.”

Kate frowned. “But we made a deal.”

“If you’re so worried, you go clean your room. Tell Grandma I’ll have breakfast later. Right now I need to sleep.”

Kate trudged back to the kitchen.

“What’s wrong?” Grandma asked.

“Becky says she’s not going to clean. She thinks Mom will let us go even if we don’t clean our rooms,” Kate explained.

“What do you think?” Grandma asked.

“We said we would clean our rooms,” said Kate, “so that’s what I’m going to do.”

“Well,” said Grandma, “you’ve made your decision, and you’ll have to let Becky make hers. Sometimes we want to make other people’s decisions for them, but we can’t.”

After breakfast Kate marched to her room. She decided to start by moving everything off the floor. At first she was angry at Becky for not cleaning, but soon her thoughts turned to the job she was doing.

When Mom arrived home, Kate was organizing books on a shelf.

“Where’s your sister?” Mom asked.

“Watching television,” Kate answered.

“Isn’t she cleaning?”

Kate shook her head.

Just then Becky appeared in the doorway. “Hi, Mom,” she said cheerfully. “Did you get the tickets?”

“Yes I did,” said Mom. “Did you clean?”

“I was just coming to start.”

Mom shook her head. “Don’t worry about it.”

Becky looked at Kate and smiled an I-told-you-so smile. Her smile disappeared when Mom added, “You can clean while Kate and I are at the water park.”

Becky’s mouth dropped open. “What do you mean?”

“You didn’t keep your end of the bargain, so you may not come with us.”

Becky couldn’t believe her ears. “But didn’t you already buy me a ticket?”

“I bought tickets for the girls who kept their promises. Did you keep your promise?”

Becky hung her head. “No.”

“Why not?”

“I thought you would let me go anyway.”

“You made a choice. You’ll have to live with the consequences.”

Tears streamed down Becky’s face. “That’s not fair.”

Mom put her arms around Becky. “I know it isn’t what you want,” Mom said, “but it is fair.”

Becky watched as Mom and Kate left. “I really wanted to go,” she said.

Grandma nodded. “You made a bad choice. What you need to do is learn from your mistake. If your mom had taken you to the water park, you would have thought it’s all right to make promises you don’t intend to keep. And it isn’t. Does that make sense?”

“I guess so.”

“Now, I have a deal for you, if you are interested.”

Becky looked up. “What is it?”

“If you’ll go clean your room, when you’re done, we’ll bake some cookies for the family.”

“It’s a deal,” Becky said, heading toward her room. “And this time I mean it.”
