One night a family watched a terrible storm from their home near a beach. Huge waves crashed against the shore, breaking apart the family’s wooden boat dock. The next morning the family found pieces of the dock along the shoreline. But their boat was floating unharmed in the water. It was held in place by a strong anchor. The anchor had kept the boat from crashing into the shore and being destroyed.

Just as the boat was safe in the storm because it was held by an anchor, we can be kept safe when we listen to and follow the prophet. Obeying his counsel is like an anchor in our lives. The prophet tells us the things Heavenly Father wants us to do. He tells us how we can have peace, even during times of fear and worry.

For example, the Lord told the Prophet Joseph Smith to warn the people about eating and drinking things that would harm them. We call this counsel the Word of Wisdom (see D&C 89). If we obey it, we will be blessed.

President Gordon B. Hinckley has asked us to study the scriptures and to pray daily. As we do so, we will feel great peace. The Spirit will testify to us that Heavenly Father loves us and answers our prayers.

Listen to the prophet. He speaks for Heavenly Father. If we are obedient, we will feel peace. And like the boat tied to the anchor, we will be safe even though there are storms all around us.

1.  Tell the story of the Prophet Joseph Smith and Jacob Haun (see Primary 5 manual, lesson 31). Explain that the Prophet counseled Jacob Haun to tell the people to leave Haun’s Mill. Brother Haun did not deliver the Prophet’s message, and many lives were lost. Whenever we follow the prophet’s counsel, we move toward safety. Cut out several paper circles. Draw a smiling face on half the circles and a frowning face on the other half. Display pictures of people doing things prophets have told us to do. Also display pictures cut out of magazines or newspapers of people doing things prophets have told us not to do (arguing; stealing; smoking; drinking coffee, tea, or alcohol; and so on). Have the children place a smiling or frowning face by each picture, depending on whether it is something the prophet wants us to do or not do. Sing songs or hymns related to the pictures with smiling faces.

2.  Explain that President Brigham Young led the first pioneers to the Salt Lake Valley. As the pioneers followed the prophet to the valley, they marked the trail for other Saints to follow. The prophet leads us today by teaching us what we should do in order to return to our Father in Heaven. Thread a button onto a long piece of string, and tie the ends together. Have the children sit in a circle, each holding onto the string with both hands. Have one child hide the button in his or her hand. Sing “We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet” (Hymns, number 19). Have the children move their hands back and forth along the string, secretly passing the button in either direction until the leader stops the singing. Have the child with the button tell one way to follow the prophet. Continue singing and moving the button. Bear testimony of how following the prophet has guided your life.

1.  Mount this page on heavy paper, and cut out the picture frames.

2.  Color the pictures of children following the prophet.

3.  Under each picture, write how you can follow the prophet as the child in the picture is doing.

4.  Hang the pictures where they will be a daily reminder of some of the things you can do to follow the prophet.
