Carlos Yépez Yong of Lima, Perú, cannot move his legs or right arm, and he has difficulty speaking. But he is one of the strongest people I know. What makes him strong is the Spirit of the Lord. Whenever he speaks or teaches, his words are beautiful to the ear because they touch the heart.

Brother Yépez’s paralysis is the result of damage he received at birth. For most of his first five years he remained in a vegetative state, receiving nourishment through his veins. Some of the doctors treating him wondered if it was worthwhile keeping him alive. They did not know the Lord had a mission for him.

When Carlos was six years old, to everyone’s surprise he began to move part of his body. Medical treatments began, and his mental abilities developed to such a degree that in a few years he surpassed his classmates. His physical progress slowed somewhat after age 12. When he was about 18, his parents divorced, and his treatments stopped.

Carlos felt frustrated and was depressed, but he did not sink into despair. When he was 20 years of age, a neighbor invited him to hear the missionary discussions. Carlos received all of them, and after praying and pondering in his heart, he received a spiritual witness that what he had learned was true. He decided to be baptized.

Carlos says that when he was immersed at baptism, his life changed completely. “In my mind, I felt as though my useless arm and legs had become strong and vigorous,” he says. “I decided on that day that I would serve the Lord in any calling He gave me, that I would ‘run and not be weary, and … walk and not faint’” (D&C 89:20).

Although his physical paralysis remained, Carlos’s spirit soared, and the Lord blessed him. He was punctual at his meetings and attended adult religion classes sponsored by the Church Educational System. He was called to serve as the second counselor in the Young Men presidency of the Caja de Agua Ward, Lima Perú Las Flores Stake. Every day of the week, we would see him going from one house to another in his wheelchair, inviting the youth to Mutual.

Years have passed since then. He is now a member of Los Jardines Ward. He still has a firm testimony of the Lord and His gospel, attends the Lima Perú Temple regularly, does his home teaching, and helps the missionaries teach investigators. Because of his perseverance, testimony, and trust in the Lord, seven of his nieces and nephews and some of his friends are now members of the Church. Other members, both youth and adults, have returned to Church activity because of his influence. He never misses a meeting, he frequently attends firesides, and he goes to ward activities. Though some might think he is hampered by his disabilities, the youth in the stake admire him as one whose spirit soars.
