The Amplified New Testament was published in 1958, with the Amplified Old Testament coming in two parts in 1962 and 1964. The whole Bible in this series is a product of the middle 1960's. The Lockman Foundation, responsible for the New American Standard, is also the instigator of this book. The original intent of the Amplified Bible was a good one. It was to make the meaning of various words and expressions of the Biblical text clearer to the reader. If such had been carried out without bias, strictly according to the meanings of words, who could fault such a purpose? The doctrinal bias, however, was not discarded; and the strict meanings of words were not adhered to. The consistent use of brackets for the explanations and elaborations was not even maintained. Read John 17 and 1 Corinthians 2 to see examples of amplifications not inserted in brackets.

The Calvinistic assumptions of the committee definitely show through in Psalms 51:5, where the idea of inborn sin is sometimes asserted; but in this version it is written into the verse in the brackets. It is easy to see this idea, for the cross references accompanying this verse are Romans 5:12 and Ephesians 2:3, two other passages used to support the same false doctrine. Romans 4:3-6 has three significant errors: (1) the translation of "unto" as "as," leaving the impression that there is an exchange of justification for faith, when the original actually places justification after ("unto" or "in order to") the believing; (2) the equating of justification, or righteousness, as "right living," whereas the original word involves a legal declaration of a verdict - not guilty; and (3) its invalidation of any effort of man in verse 7, where works designed to earn justification were in view in the context; but the committee put "the works he does."

In a passage contrasting flesh and spirit, the Amplified Bible places "Holy Spirit," not just "spirit" as the original had it.

1 Corinthians 7:2 renders "fornication" as "immorality," a term with too much latitude and not enough specificity. Verse 25 of the same chapter has Paul giving his "opinion." This is far different from the inspired judgment or conclusion that he was giving.

Ephesians 5:19 renders "singing" as"offering praise with voices and instruments." It is true that the word psallo (making melody) involved plucking the strings of an instrument (in this case the heart, as named in the verse), but ado (singing) does not. This version is based on poor Greek and poor English.

The signs and symbols of Revelation are lost sight of in the rendering "communicated" of Revelation 1:1.

As is evident and will become even more obvious from detailed study of this version, in some places it over-amplifies while in others it is not ample.

New Testament in Modern English

The Revised Edition of this book by J. B. Phillips makes some changes in his earlier edition, especially omitting his earlier interpolated remarks that he now recognizes as unjustified. We can appreciate his admission and yet point out some other areas in which improvements are mandatory if his book be correct.

The Introduction, however, serves notice of the essential weakness of the author's work - a weakness spelled m-o-d-e-r-n-i-s-m. He does admit paraphrase in places. He likewise expresses doubt of Paul's concern that he be consistent in his writing, obviously excluding any possibility of Divine inspiration. Notice how inconsistent his view is with Paul's insistence on consistency found in 1 Corinthians

BibleGuide.org

PDF: Allan E. McNabb 7:17. His introduction to the Book of Matthew also includes the liberal view of the source from which the author, "whom we can still conveniently call Matthew," gained his information. The same liberalism and anti-supernaturalism is also evident in the introduction to the Book of John. We need not get overjoyed and expect too much from a man with such a low view of Scripture. He will not approach his work with the respect and care needed, will he?

Notice the following mistakes, only a beginning of the complete list that could be given:

(1) Matthew 16:18 - He calls Peter the rock, "and it is on this rock that I am going to found my church."

(2) Luke 1:34 -He has Mary avowing the impossibility of her being with child because "I am not married."

(3) John 1:1 - Instead of affirming that Jesus was in the beginning, he says, "In the beginning God expressed himself."

(4) John 1:14 and 3:16 -He removes the word "begotten" and the idea of Jesus' being the begotten Son of God.

(5) Acts 8:20 -In crude language he has Peter saying, "To hell with you and your money!" Peter did not say that!

(6) Romans 1:16 - "I see it as the very power. . . ." (Emphasis mine, B.L.G.)

(7) Romans 11:26 - ". . . all Israel will be saved."

(8) 1 Corinthians 11:4, 5 - Prophesying is "preaching" to him.

(9) Galatians 3:1 - The foolish Galatians become "dear idiots."

(10) Galatians 3:27 - He omits "for," an important word introducing the cause of their sonship and changes "Christ" to "family likeness of Christ."

(11) Hebrews 9:15 - The testament is weakened to an "argument."

(12) Hebrews 10:9 - He has the old order of sacrifices being removed and the Lord establishing a new order of obedience. This is downright perversion!

(13) 1 Peter 3:20 - Noah and family were saved "from the water," destroying the analogy to baptism so beautifully pictured in the passage. It compares their delivery from destruction by means of water to our salvation from sin by the water of baptism, by Jesus' resurrection.

Such wanton disregard for inspired Scripture as is manifested in Phillips' additions, deletions, and changes leaves little doubt concerning the reliability of this version.

Concluding Statement

While this material does not discuss all versions or any one version in exhaustive detail, it does give the reader an idea of the areas in which several versions are weak and erroneous. The versions considered, like all others, are not all wrong; but they do have enough error in them as to render them unusable except in very close connection with a more reliable one, such as the American Standard Version (1901) or the King James Version (1611). This effort should not be interpreted to mean that either of the versions just named is completely free of mistakes, but their errors are not so numerous or so damaging as most of these considered here.

BOBBY GRAHAM 507 S. Hoffman Athens, Alabama 35611

BibleGuide.org

PDF: Allan E. McNabb
