Elder Dallin H. Oaks of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles broke ground for the Cebu Philippines Temple complex in Lahug, Cebu City, on November 14, 2007.

During the ceremony, Elder Oaks said they were there not only “to dedicate the land to the Lord,” but also “to pray … that we may prepare ourselves for the blessings of the temple.”

In his dedicatory prayer, Elder Oaks invoked a blessing for the Filipino people to live in peace, harmony, and prosperity; for the temple to be built without flaw; and for the people who come to it to feel the holiness of the building.

Some 400 members, including stake and district presidencies, bishops, branch presidents, stake auxiliary presidencies of seven neighboring stakes and districts, the six mission presidents in the new Cebu Philippines Temple district, and local community leaders gathered for this historic event.

Elder Quentin L. Cook of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles; Elder Keith R. Edwards, Philippines Area President; and his counselors, Elder Won Yong Ko and Elder Michael J. Teh of the Seventy, were also in attendance.

Twenty-three years after the first temple in the Philippines was built, President Anthony John Balledos of the Cebu City Philippines Stake expressed in his prayer how grateful the Filipino Saints are for having the second temple in the Philippines built in Cebu to serve members in the central and southern parts of the Philippines.

In the evening, after the groundbreaking, Elder Oaks held a devotional with more than 3,000 Saints and counseled them to prepare for the temple by developing “holy habits.” He said holy habits help us “be ready to answer the questions the Lord will ask us” in the final judgment. These habits include having personal and family prayer, reading the scriptures, and partaking of the sacrament every Sunday.

The Cebu Philippines Temple complex, having an area of 4.7 hectares, will include patron housing, a meetinghouse, homes for the temple and mission presidents, and a mission office. The temple itself will have an area of 2,391 square meters.

The Cebu Philippines Temple is the 132nd temple of the Church that is announced, operating, or under construction.
