Chieko N. Okazaki, Aloha! ( 1995)

Part 1: Circles of Sisterhood

Chapter 1

Strength from the Savior

The Church teaches us all the principles and doctrine that make it possible to create an ideal family: a mother and father sealed in the temple and sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise in love for each other and for the children who come to their home. In this family, the parents and children support, sustain, and love one another, seek the Lord through prayer and scripture study, both individually and together, set high goals, and work together to achieve them. They reach out to extended family members and to neighbors. They are confident in the gospel, humble in their strength to resist temptation, joyful in their testimony of the Savior's atonement. In such circumstances, the ideal of a Christ-centered family seems happily attainable.

But, President Ezra Taft Benson pointed out, only 14 percent of American households in 1980 matched the traditional image of a couple with children still in the home. (See "Fundamentals of Enduring Family Relationships," Ensign, Nov. 1982, p. 59.) According to reliable sources, only one in five Latter-day Saint families in the United States has a husband and wife married in the temple with children in their home. The comparable figure for Saints in Japan is one in thirty-three. (See Tim B. Heaton, "Vital Statistics: Demographic Characteristics," Encyclopedia of Mormonism, ed. Daniel H. Ludlow [New York: Macmillan, 1992], 4:1532.)

If I were to ask you what the Church teaches about strengthening families, I know that you would say things like, "spend time together, have family prayer, hold family home evening, and have regular scripture study." In addition to these important things, I want to talk about building stronger families by building a stronger you—strong in your faith in the Savior. That's where strong families come from—from strong individuals.

President Gordon B. Hinckley has said: "The strength of the Church is not in its thousands of houses of worship across the world nor in its universities or seminaries and institutes. These are all facilities, desirable means to an end, but only auxiliary to that which is the true strength. The strength of this Church lies in the hearts of its people, in the individual testimony and conviction of the truth of this work." ("'It's True, Isn't It?'" Ensign, July 1993, p. 4.)

Just as the Church's strength lies in the individual members, so the strength of each family lies in its members. There is great diversity in LDS homes, but all of these homes can be righteous homes in which individuals love each other, love the Lord, and strengthen each other.

Let me give you an example. Consider two quilts. Both are handmade, beautiful, and delightful to snuggle down in or wrap around a grandchild. One quilt is a Hawaiian quilt with a strong, predictable pattern. We can look at half of the quilt and predict what the other half will look like. Sometimes our lives seem patterned, predictable in happy ways, in order.

Imagine a second quilt. Its style is called a crazy quilt. Some pieces are the same color, but no two pieces are the same size. They're odd shapes. They come together at odd angles. This is an unpredictable quilt. Sometimes our lives are unpredictable, unpatterned, not neat or well ordered.

Well, there's not one right way to be a quilt as long as the pieces are stitched together firmly. Both of these quilts will keep us warm and cozy. Both are beautiful and made with love. There's not just one right way to be a Mormon woman, either, as long as we are firmly grounded in faith in the Savior, make and keep covenants, live the commandments, and work together in charity.

All of us face different family circumstances and home situations. All of us need strength in dealing with them. The Spirit of Christ is not a luxury to be enjoyed only when we have achieved an ideal environment. It is the essential transforming power that can lift and strengthen us amid the trials of real life, even when our situations are far from perfect.

It is possible, even in less than ideal circumstances, to have a Christ-centered home. The process of building a Christ-centered home can begin with a single faithful individual: ourselves. We do not have to wait to have a Christ-centered home until we have achieved perfect faith, any more than we have to have perfect circumstances first. We just need growing faith and a desire to work toward the ideal. According to Doctrine and Covenants 46, gifts are given to all. We are people in process, and that process is coming about as we keep the commandments of God and learn the doctrine of the Church.

What kind of strength do we need as women? We need the Savior's strength. It comes from faith in the Savior's love and in the power of his atonement. If we trustingly put our hand in the Savior's, we can claim the promise of our baptism to always have his Spirit with us. All problems are manageable with that strength, and all problems are secondary in urgency to maintaining a strong spiritual life.

If we have faith, we will desire to pray often and sincerely, and his Spirit will teach us what to pray for. (See Romans 8:26-27.) We will have the sensitivity to serve compassionately in our neighborhood. We will have the wisdom that we need for our church callings. We can build loving and respectful partnerships with our husband, children, parents, and friends. If we always have Christ's Spirit with us, we will have a wise consultant when we are perplexed by our children's needs. We will receive help in making correct decisions and strength in carrying them out. We will give and receive loyal friendship and feel in ourselves when the advice we receive from others is truly suited to our needs. We will hold a clear vision of gospel ideals and aspire toward them even as we deal patiently with the limitations of reality. Through faith in the Savior we can magnify our opportunities, cope with our problems, and keep both of them in perspective.

One precious account of a righteous couple rearing faithful children is the story of Jairus and his wife. The father sought out Jesus when their beloved twelve-year-old daughter was on the point of death. "Fear not," Jesus told him when messengers intercepted Him on the way with news that the child had died. "Believe only, and she shall be made whole." (Luke 8:50.) Mother and father together witnessed the fruit of their faith as their daughter was restored to them. Sorrow was averted by a miracle, thanks to their faith.

But even faithful couples cannot guarantee the salvation of all their children. Adam and Eve were certainly magnificent in their faith, but one of their sons was a murderer. Lehi and Sariah sacrificed their all in obedience to the Lord's commandment, but their disobedient sons racked the family with strife and conflict.

And many families must deal with circumstances in which there is no spouse to provide support and comfort through times of trial. Think of the widow of Nain as she walked behind the bier of her only son, the child who would have been both the economic and the emotional mainstay of her old age. She was already a single mother, earlier visited by the sorrow of losing her husband. We can guess something of her despair, but we know nothing of her faith. The scriptural record does not say that she appealed to Jesus for help; rather, Jesus saw her tears, "had compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep not." She may not even have understood what was happening when Jesus stopped the procession and raised her son from the dead. But all of us can imagine the faith and gratitude that bloomed like sudden flowers in that widow's heart as her living son was restored to her. (See Luke 7:11-15.)

Think of Mary, Martha, and Lazarus. The scriptures refer to the home as Martha's. (See Luke 10:38.) Mary and Lazarus may have lived with her. The scriptures do not mention that any of them were married. Even though their family had a less than ideal configuration, Jesus did not find them unworthy of his love and attention. Gladly Jesus came to their home, and joyfully he taught them his gospel. When Lazarus died, Jesus shared the sisters' grief even as he called Lazarus forth from the grave. (See John 11:1-44.)

Think of the mother of James and John. Certainly she had faith, for the scriptures tell us that she "worship[ped]" Jesus and begged him to guarantee a sure place in heaven for her sons, one at Jesus' right hand and the other at his left. (See Matthew 20:20-21.) What mother would not desire to guarantee her children's salvation? But the Savior explained why even this apparently righteous request could not be granted. Surely her faith had room to grow into a fuller understanding that her sons were being called, not to a guarantee of glory, but to a life of service. "Whosoever will be great among you," reminded Jesus, "let him be your minister; And whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant." (Matthew 20:26-27.) Salvation is not a prize to be hoarded within even the most loving family but the natural product of a life of service.

Think of the Samaritan woman at the well, married five times and then living with a man not her husband. Certainly those were not ideal circumstances in which to raise children, nor had her faith been sufficient to give her a more peaceful, less turbulent lifestyle. Surely she was a strange candidate for revelation, but Jesus looked past her circumstances, past her current level of faith to her potential, and she became the first person to whom he revealed that he was the son of God, the Messiah. She ran back to her town, sharing her newfound testimony. (See John 4:1-26.)

Think of Abraham and Sarah, dealing with the sorrow of infertility for so many years of their married life. Think of Esther's far from ideal circumstances—married to a man who was not only an unbeliever but a pagan, and isolated from her uncle and fellow believers. Still, her faith was sufficient to make her the instrument of salvation to her people.

What is the message of those stories? First, we do not need to wait for ideal circumstances before Jesus can enter our lives. Jesus came to save people who were not perfect, to heal people who were not already healthy, to show a better way to people who had gone astray. He will enter our homes, too, even though they are not perfect, if we open our doors to him. "Behold," he has said, "I stand at the door, and knock." (Revelation 3:20.) Sometimes we think we cannot live the principles of the gospel because we are not in ideal circumstances. We need to stretch toward Christ, and in so doing we will find that our capacity increases.

We do not need to wait for perfect faith to have enough faith to begin building Christ-centered families. When the apostles could not cast an evil spirit out of a boy, the father carried him to Jesus, who gave him a piercing challenge: "If thou canst believe, all things are possible." The father, knowing the imperfect state of his faith but also his desire for more, cried out, weeping, "Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief." (Mark 9:23-24.) Jesus did not rebuke him or say, "Come back when you have more faith." He healed the child.

The scriptures show us examples of families with whom Jesus interacted during his premortal and mortal ministries. They had hearts willing to receive him even if their circumstances were not ideal. They had faith and yearned for more. They sacrificed, served others, prayed, fasted, and pondered the promises of the prophets.

What is our Heavenly Father's work and glory? It is "to bring to pass [our] immortality and eternal life." (Moses 1:39.) The work of salvation goes on despite imperfect circumstances and imperfect faith. "I am come that they might have life," the Savior explained, "and that they might have it more abundantly." (John 10:10.) His task was not only to give life to the dead, miraculous though that was, but to give increased life to those living with less than flourishing faith, less than vibrant hope, less than burning charity.

He accepts our imperfections even as he challenges us to rise above them. He loves us even when we are not very lovable. He rewards even a struggling faith with miracles.

Because we understand the doctrine of the ideal family, we can be grateful for the parts of it that we possess. We are grateful for the guidance that comes to us from prophets, apostles, and other Church leaders. We can strengthen our family's relationship with Christ by faith, hope, and charity: faith that our prayers will be answered and that our testimonies can be shared; hope that persistent service, good example, and true teachings will eventually prevail; and charity that creates love and acceptance within our homes.

Strong families build strong individuals who, in turn, are able to strengthen other family members. We take turns in lifting each other. I have seen this process at work in my own life.

When my husband and I married, I was a Latter-day Saint and he was a Congregationalist. We both shared a strong faith in the Savior, and I felt that someone as honest and loving as Ed would continue to seek and accept truth. I shared my testimony with Ed, and ten months after our marriage, he was baptized. We were the only Latter-day Saints in our families, but we could strengthen each other.

When Ed was ordained to the Melchizedek Priesthood, the concept of priesthood was a thrilling and exciting one for us. He was the first priesthood holder in the Okazaki family, and I, of course, had no relatives who were priesthood holders. It was something we talked about and worked to understand together. How grateful I was for Ed's goodness, his Christlike desire to serve others, and the many opportunities that the Church gave him to exercise his priesthood on behalf of us, our sons, and others. There were many tender moments as he gave father's blessings to our two sons—not only when they were ill but when they needed comfort and strength, or to mark special events like school years, new church responsibilities, and their missions. Ed never took his priesthood for granted. It was always a privilege to him, one exercised with thanksgiving and humility. Supporting Ed in his callings and feeling his support for me in mine was part of the partnership of our marriage.

After we moved back to Salt Lake City in 1988, we were invited to an interview with the Missionary Committee. We suspected that a calling might be in the offing, so Ed, who had had a stroke about two years earlier that affected his heart, went to the doctor first so that he would know if he could accept an assignment. The doctor was absolutely firm that Ed must not leave the country. Thus, when the Missionary Committee discussed the possibility of Ed's being called to preside over a Missionary Training Center in another country, Ed was very disappointed to have to tell them the doctor's instructions. I would have supported Ed wholeheartedly in his calling, but it was not to be.

Then, a few weeks later, I was called to serve on the Primary General Board, and a year and a half later, I was called to be first counselor in the Relief Society general presidency. When I was being set apart, President Thomas S. Monson, who had known us for years, said, "Eddie, Chieko has supported you in your priesthood callings—in the bishopric, as mission president, and as regional representative. Now it's your turn to support her." Ed smiled and agreed to do so. What President Monson may not have known is that was not a change for Ed.

Ed and I loved teaching our sons the gospel and a strong faith in the Savior. We were grateful we had the strength to care for them and grateful to see them grow up to become independent and self-reliant people with the strength to help others. We rejoiced in the strength that an intelligent and sensitive daughter-in-law brought to our family. We delighted in seeing our grandsons born and begin to follow the cycle of family life themselves.

I never appreciated the strength of my sons more than when my husband was dying. All three of us sustained each other and consulted with each other, but Ken took the lead in working with the doctors and the hospital. Then when Ed died, Bob took the lead in making funeral arrangements and dealing with the legal procedures that had to be followed. In planning the funeral service, I took the lead. As each of us passed through different stages in our shock and grief, we had the others for support. When one of us needed to rise to an occasion, we could. When we needed to withdraw with our sorrow, we could because one of the others could step forward and be the leader.

I have used the example of my own family, because I have seen for myself that it is to our family that we turn in such crises. Yet whatever our family or marital circumstances, the strength we need can always be found because it comes from the Savior and his love. Sometimes our own faith enables us to draw on that love. Sometimes it is the faith and love of others that strengthens us.

We do not know the challenges and adversities that life will give us. But the scriptures promise us that "with God nothing shall be impossible" (Luke 1:37), and we can say with the apostle Paul, "I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me" (Philippians 4:13).

The scriptures are filled with testimonies of the strength that comes from the Savior. I particularly love the encouragement and lift of the heart that comes to me when I read these rejoicings of the prophets:

Moses exulted, "The Lord is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation." (Exodus 15:2.)

David sang, "God is my strength and power: and he maketh my way perfect." (2 Samuel 22:33.)

The psalmist testified, "God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. Therefore [we] will not . . . fear, though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea." (Psalm 46:1-2.)

To Isaiah, the Lord promised: "Fear thou not; for I am with thee: be not dismayed; for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness." (Isaiah 41:10.)

How can we build that kind of faith in the strength of the Savior? David had counsel for the people of his time that I repeat to you: "Seek the Lord and his strength, seek his face continually. Remember his marvellous works that he hath done, his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth." (1 Chronicles 16:11-12.) "Blessed is the man [or woman] whose strength is in thee; in whose heart are [thy] ways. . . . Go from strength to strength." (Psalm 84:5, 7.)

Strengthen yourselves by seeking the source of true strength: the Savior. Come unto him. He loves you. He desires your happiness and exults in your desires for righteousness. Make him your strength, your daily companion, your rod and your staff. Let him comfort you. There is no burden we need bear alone. We do not need to wait for perfect faith to have enough faith. He meets our need. His grace compensates for our deficiencies. He is willing and eager, if we will only ask.

Your strength will strengthen others—your children, your husband, your friends, and your sisters in the gospel. That strength will flow back from them to you when you need it.

Through the years, the circumstances of my life have changed. I was a single woman, then a wife married to a nonmember, then a partner in a temple sealing, a mother, a mother-in-law and grandmother, and now a widow. I have known the Savior's love in all of these circumstances. My own faith has been rewarded as I have felt the Savior's presence and power in my home.

Our circumstances will not always be ideal, but we can still strive to live up to our ideals, to strengthen our faith, and to do the best we can. We can draw on the Savior's power to strengthen us as individuals and families. From the bottom of my heart and from more than fifty years of experience in the Church, I testify that the Savior extends to us all the same mercy, the same power to find healing, and the same perfect love. He has assured us that it is his work and glory to bring to pass our immortality and eternal life. What joy it gives us to contemplate eternal life with our families as part of the great family of God. What warmth and what beauty come from every well-made quilt, even crazy quilts.
