Chieko N. Okazaki, Aloha! ( 1995)

Chapter 2

Sisterhood and Service

The gospel teaches us the joy of service. It teaches us about Jesus Christ, whose whole life was one of service. And it teaches us how to serve.

After a year of thinking about service during 1992 as part of the sesquicentennial of the Relief Society, all of us have broadened and deepened our understanding. In connection with that principle, let me share with you a legend from my homeland of Hawaii. It is significant to me that many of the powers we Christians associate with the Savior were the province of goddesses in the ancient tales and legends of Hawaii. This legend from the big island of Hawaii is a story of divine sacrifice that has, I think, some parallels with the sacrifice of the Savior, though expressed in ways that the ancient Hawaiians could understand.

You may know that the island of Maui, according to the legends of Hawaii, was named for the son of the goddess Hina. It is not so well known that Hina also had four daughters. Near the city of Hilo, on the big island, are three small craters that are particularly associated with one of those daughters, Hina Keahi, whose name signifies her control of fire. According to the legend of the place, the mother Hina gave Hina Keahi the area near Hilo where she ruled over her people and her children. For a long time they lived in peace and prosperity. The land was fertile, and the rains came often.

But at last the days were like fire and the sky had no rain in it. The taro planted on the hillsides died. The bananas and sugar cane and sweet potatoes withered and the fruit on the trees was blasted. The people were faint because of hunger, and the shadow of death was over the land.

Hina Keahi pitied her suffering friends and determined to provide food for them. Slowly her people labored at her command, . . . gathering and carrying back whatever wood they could find, then went up the mountainside to the great koa and ohia forests, gathering their burdens of fuel according to the wishes of the [goddess].

. . . After many days the great quantity of wood desired by the goddess was piled up by the side of the Halai Hill.

Then came the days of digging out the hill and making a great imu or cooking oven, and preparing it with stones and wood. Large quantities of wood were thrown into the place. Stones best fitted for retaining heat were gathered and the fires kindled. When the stones were hot, Hina Keahi directed the people to arrange the imu in its proper order for cooking . . . a great feast. A place was made for sweet potatoes, another for taro, another for pigs, and another for dogs. All the forms of preparing the food for cooking were passed through, but no real food was laid on the stones.

Then Hina Keahi told them to make a place in the imu for a human sacrifice. . . . Therefore it was in quiet despair that the workmen obeyed Hina Keahi. . . . It might mean their own holocaust as an offering to the gods. At last Hina Keahi bade the laborers . . . [to] stand by the side of the oven, ready to cover it with the dirt which had been thrown up and piled up by the side. The people stood by, not knowing upon whom the blow might fall.

But [although] Hina Keahi . . . stood before them robed in royal majesty and power, still her face was full of pity and love. Her voice melted the hearts of her retainers as she bade them carefully follow her directions:

"O my people! . . . This imu is my imu. I shall lie down in its bed of burning stones. . . . I shall sleep under its cover. . . . Quickly throw the dirt over my body. Fear not the fire." . . .

Hina Keahi was very beautiful and her eyes flashed light like fire as she stepped into the great pit and lay down on the burning stones. A great smoke arose and gathered over the imu. The men toiled rapidly, placing the imu mats over [her] and throwing the dirt back into the oven until it was all thoroughly covered and the smoke was quenched. . . . The great heat of the fire in the imu withered the little life that was still left [in the surrounding countryside] from the famine.

Meanwhile Hina Keahi was carrying out her plan for . . . her people. [Although her people were sure that she was dying, smothered by the smoke and burned by the flames] she could not be injured by the heat, for she was a goddess of fire. The waves of heat raged around her as she sank down through the stones of the imu into the underground paths which belonged to the spirit world.

On the first day, there burst forth a gushing stream of water. On the second day, closer to the sea, appeared a pool of water. And on the third day, on the beach "in the very path of the ocean surf burst forth a great spring of sweet water." A beautiful woman appeared at the imu and commanded the starving people to dig away the dirt and pull back the mats. "When this was done, the hungry people found a very great abundance of food, enough to supply their wants until the food plants should have time to ripen and the days of the famine should be over. The joy of the people was great." (W. D. Westervelt, Myths and Legends of Hawaii, sel. A. Grove Day [Honolulu: Mutual Publishing/Tales of the Pacific, 1987], pp. 25-29.)

I love thinking about this legend of Hina Keahi, who saw suffering and had compassion on the sufferers and who was willing to sacrifice herself for her people out of the love and generosity of her heart. This story embodies the belief of the Hawaiian people that love, generosity, and sacrifice in behalf of others can make great miracles. If you have experienced the aloha spirit of Hawaii, you know that those same principles still make Hawaii the special place that it is. But love and generosity are miracles wherever they occur. The service that takes place within a network of sisters is one of the most beautiful manifestations of charity, or the divine love of Christ, that we can experience in mortality. Each kindly deed weaves another strand in the gospel pattern of love and service.

I want to discuss sisterhood and service in three of its many aspects. First, let me share with you some of the amazing things that happen when sisters work together in groups. Second, let me suggest some of the even more amazing things that can happen when we have the will within ourselves to act on our own in offering individual service. And third, let me share my testimony about the power available when men and women work together in harmony.

Working Together

Following is just a sampling of some of the joyful reports we have received from Relief Society sisters all over the world who have found a way to reach out to their communities during the sesquicentennial year. Many of these projects have been in the self-sacrificial spirit of Hina Keahi, responding with compassion to the needs of the people around them.

In South Africa, the Benoni Ward is visiting and serving at a home for old-age pensioners.

In Australia's Gosford Ward, sisters are working to establish a youth detoxification center.

In France, the Versailles Ward is sending packages and letters to Romanian families whose immigrant brothers live in the ward.

The tiny Covington Branch Relief Society in Georgia was organized only recently, in February 1991, but every active member was present at the first homemaking meeting, and they chose to adopt a highway for cleaning.

The Ashford Ward of Rhode Island Stake is providing service at a camp for children with cancer.

The Staten Island Ward in New York wrapped Christmas packages at a mall to earn money for material for quilts to give to shelters for abused women and children.

Southington First Ward in Connecticut is coordinating a soup kitchen with the local council of churches.

In Yugoslavia, sisters in Zagreb are aiding refugees from the war.

Sisters in a ward at Brigham Young University made flash cards for Vietnamese refugees to help them learn English.

In Orem, Utah, one group of sisters makes teddy bears to be carried in police cars to comfort little children in need.

A group of sisters in Tennessee helps adults who are trying to pass their high school equivalency examinations.

In Santa Monica Second Ward in California, sisters made protective cases for magnifying lenses and gave them to a local institute that serves the partially sighted. (See Sheridan R. Sheffield, "Celebrate through Service," Church News, 25 Apr. 1992.)

In Micronesia, on the small island of Ebeye, where there are about three hundred Church members among a population of thirteen thousand, the Relief Society sisters have spent time picking up litter every Wednesday. After the first few times, the queen of the island joined them. (Ibid.)

A presesquicentennial project in the Huntington Beach Fourth Ward did great things with small resources but enormous love for the women and children in an emergency shelter. Early in 1990, the Relief Society presidency asked the sisters to look through their sewing boxes and donate fabric they weren't using or scraps left over from a project. They also asked for yarn and batting. Judy Lockhart, the Relief Society president, wrote:

The response was overwhelming! We sorted the fabric into heaps by colors—every color of the rainbow was there—and miraculously there was a skein of yarn just the right color to go with each heap of fabric.

The sisters took the fabric home and each worked individually on making one or more pieced quilts from the fabric they had. They constructed a quilt top as well as a back. Some sisters made one; some made eight or ten. The Merrie Miss class made a complete quilt, tied it, and finished the edges.

In one twelve-hour marathon that included the Young Women during the evening, these sisters tied forty-one quilts, ranging from baby- or youth-size to twins and doubles. Sister Lockhart summarized, "The spirit of the event was indescribable. We learned skills, we were able to give generously of our time and talents, we were able to socialize as we worked." And they provided gifts of warmth and love to many women who must have felt that the world was a dangerous and uncaring place.

This same Relief Society has taken on the therapy of a young man who had been paralyzed in a car accident and who was slowly dying in bed for lack of the ability to pay for the intensive therapy he needed. These generous-hearted sisters have involved their husbands and even their teenage children in this young man's therapy. After talking with his parents, Sister Lockhart says, "I was humbled to know that we are the answer to their prayers." (Letter to Relief Society General Presidency, 12 Nov. 1991.)

We are literally answers to prayers when we are willing to serve. It is a lovely thought that, all around the world, these acts of kindly service are occurring, linking sister to sister, Relief Society to Relief Society, and human being to human being. They are part of the loving and sacrificial spirit of the legend of Hina Keahi.

Sometimes we get discouraged because the needs in the world around us seem so great and our resources seem so few. We think, "We're not doing enough. We can't do enough. Nobody could do enough." When we think like that, we focus on what is left undone, and we lose the joy that comes with service. I want to tell you that we don't need to compare ourselves to anyone else, either collectively or as individuals. Lighten up. Concentrate on the joy, not the job. We can do great good when we work as a united sisterhood, as long as we don't burden ourselves with unrealistic expectations that rob us of the joy of achievement.

Service as Individuals

Another side of service is our ability to do good as individuals. Just a single individual can set amazing things in motion if he or she has the sensitivity to see a human need and has the will to respond to it. It takes special eyes to see that we are not just individual strands but rather that we are all part of the cat's cradle of caring. President Gordon B. Hinckley, expressing the credo that has shaped his life, bore a powerful testimony about the importance of individual service:

Though my work may be menial, though my contribution may be small, I can perform it with dignity and offer it with unselfishness. My talents may not be great, but I can use them to bless the lives of others. I can be one who does his work with pride in that which comes from hand and mind. I can be one who works with respect for my associates, for their opinions, for their beliefs, with appreciation for their problems and with a desire to help them should they stumble. I believe in the principle that I can make a difference in this world. It may be ever so small. But it will count for the greater good. The goodness of the world in which we live is the accumulated goodness of many small and seemingly inconsequential acts. ("I Believe," Ensign, Aug. 1992, p. 7)

President Hinckley has the quality of kigatsuku. This important Japanese concept, which I learned from my mother when I was a very small child, means an inner spirit to see good and do it, without being told and without being organized into a service project. My husband, Ed, was kigatsuku his entire life, always thinking ahead in his assignments. He liked the story of Hina Keahi because of the goddess's gentle and loving spirit. When he was executive secretary in the Littleton Colorado Stake presidency, he would go early for the stake presidency and high council meetings, arrange the chairs, sharpen the pencils, and lay out copies of the agenda. During the meeting, he would make notes about upcoming events and quietly see that the stake president had reminders when he needed them. Nobody told him that was part of his job when he was called. And Ed wasn't the kind to go around only reading books and manuals on how to be the perfect executive secretary—although I think he came pretty close to achieving it. He did what he did because his heart was in the right place. He was constantly asking himself, "How can I help the stake president and the high councilors? What can I do to make their work easier? What needs do I see, and what can I do about them?" Second-mile service for him was second nature.

Here's a wonderful story about doing just what you can. A deputy answered a call to the Knox County, Tennessee, sheriff's department about a woman crying uncontrollably in a restaurant. Two girls, perhaps four and five years old, anxiously watched their mother. "'Daddy left us,' [one] blurted. 'He just put our stuff out of the car while we was in the bathroom.'"

The officer sent the little girls to the counter to order something to eat, and he signaled the waitress to take their order. Then he asked the woman what the problem was. "'Just what my girl said,' she replied, wiping her eyes with the back of her hand. 'My husband's not cruel—just at the end of his rope. We're flat broke, and he figured we'd get more help alone than if he stayed.'"

Her nearest family was in Chicago, so they talked about local agencies that could help. When the waitress took hot dogs and french fries to the little girls, the officer went to the counter to pay.

"'The boss says no charge,' the waitress said. 'We know what's going on.'

"'Officer, excuse me.' A big man in jeans, T-shirt, and baseball cap stood by the counter." The other patrons in the restaurant watched without speaking.

"'Here,' he said, extending a handful of bills. 'We passed the hat. . . . Tell her it was from folks with families of their own.'"

There was enough money for the woman and her daughters to buy bus tickets to Chicago and meals during their journey. When the deputy put the money into the woman's hand, she began to cry again. (See David Hunter, "Truck-Stop Samaritans," in "Heroes for Today," Reader's Digest, Jan. 1992, pp. 142-43.)

What I love about this story is that many people became part of the solution to the woman's problem. But did you notice what the officer didn't say? Not one of the people there had made a move to help the woman before he got there. Someone had telephoned the police to say, "There's this woman who won't stop crying and she has two little girls with her," but everyone waited for someone else to do something first. Perhaps because he had an official position, the officer was the key to the solution, but what exactly did he do? He sat down and asked her one question. And he was willing to pay for the girls' hot dogs—but he didn't even have to do that. As soon as it became apparent that the girls were hungry, someone else took care of providing for that need. That's kigatsuku service—reaching out to do what you can, even if you're not sure that you can solve the problem, even if you're not sure that anyone else will help, and even if you're not sure that there are enough resources of the right kind to solve the problem. In more cases than you'd think, a cat's cradle of caring will spring up. Even though the truck drivers and the waitresses didn't feel as individuals that they could solve the problem, they were all willing to help become part of the solution when they could see a pattern start to form.

And here's an equally inspiring story about one Latter-day Saint woman, Vicki Vehar, who made a great difference because she took seriously the Book of Mormon scripture, "When ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.) Vicki, a member of Naperville Second Ward in Chicago, was greatly struck by that scripture when she was investigating the Church. She has always taken time for community service, even though she is very busy as a financial planner, wife, mother, and now worker in the Chicago Temple.

When she read about a program in which excess food [was] collected from places such as restaurants and grocery stores and distributed to food banks and shelters for the homeless, she believed it was an idea that could work in her area. She began investigating the availability of surplus food and the need for it in the Chicago area. One of the places she called to offer help in arranging for food was the Salvation Army.

The night following her call, a freak tornado struck the Plainsfield-Joliet area, about thirty-five miles southwest of Chicago. The twister plowed down a three-mile swath several blocks wide, destroying everything in its path and killing twelve people. The next morning, Vicki received a call from the same Salvation Army worker she had spoken to the previous day: Could she possibly help provide some volunteers to assist the tornado victims?

Although this wasn't the kind of help she had originally offered, it was still an opportunity to serve. Vicki called the mission president, and within an hour, eight missionaries—one couple, four elders, and two sisters—were on the scene. The women distributed hamburgers and other foodstuffs, donated by a national fast-food chain, to people whose homes had been destroyed; the men began helping with the salvage process.

The next morning, Vicki got an elated phone call from the woman at the Salvation Army. "I don't know how you did it, but your church is absolutely wonderful!" the woman exclaimed. (Derin Head Rodriguez, "Reaching Out," Ensign, Jan. 1992, p. 70)

Vicki is a kigatsuku woman, busily and beautifully involved in a cat's cradle of caring.

Let's not be afraid to take the first step when we see a need and to do what we can, even if it looks as if it couldn't possibly be enough or be really helpful.

Building the Kingdom

The third concept about service that I want to share with you involves men and women working together in harmony in mutually supportive relationships that recognize and honor the differences and similarities between men and women, that draw deeply on the strengths of both, that focus on working toward righteous goals, and that celebrate the contributions of both in the home, in the community, and in the church and kingdom of God. I was very touched when President Howard W. Hunter spoke in the general women's meeting in September 1992. I love President Hunter, the gentleness and the clarity of his manner, and the obvious love he has for all members of the Church. He said: "By reason of our call to testify, govern, and minister, it is required of us that despite age, infirmity, exhaustion, and feelings of inadequacy, we do the work he has given us to do, to the last breath of our lives. As our Lord and Savior needed the women of his time . . . —even in his hour of humiliation, agony, and death—so we, his servants, all across the Church, need you, the women of the Church, to stand with us and for us." ("To the Women of the Church," Ensign, Nov. 1992, p. 96.)

I, with you, felt within myself the desire to respond even more strongly to that call from a priesthood leader. Sometimes the opportunity to stand with and for our priesthood leaders comes about in ways we may not expect or understand. Let me tell you of an experience I had not long ago.

I was assigned to speak at a regional Relief Society meeting. Before I went, I conferred with the host stake Relief Society president and the host stake president about the needs of the sisters in that area and felt deeply impressed to address directly one of the items on their list: sexual abuse. I had many misgivings about speaking on this subject. I am far from being an expert on it. I had great feelings of inadequacy. Yet I knew in my soul that I was receiving promptings to do so. I prayed with humility for assistance. Afterward I discovered that the need was indeed a serious one and that many women and priesthood leaders in the audience had been praying for that message and so were already prepared to hear it. One was a bishop who came up to speak with me afterwards. His eyes filled with tears as he told me about being prompted strongly and repeatedly to address the topic of sexual abuse with his ward members. Bishops who have dealt with this subject sensitively have been able to help those who have suffered the indignity and the pain of abuse.

I have spoken here of abuse not only because it is an example that is fresh in my mind on account of my recent experiences but because all of us can understand how important it is for the survivors of childhood sexual abuse, particularly incest, to see examples of men and women working together in healthy ways for the good of others.

As I think of the next one hundred fifty years of the Relief Society, I foresee the flowering of the great work that I believe Joseph Smith had in mind when he organized the women in Nauvoo. It is a great joy to support the priesthood, to see our different strengths, our different perspectives, and our different gifts unite in righteousness to be dedicated to the Lord. I see a greater acceptance of and rejoicing in the diversity among brothers and sisters in the kingdom, knowing that each person is important, no matter what the individual's circumstances may be. I see women acknowledging their own strength and that of their sisters and freely offering it in harmony with priesthood principles. I see the strength and the joy that come from being united in the great cause of building the kingdom.

I think of the partnership between my husband, Ed, and me. I have always shared everything in my life with Ed; and whether I have been excited, dismayed, upset, confused, or thrilled by something, Ed was always there to listen attentively, to ask clarifying questions, and to express his loving support. I still talk to Ed in my mind. We were married too long for that dialogue to stop. But it is hard to know that his steady eyes, his warm smile, and his own happy enthusiasm are no longer a living presence in my life.

Even though I would give anything to talk with him again and hear his answers, I know that I cannot expect any contact except as a rare and sweet occurrence. But one morning some months ago, I was lying in bed just before I needed to get up to go to an early meeting. I wasn't asleep. I was just relaxed. And I heard Ed call me, "Chick! Chick!" It was exactly what he used to do when he got out of the shower and I was still in bed. He wanted to be sure that I wouldn't oversleep and miss getting up on time. Oh, I jumped right up, calling, "Ed!" There was no answer, of course, but I felt so good!

Ever since he died, I've wondered where he is exactly, whether he knows what's happening with me and the boys, and I so desperately wanted just a little contact with him again. And so that was how he chose to come. I have to smile. It was so characteristic of Ed. That loving little service, that gentle support to help me with my calling, is exactly the service that Ed would have chosen to perform in life.

Conclusion

The support of my sisters in the Relief Society, not only on the general board but throughout the world, has been a great source of comfort to me. I have grown to appreciate anew the strength in our sisterhood.

The sesquicentennial year launched us into the next one hundred fifty years of service. The gospel will enter many new lands, and millions of women will hear its glad tidings. They will understand their eternal identity as daughters of God. Their hearts will be flooded with gratitude as they realize the opportunity mortality offers them to work out the promises made in the premortal existence and the beauties of eternal progress and eternal family life that await them in the postmortal existence. The Relief Society will be a powerful part of their lives. It will reinforce the gospel principles that they learn from the missionaries and confirm all that is good in their own families and cultures. Relief Societies will truly be "nursing mothers" to their wards and branches, but more—Relief Societies will be "nursing mothers" to hundreds of communities as the women unite in righteous service, bringing health, happiness, and holiness where there has been pain, sorrow, and fear.

The Relief Society is a mighty sisterhood. There is a great force for good in our organized, group efforts to improve our communities and reach out to others in loving service. We have immense power in ourselves, through the Spirit, to see a need and to meet it quickly with the resources at hand. In so doing, I believe that we will seldom need to work alone but that co-workers and colleagues will be attracted to our cause. Remember the legend of Hina Keahi. Remember to lighten up, and to greet our opportunities for service with a light heart, instead of being burdened. Remember the cat's cradle and the networks of caring and service that we can build together. Remember the strength and power of women, daughters of Christ, united in the cause of building the kingdom of God on earth.
