Chieko N. Okazaki, Aloha! ( 1995)

Part 2: Centered on Christ

Chapter 3

The Way, the Truth, and the Life

"I am the way, the truth, and the life." (John 14:6.) Jesus spoke those words in a very intimate gathering, during the Passover supper that he ate with his apostles in the upper room. It must have seemed like an island of peace before the ocean of turmoil and pain that was rising outside. It would end, just a few hours later, in the trial and crucifixion of Jesus. Gently he prepared them for his departure, and lovingly he comforted them with these words:

Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me.

In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you.

And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be also.

And whither I go ye know, and the way ye know.

Thomas saith unto him, Lord, we know not whither thou goest; and how can we know the way?

Jesus saith unto him, I am the way, the truth, and the life: no [one] cometh unto the Father, but by me. (John 14:1-6)

Let's turn that statement into a question: Is Christ our way? Is he our truth? Is he our life? If he is, we already have claimed the promise he gave us of untroubled hearts.

I'd like to discuss with you three implications of accepting Christ's way as our way. And I'd like to do it by using another metaphor of Christ—Christ as the cornerstone. First, I'd like to share some thoughts about what it means to make Christ our foundation, our cornerstone. Second, let's consider the role of kindness as part of a Christian life. And third, I'd like to talk about patience as essential in living a Christian life.

Christ the Cornerstone

What does it mean to make Christ the cornerstone of our lives and to build on him as our foundation? You're all familiar with Paul's lovely description of the organization of the Church:

Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellowcitizens with the saints, and of the household of God;

And are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone;

In whom all the building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord:

In whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit. (Ephesians 2:19-22)

To me, this scripture means that our feelings about ourselves and our relationships with others are founded upon and spring from Jesus Christ. If we accept him as our Savior, if we believe that he truly came to earth out of love for us to accomplish his atoning sacrifice and to redeem us from our selfishness and our shortsightedness and our sins, then it means that we are building for eternity and that nothing will be wasted. But if we have not made a commitment to Christ in our hearts and if we have not accepted his loving sacrifice on our behalf, then all of our achievements are bricks without mortar—solid and even beautiful in themselves but not connected to each other, not something that will help us discover our eternal identities and build lasting relationships in our families, in our friendships, and in our shared membership in this wonderful church.

I feel such gratitude for the sacramental promises of the Savior to always let his Spirit be with us. I feel such strength from his love for me. I feel such acceptance and compassion in how he deals with me day by day. I feel such a desire to follow him and to be the kind of person who is worthy of his name. In my prayers I feel the peace and comfort of that little circle of disciples around the Savior in the upper room, and it gives me strength to walk down the stairs and out the door in my own life into the demands, the adversities, and even the calamities and tragedies that daily life hands us. He has promised that he will be our never-failing companion. We can trust that promise.

I hope that all of us begin our day by spending some time with the Savior, feeling his Spirit and enjoying his love for us. I realize that there are many days when that time can be only a moment snatched very early, either before other obligations claim us or in a quiet crack between responsibilities. But it doesn't matter. Once we have learned to recognize the Savior, I think we realize that he is our companion, even as we fly through a list of demands, distractions, and duties. He is a help, an anchor.

I think that's what being the foundation means. It means that there's a sure, safe place in our hearts that shapes all the rest of our lives. It doesn't matter how prettily we paint the walls or how attractively we arrange the furniture in a house where the foundation is cracked and unstable. It will all come down. But when the foundation is strong, we can attend to all of the painting, patching, and piano moving with confidence, knowing that the foundation is there.

I love Primary songs. I particularly enjoy the song "The Wise Man and the Foolish Man," which describes the parable of Jesus about the two house builders, one who built on a foundation of faith in God and the other who built on a sandy foundation. (See Children's Songbook [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1989], p. 281.) Jesus is the rock on which we build our lives. Now, if we're all convinced about the importance of building our lives on our testimonies of the Savior, we're ready to talk about the second point, kindness.

Kindness

Have you ever noticed that the way of Christ takes us straight to other people? The purpose of a foundation is not to be the rest of the house. It's to provide the base for the house. In the household of the Saints that Paul talks about, Christ is the foundation and the cornerstone, but our work and our responsibilities lie among our brothers and sisters.

While I was thinking about this idea, I remembered an important scripture that also deals with a stone—this time, not the foundation stone that Christ represents but the stone in our relationships. You remember that when the Savior was teaching his disciples how to pray and why their Father in Heaven felt so strongly about prayer that he commanded us to pray to him, he used the example of the fish and the stone. Let me read you these verses from Luke 11, adapted slightly to apply directly to us as women:

And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.

For every one that asketh receiveth; and [she] that seeketh findeth; and to [her] that knocketh it shall be opened.

If a [daughter] shall ask bread of any of you that is a [mother], will [she] give [her] a stone? or if [she] ask a fish, will [she] for a fish give [her] a serpent?

Or if [she] shall ask an egg, will [the mother] offer [her] a scorpion?

If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children: how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him? (Luke 11:9-13)

You get the point. Our Heavenly Father is a loving parent. He is kind to us. He waits tenderly to give us good gifts, out of the bounty of his love for us. And we have learned to rely on that love. The challenge for us is to deal kindly with each other. We need to have the same sensitivity and tenderness toward those around us with needs. A sister might not ask us for an egg, but she may ask us to listen while she talks about how frightened she is as her mother slowly slips toward death. A daughter might not ask us for bread and fish, but she might ask for reassurance when friends seem scornful or for encouragement when she has a tough school assignment to do. Can we give support and empowerment and courage instead of doubts and fears?

We're not talking about anything complicated or difficult here. We're talking about simple human kindness, ordinary courtesy, genuine warmth, attentive listening. These are things we can all do. I think of Mother Teresa and how simple and uncomplicated she makes the enormous task of helping the poor of Calcutta. I love to read about her life and study her words, because she's someone who really puts the gospel into action. Malcolm Muggeridge, a prize-winning journalist who did some documentaries of Mother Teresa for the BBC, describes her this way:

Mother Teresa moved in [among the poor of Calcutta] and stayed. . . . She, a nun, rather slightly built, with a few rupees in her pocket; not particularly clever, or particularly gifted in the arts of persuasion. Just with this Christian love shining about her; in her heart and on her lips. Just prepared to follow her Lord, and in accordance with his instructions regard every derelict left to die in the streets as him; to hear in the cry of every abandoned child . . . the cry of the Bethlehem child. . . .

To her they are all children of God, for whom Christ died, and so deserving of all love. If God counts the hairs of each of their heads, if none are excluded from the salvation the Crucifixion offers, who will . . . exclude them from earthly . . . esteem? . . . I never experienced so perfect a sense of human equality as with Mother Teresa among her poor. Her love for them, reflecting God's love, makes them equal, as brothers and sisters within a family are equal, however widely they differ in intellectual . . . attainments, in physical beauty and grace. (Something Beautiful for God: Mother Teresa of Calcutta [New York: Walker and Co./Phoenix Press, 1971; large print ed., 1984], pp. 10-12)

Sometimes we're hesitant to reach out to others because we're afraid. We're afraid that their needs are too great, that we won't know how to help effectively, or that we might be taken advantage of. I think it's possible that we may bungle things a few times when we're trying to help. We may give the wrong kind of service or give it at the wrong time. It's true that we may be taken advantage of. But if I have to make a mistake between being trusting and being suspicious, I'd rather be too trusting. If I have to make a choice between being too generous and too judging, I'd rather be too generous.

One Sunday the autumn before my husband died, we went to a sort of park under a viaduct on Salt Lake City's west side where every Sunday a woman has come to feed the homeless. Others have come to help, too, and that's what Ed was doing. He'd been at the store the day before, and he just picked up two crates of oranges, one for us and one that he drove down early on Sunday morning. We helped serve the plates until we had to leave for church, and as we were leaving, passing among the groups of men standing around or sitting on the grass, Ed saw a man, thin and unshaven, shivering in only a T-shirt. When I glanced back over my shoulder, there was my wonderful husband slipping off his jacket and helping this man into it. He just said quietly, "You need this more than I do," and then, in his shirt sleeves, he came walking toward me with the biggest smile on his face. Nothing in the world—and I mean nothing—made Ed as happy as helping someone else.

It can be the same for us. The Savior is not asking us to wipe out poverty or eradicate disease. He's just asking us to "give . . . unto one of these little ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple," as he says in Matthew 10:42, to speak gently instead of harshly when our patience is tried, to pray for someone who makes a mistake rather than gossip about that someone, to smile and say hello instead of walking on by, to ask "How are you?" and then really listen to the answer. He's just asking us to do what we can in very little ways.

I remember being very touched when I read an article by Lois M. Collins, a Utah writer. She recalled seeing a note taped up in a rest area off the freeway near the Utah-Nevada border from a man trying to reach his family in Reno. He was out of gas and had no money. "If you can help me, I am sleeping in the gray Ford," the note finished. "God bless you."

Lois saw the car immediately, an old dilapidated car, all its windows open in the heat. A German shepherd was asleep on the sidewalk in a tiny patch of shade. The dog looked exhausted too. Lois felt sympathetic, but she also felt cynical. She wondered if the note writer was just trying to make money, and she realized that she didn't like thinking that way about someone else.

Other people were already helping. The man really didn't want money—just gas. Another traveler with a gas can contributed a couple of gallons of gas. The mother of three little children poured some ice chips into a bowl for the appreciative dog. An elderly man and his wife in a battered old car gave him a couple of dollars.

Then Lois writes: "As we walked back to our cars, I asked the elderly man if he ever worried about being 'taken.'

"'Nope,' he said. 'I just bought myself a good feeling. Cheap. If he's taking advantage of me, that's his problem, not mine.'" ("A Little Compassion Buys a Great Feeling," Deseret News, Aug. 11-12, 1992, A11.)

Lois tells another story. A colleague at her office had been leaving an event with her children when she saw a couple pulling a wagon filled with miscellaneous household items and panhandling. With shame, the friend confessed, "I did my very best not to see them. If I didn't see them, I wouldn't have to respond." Once in the car, however, she started to cry. She'd always thought of herself as a kind person. She was stunned to realize that she had ignored someone in obvious need. She'd always tried to teach her children to help others. And what was the message she'd just given them?

She insisted that they try to find the couple. It took them about fifteen minutes of driving around the area before they found them. The couple were missionaries who had given up everything to come to America and had no money. Lois's friend and her husband pressed all the money they had with them into their hands, and then she kept on crying all the way home. She was feeling the pain of realizing her own capacity for hardheartedness.

Lois summarizes: "I could offer that bowl of ice chips. The gallon of gas. The few small bills or coins. . . . And if I was taken, I'd be out a bowl of ice chips. A gallon of gas. A few small bills or coins. Big deal.

"What I can't afford to be out of is the feeling I am part of a giving, caring world." (Ibid.)

I love these experiences. They exemplify the principle of giving bread and fish instead of stones and scorpions. We can give that kind of gentle, loving service to others. We can pour ice chips into a bowl for a thirsty dog. We can hand a hungry man a couple of dollars. We can listen sympathetically to a sister with a burden on her heart. We can sit next to a new sister and say, "I'm so glad you're here." And when we do, we receive the reward of a disciple. The reward of a disciple is that great big glow in the heart that turns into a great big smile, like the one I saw on my husband's face.

Patience

The third principle that I want to talk about in relation to making Christ the foundation of our lives is patience. There's a lovely scripture in Isaiah that says, "Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation: he that believeth shall not make haste." (Isaiah 28:16.) Now, who is this tried stone, the precious corner stone, the sure foundation? Yes, it's Christ. But what does the next part mean: "he that believeth shall not make haste"?

I think it means that we can build our household of faith slowly and carefully, "line upon line, precept upon precept" (D&C 128:21), knowing that every small effort counts, every small improvement is important, every cup of cold water is measured unto God. It means that we don't need to compare ourselves to anyone else. We don't need to keep checklists of our righteousness or be anxious or frantic about our lives. We are okay, just the way we are, each of us, with our own needs, our own abilities, our own desires for righteousness, and our own set of obstacles to overcome. When we build for eternity, we need not make haste.

Another reason for being patient with ourselves is that we cannot see the end from the beginning, as God can. Remember how a cat's cradle works? We don't know whose lives are going to touch ours at one point, then go off, loop back, and touch us in another way. During the summer of 1992, at a women's conference in Huntington Beach, Betty Martin introduced me to the congregation by saying, "Fifty years ago, my uncle Edward labored as a missionary in Hawaii where he learned to love the Japanese people. Soon after World War II broke out, his mission ended and he came back to the mainland where he joined the Air Force. He was very worried, thinking that he was going to be forced to fight against the Japanese people whom he loved so much. But during training, his plane crashed and he was killed. This was very hard for my grandmother and my mother, but it was a comfort, too, because we knew that he didn't have to kill anyone. Then when we were reading his missionary journal, we came across a reference to Chieko Nishimura on the big island of Hawaii—"

You can imagine that I suddenly sat up very straight with my eyes wide open. This was Elder Edward Cornelius, my Elder Cornelius, one of the elders who taught me the gospel when I was fifteen. I'd been an investigator since I was eleven, but he and his companion used to walk out to our little village of Mahukona, twelve or thirteen miles from Kohala, where they lived. It took so long for them to get there that my mother often had them sleep overnight at our house.

A few weeks later, Sister Martin sent me a very precious document—a photocopy of the pages of her uncle's diary where he talks about visiting our home. It's quite a strange feeling to read a missionary's diary and come across your own name there! What he said brought back so many details.

Elder Cornelius talked about working in a "switch-room," sometimes for up to seven hours. I'm not sure what this means, unless the missionaries were helping to fill in at the telephone switchboard at the police station in Kohala. He and his companion played basketball with the boys at my high school. They worked very hard holding Sunday School in three separate places each week plus MIA on Saturday nights. They were so pleased, he wrote, when eighteen people came to meeting.

Then the entry for Tuesday, January 13, 1942, reads: "This afternoon we went up to Mrs. Sakai's home and held our Cottage M[eeting]. Chieko Nishimura came over to the Meeting for the first time. She works right near there, but has been unable to attend before because of school. Had a nice meeting. We are expecting to have both of them in the Church before long."

It turns out he was right! On February 17, 1942, the mission president and one of the district leaders came through, so the missionaries took him to a cottage meeting at Sister Sakai's in Kokoike, which was about halfway to Mahukona. Elder Cornelius wrote, "Pres. Jensen gave us all some fine advice." I remember attending that meeting. I'd hitched a ride there. I still remember what a sweet man President Jensen was and how lovingly he expressed his appreciation for being with us. He knew our background and knew we would have challenges, but I remember his blessing that we would be able to keep the love of Christ in our heart. It was raining when the meeting ended, and I remember that we all had to walk back to Kohala six miles in a tropical rainstorm!

Then on Saturday, March 8, 1942, Elder Cornelius wrote: "This morning after breakfast we did the dishes and then cleaned the house a little bit. We then got ready to go to Mahukona. . . . We had got as far as Kokoike when the air raid signal came on." After the all clear, they walked the rest of the way to our house. I was glad to read the next sentence: "Had a nice visit with the Nishimura family," he wrote.

I remember it all. Sister Sakai and I were baptized together not quite a month later—on April 6, 1942, to be exact. Elder Cornelius was transferred before that day, so he wasn't there. In fact, nobody was there except for the two missionaries, Sister Sakai, and me. I'm so grateful to Betty Martin for introducing herself to me, not only renewing my connection with Elder Cornelius but also making a new connection between her and me. I'm thankful Elder Cornelius and his companion had the patience to walk the thirteen miles out to Mahukona to visit a fifteen-year-old girl and encourage her to keep on studying the gospel. I'm so grateful for the two missionaries who spent the day filling with a hose the redwood box that served as a font where Sister Sakai and I were baptized. I'm thankful for those dear, generous-hearted Hawaiian sisters in the little branch in Mahukona. They scooted over and made room for a shy, skinny, eleven-year-old Japanese Buddhist next to their own children. They shared their hymnals with me. They patiently showed me how to read music. They took me with them when the women separated for Relief Society.

I'm thankful for all of the people who have been patient with me since then as I learned the gospel, those who gave Ed and me and our boys opportunities to serve, and those who are patient in sharing their stories and ministering to me now so that I can understand better the needs of the women of the Church. We do not need to be hasty. We can be patient. We are sisters in Zion, building on a foundation stone, a tried stone, a precious cornerstone, a sure foundation—the testimony of our Savior.

Conclusion

All of us, as members of the Church and as brothers and sisters in the gospel, are co-workers now with each other and with the Savior in the great cause of Christ—the cause of building the household of faith, the cause of bringing souls to him. Let us make him our way, our truth, our life.

First, let us make faith in him the foundation and cornerstone of our lives so that we can build the household of faith in power and love. The rains will fall and the floods will come up, but our house will stand if it is built on his rock.

Second, let us remember that Christ's way is the way of kindness. He does not ask of us things we cannot do; but if we will listen to our hearts, we will hear the whisper, "Give the dog some ice chips," or, as my husband heard the whisper, "This man needs a jacket more than you do." The kindness itself is a gift, no matter what gift it may accompany.

And third, we need not be hasty or run faster than we have strength. When we build for eternity, we have no time to waste, but we can take as much time as we need. We can lighten up about our work because Christ is our yokefellow in pulling the load. We can be patient with our little part of the pattern because we know our Heavenly Father knows the whole pattern. We can concentrate on making each encounter a positive one, each relationship a nurturing one, each contact a loving one—because we never know whose life will come back into contact with ours as the strands touch and cross and form new patterns.
