Chieko N. Okazaki, Aloha! ( 1995)

Chapter 4

Beyond Juggling: The Christian Life

I suspect that most women in the Church are expert jugglers. All of us have to deal with the perennial problem of finding time for family, church, self, and perhaps work. I've done a lot of juggling myself—including real juggling, the kind you do with oranges or balls—and the first thing that happened was pieces flying all over, totally out of control.

Sometimes we feel that we live in pieces. The Young Women owns a piece of us, our boss or daily responsibilities own a piece of us, the cancer drive owns a piece of us, the bishop comes along and takes a few more pieces, and every lesson and sacrament meeting talk we hear reminds us of more we should be doing or doing differently, and then more chunks of us sail off into feeling guilty and ashamed because we're not doing better.

When you see jugglers on television or in programs—I mean, people who really know how to juggle—they seem relaxed. It looks easy. They can talk while they're doing it. Their hands just seem to be in the right place at the right time. What is their secret? Why is it so easy for them and so hard for us?

The lesson of any juggling act is that sooner or later you drop the balls; sooner or later someone jiggles your elbow. Juggling is a marvelous, awe-inspiring performance because it defies belief. It defies reality. It defies the odds. But it's not a comfortable, normal way to live.

As I think about juggling, I keep coming back to the Savior. He was so busy, so pressed with responsibilities that he had to hide sometimes even to find time to pray, but we never think of his life as being out of control. We don't see pieces of his life flying away. We never think of him as distracted, interrupted, forgetting things, putting things down on lists and then forgetting where he put the list. We don't think of him as a juggler, although in many ways he must have been. How did Jesus do it? And is it possible that we could do it the same way Jesus did?

I think we can. And I'd like to share with you a powerful idea that I've drawn from Jesus' life. It is to create an integrated identity, a Christian identity. A Christian identity is a powerful principle that lets us live with the parts of our lives integrated into the whole of our lives. Then I'd like to discuss some of the consequences of having an integrated Christian identity. The first consequence is that we can stop juggling. We can stop switching roles, snatching and grabbing at minutes of time, and moving nervously from task to task. It lets us be centered in Christ and stand firm and calm. The second consequence is that it lets us live in the present, so that depression about the past and worry about the future do not rob our present of its joy and vitality. And the third consequence is that it lets us act with deep confidence in ourselves and in the Lord.

An Integrated Christian Identity

So how do we begin? For me, the unifying principle is to be a follower of Christ, a disciple of Christ, a sister of Christ everywhere I am, no matter where I am, no matter who I am with, and no matter what I am doing.

Remember how the scriptures describe the great council in heaven? Jesus stood before the Father and said, "Here am I; send me." (Abraham 3:27.) Mary, kneeling before the angel Gabriel, said, "Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word." (Luke 1:38.) These are life-integrating statements. They pull all of the parts together into something solid and whole.

We know from the rest of Jesus' mortal life that he drew great strength from that commitment, from being able to say, "Here am I; send me." We know less about Mary's life, but she could not have had the strength to raise her Son, send him forth, listen to the reports of both the miracles and the mockery, and then stand steadfast at the foot of the cross if she had not drawn great strength from that life-integrating statement, "Behold the handmaid of the Lord."

For me, great strength comes every week as I partake of the sacrament and remind myself that I bear the name of Christ, that I have taken it upon myself like something tangible. Sometimes, when I am feeling lonely and tired, I take the name of the Savior upon me like a warm blanket. I wrap myself in it the way my two-year-old grandson wraps himself in his cherished "blankey," and I feel warmed and comforted. If I am feeling vulnerable, sometimes I take the name of Christ upon me like armor, feeling it solid and bright and impregnable, so that no opposition can puncture it and so that no wound can devastate me. Sometimes I take the name of Christ upon me like Joseph's coat of many colors, a beautiful garment in which to dance and rejoice and praise the Lord.

I don't know how you remind yourself that you are a Christian, bearing the name of your King and Savior. But maybe it will help you to think of something like this example of mine. Find your own life-integrating statement to remind you who you are and what holds your life together.

Our lives are full of voices trying to tell us who we are. Television advertisements try to talk us into being consumers of this product or that product. Newspapers and magazines publish editorials that try to sway us from one position to another. We read opinion polls and think, "Am I for this issue or against that one?" We each have many roles that our life circumstances bring: student, parent, spouse, employee, teacher in the church, administrator in the church, divorcee, widow or widower, boss, neighbor, temple worker, family historian, community worker, volunteer, reader, writer, recycler . . . Why, the list simply doesn't end.

All of these roles can turn into brightly colored balls, flying through the air at us. Each one can claim to be the most important one, the one we should drop all the other balls for. That can happen to us even in the Church. One of my missionaries told me that he was called to be the elders quorum president soon after he married. Along with the handbook, the high council had also supplied a typed list of "The Twenty-Two Most Important Responsibilities You Must Do Every Week." Fortunately he had a good sense of humor. Through studying the handbook, through talking with the elders in his ward, and through diligently seeking inspiration, he and his counselors set priorities to meet the needs of the men in the quorum.

I don't think we can have an integrated, Christ-centered life unless we take all the parts of our lives to him, spread them out before him, and let him heal them into one Christ-centered whole. When he does, we receive our lives back again from the Savior, sanctified by the Holy Ghost, radiant with grace. What does that mean—to take our lives to Jesus and to receive sanctified lives from him again? Jesus knew who he was. He said, "I am the bread of life" (John 6:35); "I am the light of the world" (John 8:12); "I am the good shepherd" (John 10:11); "I am the resurrection, and the life" (John 11:25); "I am the way, the truth, and the life" (John 14:6); "I am the vine, ye are the branches" (John 15:5).

Did you notice that three of those statements used the word life? Christ defined himself as life. Perhaps the most important life-integrating statement he made about his mission here on the earth was, "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly." (John 10:10.)

What is the kind of life he wants us to have? He wants us to have him, his life, his way of living. And isn't that what we want? Isn't sharing in the life and will and works of Jesus what we all hunger and thirst for?

But wait, you might say. Our lives aren't the same. We don't know much about Jesus' life before he turned thirty, and then he was on a full-time mission. During his three-year ministry, he depended on the charity of friends and strangers for food, clothing, and shelter. He did not have direct responsibility for a wife and children. He did not work at a profession after he began his ministry. Sometimes we think, That would be great, but I've got three teenagers, a son on a mission, a mother in the rest home, the Laurel class, and I'm in charge of the school carnival. Who will take care of them while I go about doing good, like Jesus?

Living a Christ-centered life doesn't mean that all of those responsibilities are in competition with being Christian. Jesus wants us to take all of those parts of our lives to him in prayer, lay them out before him, and ask him to be with us in all of these responsibilities. In other words, Jesus doesn't want us to go about doing good; he wants us to stay put doing good. This is what being an every-day Christian means. It doesn't mean that you're one person at work, and then you hurry home and are another person making a batch of brownies for the school bake sale, and then you hurry to teach your Laurel class where you turn into a third person and hope there's some time left over for you to be a Christian. It means being a Christian, being a Latter-day Saint while you're at work, while you're making the brownies, while you're at the Laurel class. Sometimes we think Jesus doesn't really understand any of the parts of our lives except our families and our Church jobs. Well, he created the world. He knows exactly what living in the world means. And when we take his name upon us, it means that we can have a life integrated around our identity as a Christian. Thus, we can be Christians no matter where we are or what we're doing or who we're with.

What happens if you think of yourself as a total Christian? It means that you're in disguise on a secret mission for God. Your secret mission is to provide love and service for people that Jesus would have served if he were here on the earth. Every person you are with is the person Jesus wants you to serve, whether that's your four-year-old child, your eighty-year-old auntie, the counselors in the bishopric meeting, the fourteen-year-olds in your Sunday School class, the tourist who asks you for directions, the children you are carpooling to school, or the secretary you ask to type a letter. These people may be family or they may be strangers, but they are the neighbors Jesus wants you to serve. And they may think, "Oh, that's Mom, that's the teacher, that's the boss," but really, those roles are the temporary disguises you put on to conceal your real identity as a Christian.

The Juggling Stops

Now let's talk about some of the consequences of seeing yourself first, foremost, and always as a Christian. The first consequence is that the juggling stops. If you think of all your tasks, jobs, and roles as balls that you somehow have to keep in the air, then your religious service is just another ball to add. Sooner or later, you're going to drop the balls, because no one can juggle forever. But if you are a Christian, then that is your permanent identity and everything else is temporary. Think of this example. You dash into the grocery store to pick up some ice cream for supper. You're a harried mom, a frantic shopper, eager to get in and get out. Other people are in your way—the person stocking the shelves, the people ahead of you in the checkout line, the checker. You're even more frazzled when you reach the car.

But suppose you go in as a Christian disguised as a shopper. You see other people on your way to the ice cream, excuse yourself and smile when you reach past the person stocking the shelves, comment on the weather to the person standing in front of you at the checkout stand, and thank the checker who whisks the ice cream into a bag for you. You reach the car having had three very pleasant encounters and feeling good.

If we see every place, every job, every responsibility as an opportunity to be with another precious child of God who needs our ministry, the ministry we can bring as a Christian and as a disciple of Christ, then even a very busy schedule doesn't feel like juggling any more. Something has taken the fragmentation out of it and given us a unified purpose.

My husband, Ed, was this kind of Christian, an every-day Christian, even an every-minute Christian. Sometimes we think that the life of a disciple is hard, but if you knew Ed, you would know that it is a joyous, rewarding life. Terms like hard or easy really didn't make sense to Ed. When he was doing what Christ did—helping and serving other people—his life was filled to overflowing with joy and love. Nothing made him happier than finding something to do for someone else. He didn't make rules for himself like, "Take the children in your home teaching families out for ice cream cones when it's their birthday." He didn't need to make rules for himself because he was sincerely interested in each child, had written down their names and birth dates on his very first visit, and was anxious to find a chance to give each child a treat. And each time he did, it made him so happy that he was more anxious to find something else to do for each person. In other words, Christian discipleship was its own reward, not something he had to drag himself to do by making rules for himself and exercising enormous willpower.

Sometimes I wonder what made Ed so good. I know that a great part of it came from the good teachings he had received from his parents and his Congregationalist church. They taught him to love Jesus, to love the scriptures, and to do all the good he could to everyone. Ed never theorized about the gospel. He didn't try to systematize the theology, and he wasn't very interested, actually, in theoretical discussions about points of doctrine. He wanted to live the gospel as well as talk about it. He was hungry for the scriptures. One of my most enduring memories is seeing Ed sitting and reading his scriptures. He didn't read the scriptures because it was a commandment, or because his high priest quorum had set the goal of reading the Book of Mormon that year, or because he was preparing a lesson—although he took all of those obligations seriously. He was hungry to see how the gospel worked. He was thirsty for the words of the Savior. He was eager to learn more about how to be a better Christian.

Ed's companion was Christ. All of our life together, when we were discussing a situation or a problem, Ed would ask, "What would Christ do?" That made many decisions very simple and very clear, though sometimes they were not very easy to carry out. Over the years, I heard him ask this same question to young people, to struggling couples, to perplexed missionaries, to confused home teachers, and each time this question helped them find their own answers. In later years, Ed asked this question less often, and sometimes I heard him say, "I know what Christ would do." I think that Ed had been a faithful companion of Christ for so long that he could literally do the works that the Savior would have done. The apostle Paul has a lovely statement that I think applies to Ed: "For who hath known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him? But we have the mind of Christ." (1 Corinthians 2:16.) I think Ed had the mind of Christ.

Because Ed's identity was that of a disciple, he was free from many problems and vexations that are troublesome for other people. He never wasted any energy being angry at someone who had mistreated him. He never allowed his attention to be drawn into enmity or bitterness, even when bitter things happened. He never hated the Germans whose artillery fire wounded him and almost killed him. He never resented the people who mistrusted Japanese-American soldiers during World War II. I was always so proud of Ed. He reproached evil by his very being, because he was so good.

Because Ed had a disciple's identity, he did not need to make distinctions among people. In that way, I think he was like Mother Teresa. He saw the face of Christ in every human face. He never treated his boss in a way different from the way he treated the janitor. He behaved with the same cordiality toward the bishop and toward the fourteen-year-old Scout. When we went into sacrament meeting, he shook hands with the fathers, the mothers, the teenagers, and the children, right down to the babies.

Do you see how making a commitment to Heavenly Father and having a life-integrating identity can eliminate our feeling that we're juggling too many balls? One of the most difficult problems we struggle with is switching roles: here we're a mother, there we're a bishop, here we're an employee, there we're a Scoutmaster. If we're a different person in each of these roles, then a great deal of energy has to go into remembering which tone of voice to use, which manner to put on, and how to behave in each role. And what happens when the roles collide? When our family role suddenly overlaps with our employee role? If we're just one integrated person—if just one simple principle forms the foundation of our identity—much energy is freed for other things.

So that's the first consequence of having an integrated Christian identity. We can eliminate the juggling act. It lets us be the same person at all times and in all places. Then instead of fretting, worrying, and fumbling as we drop one role and pick up a new one, we can concentrate on our real task: serving whoever we are with.

Live in the Moment

The second consequence of having an integrated Christian identity is that it lets us develop a different sense of time. You know that one of the marvelous things about watching a juggler is how easy it looks. A juggler's hands move in a very precise rhythm but without being tense or jerky or nervous. Of course, a juggling act lasts only a few minutes, and we need to find a lifestyle that can go on much longer, so let's think about Jesus' sense of time.

I believe that Jesus was very conscious of time, but he was never in a hurry. He never said, "Don't you get it? I've only got three years. Listen up! Pay attention! Get that multitude fed right now! Get a move on. Snap it up. We've got to get to the walls of Jerusalem before the owner of the colt moves it." I think it's very interesting that the only time Jesus is recorded as saying, "Hurry up" was when he walked under the sycamore tree where a short tax collector named Zacchaeus had climbed so he could see Jesus. According to Luke: "And when Jesus came to the place, he looked up, and saw him, and said unto him, Zacchaeus, make haste, and come down; for to day I must abide at thy house." (Luke 19:5.) I don't think Jesus told Zacchaeus to "make haste" because Jesus was in a hurry but because he wanted Zacchaeus to act without saying, "Let's see, do I really want this radical preacher in my house? How does he know my name? Have some of my enemies put him up to this?" In other words, Jesus wasn't in a hurry, but he wanted Zacchaeus to be in a hurry to hear the words he needed to understand so he could repent.

Jesus had a wonderful gift of living in the present moment. He could pray as long as he needed to while his disciples were sailing across the Sea of Galilee, because he could walk on the water, if he needed, to rejoin them. He could preach an entire day to a multitude in the wilderness, because he knew there would be sufficient bread and fish to feed them when night came. When you stop to think of it, the present is all we've got. We can predict and make guesses about the future, but we can't control it. The past is already out of our reach. If we can live each present moment without trying to cling to it as it moves into the past, then, like the juggler, our hands will be in the right place at the right time.

One woman wrote of a wonderful experience about learning to live in the moment. She had bought a "misbegotten onion" for $5.95 and planted it in a soup tureen. It grew into a "skinny houseplant," and then suddenly, one day when she wasn't looking, it burst into a flamboyant, crimson flower. The flower came so quickly that she knew it would also leave quickly. "Now!" her flower demanded. "Now is the flame-orange, crimson-trumpeted moment. Look now!'" Of course, she didn't want it to die. She stared at it until her eyes ached, until she needed "a trip to the flatware drawer or a view of the dish towels. Something not so demanding." And it made her think. Should she have spent $5.95 on something as impermanent as an amaryllis? For $5.95, she could have bought "a durable stainless-steel spoon. . . . A spoon would last longer than an amaryllis. A lot of things would last longer than an amaryllis. However," she continued, "I own a drawerful of spoons. And not one of them in five years has given me as much happiness as the amaryllis has in one week."

She accepted her flower's death as unimportant. What was important was to have saluted its beauty and its vibrancy in living and the moment of joy that it gave her right then. (Debbie Anfenson-Vance, "Slipping through My Fingers All the Time," Signs of the Times, Aug. 1992, p. 11.)

Ed had the same gift of living in the moment. He was always on time and even early, but he was never in a hurry. I think perhaps he felt that his life was a gift. When Ed was eighteen, his father died very suddenly of a heart attack. His father was a young man, just forty years old, and he had not been ill. He was driving down a road on Maui, and by coincidence, the local police officer was driving behind him. He was driving very slowly, then more slowly still, and his car gently aimed toward the right side of the road and then, very slowly, came to a stop in the little ditch beside the road. The police officer parked and hurried to Ed's father, but he was already dead. Ed himself died in much the same way, although he had had many more years to live than his father. Ed felt that those years past forty were a gift, for he often said so.

He felt that his years after World War II were particularly a gift. He was a minesweeper, a terribly dangerous specialty. Many of his friends in the 442d were killed, and he himself was severely wounded. He could very easily have been among the dead. And out of the bitterness and anger and hatred that war so often generates, Ed took only gratitude for his life, a great sweetness of disposition, and a complete generosity toward anyone whom he could help.

If we can be Christians, every day and every minute, then we can live in the present without letting worries about the future or regrets about the past drag us down. I think we will find that there is enough time to do every task beautifully and rejoice in it and to feel the joy and love that comes from focusing on people instead of on jobs and things.

Having Confidence

The third consequence of having an integrated Christian identity is that it lets us act with deep confidence in ourselves and in the Lord. The very best jugglers—not me!—don't look nervous and tense. They look relaxed and easy. They know they can do it. So often, we feel nervous and tense because we feel inadequate, incapable, and unsure of ourselves.

Think about the Savior. It takes a lot of confidence to tell a blind man to see, or to tell a crippled man to pick up his bed, or to set off walking across the surface of a stormy sea. Where did Jesus' confidence come from? I think it came from his relationship with his Heavenly Father. If we have faith in the Savior and follow his example, I think that we also can have the same kind of confidence. Jesus taught us how to pray, how to approach our Father in Heaven in great confidence and great love. I have read that the Aramaic word Jesus used doesn't mean just "Father" but something much more intimate, like "Daddy" or "Papa," the word a very small child would use in calling to his or her father. The apostle Paul told the Hebrews: "Let us . . . come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need." (Hebrews 4:16.) Paul was reminding the Hebrews that they could have confidence in Christ because He was their Savior. He reminded the people that they were only mortals but they still were good enough to give bread and fish to their children, not stones or serpents. "How much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?" (Luke 11:13.)

Doesn't that increase our confidence that we can ask our Heavenly Father, confide our troubles in him, share our griefs and burdens, rejoice in his blessings, and step off in faith even if it looks as if we will be planting our feet on the stormy surface of unstable water?

When responsibilities seem to be falling upon us thick and fast, when our hands are already full but here comes something else, when people around us don't seem to understand, let's remember that our Heavenly Father does understand, that the simple confidence Jesus had in his Father is the same confidence that we can have in him.

Conclusion

I probably haven't given you many hints about how to juggle all of your responsibilities better. Instead, I have tried to share with you a different way of seeing ourselves—not as jugglers but as brothers and sisters of Christ, his disciples and his co-workers. Juggling means that we always have to keep our eye on the next ball coming and our hands moving. We're locked into a rhythm that will bring everything toppling down on us if we make the slightest mistake. I don't think that the Christian life is as much like juggling as it is like hearing music and joining our voice in its chorus, even when we don't know the words perfectly, or like joining in a dance, even if we don't know the steps perfectly.

We reach this new way of seeing ourselves by centering our lives on Christ, by taking our lives to him, laying them out before him in prayer, and then receiving them back from him sanctified. He wants us to be parents, children, students, bosses, employees, community workers, church workers. All of those roles give us experiences that bring us into contact with other beloved children of God. But he wants us to act in all of those roles as his disciples, as every-minute Christians. That orientation is a powerful principle that lets us live a life in which the parts are integrated into the whole.

And we've also talked about three consequences. First, the juggling stops. We see ourselves differently. We can act with integrity and authenticity no matter where we are or who we are with. The second consequence is that we can live in the present, so that depression about the past and worry about the future do not rob our present of its joy and vitality. And the third consequence is that we can act with confidence, not with insecurity and doubt.

Let me conclude with the powerful words of the Savior to the Saints of Joseph Smith's day:

Pray always, and I will pour out my Spirit upon you, and great shall be your blessing—yea, even more than if you should obtain treasures of earth and corruptibleness to the extent thereof.

Behold, canst thou read this without rejoicing and lifting up thy heart for gladness?

Or canst thou run about longer as a blind guide?

Or canst thou be humble and meek, and conduct thyself wisely before me? Yea, come unto me thy Savior. (D&C 19:38-41).
