Chieko N. Okazaki, Aloha! ( 1995)

Chapter 5

Keeping a Balance

What do you see in your mind's eye when you hear the phrase "keeping a balance"? Do you see the fiddler on the roof, balancing across the ridgepole as he plays his violin? Do you see an exquisite gymnast working with elegance and precision on a balance beam? Do you see the traditional statue of Justice, blindfolded and holding in her hand her scales to weigh the balance of evidence between truth and error, justice and injustice? One of Job's prayers was "Let me be weighed in an even balance, that God may know mine integrity." (Job 31:6.)

Do you know the children's game "Spill the Beans," in which a little platform is balanced at two points? Each player must add a bean to the platform. Because it's balanced at only two points, it's very unstable, so if the beans begin to pile up on one side, it begins to tip. The person who adds the bean that makes the platform tip and spill the beans loses the game.

Sometimes our lives feel like that—everyone has a bean to add to our platform, we can feel things getting lopsided and out of control, but—whoops! here comes another bean and there goes the whole pile, spilling all over the place.

When it comes to keeping balance in our lives, I want to suggest a simple technique: find the center of balance and strengthen that point until it has enough solidity and weight that it doesn't matter if things are a little out of balance on top. For example, most trees are naturally symmetrical, if they're allowed to grow with access on all sides to the same amount of sun, wind, and soil. But sometimes a tree is close to a house, so it has lots of branches on one side but not very many on the other. Sometimes, like on the windward side of Hawaii, the wind blows steadily for most of the year from one direction, so the tree bends under that wind, pointing inland. Sometimes a tree is too close to another tree, so that it grows in a curve, seeking an open space where it can get more sunlight.

We don't think of these trees as sick or handicapped or dysfunctional. We don't even think of them as out of balance, even though they are no longer symmetrical. They're healthy and functional and will do just fine for years. Why? Because it's not the branches on the right that have to balance the branches on the left. The point of balance is between the branches and the roots. If the roots are sturdy and run deep into the soil, then the tree as a whole is strong and healthy and in balance.

Think of the image of the tree, not the image of the spilling beans or the image of the scales of justice. Our lives as women often require that we grow thicker branches on one side of our lives than another. There are seasons of mothering when almost all of our energy goes into those branches. There are seasons of serving a mission or serving in an intensive calling when those branches grow thick and bushy. There are times of completing an academic program or establishing a career. During those times, one part of the tree gets most of the growth. But the tree as a whole will stay in balance if the roots are deep and healthy.

What are the roots in our lives that give us this kind of health and stability? It's our relationship with the Savior. Paul pronounced an extraordinary blessing upon the Ephesian Saints:

For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, . . .

That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye, being rooted and grounded in love,

May be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height;

And to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fulness of God. (Ephesians 3:14, 17-19; emphasis added)

If you felt "rooted and grounded in love," wouldn't it be easier to feel balance in yourself? Wouldn't you be able to put out new branches in areas where you need them? Wouldn't you feel a stronger ability to stay focused on the important parts of your life? Wouldn't it be easier to set priorities and make decisions?

Of course it would. As Paul explained to the Romans, "If the root be holy, so are the branches." (Romans 11:16.) So let's discuss how to find a balance by sinking deep roots in our relationship with Christ. Then let's consider how to use that strength to meet our own needs and the needs of others.

Rooting Ourselves in Christ

I'm not going to tell you to read the scriptures, fast and pray, keep the commandments, attend the temple, and attend your meetings as ways of coming to know Christ. We all know that those things are important, and we know why they're important. All of them will improve and strengthen our relationship with the Savior, but they are not the relationship itself, and sometimes we forget that. The relationship I'm talking about is a sense of presence, a sense of companionship, a sense of closeness. It's a relationship not with an idea or a historical image but with a living individual. When we have the feeling of the Savior as a real person, there's a new awareness of what it means to take his name upon us, almost of being clothed in his name, of seeing with his eyes and of feeling his work being done with our hands.

I want to relate two stories that will, I hope, give you a feeling of what this new reality feels like. The first story is about Mother Teresa, told not by herself but by a rather skeptical—an agnostic—television journalist named Malcolm Muggeridge, who did some prizewinning documentaries. He remembers his first meeting with Mother Teresa as really nothing extraordinary. He was doing a television interview with her for the BBC. He knew nothing about her beyond a few facts that he had hastily read in the train on the way to London. He writes:

I sat waiting for her, with appropriate questions running through my head; the camera, the lights, the sound recordist, all in position. A scene desolatingly familiar to me. Then she came in. It was, for me, one of those special occasions when a face, hitherto unknown, seems to stand out from all other faces as uniquely separate and uniquely significant. . . . I knew that, even if I were never to see Mother Teresa again, the memory of her would stay with me for ever.

Still, the interview was only ordinary. Mother Teresa did not play to the camera or utter scintillating one-liners. When he asked her provocative questions, she simply responded with thoughtful sincerity, giving answers that were exactly what you would expect from a nun with an Albanian accent. She did not seem to recognize controversial subjects and certainly did not follow up on them. At the end, there was considerable dissatisfaction among the BBC personnel. As Muggeridge described it:

The verdict on the Mother Teresa interview was that, technically, it was barely usable, and there was for a while some doubt as to whether it was good enough for showing at all except late at night. In the end . . . it was put out on a Sunday evening. The response was greater than I have known to any comparable programme, both in mail and in contributions of money for Mother Teresa's work. I myself received many letters enclosing cheques and money-orders ranging between a few shillings and hundreds of pounds. They came from young and old, rich and poor, educated and uneducated; all sorts and conditions of people. All of them said approximately the same thing—this woman spoke to me as no one ever has, and I feel I must help her. . . .

The Mother Teresa programme was repeated quite soon after its first showing in response to numerous requests, and the response to the repeat programme was even greater than to the original one. Altogether, something like 20,000 pounds found its way to . . . Mother Teresa.

Then Malcolm Muggeridge asks the question that we are surely asking ourselves:

Why? Why would an obscure nun of Albanian origins, very nervous . . . in front of the camera, somewhat halting in speech, . . . reach English viewers on a Sunday evening as no professional Christian . . . bishop or archbishop . . . ever has? But this is exactly what happened, to the surprise of all professionally concerned, including me. The message was the same message that was heard in the world for the first time two thousand years ago; as Mother Teresa showed, it has not changed or lost its magic. As then, so now, it is brought, not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power; that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. (Something Beautiful for God: Mother Teresa of Calcutta [New York: Walker and Co./Phoenix Press, 1971; large print ed., 1984), pp. 13, 20-23)

In other words, this mysterious magic that Mother Teresa conveyed, this remarkable appeal, had very little to do with her at all. She was simply a pure-hearted woman through whom the miraculous message of the Master moved and looked out, comforting the sorrow and feeding the hunger of those who were perishing for lack of spiritual nourishment. People wanted to be with Mother Teresa, to help her in her work, and to follow her because they felt the Spirit of Christ in her. She was "rooted and grounded" in the love of Christ. Those roots were so strong and healthy that she was an immensely happy, contented, and nurturing woman despite what must have been an extremely stressful lifestyle, what looks like an extreme lack of balance between the important value, to us, of family life and Christian service, very few material resources, and the kinds of needs and demands on her time and resources that make our little platforms piled with beans seem almost trivial by comparison.

Some people may feel that they can't relate to Mother Teresa. Our family-centered lives, our social and professional responsibilities, and many of our beliefs seem so different. It's true: they are. But her attachment to the Savior is something that we can all relate to and feel the power of.

The second story occurs in a more familiar context. I recently attended a Relief Society regional conference in Washington, D.C., and on Sunday I was given my choice of wards and branches to attend. I chose an inner-city branch, Mount Pleasant First Branch, and there I saw the fulfillment of the Savior's promise, "Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them." (Matthew 18:20.)

The teacher warmly greeted everyone. Members of the class were talking among themselves with affection and concern and pleasure at being together. It was obvious that Sunday School class was a warm and welcoming place to be; the people were there because they wanted to be. I was a stranger, but I felt the sense of love they all shared because it reached out and enveloped me, too.

The lesson was on honesty in human relations, and the teacher talked about interdependence as an ideal state, whereas dependence and independence both created unhealthy relations. When she started talking about interdependence, a toothless and shabbily dressed woman on the front row raised her hand and said, "I disagree. No such thing as interdependence. Who pays my rent if I don't? Nobody. And I'm going to jail."

The teacher asked, "How do you know you're going to jail?"

"Because I've been there before," retorted the woman. "I've got some money coming next week, but it won't help, and nobody helps me."

"I can help you," said the teacher. "I'm an attorney; and if you've got money coming in, then there's a way to arrange for the payment."

"You can help me?" exclaimed the woman, jumping up. "You can really help me?"

"Just as soon as the lesson is over," said the teacher.

"When?" demanded the woman. "When can you help me?" Confused and insistent, she repeated her question again. It was clear she was disrupting the lesson. I looked around me at the faces of the class members. No one showed impatience or embarrassment or irritation. They all looked upon this woman kindly. In their total acceptance, I felt again the Spirit of the Savior.

The teacher left her books and blackboard and walked to the row where this woman was talking, loudly repeating her question. She put her arms around the woman and explained again, slower and more clearly, "I can help you in ten minutes," she said. In most wards I have been in, someone would have taken the woman out of the room or those around would have given her rebuking looks. But in the faces of those in that simple room, I saw only kindness. No one was angry at her. No one was embarrassed that she was making a disturbance in front of a visitor from Salt Lake.

The woman quieted immediately, looked into the teacher's face, and said, "Can I sit by you until the meeting is over?" So the teacher gave her a chair right beside the table and continued with the lesson. After six or seven minutes, the woman became restless again, shifting in her chair, gesturing to a missionary on the front row, and pointing at her wrist, obviously asking whether the time was up. I couldn't see what the missionary did, but again the teacher calmed her by touching her and speaking to her directly.

Again I looked at the faces of the class members. I saw only love and acceptance. I will always remember that woman, that teacher, and that lesson. We were all learning the real lesson—"Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these, my [children], ye have done it unto me." (Matthew 25:40.) I wanted to weep from the sheer beauty of this Christian community acting in love.

In Relief Society, the president, a radiantly happy Hispanic woman, was conducting the opening exercises, her face so joyful as she welcomed the sisters that I could feel the attachment and kinship. I can't tell you how thoroughly at home I felt. A black woman offered a simple opening prayer that truly cried unto the Lord. I knew that she knew to whom she was talking. The Relief Society room was the first room off the hallway. A man who seemed slightly retarded wandered in, looking somewhat confused, and started to sit down. Without any constraint or embarrassment, the Relief Society president greeted him by name and gently reminded him where the priesthood meeting was being held.

As sacrament meeting began, the counselor in the bishopric who was conducting, a Caucasian, began opening exercises, but unexpectedly his voice broke with emotion. He was surprised. He apologized, "I don't know why I feel this way. It doesn't have anything to do with what I'm saying." But I knew what he was feeling. It was the spirit of love that had filled that little rented chapel from the moment that branch had convened that morning. It was one of the most precious experiences of my life. I did not want to leave. The Lord was there with us.

Think of your own experiences with that sweet, unmistakable spirit. Under the influence of that spirit, it is easy to be patient, kind, loving, and strong. It is easy to be brave, clear, and resourceful. It is easy to reach out to others, to protect yourself and your children, to feel contentment with your circumstances, to act on impulses of generosity whether you have much or little, to perceive quickly and perceptively a heart that is breaking with sorrow, and to find in yourself the healing word and the tender touch with which to meet that need.

In general conference President Howard W. Hunter quoted the words of the hymn "Jesus, the Very Thought of Thee" (Hymns [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985], no. 141.) and talked of the miraculous power of thoughts of Jesus. The words of this hymn are a Christian expression of faith and desire that is almost nine hundred years old. President Hunter said: "Surely life would be more peaceful, surely marriages and families would be stronger, certainly neighborhoods and nations would be safer and kinder and more constructive if more of the gospel of Jesus Christ 'with sweetness' could fill our breasts." He expressed the hope that such thoughts would fill our hearts, that we could hope "to claim that greater joy, that sweeter prize: someday his loving 'face to see / And in [his] presence rest.' . . .

". . . Is there one among us, in any walk of life, who does not need hope and seek for greater joy? These are the universal needs and longings of the human soul, and they are the promises of Christ to his followers."

President Hunter continued: "Sooner or later, and we pray sooner than later, everyone will acknowledge that Christ's way is not only the right way, but ultimately the only way to hope and joy. Every knee shall bow and every tongue will confess that gentleness is better than brutality, that kindness is greater than coercion, that the soft voice turneth away wrath. In the end, and sooner than that whenever possible, we must be more like him." ("Jesus, the Very Thought of Thee," Ensign, May 1993, pp. 64-65.)

Remember the sweet, sweet spirit that comes with our awareness of our Savior. It's this feeling I want you to remember when we talk about keeping a balance in our life. We're not trying to balance reading the scriptures against making a casserole for the ward dinner, or visiting teaching against serving on a PTA committee, or earning money to keep a missionary son or daughter in the field against writing a family history. We're not trying to balance the Savior or our spiritual life against any other aspect of our life. The Savior is the fulcrum of the balance, the pivot point of the balance, the trunk and roots of the tree that keep the branches in balance. We're trying to keep this feeling about the Savior sweet and strong, because then, questions of priorities and how to spend our time will be easy and clear.

In Proverbs 8, God says:

I love them that love me; and those that seek me early shall find me.

Riches and honour are with me; yea, durable riches and righteousness.

My fruit is better than gold, yea, than fine gold; and my revenue than choice silver. . . .

. . . I . . . cause those that love me to inherit substance; and I will fill their treasures. (Proverbs 8:17-21)

To his disciples, Jesus said, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you." (Matthew 6:33.) And where is the kingdom of God? When the Pharisees asked Jesus that question, he answered, "The kingdom of God cometh not with observation [meaning visibly, or with outward show]: Neither shall they say, Lo here! or, lo there! for, behold, the kingdom of God is within you." (Luke 17:20-21.) In other words, if we truly "come unto Christ" and "are rooted and grounded" in his love, we will find within ourselves the peace and strength to maintain balance in the rest of our lives.

That balance may be different for each one of us, depending on the needs and demands of those around us and the season of our life. What is balance for a young mother is different from what is balance for a single woman. What is balance for a healthy woman is different from what is balance for a chronically ill woman. What is balance for an attorney is different from what is balance for a teacher. But what is the same for each of those women is the need to find that balance in the Savior's love and strength and trust in her. That's a very personal relationship and a very personal search. Many others may have helpful counsel for you, but nobody else gets to make that decision for you.

When a Pharisee lawyer asked Jesus which commandment was the greatest, Jesus did not get drawn into a discussion of balancing the relative merits and importance of a complex law with many parts. Instead, he taught a doctrine that was simple and powerful:

Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.

This is the first and great commandment.

And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.

On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets. (Matthew 22:37-40)

That is the same commandment that Moses gave to the children of Israel before they entered the promised land:

Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord:

And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.

And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart:

And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes.

And thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy gates. (Deuteronomy 6:4-9)

Now, what's so important about the teaching, the speaking, the signs, and the writing on the gate posts? Nothing at all—in themselves. All of those pious rules and observances existed for one reason: to help the people of Israel learn to love the Lord. They could do all of those things and never love the Lord or do all of those things instead of loving the Lord.

Sometimes we fill our lives with pious rules and observances too, or let other people do it for us. We forget the Lord. We forget to love him. We forget to feel in our hearts his love for us. And that's when our lives get out of balance, when our trees come crashing down in a windstorm because the roots are shallow, or when our little platform gets overbalanced and spills the beans we have balanced so busily and so carefully on it.

When our hearts are centered on the Savior, we don't have to drag ourselves to do good works. They spring up generously and abundantly. They don't fatigue us or frighten us or drain our energy. They give us energy. They make us want to do more. And simultaneously, we become less attached to what we do because we see that it is truly the Savior working through us. I think of people like Ray Ertmann, a Scoutmaster. One of his Scouts, Lester W. B. Moore, who later became president of the Polynesian Cultural Center in Hawaii, said that Brother Ertmann had a wonderful influence in his life because he was such a loving and available man. "His house was always open to us. He said, 'As long as the front porch light is on, you can come in and see me.' [And Brother Ertmann] left the light on all night every night." (Gerry Avant, "No Longer a Stranger in Paradise," Church News, 18 July 1992, p. 11.)

I think of the pure-hearted and loving service of Tony and Angie Franquelli and their two children, eleven-year-old Anthony and thirteen-year-old Jilleien. At a family home evening in April 1991 they decided they wanted to "do something in the community to help the kids learn compassion" and also to build "a lot of family unity." Anthony suggested they feed the homeless, so they bought some extra groceries and made ten sack lunches. They took them to a park in downtown Baltimore where the homeless gathered.

"We gave away four lunches," [recalls the father], "then Anthony pointed out a group of men. He had been afraid to get out of the van . . . [but] he said to Tony, 'If you take my hand, Dad, I think I can give these lunches to them.' These men were so grateful. They were trying to split a piece of gum between them."

It was obviously more than a one-time project. Baltimore has about twenty-seven hundred homeless, and its soup kitchens can feed only about fifteen hundred. The Franquellis went back every week with more lunches, until they were giving away a hundred a week and stretching the family budget so far that Sister Franquelli even sold some jewelry to help buy the food. Then other members of the ward got involved, a newspaper article resulted in some contributions from the community, and merchants began to donate bread and other items. Several other families also started doing lunches for a family project. The Franquellis make between five hundred and seven hundred lunches each Saturday in their two-car garage with the help of missionaries, single members, and other workers. They deliver them on Sunday and take along about three hundred extra sandwiches.

Sister Franquelli, who suffers from a terminal liver disease, says, "Doing this work brings one of the greatest spiritual feelings we've ever had in our lives. . . . There have been times when we have driven back from Baltimore when we couldn't talk." Brother Franquelli says that the most important thing is learning to give unconditionally. "When you give unconditionally, it doesn't make a difference who you give to. You have to . . . give without putting conditions on the giving." ("Feeding Homeless Sparks Spirit of Service, Unity," Church News, 23 May 1992, pp. 5-6.)

Why do they do it? Can you feel their joy and their desire to serve? Where does it come from, if not from Christ?

Conclusion

For many of us, the Spirit of Christ is a familiar and a beloved Spirit. We feel it often in our home. It stirs our heart as we kneel in prayer. We feel it accompanying us as we exert ourselves in acts of service for others. For some of us, perhaps this Spirit is not so familiar. When we talk about being "rooted and grounded in love," this tenderness of heart, this feeling of connectedness to others—this feeling is what we mean. Keeping a balance in our life means having deep roots. It is not a matter of piling our plate high with beans, juggling scripture study and jogging, squeezing in banana bread for the sisters we visit teach, and choosing a present for a baby shower—all in the same crowded day. Those things will happen—I promise you they will happen—and they will happen without worry and without cramming and juggling.

Our hands will find deeds of kindness to do just as words of kindness will spring to our lips before we even know that we are searching for them, because the roots of our relationship with Christ will keep that nourishing flow coming. It is the water of life, springing up in us, refreshing us, cleansing us, anointing us—and spilling over through us to anoint and bless others.

I feel to promise with the prophet Isaiah: "And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones: and thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not." (Isaiah 58:11.) That is the Lord's blessing. It will be fulfilled.
