Chieko N. Okazaki, Aloha! ( 1995)

Chapter 6

Following Him

Few invitations come to us with such warmth and simultaneously with such challenge as this invitation to follow our Savior:

And [Jesus] said to them all, If any [of you] will come after me, . . . deny [your]self, and take [your] cross daily, and follow me.

For whosoever will save [your] life shall lose it: but whosoever will lose [your] life for my sake, the same shall save it. (Luke 9:23-24)

Let me share with you four principles of following the Savior that I hope will paint a bigger picture in our minds of what it all means.

First, we can follow the Savior in establishing a personal relationship with our Father in Heaven.

Second, we can follow the Savior in serving.

Third, we can follow the Savior in forgiving others.

Fourth, we can follow the Savior in reaching across barriers.

A Firsthand Relationship

To set the theme for the first principle, think of the beloved hymn, "God Loved Us, So He Sent His Son" (Hymns [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985], no. 187):

God loved us, so he sent his Son, Christ Jesus, the atoning One, To show us by the path he trod The one and only way to God. He came as man, though Son of God, And bowed himself beneath the rod. He died in holy innocence, A broken law to recompense. Oh, love effulgent, love divine! What debt of gratitude is mine, That in his off'ring I have part And hold a place within his heart.

I particularly love the last line that reminds all of us that we, too, "hold a place within his heart." When I think about the many things the Savior did and said, the way he led his life and the willingness he had to offer up that perfect life for us, I wonder how he could do it. And I think that he could do it because he carried in his heart the shining image of his Father's perfect love for him.

Jesus said, "I and my Father are one." (John 10:30.) To me that means that whenever the Savior had to make a decision, he consistently and continually referred that decision to the image in his heart. He asked himself, "Uh oh. Here come some self-righteous men dragging a woman taken in adultery. What would my Father do? What would he say to the men? What would he say to the woman?"

What Jesus actually did was something that seems fairly mystifying on the face of it. He said nothing. He stooped and wrote something in the dust and then said one sentence that wasn't really addressed to anyone in particular and that didn't seem to have much to do with the correct and legally prescribed punishment for an adulterous woman. He said, "He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her." Stung by their own guilty consciences, those men who had been ready to kill this woman melted away. Then Jesus asked the woman where her accusers were. When she pointed out the obvious—that they had gone—he said kindly, "Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more." (John 8:7-11.) That turned out to be exactly the right thing to do.

When Jesus saw Zacchaeus in the tree, I think he asked himself what his Father would do—walk on by? scold him? tell him to come down and be preached to? All of those were logical and reasonable things to do. Instead, he did something mystifying and puzzling. He told Zacchaeus to come down—that he was inviting himself and his apostles to Zacchaeus' house for dinner that day. Zacchaeus had just been ignored by a whole crowd of taller people; and he'd probably, as a tax collector, been scolded by experts before. Neither one of those things would have done much good. But to be invited to dinner—even if he was supplying the house and the dinner—now that was such a bizarre and unusual thing that Zacchaeus didn't even hesitate! (See Luke 19:2-6.) But once again, it turned out to be exactly the right thing to do.

I'm suggesting that Jesus always did the right thing because he carried in his heart the divine image of his Father in Heaven. He could not say or do things that did not fit that image. That's what we need, a divine image so clear and powerful that we can recognize it and tell if our actions are matching it. Jesus said, "My sheep hear my voice." (John 10:27.) We, too, can hear and recognize the voice of the Savior.

Each one of us needs a firsthand relationship with the Savior—a primary relationship, not a secondary one. The testimonies that others have of Jesus are powerful and strengthening, but if we rely on them instead of developing our own relationship, we will be spiritually weak. The manuals and the Ensign and other commentaries and sermons and essays are meaningful and perceptive; but if we read only them and don't study the scriptures for ourselves, we will have only a secondhand relationship with the scriptures. The prayers of others can be uplifting and spiritual, but if we don't pray our own prayers, we will be distant from the Savior.

Let's follow the Savior in establishing a firsthand relationship with our Father in Heaven, a relationship so strong that it will fill our hearts so that we can, without confusion, follow him by following our hearts. "Draw near unto me," the Lord says, "and I will draw near unto you; seek me diligently and ye shall find me." (D&C 88:63.) I know this promise is true because he has drawn near to me and guided me as I have diligently sought his companionship.

Service

To express the theme of service, consider the beautiful hymn "Lord, I Would Follow Thee" (Hymns, no. 220):

Savior, may I learn to love thee, Walk the path that thou hast shown, Pause to help and lift another, Finding strength beyond my own. Savior, may I learn to love thee— Lord, I would follow thee. Who am I to judge another? When I walk imperfectly? In the quiet heart is hidden Sorrow that the eye can't see. Who am I to judge another— Lord, I would follow thee. I would be [another's] keeper; I would learn the healer's art. To the wounded and the weary I would show a gentle heart. I would be [another's] keeper— Lord, I would follow thee. Savior, may I love [another] As I know thou lovest me, Find in thee my strength, my beacon, For thy servant I would be. Savior, may I love [another]— Lord, I would follow thee.

All over the Church during 1992, Relief Society sisters celebrated the sesquicentennial with a wonderful year of service, particularly community service. The Relief Society general offices were flooded with reports, each one more inspiring than the one before. Service is the signature of the Relief Society, and it's the signature of the Savior. As King Benjamin pointed out, "When ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.) And as Jesus promised, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these . . . , ye have done it unto me." (Matthew 25:40.)

We know that service is indispensable for bringing us close to the Savior and letting us feel his Spirit. In nothing do we resemble the Savior more than in serving others. So in nothing should we feel greater love and joy than in service.

But I'm aware, from my discussions with many women, that service can sometimes be perceived as a burden, an obligation, something to get through, something that we drag along and are dragged down by. What if the joy isn't there? What then? Well, that's the point I want to focus on right now. If the joy is gone from service, we often just feel guilty. We blame ourselves for having a bad attitude. We redouble our efforts. We make longer lists. We take on more projects. We have worse experiences. We reproach ourselves more. We work more anxiously. And the joy gets farther away.

Service may be a duty and a responsibility, but it is also voluntary, not compulsory. If your service is starting to feel like a job, then you need to change things to get the joy back. I think that often the problem is that we are no longer choosing. We are not seeing needs. Someone else is. And we are not responding to the need of an individual whose need we see. We're just responding to an assignment instead of choosing to help a brother or sister. Guilt-sponsored service may get some necessary jobs done, but I'm not sure it gets many joy-filled jobs done.

I think that the solution is to remember the principle of agency. Agency allows us to say no, which is difficult for many of us to do, as well as yes. Otherwise our yes doesn't mean very much. That wonderful Japanese word kigatsuku means having an inner spirit to see good and do it voluntarily. It's easier to say yes, I think, if we're responding to the needs of a widow whose daughter is on a mission instead of Service Project 14B. It's easier to feel the joy of service if we have in our awareness a consciousness of the Savior's own great joy in serving others.

My eldest grandson, Matthew, is a wonderful boy, very helpful and alert. Ed and I were visiting for Thanksgiving of 1991 when Matthew was four, and Ed was helping our son Bob finish the basement. Whenever they sawed boards, they would make a mess with the sawdust on the floor, so in every break, Ed would reach for the broom. When Matthew saw him sweeping, he'd run and get the dustpan without being told and hold it for him. Then Ed would say, "Matthew, you are being a kigatsuku boy. You're helping Bapa and Daddy a lot. Thank you so much!" Matthew helped in every way he could all day long.

Then, just when they were cleaning up for supper at five o'clock, Ed started sweeping one more time, but Matthew didn't bring the dustpan. Ed looked around and saw Matthew sitting on the steps just looking at the scene. "Matthew," he called, "I'm sweeping."

Matthew said, "I'm sick and tired of this. I don't care if you get the broom, Bapa. I'm not getting the dustpan."

Ed and Bob looked at each other, laughed, and finished the cleanup by themselves. The next morning, Matthew was on the job with them bright and early again. What if they'd scolded him? What if Bob had been embarrassed and thought Matthew was being rude to his grandfather? What if they'd forced him to serve? I wonder how he would have felt about helping the next morning. But because he was free to choose, he chose to serve again, and he felt good about it.

You know what your resources and your circumstances are. There come times in every life when there's just nothing left to give. King Benjamin gave us a model to follow in such times: "I would that ye say in your hearts that: I give not because I have not, but if I had I would give." (Mosiah 4:24.)

I don't want you to misunderstand me. Some reasons for saying no are not good reasons. For example, fear. We sometimes want to say no to a calling or an assignment out of fear, because we're afraid we can't do it right. When we have to struggle with fear, let's pray for more faith. The apostle Paul said, "I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me." (Philippians 4:13.)

A second reason why we sometimes want to say no is out of selfishness. When we have to struggle with selfishness, let's pray for more charity, the pure love of Christ. But if we come to a season in our lives when King Benjamin's counsel applies to us, let's pray to know clearly our limits and our priorities. We have the same commitment to say both of those simple words, yes and no, but we must do it wisely and responsibly.

Let me tell you one more story about my grandson. For Thanksgiving dinner, I was making chocolate turkeys with malt balls and chocolate stars and frosting lines for the heads and wings. Matthew scrambled up to the table and exclaimed, "I can do that, Nana!"

I said, "Great! Here you go."

He tried it all the way through, and it turned out to be pretty complicated for his little fingers, so he said, "I think you'd better do this, Nana. But I can do this part." He could place the malt balls where they needed to go. And he stayed with me until we finished the whole project, placing the malt balls for the feet of each turkey.

He felt good about trying everything, but he knew what he could do and what he couldn't do. That's a lot of wisdom for a little boy. Do we know ourselves that well? We are instructed that "it is not requisite that [we] should run faster than [we have] strength." (Mosiah 4:27.) Let's look at our own circumstances, appraise our own strength, get in touch with our desires. Let's do what we can do; and when we do, there's joy in our job. Let's use our own agency. Let's choose freely and wisely, and do the best we can, if it is only to put the feet on the body of the turkey.

And finally, let's remember that all kinds of service are acceptable to the Lord. We may think that service is getting out there and collecting funds for a children's orthopedic unit or a homeless shelter. Sometimes it is. But sometimes it's writing out the check for the volunteer who comes canvassing and saying to her sincerely, "Thank you so much for giving your time to do this. I hope that someday I can do the same thing." Choose wisely, so that the things of greatest value during your particular season have the highest priority. That way, our service stays a joy, not a job.

We don't need to compare ourselves to anyone else. The service we can offer will always stretch us a little beyond our own boundaries, but what we can offer is okay even if it's just a few resources, just a few minutes. Jesus healed a blind man in a few seconds with spit and mud. We don't have to measure up to somebody else's checklist of perfection. The Lord loves and appreciates us, just the way we are. We can follow the Savior in serving others. Jesus told the Nephites: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel; . . . the works which ye have seen me do that shall ye also do." (3 Nephi 27:21.) Now that's an uncomplicated definition of the gospel that I can manage with no confusion.

The first two concepts seem to go together, don't they? First, we can have a primary, personal, firsthand relationship with our Heavenly Father and learn to carry the image of the Savior in our hearts. Second, service then becomes a joy because we will want to follow Christ in serving each other. It makes it easier when we do things for the right reasons and overlook the difficulties and obstacles that are part of mortality.

Forgiveness

To set the theme for the topic of forgiveness, think of that lovely sailor's hymn for men's chorus (Hymns, no. 335), "Brightly Beams Our Father's Mercy":

Brightly beams our Father's mercy From his lighthouse evermore, But to us he gives the keeping Of the lights along the shore. Chorus: Let the lower lights be burning; Send a gleam across the wave. Some poor fainting, struggling seaman You may rescue, you may save. Dark the night of sin has settled; Loud the angry billows roar. Eager eyes are watching, longing, For the lights along the shore. Trim your feeble lamp, my [sister], Some poor sailor, tempest-tossed, Trying now to make the harbor, In the darkness may be lost.

This hymn was a favorite of my husband, Ed. He loved to sing, and he loved the harmony in this song, but he also loved the feeling that there was a shore and a light in what sometimes felt like a huge ocean of indifference and even hatred. When you grow up on an island, you became very sensitive to the ocean and its moods, aware that you can't really trust it, and yet you are dependent upon it and even more dependent on those who trim their feeble lamps.

Ed knew a lot about forgiveness. He was a member of the 442d Division, a unit of Japanese-American soldiers that fought in Europe during World War II. Most of them were from Hawaii. It had the highest rate of casualties and the highest rate of decorations of any unit on the Allied side, and that kind of tells the whole story right there. Ed was so severely wounded in France that it took him a year to recuperate.

Many of the men who were his comrades in arms had fathers and uncles who were in American internment camps, just because they were of Japanese ancestry. Ed and many of the other soldiers had been in the ROTC unit at the University of Hawaii. When war was declared, they were all mobilized; but within a few weeks, the Japanese ROTC members were discharged—just for being Japanese. They pleaded for a chance to serve their country, and when the 442d Division was organized to fight in Europe, they competed with each other to join up. They did not let bitterness consume them. They asked only for a chance. When we came to Utah, we had a hard time finding a place to live or to build a house because we were Japanese. One insurance company wouldn't insure our car. Some people made unkind remarks on the street. I never saw Ed lose his temper or even his patience. He just forgave and stayed focused on the gospel.

Ed understood the power of forgiveness in overcoming the destructive power of hatred and resentment, and when the fifty-year anniversaries of World War II events were observed, he was keenly interested and deeply moved. I remember how touched he was at the account of an earlier story of reconciliation and forgiveness:

Captain Ben W. Blee, retired from the U.S. Navy, wrote about the reunion in Wilmington, North Carolina, aboard the retired battleship USS North Carolina, of a group of American survivors and four former crew members of a Japanese submarine, the IJN I-19. They had met in the battle of the South Pacific known as Torpedo Junction. The IJN I-19 had torpedoed and sunk an aircraft carrier and a warship and had disabled the North Carolina. Captain Blee explains the terrible complexity of the gesture of peace they were trying to make:

"Untold hundreds, perhaps thousands, of Japanese were killed by the North Carolina's guns. Could we, or they, in good conscience make friends with some of the very men who had done the killing?"

Captain Blee acknowledged that those feelings were strong and real and then concluded:

"To go to our graves still seething with hatred would serve no good purpose. Our lifelong obligation to the dead will be far better honored if we do what we can to build harmony and goodwill in the world. . . . It is not enough for former enemies merely to decide in the privacy of their own minds that they no longer hate or distrust each other. To give that decision any real meaning, we believed we had to meet and express our feelings man to man."

As the four Japanese submariners walked forward along the deck, more than a hundred American veterans of the war in the Pacific saluted them and applauded warmly. Facing the port bow of the old battleship, the two groups held a joint memorial service and exchanged identical commemorative plaques in both languages that read: "Having endured the perils of World War II as mortal enemies, we now offer to each other the hand of friendship, fervently sharing the hope that the sacrifices made in that war will never be forgotten or repeated."

One of the four Japanese former submarine crew members of the IJN I-19, Quartermaster Rishichi Sugiyama, said that the invitation was "almost incomprehensible by Japanese standards." Torpedoman Shichiro Tange said, "It gave me the most exalted experience of my life to participate in the solemn joint memorial service. . . . If only all people in the world can proceed hand in hand with courage and determination to maintain peace in the world after the pattern set by this reunion! We have a solemn obligation to convey this feeling to our descendants."

Another memorial service held on Iwo Jima commemorated the battle in which twenty thousand Japanese soldiers and seven thousand U.S. Marines died. "They were reconciled through a worship service, and a memorial has been constructed and dedicated as a testimony of that reconciliation." (Duane E. Couey, "Peace and Reconciliation," Saints Herald, May 1991, pp. 13-14.)

I have used the example of war partly because of Ed's song and partly because of my own feelings. Perhaps that is an overdramatic example. Think of the daily little injuries, the unintentional snub, the thoughtless remark, the unjust comparison, the swift stereotype—all of the ways in which we injure and harm other human beings. All of them require forgiveness. The Savior warned the Latter-day Saints through Joseph Smith:

My disciples, in days of old, sought occasion against one another and forgave not one another in their hearts; and for this evil they were afflicted and sorely chastened.

Wherefore, I say unto you, that ye ought to forgive one another; for [she] that forgiveth not [her sister her] trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord; for there remaineth in [her] the greater sin.

I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all. . . .

And ye ought to say in your hearts—let God judge between me and thee, and reward thee according to thy deeds. (D&C 64:8-11)

The commandment to forgive is universal. Ultimately we both must and can forgive all who have trespassed against us, but I do not suggest that forgiveness is always quick or easy. Forgiveness is a change of heart, and sometimes a great deal of healing must take place before forgiveness can occur.

I think we have all become more aware of that requirement as the terrible dynamic of sexual abuse is being studied and discussed more widely in the Church. I hope you have had a chance to read the anonymous article in the Ensign in January 1992 in which a sister talks about being sexually abused by her active Latter-day Saint father and how, because of the abuse, she learned, she said, to "turn off my feelings . . . to completely separate my mind from my body. . . . I am so expert at distracting myself from the realities of the present that, until a short time ago, I was unaware that I was even doing it." She didn't trust her father. She didn't trust God. She never felt safe or loved until she recognized the anger she felt at her father for abusing her, at her mother for not protecting her, at the Church for believing her father, at God for letting it happen, at herself for being a victim. Those were very painful feelings; but when she let herself feel the "anger, the hurt, and the rejection," then she could also start to feel "God's pure love for [her]." She discovered new courage, new compassion for others. She writes:

One of the most difficult yet most rewarding aspects of this entire experience has been my quest to reach a point where I could forgive my father. In the early stages of my grief, the Holy Ghost revealed to me over and over that God does indeed love me. I began to pray more often and more earnestly. I read more scriptures and sought comfort, hope, and answers. I knew I couldn't forgive my father on my own, so I asked God to help me. And he has.

I have realized that my father's repentance is his job, not mine. I'm not sure Dad understands how much he has hurt his children and others. When the day comes that he does, I know he will truly mourn. Should the day come that he approaches the Father with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, I do know this: Like the father of the prodigal son, God will open his arms and welcome him home. And I, like the brother in the story, have learned to open my heart and love again. ("A Refuge for the Oppressed," Ensign, Jan. 1992, pp. 62-64)

There are two messages in this sister's story for me: the first is that forgiveness of even the most grievous injuries is possible; the second is that, in such circumstances as sexual abuse, forgiveness can take a long time. Don't let other people set timetables for you or tell you that you've finished some spiritual business if you yourself know that there is more work to be done.

Consider this wonderful one-sentence letter from a child to God: "Dear God, I am doing the best I can. Frank." (Children's Letters to God, comp. Eric Marshall and Stuart Hample, enl. ed. [New York: Pocket Books, 1975], n.p.)

That's all God wants—progress toward the goal. No one who has felt the sweetness of being forgiven or of forgiving another can possibly want to cling to feelings of resentment one second longer than absolutely necessary, but forgiveness is a gift. It comes to us through the grace of Christ. And speaking the words of forgiveness before our hearts have changed, even if we most desperately want the words to be true, may only postpone the actual gift itself. But I can assure you, in time, with continued faithfulness and through the grace of Christ, the gift of forgiveness will surely come.

Reaching across Barriers

Now let's consider how we can follow the Savior by reaching across barriers of diversity that seem to separate us from each other. Unity is a wonderful principle of the gospel. The Savior told the Latter-day Saints, "I say unto you, be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine." (D&C 38:27.) The psalmist rejoiced, "Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!" (Psalm 133:1.)

The apostle Paul wrote to the Ephesians:

There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling;

One Lord, one faith, one baptism,

One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all. (Ephesians 4:4-6)

Yes, unity is important in the Church. But sometimes we misread these strong messages for unity as instructions to look alike, talk alike, dress alike, think alike, have the same number of children, keep house a certain way, have prayers at certain times, serve green Jell-O for certain meals, or have plastic grapes in the living room. You get the point. Complete conformity in our personalities and styles of living is not the same thing as unity of spirit, unity of testimony, and unity of faith in the Savior.

Unity in the Church grows from a few great master principles: our eternal identity as children of our Heavenly Parents, our eternal and inescapable right and responsibility to exercise agency, the divine mission of the Lord Jesus Christ, the prophetic calling of Joseph Smith and his successors down to our current prophet, the centrality of the scriptures, and our baptismal commitment to live together as Christians, bound together by our understanding of the gospel and by our loving service to each other. But when it comes to practices—how we learn, how we pray to the Father, how we apply the teachings of the prophets, what shape our service takes—in all of these, there is great room for individuality. Let's acknowledge it and rejoice in it.

Here's one of my favorite proverbs: "If both of us think alike, one of us is not necessary." Well, all of us are necessary. We all think different thoughts, have different perceptions, enjoy different opinions, and rejoice in our diversity. Diversity means uniqueness and difference. It is a cause for celebration within our Church membership. Diversity is not a danger to be stamped out, a broken thing to be fixed, or a sin to be repented of. We'll be stronger, healthier, more interesting, and more capable when we learn to enjoy differences instead of feeling frightened about them or angry because of them.

Now, with that as an introduction, think of a hymn that celebrates both diversity and unity. It is the lovely hymn of St. Francis of Assisi that calls on all of the diverse creations of God to praise him and show forth his glory (Hymns, no. 62):

All creatures of our God and King, Lift up your voice and with us sing, Alleluia! Alleluia! Thou burning sun with golden beam, Thou silver moon with softer gleam, Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Oh, praise him! Alleluia! Thou rushing wind that art so strong, Ye clouds that sail in heav'n along, Alleluia! Alleluia! Thou rising morn, in praise rejoice; Ye light of evening, find a voice, Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Oh, praise him! Alleluia! Thou flowing water, pure and clear, Make music for thy Lord to hear, Alleluia! Alleluia! Thou fire so masterful and bright, That gives to [us] both warmth and light, Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Oh, praise him! Alleluia! Dear Mother Earth, who day by day Unfoldest blessings on our way, Alleluia! Alleluia! The flow'rs and fruit that in thee grow, Let them his glory also show, Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Oh, praise him! Alleluia!

We all have different personalities, but we can all unite our voices in singing praises to God using the English translation of the words of an Italian saint in the Catholic church. There is room in the world for all of us. There is room in God's love for all of us, and there is room in the Church for all of us.

Sometimes we have what I call the Too Syndrome. We feel that there are some people we can't really extend full acceptance to because they are too something—too old, too young, too liberal, too conservative, too rich, too poor, too educated, too uneducated, too rigid in religious observances, too lax. In the parable of the good Samaritan, if the traveler who fell among thieves was like other Jews of his time, he felt that Samaritans were too ethnically impure to worship in the temple; I don't think he felt that the wine and the oil poured on his wounds were too Samaritan, do you?

I feel strongly about this principle of reaching past barriers because I'm so grateful for all the people in my life who have not been afflicted with the Too Syndrome. I'm grateful to the missionary who did not think that I was too Buddhist to learn about Jesus. I'm grateful to the elder who did not think that fifteen was too young to be baptized. I'm grateful to Ed for not thinking that I was too Mormon to marry into his Congregationalist family and who did not think that his family ties were too strong to keep him from being baptized himself when he gained a testimony of the truthfulness of the gospel. I'm grateful to Florence Jacobsen, who did not think I was too Japanese to be on the YWMIA general board in 1961. I'm grateful to the bishop who did not think that as a school principal I was too busy to be a Relief Society president. I was not too anything for those people. I was enough.

We, too, can follow the Savior by reaching beyond diverse circumstances that seem to separate us from other members of the Church and other people in our community.

Conclusion

We've talked about following the Savior in establishing a personal relationship with our Father in Heaven, in serving, in forgiving others, and in reaching across the barriers of diversity that separate us from our brothers and sisters.

If we had been able literally to follow Jesus, tagging along at his elbow, as it were, during his mortal ministry, there are parts of it that would have been wonderful and other parts that would have been very trying. We would have grown hot, hungry, dusty, and thirsty. We would have been jostled by crowds and had to rely on the hospitality of others for food and shelter. We would sometimes have been confused by the teachings of Jesus and struggled to understand why he did some of the things he did and what he meant by some of the things he said.

There would also have been moments of love that touched us to the very heart and transformed our souls. There would have come moments of transcendent awareness when we knew that we stood in the presence of the very God foretold by Moses, Isaiah, and Jeremiah. We would have seen ourselves as Jesus saw us—limited and frustratingly inadequate but also infinitely precious, unendingly worthy of his love. We would never have wanted to be anywhere other than where we were. We would never have imagined a love stronger and deeper than the love that filled us for Jesus.

We would also have understood, as the disciples did, that the way of Jesus led not only to the mount of penetrating sermons, to the hillsides where miracles of loaves and fishes occurred, to the quiet rooms of healing and blessing but also to the garden, the cross, and the tomb. The way of the disciple is that same path. The confusion of the disciples as they groped toward a testimony of the Savior as the Son of God finally yielded to the witness of the Spirit that he was in very deed the literal Son of God. Once possessing that understanding, think of their bewilderment and anguish at seeing him, the Lord of all creation, hanging on the cross, crucified by the very people he had come to save. And yet, even this bewilderment gave way to their joyous witness of his glorious resurrection.

We have taken upon ourselves the name of Jesus and the way of the disciple. Our way will also lead to gardens of anguished prayer, to crosses, to tombs. At those times, we, like the apostles, must endure in faith and love. We must endure despite our pain, with our pain, in the depths of our pain, until the moment of the resurrection in us when we understand the greater purpose in the cross and the tomb. I testify to you that those moments of understanding and acceptance will come.

The loss of my beloved husband is the hardest thing that has ever happened to me. I am a triple cancer survivor. I have been near death three times from other causes. Those were testing times. Sometimes I thought I had been tested to the point of breaking. But none of them compares with the testing following Ed's death. There have been times when I literally could not turn the doorknob and leave the house without praying for strength and imploring the Lord for his Spirit to accompany me as I went out to perform my duties. All of us must face death—our own deaths and the deaths of loved ones. I feel that I am learning something about the way of the disciple that leads through the valley of the shadow of death, but even there—even there—I know I am following the Savior, and I can feel his hand upholding me and his voice promising me, "I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee." (Hebrews 13:5.)

May we all follow the Savior, even though the disciple's path is stony and shadowed. May we feel the presence of the Savior with us on that path, and may we sustain and support one another as we walk together. I pray upon us the blessing that the apostle Paul invoked upon the Thessalonian Saints as they walked their own disciple's path:

The Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward another, and toward all . . .

To the end [that] he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints. (1 Thessalonians 3:12-13)

May we be among their joyous number!
