Chieko N. Okazaki, Aloha! ( 1995)

Part 3: The Way of the Christian

Chapter 7

The Way of the Christian

What does it mean to follow the way of the Christian? And what could be more appropriate than that those who have taken upon themselves the name of Christ at the waters of baptism should reflect together on what it means to follow our Savior?

I'd like to share with you two ways of following the Savior, ways that we can all follow as we come unto Christ: first, have a primary relationship with the Savior; and second, serve others with love, not judgment. Those are prime characteristics of the way of the Christian.

Have a Primary Relationship with the Savior

We all need to have a primary relationship with the Savior—a firsthand relationship, not a secondhand or hand-me-down relationship from our parents or our teachers. We need a personal, intimate relationship, one that is based on our own experiences with the Savior, our own answered prayers, our own knowledge of what the Spirit feels like, our own obedience to its guidance, our own knowledge that Christ atoned for us. A secondhand relationship is based on knowing people who know the Savior and believing their testimony. I don't want to suggest that there is anything wrong with doing so in part. The scriptures tell us:

To some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that he was crucified for the sins of the world.

To others it is given to believe on their words, that they also might have eternal life if they continue faithful. (D&C 46:13-14)

But the scriptures also promise:

Verily, thus saith the Lord: It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am;

And that I am the true light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world. (D&C 93:1-2)

To me, this passage means that the spiritual gift of believing on the testimony of others is meant to lead us to the greater gift of receiving a direct and personal knowledge of the Savior. My husband, Ed, had this personal knowledge from the time he was a child. I grew up in a Buddhist home and discovered Christianity as part of the intriguing but puzzling world of the haoles who ran our plantation. Ed was raised a Congregationalist and had a great love for the Savior from the time he was a little boy. It was this great love that I recognized in him when we met at the University of Hawaii as students and began dating. Many people warned me against getting too serious about Ed, because he wasn't a Mormon and they were afraid that I would become inactive. But I recognized in Ed a purity of heart and a thirst for goodness that whispered to me that he would accept greater truth when he recognized it. With that faith, I took the risk of marrying him; he was baptized ten months after our wedding. The gospel added to the faith and love he already had for Jesus, building on the foundation established in him during his youth.

I want to share some experiences that show the quality of Ed's faith, stories that Ed prepared just two weeks before his death to share with the Lambda Delta Sigma unit in Salt Lake City when he introduced me as their speaker. He told them about four miracles in our family, not because our family is uniquely special but because he wanted to testify to those young women that each one is equally precious to her Heavenly Father. I already knew of Ed's love and support, but his expressing those feelings in writing just a few days before his death made them doubly precious to me. I speak of these four miracles in Ed's own words as examples of his faith:

When Chieko was in labor at the birth of our second son, she felt her spirit drifting upwards out of her body. She struggled against the feeling, fighting to get back to deliver the baby. I was in the waiting room and felt the sudden urgent need to pray. The only private room I could find was a tiny toilet off the hallway. I went in, closed the lid, knelt down, and prayed humbly for my wife. The Lord preserved her.

The second time, we came home from work and Chieko complained of a temperature and a pain in her arm. We called our family doctor who told her to take two aspirins and call him in the morning. By midnight, she was in great pain. I was a social worker at the V.A. Hospital and called my friend, Dr. Howard Latimer. When I described the symptoms, he asked, "Can you see a blue line running up her arm to the armpit?" I checked. There was the line. "It's staph infection," he said. "I'll be right there." He came at once, started antibiotics on an IV, and stayed with me all night. "If you'd waited," he told us, "Chieko would have been dead by morning."

The third time, we were in Denver. For some reason, I had had the car running in the garage next to the kitchen. When I came into the kitchen, I saw Chieko slumped at the table over her schoolwork. I knew immediately that she had been poisoned by the carbon monoxide fumes. Our son Bob and I picked her up, took her outside, draped her arm over my shoulder, and walked her up and down until the oxygen revived her, and then took her to the hospital. Heavenly Father preserved her life a third time.

A few months later, she discovered a lump in her breast. Three days later, she was admitted to the hospital and we signed the consent forms for a mastectomy to be performed if the biopsy proved to be malignant. It was, but she has outlived her doctor. For the fourth time, Heavenly Father preserved her life.

Ed told these stories to make the point that my life had been spared for a purpose. I tell them to you to make the point that Ed was a man of God whose faith in our Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ was absolute. He saw the hand of God in these experiences because he lived close to the Spirit.

Prayers are not little set speeches that we deliver at stated times during the day or rituals for opening and closing meetings. Think of prayer as a sustained, ongoing conversation that you have with God during the whole day. Mother Teresa tells the Sisters of Charity who work with her among the poor in Calcutta:

Love to pray—feel often during the day the need for prayer, and take [the] trouble to pray. Prayer enlarges the heart until it is capable of containing God's gift of himself. Ask and seek, and your heart will grow big enough to receive him and keep him as your own. . . . The more we receive in silent prayer, the more we can give in our active life. We need silence to be able to touch souls. The essential thing is not what we say, but what God says to us and through us. All our words will be useless unless they come from within—words which do not give the light of Christ increase the darkness. (Malcolm Muggeridge, Something Beautiful for God: Mother Teresa of Calcutta [New York: Walker and Co./Phoenix Press, 1971; large print ed., 1984], pp. 60-61)

If your relationship with the Lord is not all that you would like it to be, I encourage you to spend more time with him in prayer. Sometimes we think that we must meet a long list of specifications before we're worthy to approach him. Or sometimes we think that we must withdraw completely from our daily activities to meet him. Perhaps both of these things are partially true in some circumstances, but I testify to you that he is already with us in those daily circumstances and he stands beside us as we anxiously check off good deeds on our endless lists, patiently waiting for us to notice him. He doesn't call us away from our daily activities; he asks simply that we let him be with us as we carry them out—including the carpooling, the housecleaning, the parent-teacher conferences, the meetings at work, and the meetings at church. Prayer is an endlessly refreshing and delightful dialogue that can be carried on, even without words, between the heart in tune and the Spirit of the Lord.

So my first point is, Follow the way of the Christian by following the way of prayer.

Serve with Love

My second point is that as Christians we should serve with love, not judgment. Judging others and labeling their motives and their behavior puts an obstacle in the paths that we try to follow as Christians. It always hurts and grieves me when members of the Church condemn people who don't keep the Word of Wisdom and make them feel that they'll be welcome at church just as soon as they stop smoking. Where will they get the strength to change if they feel condemned until they become perfect?

I am so grateful for the commandment of the Savior, "Judge not, that ye be not judged." (Matthew 7:1.) Some of our leaders in the Church—our bishops and stake presidents—are called to be judges. It is a heavy burden they bear, and I pray for them to bear it righteously. But I am glad not to have that responsibility. I am glad that I can focus on other parts of the gospel, especially just loving others. We can be free of the burden of judging others' motives or achievements, how they raise their children, or how well they do their church jobs. And we can be especially free of that burden in relation to ourselves.

We must stop judging ourselves and get on with the Christian business of loving and forgiving ourselves, along with loving others.

Sister Ida Smith of Brigham Young University put this concept into a wonderful perspective:

No two of us are alike. We have not had identical backgrounds, our current experiences vary enormously, our timetables are not the same. It is important that we not compare ourselves with others, which often causes us to see ourselves in a negative light. Also, we must constantly guard against the temptation to assume that where there is a difference, there must also automatically be a defect. Too often we not only berate ourselves, but each other as well, saying, "If you were really a righteous woman, you would/wouldn't be doing what you're doing!" If we are honestly doing what we feel we must do for ourselves and our loved ones, and are doing so because that is our choice, ratified by the Spirit, we have the right to feel good about ourselves and to be free of feelings of guilt. There is a world of difference between being guilty and feeling guilty, and women are far too prone to allow themselves to feel guilty when they're not living up to someone else's expectations of what they should or should not be doing. ("LDS Women: At Home and Beyond," in As Women of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences, ed. Mary E. Stovall and Carol Cornwall Madsen [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1991], p. 214)

Remember that the gospel is good news—the good news that our Heavenly Father and Jesus loved us so much that Jesus came among us to show us how to live and to die for us. The way of the Christian involves drawing near to him in ongoing, loving prayer, in not checking the flow of the Spirit by judging others, and by letting the sunshine into our own lives by not judging ourselves harshly.

When we set aside the burden of judgment, then our hands and hearts are free to serve others with joy. Such service is truly the way of the Christian.

Ed never worried about finding someone to serve and he never worried about the service itself. Whoever Ed was with had his undivided interest—a teenager in the foyer on the way to sacrament meeting who needed a warm smile and a handshake, a stranger sitting next to him at a political rally with a few minutes to pass before it started, a car stranded by the side of the road, a man shivering in shirtsleeves under the viaduct in Salt Lake City. Ed was there for all of them.

At Ed's funeral, speaker after speaker testified to Ed's gentle, happy, caring service to them. The bishop said that when we moved into the ward, it was as if we had always been there. He said:

They didn't wait for us to come to them. They came to us. Ed crossed the fence lines and the invisible lines of age, gender, and religion until he had met everyone in the neighborhood. Ed was able to get more mileage out of a tiny bag of fortune cookies than the combined empires of Asia realized with gunpowder.

You need to realize that Ed's signature was fortune cookies. He never went anywhere without a plastic bag or two full of fortune cookies in his pockets. He gave them out to the children in his home-teaching families, to the person who came to read the electrical meter—you name it!

Bishop Gaykowski continued:

When my own grandchildren would come to visit, they would race up the stairs and say, "Hi, Grandma. Hi, Grandpa. Can we go see Ed and Chieko?" Ed would give them fortune cookies and then take them out to the front yard where he had a goodly supply of snails and would help them catch snails and put them in a jar to bring home.

Kjaristy Griffiths also spoke at Ed's funeral; she was a seventeen-year-old in a family that Ed was assigned to home teach. She said:

Brother Okazaki . . . didn't talk down to us or refuse to discuss seriously the principles of the gospel. He was prepared to teach and excited to teach. The very first time he came, he pulled out a small notebook and wrote down all of our names, ages, years in school, even my dog's name.

One of our missionaries also spoke at Ed's funeral. He talked about how nervous and anxious he and the other missionaries in his district in Okinawa were the first time Ed came to interview them. They just barely knew his name and that he was from Hawaii. Would he be harsh and demanding? or fair and kind? Their questions were answered in the first few seconds. Our missionary said:

The first time I saw our new mission president was from the airport observation deck on the island of Okinawa. We saw a short man with a big smile carrying his own suitcase across the tarmac. He looked up at us, grinned, waved and shouted, "You guys look like a million bucks!"

We discovered that we had an unusual leader. He was completely free of the pompous solemnity sometimes found in the Church.

Then our missionary described some of the ways Ed served the missionaries:

He let us know we were important. He greeted the groups of new missionaries at the airport by rolling out a piece of red carpet for them to stand on while he shook their hands, with a chorus of local members singing in the background. To missionaries who were struggling with the work, their testimonies, or personal difficulties, he was incredibly patient, respectful, and kind. Those most troubled were sometimes assigned to the mission office where he could try to help them and provide time and space for them to work through their problems. Although our mission had its full share of problems, no one was sent home a failure during the Okazaki years.

When he visited us in our branches he came with a smile and bearing gifts, often a cake or cookies baked by Sister Okazaki. Sometimes he came without warning early in the morning to check on who was up on time and who wasn't. He didn't preach or condemn—he laughed at the ones caught in bed and sometimes stayed to cook breakfast for them.

There were plenty of other ways Ed served, too. During our first winter in Salt Lake City, he was impressed by how promptly our streets were plowed and took up a collection among the neighbors. Then he delivered a box of oranges and a box of apples to the flabbergasted and delighted street crew. He quietly showed up to help feed the homeless. After one of my talks in the ward of one of our missionaries, I looked around for Ed. He was quietly folding up the chairs and tables and putting them away. He made no distinction between important and unimportant service, between important and unimportant people. He gave a four-year-old child or an eighty-year-old widow exactly the same total attention and love that he gave President Kimball or President Hinckley. In fact, it's hard to say, but maybe the four-year-old and the widow got a little bit more. For Ed, the commandment "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, you have done it unto me" (Matthew 25:40) was a reflex. He followed the Christian way through his service.

Conclusion

Seeing a Mother Teresa or an Ed in action is a way to see Christ in action. I think of Jesus explaining to Philip: "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father." (John 14:9.) When we see a true Christian in action, we see Christ in action. We see Christianity in action when we see any Christian's firsthand relationship with the Savior, a relationship based on continual and loving prayer. Second, we see the way of the Christian in acts of service that are untainted and unencumbered by the burden of judgment.

I will conclude with Ed's own testimony to the young women of Lambda Delta Sigma, because at that point in his remarks, he applied what could have been a tribute to me to all of them. He said:

To me, Chieko is the most wonderful woman in the world, but I know she is not unique. The Lord has his hand upon each of his children in great loving kindness. The Lord loves you as much as he loves Chieko. He will make miracles happen for you, as much as for Chieko and me. You will have hard experiences to go through, but he will sustain you in those experiences as he has sustained us. You will make plans and see things sometimes go wrong; but if you take these setbacks with faith, do your very best under all circumstances, and do all the good you can with the skills and abilities you have, I testify that you, too, will be able to look back and see in clarity the Lord's plan for you. I testify that our Heavenly Father does have a plan for each of us, that he loves us, that we must have faith and be obedient to the promptings of the Spirit that come to us directly and also that come to us through the promptings of those who work with us and preside over us.
