Chieko N. Okazaki, Aloha! ( 1995)

Chapter 10

Steadfast in Christ

As I pondered various scriptures that deal with the topic of being steadfast, I was particularly struck by the lovely promise that the Lord gave to the Saints of Joseph Smith's day in Doctrine and Covenants 84:60-63:

Verily, verily, I say unto you who now hear my words, which are my voice, blessed are ye inasmuch as you receive these things;

For I will forgive you of your sins with this commandment—that you remain steadfast in your minds in solemnity and the spirit of prayer, in bearing testimony to all the world of those things which are communicated unto you. . . .

And as I said unto mine apostles, even so I say unto you, . . . ye are they whom my Father hath given me; ye are my friends.

Isn't that glorious! The Savior promises us forgiveness of our sins and calls us his friends if we remain steadfast in prayer and testimony. I'd like to explore how we can be steadfast in prayer and steadfast in service.

Steadfast in Prayer

First, let's discuss what it means to be steadfast in prayer. In the Book of Mormon, Amulek gives some beautiful instructions about how widespread, far-reaching, and all-encompassing our prayers should be:

Yea, humble yourselves, and continue in prayer unto him.

Cry unto him when ye are in your fields, yea, over all your flocks.

Cry unto him in your houses, yea, over all your household, both morning, mid-day, and evening.

Yea, cry unto him against the power of your enemies. Yea, cry unto him against the devil, who is an enemy to all righteousness.

Cry unto him over the crops of your fields, that ye may prosper in them.

Cry over the flocks of your fields, that they may increase.

But this is not all; ye must pour out your souls in your closets, and your secret places, and in your wilderness.

Yea, and when you do not cry unto the Lord, let your hearts be full, drawn out in prayer unto him continually for your welfare, and also for the welfare of those who are around you. (Alma 34:19-27)

Is there one thing that we could or should exclude from our prayers? Is there any topic about which the Lord doesn't want us to pray? Obviously not. And he makes a distinction between crying unto the Lord—by which I think he means formal prayers, even prayers spoken aloud—and prayers of the heart. I have always loved the image of a full heart, drawn out in prayer to God; and I have learned so much about a heart full of prayer. I have needed the companionship of the Savior so much since my husband's death, so it has been easy for me to have my heart drawn out in prayer—prayers of deep need for that sacred companionship and then prayers of loving gratitude when that companionship comes.

Elder Boyd K. Packer talked about the importance of attuning ourselves to listen to the "quiet voice of inspiration" in our prayers; to illustrate, he described how one of his sons had always been interested in ham radio. Elder Packer cheerfully admits that, as he has sat with this enthusiastic son, speaking to someone in a distant part of the world, he has been amazed and impressed by his son's ability to communicate: "I could hear static and interference and catch a word or two, or sometimes several voices at once. Yet he can understand, for he has trained himself to tune out the interference." ("Prayers and Answers," Ensign, Nov. 1979, p. 19.)

He marveled at his son's ability and soon realized that he had a similar one:

In the early days of our marriage, our children came at close intervals. As parents of little children will know [and I'm sure this is something we can all relate to!], in those years it is quite a novelty for them to get an uninterrupted night of sleep.

If you have a new baby, and another youngster cutting teeth, or one with a fever, you can be up and down a hundred times a night. (That, of course, is an exaggeration. It's probably only twenty or thirty times.)

We finally divided our children into "his" and "hers" for night tending. She would get up for the new baby, and I would tend the one cutting teeth.

One day we came to realize that each would hear only the one to which we were assigned, and would sleep very soundly through the cries of the other.

We have commented on this over the years, convinced that you can train yourself to hear what you want to hear, to see and feel what you desire. (Ibid., p. 20)

We've all had this experience, haven't we? We've scanned the crowd pouring down the concourse at the airport, and our eye has instantly picked out the figure of our husband from the hundreds we're scanning. Or we can hear our own fourth-grader singing in his school chorus. We can hear the voice of the Spirit in the same way, after we have poured out our hearts in prayer, speaking to us in impressions, in promptings, in gentle whispers, in inclinations in one direction and a turning away from another.

I remember reading several years ago the experience of Jerry Lee Turley, who moved with her family to the Hopi Indian reservation in Arizona. It felt very much like a foreign country to her, and she was "stunned" when the branch president called her to be the Primary president. She had never worked in Primary before, her branch had no functioning Primary, and she had no experience working with the Hopi. But Nephi's promise, that "the Lord giveth no commandments . . . save he shall prepare a way" (1 Nephi 3:7), strengthened her, and she accepted the calling. The branch president gave her a list of fifteen women and asked her to choose her counselors by the next Sunday.

She pored over the list again and again that week, praying earnestly for inspiration. But she was struggling even to pronounce the names; and as Sunday drew near, she "had a feeling of panic." It was fast Sunday, and she prayed with real intensity as she fasted that the two women the Lord wanted for counselors would be present the next day and she would know who they were. This is what happened:

When fast and testimony meeting started . . . very few members were in attendance, but as the meeting progressed, the congregation increased. . . . Early in the meeting a sister came in and sat in front of me, and I was impressed that she was to be one of my counselors. But what of the other? Each time the door opened I looked, wondering if it would be the other counselor. Finally a lovely sister came in, and I knew she was the one. ("I Saw My Counselors Walk In," Ensign, Jan. 1976, p. 55)

You can imagine Sister Turley's relief and her gratitude that the Lord would answer her prayers so directly and unmistakably. When we have sweet experiences of this nature, it strengthens our faith in the Savior until we can pray with joy and rejoicing like the words of the psalmist:

O God, thou art my God; early will I seek thee: my soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh longeth for thee in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is; . . .

Because thy lovingkindness is better than life, my lips shall praise thee.

Thus will I bless thee while I live: I will lift up my hands in thy name.

My soul shall be satisfied . . . ; and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips: . . .

Because thou hast been my help, therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice. (Psalm 63:1-7)

If we have feelings of joy and love and faith in the Savior, we can cry to the Lord about everything in our lives, like Amulek. We can listen for the Lord's voice, like Elder Packer, and expect answers to our prayers, like Sister Turley. We need to be steadfast in prayer.

Steadfast in Service

The second way in which we can be steadfast in Christ is to be steadfast in service. Our service doesn't need to be very elaborate or very complicated. Little, tiny things make a big difference. I remember a Russian proverb: "If everyone gives one thread, the poor man will have a shirt."

One important thing to remember about service is that no matter how little you have, there is still enough to share. Our sisters in the Caracas Venezuela Stake learned that a senior citizens' home had a great need for clothing and food. With compassionate hearts, the sisters collected clothes, made cookies and Christmas cakes, and mixed up hot chocolate. Then one Sunday afternoon, with hearts "filled with enthusiasm and charity," they went to the home for the first time.

They introduced themselves to the attendants and asked to spend a few minutes visiting with the elderly women. When they were shown into the large dormitory room where the women who had no families were assigned, they received "a terrible shock." These women had no clothing at all. "They covered themselves with whatever rags they could find and were curled up like little balls," the sisters wrote. "Several sisters had to leave the room to cry outside. Then they steeled themselves and came back in, and we all dressed the women with stockings, underwear, and whatever clothing we had." The women were desperately grateful not only for the clothing and the cookies and hot chocolate but for the attention and care. They begged the sisters not to leave.

Our correspondent wrote, "We have cried many times over this scene . . . and vowed that we would do everything we could to mitigate the anguish, the loneliness, and the hunger of these little ladies who are our sisters." (Untitled and undated typescript, translated for the Relief Society General Board, 1992. Photocopy in my possession.)

I recently learned about a whole ward of sisters who are steadfast in performing a quiet, consistent, long-term act of Christian service. Ruth McClure of Orem, Utah, remembers hearing with very mixed feelings the announcement about the change to the consolidated meeting schedule. She was happy that the burden of time and expense would be reduced for members of the Church in scattered wards and stakes, but she realized that she herself had a serious problem. Her daughter has multiple handicaps and is very sensitive to noise and movement. When she is overstimulated, she begins to cry in distress. As a result, this daughter had to be cared for at home while the family was in church. That hadn't been a problem up to this point, because someone was always home during the time that Sister McClure needed to attend Relief Society, but now she was stranded. Her husband was serving in a bishopric of a Brigham Young University ward, her younger son was on his mission, and her two older children were married and living at some distance. There was no one to care for her daughter. Then Marilyn Mansfield, a sister in the Relief Society, asked her, "What will you do?"

Sister McClure answered, "I don't know."

Sister Mansfield said quietly, "Let's see what we can do."

She proposed to the ward Relief Society that each sister take one Sunday a year to watch Sister McClure's daughter. "That way you'll only miss one Sunday," she explained, "and Sister McClure won't have to miss any." They passed around a sign-up sheet and filled it in for the first three months. Sister McClure writes:

That was over twelve years ago, and the sheet is still being filled every three months by those sweet compassionate sisters. In that time, I have served in a number of callings—once even as Primary president! Our ward has been divided four times. Each time, the new presidency picks up the challenge. Many have come and gone but the generosity of their spirit lingers in my home. And now I have a much clearer understanding of the Savior's charge to "bear one another's burdens." ("Twelve Years and Counting . . . "; typescript in my possession)

It's like a circle. If we're steadfast in prayer, then we have the connection with Christ that lets his love flow into us and through us so that we can reach out in charity to serve others. Our understanding moves in a spiral. At any point where we begin to understand a gospel principle and live it, we can move forward from that point and learn something new. Even when we come back to a principle we think we understand, we find that we will relate to it in a new way because we are no longer the same person we were. For instance, we can serve people because we love them or we can learn to love them by serving them. This love then comes back into our own life, and we have the Savior's own reward for helping others. As a result, our own faith and trust in the Savior deepens constantly and steadily.

Conclusion

These two principles of the gospel are not, of course, the only ways we can be steadfast in Christ; but I think they are foundations upon which we can all build. We are being steadfast in Christ when we are steadfast in prayer and steadfast in service. I love the blessing that King Benjamin gave his people in the Book of Mormon—a blessing that again encourages us to be steadfast:

Therefore, I would that ye should be steadfast and immovable, always abounding in good works, that Christ, the Lord God Omnipotent, may seal you his, that you may be brought to heaven, that ye may have everlasting salvation and eternal life, through the wisdom, and power, and justice, and mercy of him who created all things, in heaven and in earth, who is God above all. (Mosiah 5:15)
