Chieko N. Okazaki, Aloha! ( 1995)

Chapter 12

Therefore, Choose Happiness

The concept of choosing happiness is powerful and empowering, because it acknowledges that we are created to experience a fulness of joy, that joy is inextricably involved with our use of agency, and that other things besides happiness will come to us.

Whenever I think of choices, I think of one of my favorite Calvin and Hobbes cartoons. The first frame shows Calvin springing off the school bus. He dashes up the sidewalk exulting, "I'm home! I'm free! The rest of the day is all mine!" He sprints up the front steps grinning broadly and chortling, "Finally, some time to myself! Liberty, precious liberty! Ha, ha, ha!" The last frame of the cartoon shows him slouched in front of the television set, his eyes glazed.

Can we relate to that situation? Do we sometimes find ourselves rejoicing in our freedom but not quite sure what to do with it? Perhaps we're dealing with a universal trait of human nature here, because that's exactly the situation we read about in Deuteronomy when Moses explained the terms of the Lord's covenant to the assembled Israelites in Moab before they entered the promised land. He told them that obedience would bring the blessing of the Lord but disobedience would bring sorrow and lamentations. Then he summarized in the most persuasive way he could:

See, I have set before thee this day life and good, and death and evil;

In that I command thee this day to love the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his commandments and his statutes and his judgments, that thou mayest live and multiply: and the Lord thy God shall bless thee in the land whither thou goest to possess it.

But if thine heart turn away, so that thou wilt not hear, but shalt be drawn away, and worship other gods, and serve them;

I denounce unto you this day, that ye shall surely perish, and that ye shall not prolong your days upon the land, whither thou passest over Jordan to go to possess it.

I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live:

That thou mayest love the Lord thy God, and that thou mayest obey his voice, and that thou mayest cleave unto him: for he is thy life. (Deuteronomy 30:15-20)

We all know that Moses succeeded in his persuasion; the Israelites accepted the covenant. Sometimes we apologize for the Israelites. We say, "Yes, they accepted the covenant, but then they had a very difficult time living up to its provisions." Or, "Yes, the Lord made them his chosen people, but he had to keep calling them to repentance." I think the "but" doesn't belong in those sentences. We are all human. We all make mistakes. If we didn't, we wouldn't need a Savior and a Redeemer. We are all covenant people; we have all made promises to the Lord; and we all need help living up to those covenants and repenting to maintain our chosenness.

The gospel teaches us to strive for perfection, but we're not expected to reach perfection today or tomorrow. The reason I love the gospel is that it's a system for real people with real problems and real challenges and real conflicts and real joy.

Our happiness doesn't come because we have somehow managed to eliminate all problems, transgressions, and imperfections from our lives; our happiness comes to us mingled with those problems and imperfections. As Father Lehi observed, "It must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things" and "all things must needs be a compound in one." (2 Nephi 2:11.) The way to choose happiness is not to choose not to have problems. That system won't work. I once read a saying attributed to Agnes Repplier: "It is not easy to find happiness in ourselves, and it is not possible to find it elsewhere." I don't know anything about Agnes Repplier, besides her name, but I wish I did; I think she is a very wise woman.

I'd like to share two thoughts on how we can choose happiness. First, we must choose prayer, because it is the foundation of our spiritual lives. Without a strong relationship with Heavenly Father and Jesus, it is impossible for us to find true happiness. Second, we must choose kindness as the way in which we lead our lives—but without a spiritual foundation, we simply will not have the strength and will to sustain our desire to be kind.

Choose Prayer

I would like you to think of prayer as an intense, open communication with our Heavenly Father. Above all, it must be an honest communication. One of my favorite books is Children's Letters to God, simply because of the honesty of children's relationships to God. How long has it been since you asked questions like these: "Dear God: How did you know you were God? Charlene." Or here's a letter from a little boy named Tommy: "Dear God, I want to be just like you when I am your age. OK?" (Comp. Eric Marshall and Stuart Hample, enl. ed. [New York: Pocket Books, 1975], n.p.)

We need to have an ongoing conversation with God that shares our whole hearts with him. That means we need to be honest about what we love and what we don't, where we succeed and where we fail, what we're feeling and what we're thinking. One of the most human things about us is the strength and power of our feelings—and some of those feelings are very negative. We feel grief so intensely that we think our hearts will break. We are consumed by a rage so fiery that our whole world seems angry. We feel discouraged. We feel depressed. We aren't always honest, always kind, always faithful. We aren't uniformly cheerful, compassionate, and courageous. And usually it's during those very moments that we choose not to pray, because we think that God doesn't want to see that part of us, respond to such turbulent emotions, or accept us in our negative moments.

I think that the scriptures teach a far different message.

At the crucifixion, Mary, the mother of Jesus, stood below as the broken body of her son hung from the cross. . . . Mary Magdalene stood weeping at the tomb of Jesus, asking, "If you have carried him away, tell me where you have laid him." (John 20:15). . . . These women, stricken with deep sorrow, went to the place of most intense grief and set themselves in the midst of it. By their actions, they spoke silently to God from the depth of their pain. Their courage in facing their pain enabled them to be comforted by the presence of God. These women teach us an important truth—God can be . . . present to us [only] if are willing to face our pain. . . .

If we are to have an authentic relationship with God, we need to be honest about our pain, our anger and our confusion. If we do not share our pain with God, God cannot comfort us. At first we may feel inhibited in honestly expressing how we feel. Perhaps our religious training has taught us that we cannot be angry or honestly share how we feel with God. We are afraid that God might take offense at our anger, judge our faith-questioning, play down our grief. At times we choose to second-guess God instead of dealing with the pain of our vulnerability.

Certainly the one who created us is aware of our questioning and accepting of our emotions. (Sandra M. Flaherty, Woman, Why Do You Weep? Spirituality for Survivors of Childhood Sexual Abuse [New York/Mahwah, N.J.: Paulist Press, 1992], p. 54)

The woman who wrote those words knew exactly what she was talking about. She had been sexually abused by her father for many years during her childhood and then had repressed those negative experiences for many more years. During her thirties, she began having memory flashbacks that finally led to the reconstruction of her abuse. After working through those issues for seven years, she was still struggling with the step of forgiving her father. She acknowledged that, at that point, she could not forgive her father—that forgiveness was simply not in her heart, despite all of her anguished prayers and her hard work in therapy. She writes movingly:

At times my inability to forgive my father confronted me . . . on all levels; the most painful level was the spiritual. I believe that I am a Christian, and I know that one of the basic calls of Christianity is to reconciliation. There were times when I interrogated myself mercilessly, asking how I could stand before God when my heart was filled with hatred. It seemed so basic. I was not debating some theological concept or church teaching. This was Christianity at its core—"love one another."

This was a humbling experience for me. With all my theological training, ideals, and years in [church life], I couldn't forgive him. Even more humbling was the awareness I had in prayer one night. I prayed to God, "I can't do it! I can't forgive him, so you'll have to." Later I let go even further when I prayed, "I'm leaving all of this in your hands. His guilt and my inability to forgive—somehow you will have to take care of it and administer justice."

Then she adds this very important explanation:

I thought if I ever gave up trying to forgive that would prove my guilt. At least if I were trying, there was still a possibility, but [oddly enough] when I gave up and left it in God's hands, I felt free; it was no longer mine. Somehow I have discovered that there is wisdom in the saying, "Put it in God's hands."

I used to think of such statements as pious remarks that made clever bumper sticks but didn't mean much. I believed only passive people would really put it in God's hands. We passionate types wanted part of the action, part of the creating. I used to smile politely at such statements until that moment when there was nothing more that I could do than leave it in God's hands.

It seems so simple, almost too simple. But there are some things which are beyond us. At some point we have to let go and leave the unanswerable questions and conflicts to God. We leave these things in the hands of a God who understands forgiveness, but even more importantly a God who understands justice. (Ibid., pp. 138-39)

In other words, this woman chose happiness. She found peace and acceptance, even in the middle of turmoil and pain, because she was honest and open in her prayer life with our Father in Heaven. She denied nothing of what she was feeling. She didn't try to be sweet. She didn't try to be nice. She was honest, and the Lord could answer her prayers with what she could accept right then. I believe that someday she will be able to forgive if she continues her course of honesty.

When we think about commitment to prayer and perseverance in prayer, we often think of Daniel, who refused to cease praying to the true God morning, noon, and night, even when his king, seduced by false counselors, signed a proclamation that meant Daniel's death if he disobeyed it. You know the story of how Daniel persisted in prayer, was denounced by the false counselors, and was brought before the king, who finally realized the foolishness of his actions but still reluctantly ordered that Daniel be cast into the den of lions. You also remember how Daniel prayed, how the king also prayed all night and then hurried to the den of lions to call, with hope but not faith, for Daniel, and how Daniel answered out of the lions' den that he had been preserved by the power and love of his God, who had sent an angel to close the mouths of the lions.

I've often wondered what Daniel said in those prayers offered after the proclamation had been issued, when he knew that he was risking his life in praying. What did he talk with God about? I doubt very much that it was a routine recital about the weather and the success of the missionary program. No, I think Daniel expressed the feelings of his heart. And what were the petitions of his heart that ascended from that pit? I wish we knew what Daniel said and how he prayed at that time.

We do, however, have record of another prayer that Daniel offered later, after these alarming and dramatic adventures. He had received a vision that he did not completely understand and offered a prayer imploring the Lord's enlightenment. I'm very impressed by how hard he worked to understand the revelation he received and how willingly and graciously God worked to clarify his understanding. Let me read just a few sentences of his wise and humble prayer:

O my God, incline thine ear, and hear; open thine eyes, and behold our desolations, and the city which is called by thy name: for we do not present our supplications before thee for our righteousnesses, but for thy great mercies. (Daniel 9:18)

Do you understand what he was saying? He was saying, "We do not make requests of you because we are righteous, but because of your great mercy."

Then, he didn't just sit around and wait for an answer, but he continued "speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before the Lord." (Daniel 9:20.) While he was struggling thus in prayer, the Lord sent an angelic messenger to him. The messenger touched him to attract his attention. Daniel says, "And he informed me, and talked with me, and said, O Daniel, I am now come forth to give thee skill and understanding. . . . For thou art greatly beloved: therefore understand the matter, and consider the vision." (Daniel 9:20, 22-23.)

How would you like to have an angel touch you gently and say, "O Chieko (or O Maryanne, or O Harold), I am now come to give thee skill and understanding . . . for thou art greatly beloved: therefore understand the matter, and consider the vision."

We say that we believe that God "will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God." (Article of Faith 9.) Revelation to the Church will come through the prophet, but doesn't that article of faith make you ask questions? What are those great and important things? And who will he reveal them to? Could you be one of those who is struggling to "understand the matter, and consider the vision"? If you are, then you're one of those worthy to receive an angelic visitor. Furthermore, the promise of Joseph Smith to the Nauvoo Relief Society on 28 April 1844 was this: "Angels cannot be restrained from being your associates." (History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2d ed. rev., ed. B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 4:605.) Has this promise come true for you? Both Joseph Smith and Alma promise the ministration of angels to women. Yet such is the respect of our Heavenly Father for our agency that he will very rarely give us something for which we have not asked. What would happen, do you think, if we prayed for revelation, for knowledge, for the comfort of the ministration of angels?

But maybe there's another question rising up to loom over you. Something like this: "Oh, isn't it wrong to pray for such things, or even to think of such things? Aren't these things just for the prophets? Aren't we likely to go astray out of pride or ignorance?" Listen to the words of Moses, when Joshua heard that two men were prophesying in the camp of Israel and cried out to Moses to forbid them. Moses answered, "Would God that all the Lord's people were prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them!" (Numbers 11:29.) Is it possible that we're asking the wrong questions and limiting the operation of the Holy Ghost, cutting off the spiritual gifts that the Father wants to bestow upon us, and feeling fear rather than faith?

Here's what the Lord himself says:

For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord.

For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.

For as the rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater:

So shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.

For ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth with peace: the mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands. (Isaiah 55:8-12)

Have you ever heard the hills break into song or the trees clap their hands? To me, this scripture says that the Lord has miracles prepared for us, miracles that we simply can't imagine, marvels that we will never be able to figure out if we try to think of God's thoughts as just variations of our own thoughts.

I have spent a long time discussing prayer for one reason: our happiness in this life depends, I believe, on the quality of our relationship with our Heavenly Father and our Savior; and prayer is the fabric of our relationship with them. Reading the scriptures is thrilling and inspirational because it is the record made by individuals who knew the Savior and testified of his goodness—but it is their record, not your record. When we have an honest relationship with the Lord, then we know that he loves us and that we are precious in his sight. That knowledge is what gives us the strength to be sustained during our moments of adversity and trial. And that knowledge of being completely loved by the Savior and by our Father in Heaven is what gives us the desire, the ability, and the will to serve others. When we serve others, then we experience the kind of joy that comes directly from the Savior, who sees us treating others with the compassion and love that he would manifest if he were among us in the flesh.

Choose Kindness

If prayer is the foundation and fabric of our whole spiritual life, then kindness is the rest of the building we erect on that foundation and the pattern in the fabric. I think we already understand that. By saying "choose prayer" and then "choose kindness," I'm just putting into other words the Savior's phrasing of the two great commandments: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind," and "thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." (Matthew 22:37, 39.)

Mother Teresa understands these principles deeply. Of her understanding, someone wrote movingly, "The biggest disease today she says is not leprosy or tuberculosis, but rather the feeling of being unwanted, uncared for and deserted by everybody. The greatest evil is the lack of love and charity, the terrible indifference toward one's neighbour who lives at the roadside assaulted by exploitation, corruption, poverty, and disease." (In Malcolm Muggeridge, Something Beautiful for God: Mother Teresa of Calcutta [New York: Walker and Co./Phoenix Press, 1971; large print ed. 1984], p. 68.)

Kindness cannot be calculated, or it is not kindness. I love the Lord's admonition: "Cast thy bread upon the waters: for thou shalt find it after many days." (Ecclesiastes 11:1.) I think we all saw a wonderful example of this principle in the tour the Tabernacle Choir took to Israel. According to the report in the Ensign, part of the incredible success they enjoyed in that country came about because of the act of kindness of an unknown usher at the Tabernacle many years earlier:

Iain B. McKay, director of international media relations for Bonneville Communications, recognized the importance of making the music of the choir available to everyone. Radio and television broadcasts are an important source of music for those living in Israel and the surrounding area. Therefore, Iain's meeting in Jerusalem with Avi Hanani, head of music for the Israel Broadcasting Authority (the umbrella organization for Israeli radio and television, and the Jerusalem Symphony), was a very important event.

"Robert Cundick, Tabernacle organist emeritus, attended the meeting with me," says Brother McKay. "We walked in, and I handed my card to Mr. Hanani. When he saw Salt Lake City on the card he said, 'Let me tell you about Salt Lake City.'"

Mr. Hanani proceeded to tell them about his own experience at Temple Square thirty-two years earlier. During the summer, his family toured the western United States and stopped at Salt Lake City. A music student, sixteen-year-old Avi got up early the next morning to visit the Tabernacle and hear the Tabernacle Choir's broadcast of "Music and the Spoken Word." When he got there, all the doors were locked, but he could see through a window that the choir was rehearsing. Timidly, he began knocking on each door, and at about the fifth door an usher opened it. Avi simply said, "I am a music student from Jerusalem and I'd like to hear the choir." At that point, the usher could have told the young man to come back later. Instead, he invited him in. The rehearsal stopped, and Richard P. Condie, the conductor of the choir, shook hands with Avi, introduced him to the choir, and invited him to sit in one of the empty choir seats and listen. When the rehearsal ended, someone took Avi to the front row of the Tabernacle, where he sat next to Church officials during the broadcast.

"Mr. Hanani told me, with some emotion, that that was one of his most profound musical experiences as a young man," says Brother McKay. "And then Mr. Hanani asked, 'What can I do for you?' I said that Mayor Teddy Kollek had invited the Tabernacle Choir to come to Israel. Mr. Hanani replied, 'Well, we must have them on Israeli broadcasting.' And I said, 'That's what we're here to discuss.'" This meeting opened the door for the outstanding media support of the Tabernacle Choir's concerts in Israel. . . .

During the choir's tour, both the Berlioz Requiem and the a cappella concert performed in the Binyanei Ha'Ooma Convention Center in Jerusalem were broadcast live on the Israel Radio network. Both performances were also recorded by Israel Television for broadcast on a delayed basis. Oren Schindel, head of the director's department at Israel Television, supervised the television coverage. He said, "The word is that whatever Bonneville and the choir want, the answer is yes." (LaRene Gaunt, "One Voice," Ensign, Apr. 1993, p. 46)

Obviously that unknown usher did not know that the sixteen-year-old music student would one day be in a position to do the Church an immense favor. Nor did the conductor who invited young Mr. Hanani to sit with the choir during rehearsals and see that he had a hospitable place during the performance calculate this kindness, hoping that it would pay off later. They had the bread of kindness in their hands and they cast it on the water instead of hoarding it until it became stale or moldy. And as a result, thousands of Israelis rejoiced with the choir during its performances, and thousands more will hear the music as it is rebroadcast.

There's a Japanese proverb, "One kind word can warm three winter months." I learned this myself from a lovely and gracious woman, Motoko Yoshimizu Nara. Perhaps you remember reading an article in the Ensign about Fujiya Nara. Motoko was his wife; and though the article was primarily about him, I wish that the author had told us more about her. Perhaps she was harder to write about and understand because she was a shy woman, totally supportive of her husband, and retiring in the way of traditional Japanese women. His story was much more exciting—his conversion as a teenager in 1915, being ordained as the first native Japanese to become an elder, the long years of isolation when the mission was closed between 1924 and 1945, and his single-handed determination to keep the members in touch with each other and to await the official return of the Church.

I do not know much about Sister Nara's background. I met her for the first time in 1968 when Ed and I and our two sons flew to Tokyo from the United States to assume our duties in the newly organized Japan Okinawa Mission. I was forty-two years old, and she was in her late sixties, old enough to be my mother. She was shy and retiring in the way of traditional Japanese women, as I have said, but she was very hospitable, insisting that we come to her home to visit her, which is not usual in traditional Japanese culture.

She knew that we were new to this work, and that I was consumed by questions and doubts. With great tact and sensitivity, she gave me the information that I needed without making me feel inadequate for not already knowing it. She communicated great strength to me by repeating many times, "I am so grateful that you have come to Japan. How marvelous it is that you have come to help establish the Church in Japan and help the Japanese people. How wonderful it is that there will be this new mission. You are an answer to our prayers, and we will pray constantly for your success." She strengthened and steadied me. More than that, by her quiet cheerfulness and her unending generosity she modeled for me how a mission mother could nurture the members and missionaries, strengthening the present and building for the future.

This gracious, very capable woman unobtrusively noticed our needs and quietly met them. In my mind, she is one of the heroines of the Church. When she married Brother Nara, who was just a few weeks short of his twenty-second birthday, Sister Nara had not yet joined the Church, but she willingly participated in a Christian ceremony conducted by Hilton A. Robertson, the mission president. For both of them, the step into Christianity was a step away from the traditional culture of the nation. Theirs was the first Latter-day Saint marriage performed in Japan. The Japan Mission was closed just a few months later, and Sister Nara was not baptized until 1948, twenty-four years later.

During those intervening years, not yet a member, she opened her small apartment home for meetings of the Church and cheerfully welcomed all who came. She must have been frightened often during World War II when Brother Nara was traveling for his job with the railroad—frightened for him in such a vulnerable position and frightened for herself. In fact, their home was destroyed in an air raid in 1945, but they miraculously escaped without injury. The new mission president, Edward L. Clissold, baptized her in April 1948, formally welcoming her into the household of the faith where she had long since earned her place and had, in turn, extended a hospitable and welcoming hand to many, many other Japanese Saints. In many ways, she is the spiritual foremother of what is now a large number of Saints in Japan—and for much of that time, she was not even a member. (See Yukiko Konno, "Fujiya Nara: Twice a Pioneer," Ensign, Apr. 1993, pp. 31-33.)

I think of her when I read in Proverbs 31:26: "She openeth her mouth with wisdom; and in her tongue is the law of kindness."

Conclusion

We have discussed how happiness can come into our lives through our own choices. We cannot choose not to have problems, but we can choose to be happy by choosing a life that is "after the manner of happiness." (2 Nephi 5:27.) The foundation of that life is prayer to connect us closely to our Heavenly Father and the Savior, and the rest of the building is the kindly deeds we perform for others, following the Savior's example of serving our brothers and sisters.

Think for a moment of Mother Teresa, of the combination of prayer and kindness in her own life. We all know of her wonderful and loving work among the poor of the Calcutta slums. I have been very drawn to her life. I sense in her a focus and a strength that comes from any disciple who manifests the principles of Christian living in daily life. She says:

Joy is prayer—Joy is strength. Joy is love. Joy is a net of love by which you can catch souls. God loves a cheerful giver. She gives most who gives with joy. The best way to show our gratitude to God and the people is to accept everything with joy. A joyful heart is the normal result of a heart burning with love. Never let anything so fill you with sorrow as to make you forget the joy of Christ Risen.

We all long for heaven where God is, but we have it in our power to be in heaven with him right now—to be happy with him at this very moment. But being happy with him now means loving as he loves, helping as he helps, giving as he gives, serving as he serves, rescuing as he rescues, being with him twenty-four hours [a day], touching him in his distressing disguise [of poverty, of disease, of illness]. (Muggeridge, Something Beautiful for God, pp. 63-64)

One of my favorite scriptures about grace relates directly to the topic of choosing happiness in the gospel. Jacob, the brother of Nephi, tells his listeners that the Lord has not forgotten them, just because they have been led away from the main body of the house of Israel:

For behold, the Lord God has led away from time to time from the house of Israel, according to his will and pleasure. And now behold, the Lord remembereth all them who have been broken off, wherefore he remembereth us also.

Therefore, cheer up your hearts, and remember that ye are free to act for yourselves—to choose the way of everlasting death or the way of eternal life.

Wherefore, my beloved brethren [and sisters], reconcile yourselves to the will of God, . . . and remember, . . . that it is only in and through the grace of God that ye are saved.

Wherefore, may God raise you from death by the power of the resurrection, and also from everlasting death by the power of the atonement, that ye may be received into the eternal kingdom of God, that ye may praise him through grace divine. (2 Nephi 10:22-25)

May we accept the atonement of Jesus Christ. May we establish a close relationship with him, one that will mean that we will always remember him as he always remembers us. May we choose the happiness that comes from our faith in the Savior and a lifestyle of kindness to others, that we, with Nephi and the Saints of his day, may "praise [the Lord] through grace divine" in the presence of our Heavenly Father.
