Chieko N. Okazaki, Aloha! ( 1995)

Chapter 13

The Lord of Little Things

One Christmas I read a very thought-provoking article by Alden Thompson, a professor of Old Testament at Walla Walla College. He talked about the terrible reality that we must all face as we grow in the gospel: the phenomenon of the unanswered prayer. For example, Moses prayed for the privilege of entering the promised land to which he had so diligently, and over such a long period of time, led his people. God denied that request, but he gave him a small gift instead: a view of the promised land from a mountaintop. I've wondered about that story. Was Moses satisfied with the glimpse from Mount Pisgah? Did he see the terrible slaughter by which the Israelites would claim their promised land and was he glad not to see his people become violent and cruel? Or did he die unhappy and dissatisfied? Was he hurt? Did he wonder why God refused to reward him as he may have felt he so richly deserved? The scriptures give us no answers to any of those questions.

There are times in all of our lives when we pray desperately, ardently, and faithfully for something and then have to deal with the fact that it doesn't happen. Professor Thompson shares the story of a friend:

"From my childhood," he said, "I have many memories of answered prayers—prayers about lost baseballs or missing pocketknives. But I prayed my most urgent prayer of all when my parents began talking about divorce. I asked God not to let it happen. It happened anyway."

Quietly he added, "I gladly would have given back all those baseballs and pocketknives just to see my parents together."

[Was it] God's will that a marriage fail? Hardly.

[Was it] simply a lack of faith? That would be a cruel burden indeed for a heart already torn by grief. (Alden Thompson, "A God of Little Gifts," Signs of the Times, Dec. 1992, p. 29)

Or how about that third answer that we often hear in sermons: God knows what we need better than we do. He gives us what we need, rather than what we want. That is a very unsatisfying answer. Why does a boy "need" divorced parents? Why does he need the shattering of his home and the painful process of reconstituting those personal relationships a bit at a time over the next years, a process so difficult that even as an adult he still feels pain about it? Or take the situation of child sexual abuse. Why does a three-year-old or a six-year-old or a nine-year-old "need" to be raped by a stranger, by a baby-sitter, by a father? Even to ask the question shows that such an answer is not possible from the loving Father in Heaven. When my husband died, many people commented on the rich, righteous, loving life that Ed had lived. The implication was that Ed did not "need" to live longer, that he had accomplished his earthly mission. I knew they meant well, but it was no comfort to me, because I needed Ed. I still do. I always will.

Surely part of the healing process in any grief or loss must be to confront God directly with the fact of our need and the seeming lack of an answer. I would not presume to tell anyone else who is struggling with his or her own burden how that process should be working. But may I ask you to consider the possibility that our answer to such questions lies in learning to look, with the eyes of faith, for "little gifts"?

Professor Thompson talks about his own bewilderment at the "mismatch between my wish list and [God's] gift list" but says that being a father has taught him that sometimes he must stifle "the urge to intervene":

Small gestures and little gifts remind us of a love that longs to help but chooses not to. And all for the greater good. This concern explains the remarkable blend of heroic deliverances and disastrous martyrdoms found in Hebrews 11. All these people of faith wanted something more, and their desire accorded with God's promise, yet they "did not receive what was promised since God had provided something better" (Hebrews 11:39, 40, NRSV). (Ibid.)

That statement requires enormous faith from us. If God gives us a little gift instead of our heart's desire—even when we think it's something we deserve and have earned—can we accept that gift with a thankful heart and see it with the eyes of faith as something that we can rejoice in?

Mother's Day was not a particularly pleasant day for me this year because Ed wasn't there. As I sat through the first part of our sacrament meeting, I was so grateful that I'd been asked to speak in two other meetings and wouldn't have any more time just to sit and think about how alone I felt. I had to leave our meeting a little before it was over to address a group of mothers and daughters in one ward and then go on to a second ward to speak in sacrament meeting.

When I got home, my son Ken, who lives in Salt Lake City, was on the phone. "Hey, Mom, where did you go?" he asked plaintively. "I went to your sacrament meeting because I thought you might be feeling a little lonely, but you left early and disappeared for six hours!" He and I had a good laugh over that. I certainly appreciated his thoughtfulness, but I appreciated more the great blessing that I had been invited to do something for someone else that took my mind off my own troubles.

Seeing Our Little Gifts

Let's talk about the ability to see little gifts. The ability to see little gifts is a gift of attitude. For me, it's captured in that wonderful scripture that Jesus gave:

Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father.

But the very hairs of your head are all numbered.

Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrows. (Matthew 10:29-31)

We're all sparrows, neither very important nor irreplaceable in the world's eyes. But God knows each one of us. He sprinkles the crumbs for us to eat. He lets us perch on his fingers. His hands make a safe place for us to nestle down.

With a sparrow attitude, we don't need to beat our beaks against the bakery window. We can feast on crumbs on the window ledge. Each new beginning, each change in our situation, each demand that stretches us in some way is a gift in which we can find something to be thankful for.

Think, for example, of the difference in attitude between these letters written by two little boys. The first boy wrote: "Dear God, I didn't think orange went very good with purple until I saw the sunset you made on Tue. That was cool. Eugene." The second little boy wrote, "Dear God, I just got left back [a grade in school]. Thanks a lot. Raymond." (Children's Letters to God, comp. Eric Marshall and Stuart Hample, enl. ed. [New York: Pocket Books, 1975], n.p.)

We might think that Eugene's appreciation is just as natural as Raymond's disappointment, but my point is this: both of them are natural reactions. Because of the wonderful gift of agency, we get to choose which attitude will be our attitude. We get to choose the sparrow's part, because we choose the sparrow's trust in seeing little gifts.

Here's another example. When I was principal of Holly Hills Elementary School in Denver, I took three of my sixth-graders to compete in the district spelling bee. I knew they would be happy and excited as we went—with some nervousness and worry mixed in—but I wondered what the mood in the car would be when we returned. Would they be disappointed and sad if they didn't win? Would they be discouraged and upset? At day's end my question was answered, and I was so delighted with their maturity. As I feared, not one of the three made it into the finals, but the comments I heard were "I'm so glad I tried out," "We should be happy we made it to this point," and "I'm going to really try again next year." They talked excitedly about being able to choose between pizza and hamburgers for lunch, cheering for the contestants when they spelled the word correctly, feeling terrible with those who didn't spell it right. They participated fully in the experience and had a day to remember. They gave me a day I've never forgotten, either. They were sparrows, grateful for the little gifts. And because they had a sparrow's attitude, they had a wonderful day.

You know the old proverb: "What we must decide is how we are valuable rather than how valuable we are." We have to respect our own judgments, insights, and opinions and not give them up easily just because someone has a different opinion. "You can't always go by the opinions of the experts all the time," someone has observed. If you were to take an opinion poll about what to stuff a turkey with, what answer would you get from the turkey? A turkey would think the right stuffing consists of "grasshoppers, grit and worms." But if you're doing the stuffing, you get to choose bread crumbs, sage, and onions. (Jo Ann Larsen, "Become Your Own Hero by Boosting Self-Esteem," Deseret News, 21 Feb. 1993, S-11.)

How do sparrows stay cheerful? How do they learn to look for the little gifts? It's a great blessing that we can have only one thing in our minds at a time, so when we choose to concentrate on being cheerful—even if we're just fooling ourselves—it usually works for at least a minute or two. I hope we can retain our feeling of being connected to a Heavenly Father and to a Savior who are the Lords of little gifts. I hope we will develop the sparrow's attitude, so that we can see the little gifts that they give us, even when sometimes what we yearn for is a great gift and even when that gift is denied.

Be a Giver of Little Gifts

In addition to developing an attitude of seeing little gifts, we can find a source of immense power in assuring our own happiness by being the kind of person who is a giver of little gifts. Once again, I think that Jesus knows a great deal about being a Lord who gives little gifts, because he probably knew that proverb in Ecclesiastes 11:1: "Cast thy bread upon the waters: for thou shalt find it after many days." Does that make sense? When you don't have any bread to spare, is it reasonable and rational and sensible to cast it on the waters?

I think that in a universe where invisible light streams from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space this proverb makes perfect sense. In a universe where we are all connected through intangible bonds as fragile and as tough as spiderwebs, where something as real as love makes wheels go round and hearts beat and stop, then casting bread on the water makes a lot more sense than storing it on a shelf. Let me tell you some stories about bread-casting.

You may have read a wonderfully thoughtful and appreciative article about the Saints in South Africa in the Ensign some time ago. One of the families it talked about was that of Bishop Alan Hogben and his wife, Pauline, of the Sandton Ward in Johannesburg. Soon after they were baptized in 1970, they began talking about attending the temple. "In those days," Bishop Hogben said, "it meant going to London. That represented a financial challenge I felt was impossible to meet."

Nevertheless, they committed themselves to go by applying for their temple recommends. "When the mission president asked us when we planned to go," Bishop Hogben says, "I said that I thought it would be in two and a half years." That was in April 1972. The Hogbens were sealed only five months later, in September.

How on earth could such a thing happen? Well, the Hogbens did their part by setting up a very tight budget that left out all luxuries, but then the windows of heaven started to open for them. "There would come a knock on the door, and someone would bring us a little cake," he said. "For months, we would find a food parcel in the back seat of our car after church. Years later, we found that it came from a sister who knew she could never afford to go to the temple, but by helping us she felt she could participate vicariously in our temple experience."

One evening after sacrament meeting, another member absolutely flabbergasted them by giving them 200 rands. (Right now, the exchange rate is about three rands per dollar.) When the Hogbens asked him why, he said that a stranger had once given his family a gallon of gas when they were stalled. They'd tried to pay him, but he said, "No, just give someone else a gallon when they need it." So that's what this brother was doing.

But the story doesn't stop there. Bishop Hogben said that R200 had "contributed to at least four more couples going to the temple" because "when we returned from the temple, we gave that R200 to another couple, and they gave it to still another. To this day, we don't know how far that R200 went." Bread had floated to them upon the waters of their faith.

They had eaten of it gratefully and then cast their own bread upon the water. (R. Val Johnson: "South Africa: Land of Good Hope," Ensign, Feb. 1993, p. 38.)

It's the cat's cradle phenomenon—they were able to see, be grateful for, and to celebrate the connections among themselves as brothers and sisters. The elderly sister who slipped food into their backseat was with them in spirit in the temple. The families who received the 200 rands probably did not even know that elderly sister, but because they are part of the Hogbens' spiritual family, they are connected spiritually to her as well. Think of the immense amount of goodwill and love that their little gifts generated. Sisters and brothers, we can do the same thing. Our small gifts may seem insignificant to us, but they are not insignificant to the Lord of little gifts. Think of the great happiness and delight you give him with a kind word, a secret act of helpfulness, a loving gesture.

Let me share with you a personal story about bread I cast on the waters. On March 28, 1993, I spoke at a fireside at Ricks College. (See Chapter 15, "Seek Ye the Best.") I had thought and prayed a great deal about that address because I know that young people are learning so quickly that sometimes they learn things you don't intend, things that may not even be true—and one of the lessons I didn't want them to learn inadvertently is that the gospel is boring! I talked about the five smooth stones that David selected from the brook before he stepped across it and walked out to face Goliath, and I asked the students to consider what their giants were and what some important stones might be to have ready to put in their slings. It was the closing fireside to Ricks's Women's Week, but there were many young men in the audience, and one of them listened to me in the way that every speaker wants to be listened to.

I had a chance to meet him later in Canada where he was home with his family. Before a biregional women's conference that I was to address, I had the opportunity of attending that beautiful temple in Cardston and enjoying a peaceful and inspirational endowment session. When the prayer circle was forming, I waited quietly, thinking of the many times that Ed and I had made a couple in similar circles. And then to my surprise, a very young man, just nineteen or twenty, was leaning over me, whispering, "Sister Okazaki, would you like to come into the prayer circle with me?" I looked up at him with such surprise and delight and whispered, "Oh, thank you very much. I'd be delighted." So I had that experience again—the first time since the death of my husband more than a year before.

He escorted me back to my seat when the prayer was finished, and I gave him a warm hug. Did he have any idea what a great gift he had given me? In the celestial room, I looked until I found him, so that I could learn his name. His name was Brad Crane. I thanked him, but he thanked me over and over. He had heard me speak at Ricks, and then, just a week later, had heard me speak in general conference. Something had made a connection between the two of us so that he felt he could ask me to join him in the prayer circle. And there's no question about it—I have a connection to Brad that will last as long as I have a memory! And I feel connected to his parents, who met me the next day. I could see how proud they were of their fine son, and I shared those feelings as we talked for a few minutes. How grateful I am for the connections in our lives that brought us together—for whatever preparation I had made in giving my talk at Ricks that made it possible for Brad to hear what I was saying, for the training he had received in his family that made it possible for him to offer me such a loving service, and for the bread cast upon the waters of my calling that had returned to me with such love and sensitive generosity in a temple I had never seen before.

Sometimes we feel that the gifts we give are too small to be worth mentioning, and often we don't know the effect our own gifts have. Instead, remember that even a small gift is love made visible. Those little gifts make it easier for us to believe, even in sad or discouraged moments, that we really are upheld in the loving hands of a Father in Heaven who is mindful of every sparrow and who knows the currents of the waters that carry bread away from us and then bring it back again—sometimes with butter and jam on it!

Conclusion

I hope that we will not underestimate the little gifts—the little gifts that we receive from God and the little gifts that we can give each other. God prizes little things too. When Alma was passing on to his son Helaman the records that later became the Book of Mormon, he explained that those simple plates were very important, that they had the power to "go forth unto every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, that they shall know of the mysteries contained thereon." (Alma 37:4.) Now, of course, I don't know what Helaman was doing while Alma was explaining this, but it's just remotely possible that he rolled his eyes up and said, "Sure, Dad," because Alma continues in that patient tone of voice that all parents have to develop at some point in their career:

Now ye may suppose that this is foolishness in me; but behold I say unto you, that by small and simple things are great things brought to pass; and small means in many instances doth confound the wise.

And the Lord God doth work by means to bring about his great and eternal purposes; and by very small means the Lord doth confound the wise and bringeth about the salvation of many souls. (Alma 37:6-7)

And the Book of Mormon has literally gone forth to "every nation, kindred, tongue, and people," and they have learned "the mysteries contained thereon."

I love Nephi's description of the Liahona in the Book of Mormon, too, because it contains the same idea about the value of little things. Nephi said that the orb of the Liahona contained a

new writing, which was plain to be read, which did give us understanding concerning the ways of the Lord; and it was written and changed from time to time, according to the faith and diligence which we gave unto it. And thus we see that by small means the Lord can bring about great things. (1 Nephi 16:29)

And in our own day, the Lord told Joseph Smith:

Behold, I, the Lord, declare unto you, and my words are sure and shall not fail, that they shall obtain it.

But all things must come to pass in their time.

Wherefore, be not weary in well-doing, for ye are laying the foundation of a great work. And out of small things proceedeth that which is great. (D&C 64:31-33)

This may be a season of sorrow, difficulty, and trial for you. This may be a season when you feel that the demands upon you are great and your resources are few, when you feel as if you are a sparrow whom no one is noticing and as if you are stranded on a shore where no current is passing. Will you please remember that the Savior is the Lord of little things as well as of great things?

See with sparrow eyes—with the eyes of faith. I promise you that the little gifts are there: the sunsets that are orange and purple, the choice between hamburgers and pizza, the son who slips into your Mother's Day program. And the second important part is to practice bread-casting—to see what we ourselves can give to others. They may look very small to us—these gifts that we pass on—but they are not small to the Lord, and we have no way of knowing how far they may extend into the lives of others.

As Mother Teresa says, "We can do no great thing—only little things with great love." (Love: A Fruit Always in Season: Daily Meditations from the Words of Mother Teresa Calcutta, ed. Dorothy S. Hunt [San Francisco, Calif.: Ignatius Press, 1987], p. 121.) I pray that we may all have the experience of knowing that we are part of the great work of our loving Heavenly Father, that through us he is doing his great work of bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of every living being.
