Chieko N. Okazaki, Aloha! ( 1995)

Part 5: Pressing Forward

Chapter 14

Banzai to Bonsai: Some Thoughts for Young People

I want to teach you two Japanese words. The first one is banzai. It means, roughly, "hooray!" or "terrific!" The second Japanese word I want to teach you sounds a little bit like the first one. It's bonsai. It refers to the miniature trees that are such a historic art form in Japan.

Patience

Creating a bonsai requires great patience. The word in Japanese means "tray planting" or "tree in a pot." The art of creating miniature rock and plant gardens was developed twenty centuries ago in China by Buddhist monks who revered these tiny trees as symbols linking the divine to human nature. So at approximately the same time Christ was born in Palestine, the art of bonsai was developing in China, and it was introduced to Japan in the tenth or the eleventh century. Bonsai is a "living art form." That means it "is the painting which is never finished, the sculpture never quite complete." (Bernie Ward, "Perfect Proportions," Sky, Dec. 1992, p. 30.)

Common forms of bonsai are junipers, redwoods, pines, cypresses, maples, oaks, and apples. There are no special dwarf bonsai species or miniature species. They are all trees that would grow eighty or a hundred feet high in the forest. But "in bonsai, [they are] measured—and treasured in inches and centimeters." (Ibid.) These trees are enchanting, mysterious. Unless there is something next to them, you have to blink hard to see what proportions they really have.

The perfect bonsai is a perfect tree, just in a pot instead of in the earth. I read about a ponderosa pine that was selected for bonsai in 1964 from a parent tree more than six hundred years old. That little shoot carries all of the characteristics of a ponderosa pine in it. That's why as an exquisite bonsai it looks exactly like a ponderosa in miniature.

Like the bonsai trees, we are miniatures of something greater. We are children of God. We get to practice, in our own little pots and our own pocket gardens, all of the traits of our Heavenly Father: love, service, wisdom, justice, mercy, faith, knowledge, diligence . . . you name it. We can practice it. God is perfect in his galaxy. We can be perfect in our pots.

But of course, practice requires patience. I'm glad for the chance to practice in patience. The apostle Paul wrote to the Thessalonians that he remembered "your work of faith, and labour of love, and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God and our Father." (1 Thessalonians 1:3.) Patience is a hopeful characteristic. It means that there is something worth working for, worth enduring for.

God's patience with us means that we have all the time we need, as long as we're trying. We can start over as many times as we need. Life isn't a race. God isn't waiting at some mythical finishing line, tapping his foot, glancing at his stopwatch, and muttering, "Hey, get a move on, will you?" As long as we're moving in the direction of sainthood and are sincerely trying, he's happy. In fact, far from waiting at the finishing line, he's there, right beside us, encouraging us and sometimes even lifting us over the rough spots.

And we can be the same way with our lives. We can be patient with ourselves in accomplishing our goals. Let me tell you about Laurel Thatcher Ulrich. She's the third Latter-day Saint and the first Latter-day Saint woman ever to win the Pulitzer prize for history. She won it for her book, A Midwife's Tale: The Life of Martha Ballard. The Pulitzer prizes are awarded in various categories of popular writing, but Laurel also won the Bancroft Prize, which is the professional historians' award recognizing "outstanding scholarship. Not since 1963 had a woman won it." (Eugene England, "The Pulitzer: Laurel Thatcher Ulrich," This People, Summer 1991, p. 19.) She also won the Joan Kelly and John H. Dunning Prizes of the American Historical Association, which means that her historical colleagues in America looked at her book and at her work and decided it was simply the best that had been done. And then, as if this weren't enough, Laurel also won the megaprize, the prestigious MacArthur Award that brings with it a no-strings-attached prize of three hundred twenty thousand dollars to be used in any way she wants. Now, there's somebody who deserves at least three banzais.

Laurel is a wonderful example of patience. Her book was, as Paul said, a "labour of love" in the "patience of hope." Three decades ago, she was the student commencement speaker at her graduation from the University of Utah, and on 12 June 1992 she returned to the University of Utah to give the commencement address:

I am grateful that 32 years ago, I earned both a Phi Beta Kappa key and a safety pin, and that for the past twenty years I have been able to combine motherhood with "a practical life-work." My children's lives have been enriched by my scholarship, and my scholarship has been enriched by my life as a housewife and mother. When people ask me how I have done it, I usually say, "A little at a time." ("A Phi Beta Kappa Key and a Safety Pin," Exponent II, vol. 17, no. 1, p. 19)

Now, pay attention to that. Laurel smiled when she said it, and so did most of the women in the audience. I think it's great to do things a little at a time when you're giving your time to other things that are important to you, such as your family and your church responsibilities. Laurel repeatedly put these obligations first while pursuing an advanced degree, and she chose not to work outside the home while her children were young. Though she writes best in the early morning hours, she gave up that time for a number of years to teach early-morning seminary. Laurel says: "It took me five years to complete a one year M.A., nine to do a Ph.D., eight years to write Martha Ballard's book. Meanwhile Gael and I together raised our [five] children." (Ibid.)

Another reason Laurel is a good example of patience is that she discovered only gradually her great love, shifting from English to history and beginning to ask questions about the lives of colonial women. Sometimes when we are young, we dream many dreams, pursue many rainbows, and try many directions. Sometimes that's a necessary stage of experimentation until we discover what brightens our eyes and makes us wake up happy for each new day. Sometimes it's a frustrating stage when we look back on all the new directions we've tried and wonder if we've just been going around in a circle. Be patient with your own dreams when you discover that you have competing demands on your time that mean you need to do things a little at a time. Most women have the opportunity to marry and to raise children. For both young men and young women, partnership with a spouse and parenting of the children who come to bless your home will come first. I hope for each one of you that your marriage is happy and successful, that parenthood is deeply satisfying, and that you fall in love with your life's work, whether that involves paid employment or not.

If it seems to take a long time to discover it, or if you have more love than time to pursue it for a while, be patient. Think of Laurel's patient discovery of her own scholarly love. Think of how patiently she worked on the Martha Ballard project. She was willing to spend years on it, a little bit at a time. You can do the same.

Maren Mouritsen, assistant vice president and dean of student life at Brigham Young University, said these thrilling words during the opening session of one BYU Women's Conference: "To never brace for the supreme effort, to never be all you can be, is a personal tragedy. To never reach one's true stature or capacity is the misuse of our greatest resource, the human resource." ("There's a Horse in the House," BYU Today, July 1992, p. 42.)

Don't give up on your dreams. Instead, think of the bonsai, slowly growing year by year toward its perfect shape. Think of Laurel, finding room in her life for both the safety pin and the Phi Beta Kappa pin, and patiently working away at recovering the voice of Martha Ballard. Think of Heavenly Father's patience with us, and then be a little patient with yourself when you find yourself making a mistake. Be a little patient with yourself when you can't achieve all that you want to by Tuesday. Be a little patient with your parents and your brothers and sisters when you feel that you're the most misunderstood teenager in the entire western world. Have you seen that poster that reads: "Be patient. God isn't finished with me yet!" Let's hear it for patience. Banzai! Banzai! Banzai!

Discipline

Now let's look at the second characteristic of the bonsai—discipline. It takes a lot of effort to make a bonsai. There's no such thing as a "natural" bonsai. Each one has to be created by hand. The bonsai artist needs to prune the tree carefully, always visualizing the end product. It is potted and repotted many times. The branches are carefully wrapped and wired to create just enough tension to shape the tree so that it leans in a particular way. The roots are also pruned.

Yet all of this shaping does not reduce the tree's natural vitality. These trees are not limited or diminished. "A healthy bonsai is as vigorously alive as its full grown counterpart." (Ward, "Perfect Proportions," p. 30.) There are bonsai in the Japanese Imperial collection that are more than five hundred years old. That means these trees were alive and loved and growing toward their perfect shapes when Columbus was sailing across the Atlantic.

When a tree is being shaped, it's called being in training. We also are in training—in training for godhood. We talked earlier about how we can consider ourselves as little bonsai with the capacity for the perfection of its huge counterpart in the forest. We have the characteristics of God within us because we are his children.

Discipline isn't a word that occurs very often in the scriptures—only once, I think, and then not in the sense that we normally use it. Rather, the scriptural equivalent of the term is steadfastness or persistence. And the scriptures do have quite a bit to say about steadfastness. Nephi talked about steadfastness in Christ in three different places in almost the same words. In 2 Nephi 25:24, he said, "We . . . look forward with steadfastness unto Christ, until the law shall be fulfilled." In 2 Nephi 26:8, he said, "Behold, the righteous . . . hearken unto the words of the prophets, and . . . look forward unto Christ with steadfastness." And then there's this lovely scripture in 2 Nephi 31: "Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all [people]. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life." (2 Nephi 31:20.) In our own day, the Lord counseled us through Joseph Smith: "Wherefore, be not deceived, but continue in steadfastness" (D&C 49:23) and "For even yet the kingdom is yours, and shall be forever, if you fall not from your steadfastness. Even so. Amen" (D&C 82:24.)

Now, steadfastness is not a terribly glamorous or flashy quality. Discipline is very seldom dashing or romantic, even though the results can sometimes be very dramatic. People all over the world were cheering when Utah's Missy Marlow performed her gymnastic routines at the Olympics. But there weren't any cheering crowds during those hours and hours of preparation while she was learning exactly when to stiffen her wrists or exactly how to point a toe.

What in your life calls out for steadfastness? for consistency in purpose? for discipline in expecting high standards of yourself day in and day out? Maybe it's as mundane as sitting down with your homework every day after school, no matter what's going on outside—falling leaves, falling snow, or falling apple blossoms. Maybe it's getting up from the dinner table and taking your dishes to the sink, and then coming back to carry another load away from the table. Maybe it's as simple as speaking gently to your younger brothers and sisters instead of snarling at them, or speaking respectfully to your parents. Maybe it's as straightforward and uncomplicated as kneeling down for prayer morning and night. Daniel probably didn't think he was doing anything spectacular in the mere fact of his praying, but it became literally a death-defying act.

I want to make another point about discipline. We usually think about it as future-oriented. I imagine you hear a lot about preparation—preparing for a mission, preparing for college, preparing for marriage. Am I right? Well, I want you also to see discipline as something that's now-centered. Daniel wasn't praying every day thinking, "Oh boy, oh boy, am I ever going to stop those lions cold when I get thrown in the den five years from now." No, he was enjoying the relationship that he had with God right then, that day, that minute. You can participate in a family home evening discussion not because it's good training for debating an investigator into submission when you're on your mission but because it's fun to exchange ideas and to learn what other people are thinking.

It's great to have goals. It's terrific to plan on missions, young women as well as young men, to look forward to college or to taking up a vocation, to anticipate marriage and parenthood. Those are wonderful pictures that we paint of a future. By loving those pictures in advance, we make them come true for us. But living only for results and putting all of our energy into our goals sometimes means that we can miss living in the present.

As you may know, one of my favorite books is Children's Letters to God, very short, one-sentence letters written by grade-school children. Some of them have more sincerity, I think, than many of the longest prayers we hear. One of those letters is from a little girl who wrote, "Dear God, When you make a miracle everybody says it is great, but I can't even play a trick without getting it. Allison," and in another a little boy asks, "Dear God, What is the use of being good if nobody knows it? Mark." (Children's Letters to God, comp. Eric Marshall and Stuart Hample, enl. ed. [New York: Pocket Books, 1975], n.p.) In both of these letters, the children are dealing with the question of being results-centered.

What is the use of being good if nobody knows it? Well, in the first place, you know and I know that somebody does know it. You know it. God knows it. But even more important, those cumulative choices for good, made hour by hour and day piled on day, mean that you're becoming the kind of person who embodies and personifies goodness. But that's in the future. Most important of all is the right now, at that moment of being good when nobody knows it. Even if it causes you some social dissonance, you can have a sense of harmony with the goodness of the universe and the satisfaction of knowing who you are. You know that the difference between a miracle and a trick isn't just a matter of being caught.

Another point about discipline I want to stress is this. We usually think of discipline as the ability to say no. No to drugs. No to premarital sex. No to certain movies and TV shows. Part of that is true. But also think of discipline as the ability to say yes.

A friend gave me this little essay of encouragement by a writer named Jim Vandenberg. Think about the discipline required to follow its advice:

People can be unreasonable, illogical, and self-centered—but love them anyway.

Do good for others, and your motives will be suspect, but do it anyway.

Small [people] with big ideas can be discouraged by big [people] with small minds—but think big anyway.

Give the best you have to give and people will find fault—but give your best anyway.

What you spend years building may be destroyed overnight by well-meaning, thoughtless people, but build anyway.

If you are successful, you will win false friends and true adversaries, but succeed anyway.

The good you do today may be forgotten tomorrow but do good anyway. ("Anyway," column from unidentified publication, April 1991, n.p.; photocopy in my possession)

The bonsai represents the simplicity and beauty achieved by constant discipline. Think of holding an entire landscape in your hand! So let's hear it for discipline. Banzai! Banzai! Banzai!

Love

I read a wonderful statement by a bonsai artist speaking about a tree. He said: "Bonsai artists invest in their trees the way parents invest in their children's future. We see every inch of these trees. We take them out of their pots. We periodically wash and trim the roots. We bend and train the branches and do maintenance grooming. It's an intimate relationship—much more intimate than simply growing a geranium in a pot." (Ward, "Perfect Proportions," p. 38.) He also described the thrill of seeing the tiny tree do exactly what larger trees do. In the autumn, the tiny leaves of a deciduous tree turn yellow and fall to the ground. In spring, the bonsai apple tree turns pink and white with blossoms. In the fall its exquisite little apples turn scarlet.

This bonsai master compared the loving feelings of the artist for his or her tree to the love of a parent for a child. Most of you [seminary students] have quite properly decided to postpone becoming parents for a few years, but I believe that you already know quite a lot about love. I think probably most of you feel a great deal of love for your parents—at least most of the time. Take on trust my promise and your parents' promise that you'll learn about an even more wonderful love when you marry, and a love more wonderful still when you become parents. Have the patience and the discipline to love as God loves—without cheating, without self-indulgence.

Conclusion

Remember the lesson of the bonsai, a living creation, a miniature masterpiece that is practicing perfection. We, in the limited sphere called mortality, are the children of God, in training for godhood. In our earthenware pots and lava rocks, we can strive for the perfection of God in his glorious galaxy and heavenly courts.

Being perfect doesn't mean we've accomplished everything. It means we are making progress along the right path. Just like the bonsai artist, we can practice patience with our own growth, being gentle with ourselves as we try and fail and try again. We can lighten up on ourselves when we make mistakes, when our families can't read our lips, let alone our minds, and when everything around us seems dark. We can exercise the discipline of being steadfast, saying yes to good things as well as saying no to things not quite so good, and enjoying living in the present as well as preparing for the future. And third, we can see love in the pattern of our lives. In our comings together and our separatings, in the points of connection and in the spaces between us, let us recognize the love of Christ. I testify to you that our Heavenly Father has his hand upon you, that he knows you, that he loves you, that he is saying, "You are mine."
