Chieko N. Okazaki, Aloha! ( 1995)

Chapter 15

Seek Ye the Best

The concept "seek ye the best" echoes two powerful scriptures. The first is from Doctrine and Covenants 88, verse 118: "And as all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith." The second scripture is "Choose you this day whom ye will serve; . . . but as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord." (Joshua 24:15.)

I want to share some thoughts about seeking the best, and I want to do it with the example of a young person who can be a model for all of us. The person I'm thinking of is David, who was quite young at the time he slew the giant Goliath. The Bible (see 1 Samuel 17:1-51) tells us that the Philistines gathered their forces for war and Saul and the Israelites drew up their forces to meet them. The Philistines occupied one hill and the Israelites another, with a valley between them. A champion named Goliath, who was from Gath, came out of the Philistine camp. He was more than nine feet tall. He had a bronze helmet on his head and wore a coat of bronze armor weighing about one hundred twenty-five pounds; on his legs he wore greaves, and a javelin was slung on his back. His spear shaft was like a "weaver's beam"; its iron point weighed about thirty pounds. His shield bearer went ahead of him.

Goliath stood and shouted to the ranks of Israel, "Choose you a man for you, and let him come down to me. If he be able to fight with me, and kill me, then will we be your servants: but if I prevail against him, and kill him, then shall ye be our servants, and serve us." Then the Philistine said, "I defy the armies of Israel this day." On hearing the Philistine's words, Saul and all the Israelites were dismayed and terrified.

You can imagine how demoralizing it was to have had this spectacle and defiance going on for forty days, twice a day, by the time David arrived in camp with food for his brothers. He reached the camp just when the men were assembling in their battle lines—although we don't know whether it was the evening or the morning roll call. He left his supplies with the officer and ran to the battle lines, where he greeted his three brothers. Then Goliath shouted his usual defiance, and David heard it. When the Israelites ran from him in great fear, David asked, "Who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should defy the armies of the living God?"

David's words were overheard and reported to Saul, who sent for him. David said to Saul, "Let no [one's] heart fail because of him; thy servant will go and fight with this Philistine."

Saul replied, "Thou art not able to go against this Philistine to fight with him: for thou art but a youth, and he a man of war from his youth."

But David bore a strong testimony to him that he had defended his father's flocks from bears and lions and affirmed, "The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine."

Saul replied, "Go, and the Lord be with thee." Then Saul dressed David in his own armor, and David fastened on his sword. When he tried walking around, he said to Saul, "I cannot go with these; for I have not proved them." Then he removed Saul's armor, took his staff in his hand, chose five smooth stones from the stream, put them in his shepherd's bag, and, with his sling in his hand, approached the Philistine.

Goliath looked David over and "disdained him: for he was but a youth, and ruddy, and of a fair countenance. And the Philistine said unto David, Am I a dog, that thou comest to me with staves? And the Philistine cursed David by his gods. . . . Come to me, and I will give thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field.

"Then said David to the Philistine, Thou comest to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a shield: but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou hast defied.

"This day will the Lord deliver thee into mine hand; and I will smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and I will give the carcases of the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the air, and to the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel.

"And all this assembly shall know that the Lord saveth not with sword and spear: for the battle is the Lord's, and he will give you into our hands."

As the Philistine moved closer to attack, David ran to meet him. Reaching into his bag and taking out a stone, he slung it and struck the Philistine on the forehead. The stone sank into his forehead, and he fell to the ground.

"So David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a stone." Then David took Goliath's own sword and cut off his head.

Put yourself in David's place as he faces the giant, a giant that very possibly could vanquish him, a giant that has vanquished many other valiant fighters, and one that is awesomely equipped to do battle. In fact, everyone who knows about this giant communicates the dubious message, "Gee, that's a pretty big giant out there. Are you out of your mind?"

Put yourself in David's position, too, as he realizes that even the king's armor will be no protection and that he must face the giant with the weapons he already knows best. Think about David, kneeling at the stream that runs through the bottom of the valley where the two armies are drawn up. He knows his life might depend on the stones that he selects. What does he look for? I've never used a sling in my life, so I have to imagine this part with you, but I'm sure he considered size and weight and shape. What is the precise point of balance between a stone that is heavy enough to do the job and one that is so heavy he wouldn't be able to throw it properly? How big does the stone need to be? What shape fits best into his sling?

As David bent over the streambed, running his eye over the stones lying on its bottom, I'm sure he was concerned to choose the best. His life depended on his choice, after all.

Think about his seeking and his choosing. David selected five stones, not one. It took only one, as matters turned out, and he had no way of knowing whether he would have time to hurl more than one, but he had four more in his pouch, just in case.

Now, I'd like to apply this situation to all of us, as if we were David kneeling beside the streambed with Goliath lumbering down the hill toward him, bellowing insults and threats. You need to choose five smooth stones. Which ones will they be? Which ones will make an effective weapon against your giant?

Perhaps for you the giant is chronic ill health and your body itself is something of an enemy to you. Perhaps it is poverty, and you are engaged in hand-to-hand combat with a lack of financial resources as you struggle to gain your education. Perhaps it is being the only member of the Church in your family and dealing with the misunderstandings and pressures from loved ones who don't accept your decision. Perhaps it is loneliness and feelings of isolation. Perhaps it is struggling to heal from physical, emotional, or sexual abuse. Whatever your giant may be, it always brings with it severe doubts about your own ability to cope. There's nothing like a giant to make you feel little and scared.

You get to pick your stones yourself, because only you know your giant and only you know your sling; but my suggestions would be these five: First, get the very best education you can; second, choose the best mentors and models that you can; third, be patient as you work toward your goal; fourth, have faith in Christ; and fifth, have faith in yourself.

Choose the Best Education

First, obtain the very best education you can. The scriptures tell us to "seek learning even by study, and also by faith, as thou hast said . . . that they may grow up in thee, and receive a fulness of the Holy Ghost, and be organized according to thy laws, and be prepared to obtain every needful thing." (D&C 109:14-15.)

David may not have had an opportunity to learn mathematics and German, but he had the very best education possible for killing giants. He'd spent a lot of time in a hazardous environment containing such four-footed giants as bears and lions. He was very motivated to protect the helpless sheep against these giants. He thus brought a combination of love and skill to his encounter with Goliath. He knew which stones to select, because he had selected dozens and hundreds and thousands of stones and had spent hundreds of hours honing his education in how to use a sling before he ever encountered the giant. I don't think he would have been anywhere near as effective if he'd tried to fight in borrowed armor. He couldn't even move in it effectively. Nor would he have been anywhere near as effective if he'd been saying, "Oh yes, a sling. Now, which end do you hold? And where do you put the stone?" He'd been educated before he met his giant.

It's important to think, but it's also important to learn how to think. Let me illustrate with an example based on this seemingly innocent vegetable—the carrot. Did you know that carrots can be hazardous to your health? Just listen to these killer statistics:

Nearly all sick people have eaten carrots. Obviously, the effects are cumulative.

An estimated 99.9 percent of all people who die from cancer and ruptured appendix have eaten carrots.

Another 99.9 percent of people involved in auto accidents ate carrots within 60 days of the incident.

Some 93.1 percent of gang members come from homes where carrots were frequently served.

Among the people born in 1839 who later dined on carrots, there has been a 100 percent mortality rate.

Studies have shown, based on recent laboratory tests, that rats who were fed 500 pounds of carrots per day died within 3 weeks.

Many bunnies have been examined post-mortem and were found to have eaten carrots.

All surviving carrot eaters born between 1900 and 1910 have wrinkled skin, brittle bones, few if any of their own teeth, and failing eyesight.

Virtually all people who experience depression for at least 45 minutes a week are known to have eaten carrots sometime during their life. (Hope Healthletter 12 [January 1992]: 1)

Have I made my point? Every one of those statistics is factually accurate, but each one sets up a false cause and effect relationship. If you learn the facts but don't learn how to think about the facts, you'll be vulnerable to people who come along and try to scare you about carrots.

I've been a teacher for most of my adult life. There are few things I care about as passionately as I do about education. (The gospel happens to be one, and my family happens to be another—and in this I suspect I'm very much like you.) I have a great deal of faith in the process of education. As human beings, we have a joy and a delight in learning built into our very cells and bones because a hunger for knowledge is part of our spirits. We came from the premortal existence having chosen a path where choice was guaranteed and inescapable. We wanted to find out for ourselves, experience for ourselves, understand for ourselves, and give a free and loving allegiance to our Savior.

The path of fear, of conformity, and of safety was Satan's path, and we rejected that. To me that means that we can have a lot of confidence in our ability to make correct decisions as long as our hearts do not waver in their first allegiance to Christ. The college years are a wonderful time to explore many subjects, many approaches, many theories, and many philosophies. It's the right time to be asking yourself, "What do I really think about that? How do I really feel about this?"

Choose the Best Mentors and Models

If the first step is to get the best education we can, then the second is to choose the best mentors and models possible. We don't know who taught David to use a sling. Possibly it was his father. Possibly it was his older brothers. We also don't know who taught David his faith in the Lord. We know nothing of his mother, but perhaps she had something to do with it. One of my favorite passages from the Book of Mormon describes the importance of choosing good examples to follow. The Savior says:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel; and ye know the things that ye must do in my church; for the works which ye have seen me do that shall ye also do; for that which ye have seen me do even that shall ye do;

Therefore, if ye do these things blessed are ye, for ye shall be lifted up at the last day. (3 Nephi 27:21-22)

Who are your mentors? One of my most important models was a woman I encountered when I was an elementary-school student, living in my little village of Mahukona on the big island of Hawaii. The sixth-grade teacher in our little school was Yuriko Yamamoto Nishimoto. She was the first person I knew who had gone to college from our area and who had come back. She gave me the courage to dream the same dream about myself. Up to that point, I thought that only Caucasians could really become somebody; they were the people who ran our plantation. The Japanese and the Hawaiian people were the laborers. Even as a tiny child, I knew the difference between the so-called important people and my own family. Most of the other teachers were Caucasian. But Mrs. Nishimoto gave me an incentive. I could see myself in her.

I resolved to get an education and become a teacher myself. This resolve was tested when I was fifteen. The gasoline rationing imposed during World War II meant that the school buses could no longer take the high school students every day to Honomakau, ten or twelve miles away. My parents and I decided that I was old enough to leave home, go to Honomakau, and work as a maid for my room and board. I worked for Mr. and Mrs. Ehrlich, who both taught school in Kohala. They lived in a duplex, and in the other half of the duplex was Mrs. Nishimoto who, by then, was teaching business education at the high school.

Nearly all of the teachers were very kind to me, knew my circumstances, and took an interest in me. They all tried to help me as much as they could. But Mrs. Nishimoto was especially kind. I used to visit her often and share with her some of the ideas and questions I had that my mother was too far away to answer. She took me under her wing in a way. Once, when the question of the junior prom came up, Mrs. Nishimoto, who knew the circumstances of my family and my distance from my mother, said, "I'll make a formal for you." I was stunned at her generosity and kindness. She painstakingly sewed a beautiful green and lavender gown in a light, floating cotton with a bolero jacket. I can still see how it flared and remember how elegant I felt in it. It was so nice that I even took it to the university and used it there. Mrs. Nishimoto became my mentor not only in terms of my dream to get an education but also in terms of her kind and generous heart.

I remember reading a very interesting article by Greg Palmer called, "Everything I Really Needed to Know I Learned at Ricks College." I don't know Brother Palmer personally, but the biographical note identified him as a director of the LDS Foundation and a Book of Mormon teacher at Ricks College. He talked about many lessons he had learned at Ricks College, but one of his examples stood out. He describes Dr. Lyle Lowder, who taught him anatomy and physiology with impressive learning, and then says:

But what I remember most vividly was something else. With the vigor characteristic of this man who so deeply felt what he taught, he spoke to us of Guatemala and the deprivation and struggles he'd seen there. He spoke, too, of the sacrifices of some students to attend Ricks. Then came a completely appropriate tirade—don't waste paper hand towels. Use one, then flail your hands in the air a bit and use the evaporative process God set up on this earth! If we each would save just a few paper towels a day we would have enough money to enable Guatemalans to eat properly and be inoculated, or provide scholarships for those who couldn't afford school!

For fourteen years since then, I've walked down unnumbered halls with hands dripping.

The point is not just a few paper towels. It is about being wise with the resources God has given us, and it is about doing without frills so someone else can have necessities.

How I admire the recyclers, the gardeners, the patchers, the salvagers, those who don't walk on the grass, the wise stewards.

Our throwaway culture can be horrifying, where we without so much as a sideways glance so readily dispose of our shaving razors and beverage containers and last season's wardrobes.

And people. (This People, Fall 1992, pp. 31-33)

Dr. Lowder was a mentor for Greg Palmer. I suspect that Brother Palmer has become a mentor himself for many others. I encourage you to look for models, find them, and follow them. But remember that mentors and models have their limitations, too. This point is made in an irresistible way in one of my favorite books, in which children, probably in the second and third grade, described their perceptions of fathers. One little boy named Jeff wrote: "You go to a Father when your in a spot. He gives you some advice and sometimes it can get you into trouble. A father is a help at everything but there's one thing you have to be careful of he's not always wright." Another little boy named John wrote: "Ask father how to spell conscience and he says you look it up." (What Is a Father? Children's Responses, comp. Lee Parr McGrath and Joan Scobey [New York: Simon & Schuster, 1969], n.p.)

Remember that even mentors and models get to make mistakes, too. They're human, just as we are. And the best mentors and models are like John's father, even though John sounds a little crabby about it. They give you tools and teach you how to use them, and then they actually make you use them. The best mentors don't want groupies or disciples. They want a new generation of scholars and Christians who can stand on their own and become mentors to another generation.

So these are two of our stones: get the best education you can, and seek the best mentors and models you can.

Be Patient

The third stone is to be patient as you work toward your goal. Paul's epistle to the Hebrews cautions new Saints: "For ye have need of patience, that, after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise." (Hebrews 10:36.) We don't know whether David was a patient or an impatient person. If we look at his later life and read the story of Bathsheba, we suspect that there were moments when he had no patience at all. But we also need to look at the long years when King Saul was slowly going mad and became convinced that David was his enemy. David spent many years in the wilderness, hiding from Saul, refusing to attack him when provoked, and even refusing to take revenge on him when Saul was asleep and helpless in his presence. So David was probably like most of us. He had moments of impatience and self-indulgence, but he also had moments of great patience and forbearance. Perhaps part of that patience was learned out with the sheep on those long, slow, hot afternoons. Perhaps some of that patience came as he hurled stones at a mark, patiently improving a little bit each day until he could hit the target right in the middle.

What if David had become impatient with himself because he missed the target the first three times he tried? What if he had thrown down his sling and walked away in disgust? What if he had felt very depressed because he wasn't doing as well as he thought he should and refused to try any more? The bear and the lion would have enjoyed a much tastier meal than they got and Goliath would have had things his own way on the field of battle.

Jo Ann Larsen, a columnist in the Deseret News, encourages people to give themselves "lots of room to make mistakes. Gobs and gobs of room, as a matter of fact. Every one of the 5 billion people on this planet makes several mistakes a day, so don't make yourself a 'Special Case'—a person who can't make a mistake without penalty. Be like Thomas Edison who, when someone asked him why he persisted when he had already failed 9,000 times, replied, 'I haven't even failed once; nine thousand times I've learned what doesn't work.'" ("Become Your Own Hero by Boosting Self-Esteem," Deseret News, 21 Feb. 1993, S-11.)

Have Faith in Christ

The fourth stone with which to attack your giant is to have faith in Christ. In importance, this stone undoubtedly should come first. Remember how David expressed his astonishment at Goliath's challenge? He said, "Who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should defy the armies of the living God?" (1 Samuel 17:26; emphasis added.)

Is our God a living God? I just love a book I have of children's letters to God. One is from a little boy, probably in the first or second grade, who wrote, "Dear Mr. God, How do you feel about people who don't believe in you?" Then he added quickly, "Somebody else wants to know. A friend, Neil." (Children's Letters to God, comp. Eric Marshall and Stuart Hample, enl. ed. [New York: Pocket Books, 1975], n.p.)

Probably most of us have our moments of being like Neil. If these moments take us, like Neil, straight to God to ask him the question, then that's great. My parents were devout Buddhists, and I grew up knowing there was a supreme being. When I learned about Jesus and Heavenly Father, this greater faith and more perfect knowledge built on the foundation that my parents had established for me. I have never stopped being grateful for that strong foundation and for the greater knowledge that the gospel brought to me.

Faith in Christ is not a possession like a book or a lamp. It's a growing thing, like a plant, and we can build our faith in Christ until it is unshakable and unconquerable. Let me give you an example from the experience of a Frenchman named Jacques Lusseyran, who was blinded at age eight in a schoolyard accident. Even after surgery he still had absolutely no vision and no possibility of ever seeing with his eyes again. For a month or so he bumped into objects and struggled to remember, and then one day in a garden in a small town in France, he experienced a new way of seeing.

He realized that

in him there was a light, and that light was also in all of creation. He could see the light in trees, in people, in the ocean. . . .

Some time after he claimed this light, he began to wonder if it was just his imagination, so he closed his eyes as a physical ritual and tried not to see the light. He described himself as in a maelstrom—but even in that he was surrounded by light.

He became so skilled at his new way of seeing that during World War II he worked for the French Underground. The only man he interviewed about whom he had any doubts was later trusted by the underground organization. It was this man who betrayed the underground workers to the Nazis. Jacques spent four years in a concentration camp in Buchenwald.

[He testified of] the two truths of his life—that all human beings can see whether they have eyes or not because we all bear that light. Any joy we experience comes from within. . . . Each of us is endowed with light. . . . We can see with the vision of faith because deep inside us is placed God's own light. (Barbara Howard, "Faithful Discipleship," Saints Herald, Nov. 1991, p. 15)

Each one of us has the ability to develop faith in the Savior in the same way that Jacques Lusseyran developed his new way of seeing. The ability to believe is planted deep within us. We all have memories, deep below our consciousness, of being with Heavenly Father and Jesus in our premortal life. To the Saints of the latter days, Jesus made this wonderful promise: "Verily, thus saith the Lord: It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am; and that I am the true light that lighteth every man [and woman] that cometh into the world." (D&C 93:1-2.)

Have Faith in Yourself

There are four stones in our shepherd's bag so far, four stones that you have chosen with your best attention and with the best intentions so that they will be the best and you can have the best. They include getting the best education you can, choosing the best mentors and models you can, being patient, and having faith in the Savior. Now my suggestion for the fifth stone is to have faith in yourself. And I've saved it until last because it's a special favorite of mine.

Recently I came across a humorous saying on the topic of having faith in yourself. It was set up like the sign that a bank teller props up to say "Next window, please." This sign read: "I am lost. I have gone out to find myself. If I return before I get back, please ask me to wait." I laughed when I read it, because identity isn't something we can find by putting the rest of ourselves on hold. We find out what kind of a worker we are in the very process of working. We find out how well we love other people when we're actually engaged in loving them. We find out the quality of our faith in the process of exercising faith.

Have confidence in yourself. The other four stones are nothing without this one. And you can have confidence in yourself as a result of what the other four stones represent: your education gives you skills to use; your mentors have shown you what kind of person to be; you have gained self-discipline through patience and persistence; and your faith in the Savior is an unshakable foundation. You have taken upon you the name of Jesus. You are a Christian, and that is a position of immense power and equally immense responsibility.

This point was forcefully made by Kay Rizzo, an author who was exploring an illegal dump where people had thrown away old bed springs and tin cans. Under the debris, she saw a battered little teapot, covered with mud. She thought it was aluminum, at best, and took it home only because she had "a conscience perpetually time-warped between the great depression and the age of programmed obsolescence." She left it on a garage shelf for weeks until she needed something to put some apple blossoms in. So she brought the teapot inside and attacked it with steel wool and scouring powder. It was grimy with sludge, layered with "tarnish and corrosion." Then she turned it over and started working on the base.

As I scrubbed, I noticed an engraved design emerging. One by one, letters appeared beneath the persistence of my steel wool: Revere—Sterling Silver.

Horrified, I dropped the teapot into the sink.

Here was an antique teapot in sterling silver that she had been gouging away at with steel wool! Well, naturally, she took it to an antiques dealer, who confirmed that it had been created two hundred years earlier by the Revolutionary War hero and silversmith, Paul Revere. He appraised it at a fabulous sum. Then she took it to an expert who restored the silver gently, and then she carried it home to an honored place—and not as a vase for apple blossoms either. But this is the point she was making about her experience:

I saw a reflection of myself in that silver teapot. Regardless of my age or the extent of sin's corrosion, I bear the Saviour's signature.

. . . That signature means . . . a royal heritage. It means I have infinite worth. (Kay Rizzo, "Buried Treasure," Signs of the Times, Sept. 1992, p. 30)

My dear young brothers and sisters, you do too. I suspect that your parents and teachers have often told you, "Remember who you are." That's very good advice, but I also want you to remember whose you are. As the apostle Paul told the Corinthians, "Ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are God's." (1 Corinthians 6:20.)

Conclusion

We've talked about some important weapons in the fight against the giants in your life. First, try to get the very best education you can; second, choose the best mentors and models that you can; third, be patient as you work toward your goal; fourth, have faith in Christ; and fifth, have faith in yourself. Remember who you are, and remember whose you are. David remembered who he was—a shepherd boy. But he also remembered whose he was: he was a shepherd boy into whose hands the Lord had delivered the lion and the bear, and thus he could confidently state that the Lord would also deliver the giant Goliath to him. There's a powerful message in Deuteronomy for all of us, as we remember who and whose we are:

For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God: the Lord thy God hath chosen thee to be a special people unto himself, above all people that are upon the face of the earth.

The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were more in number than any people; for ye were the fewest of all people:

But because the Lord loved you, and because he would keep the oath which he had sworn unto your fathers, hath the Lord brought you out with a mighty hand, and redeemed you out of the house of the bondmen, from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt.

Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God, which keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love him and keep his commandments to a thousand generations. (Deuteronomy 7:6-9)

The Lord loves you. He has brought you out of your wildernesses with a mighty hand. He is faithful. He invites you to make covenants with him, and he keeps covenants with you. May you, like David the shepherd boy, be the beloved of the Lord and have your heart fixed always in faith upon the living God.
