King Benjamin was a righteous Nephite king. With the help of other righteous men, he brought peace to the land. W of M 1:10, 17–18

When King Benjamin became old, he wanted to talk to his people in the land of Zarahemla. He wanted to tell them that his son Mosiah would be the next king. Mosiah 1:9–10

The families came from all over the land and gathered near the temple. They placed their tents so that the doors faced the temple. Mosiah 2:1, 5–6

King Benjamin stood on a tower so that the Nephites could hear him speak. Mosiah 2:7, 9

He told his people that he had worked hard to support himself and to serve them. He said that the way to serve God is by serving one another. Mosiah 2:14, 17

King Benjamin told them to obey God’s commandments. He said that faithful people will be happy and will someday live with God. Mosiah 2:41

King Benjamin told his people that Jesus Christ would soon be born on the earth. His mother’s name would be Mary. Mosiah 3:5, 8

Jesus would work miracles. He would heal the sick and raise the dead. He would help the blind to see and the deaf to hear. Mosiah 3:6

King Benjamin said that Jesus would suffer and die for the sins of all people. All those who repent and have faith in Jesus will be forgiven. Mosiah 3:7, 11–12

King Benjamin told the Nephites that wicked men would beat Jesus. Then they would crucify him. Mosiah 3:9

He said that after three days Jesus would be resurrected. Mosiah 3:10

After King Benjamin’s talk, the Nephites fell to the ground. They were sorry for their sins and wanted to repent. Mosiah 4:1

The people had faith in Jesus Christ, and they prayed for forgiveness. Mosiah 4:2

The Holy Ghost filled their hearts. They knew that God had forgiven them and that he loved them. They felt peace and joy. Mosiah 4:3

King Benjamin told the people to believe in God. He wanted them to know that God created all things and that he is wise and powerful. Moses 4:4, 9

He told the people to be humble and to pray every day. King Benjamin wanted his people to always remember God and to be faithful. Mosiah 4:10–11

King Benjamin told the parents not to let their children fight and quarrel. Mosiah 4:14

He told them to teach their children to be obedient and to love and serve each other. Mosiah 4:15

He told the people to watch their thought, words, and actions. He said that they should be faithful and keep God’s commandments for the rest of their lives. Mosiah 4:30

King Benjamin asked them if they believed his words. They all said that they did and that the Spirit of the Lord had changed them. They no longer wanted to do evil. Mosiah 5:1–4

Then they all made a promise, or covenant, to keep God’s commandments. King Benjamin was pleased. Mosiah 5:5

King Benjamin consecrated his son Mosiah to be the new king. Three years later, King Benjamin died. Mosiah 6:3–5

Mosiah was a righteous king, as was his father. He worked hard and served his people. Mosiah 6:6–7
