What do you know? Do you know your name and where you live? Do you know how to recognize colors and shapes? Do you know how to count, do arithmetic, read, and spell? If you are older, do you know something about science, history, and literature?

All knowledge is important, but to know that the gospel of Jesus Christ is true is the most important truth that you can ever learn. This knowledge is called a testimony. A testimony is revealed through the Holy Ghost. “For because of my Spirit [ye] shall know that these things are true” (Ether 4:11).

Through the Holy Ghost, you can know that:

1.  Jesus Christ is Heavenly Father’s Son and our Savior.

2.  Joseph Smith was the prophet through whom God restored the gospel of Jesus Christ to the earth.

3.  The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the only true church.

4.  We are led by a living prophet today.

Everyone can gain a testimony, but it takes effort. First, you must really want to have one. Then you need to study the scriptures, obey the commandments, and pray in faith to know the truth. When you have done these things, the Holy Ghost gives you a calm, peaceful feeling in your mind and heart that tells you that the gospel is true.

When you have a testimony, you can testify with confidence as Job did: “I know that my redeemer liveth” (Job 19:25).

To help you remember the important parts of a testimony that are listed, cut the bottom parts of these pages from the magazine and mount them on heavy paper. Color the pictures, cut the strips on the dotted lines, and glue the ends together to make one long strip. Accordion fold on the lines between the pictures so that your picture will stand on its own. Read the scriptures listed, then put the picture strip in a place where you can see it often.

1. When I have a testimony, I know that:

2. Jesus Christ is Heavenly Father’s Son and our Savior. (See D&C 46:13.)

3. Joseph Smith was the prophet through whom God restored the gospel of Jesus Christ to the earth. (See D&C 21:1–3; D&C 135:3.)

4. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the only true church. (See D&C 1:30.)

5. We are led by a living prophet today. (See D&C 21:4–5.)

6. “This is the testimony … which we give of him: That he lives!

“For we saw him, … and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father” (D&C 76:22–23).

1.  Describe occasions when Heavenly Father acknowledged his Son, Jesus Christ. (See Matt. 17:1–5; Mark 1:9–11; 3 Ne. 11:1–7; JS—H 1:11–17.)

2.  Read testimonies from the concluding paragraphs of recent general conference addresses. (See conference report in January and July issues.) Let the children determine which elements of a testimony are included in each.

3.  Hide something in the room and tell the children to find it, but don’t tell them what they are looking for. Explain that it is easier to find something when you know what it is. It is easier to gain a testimony if you understand what it is. Discuss the four elements of a testimony that are listed.

4.  Let younger children draw pictures about things that they know or want to know, as part of their testimony. Have them act out what they must do to obtain a testimony.

5.  On separate pieces of paper, write each scripture listed on the bottom of the pictures. Then cut each paper into jigsaw puzzle pieces and have the older children put them together.
