Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith's First Vision: Confirming Evidences and Contemporary Accounts ( 1971)

Preface to First Edition

As Paul journeyed along the road to Damascus, he was suddenly surrounded by a brilliant light. After falling to the ground, he heard a voice saying, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?" Paul replied, "Who art thou, Lord?" And the Lord said, "I am Jesus whom thou persecutest." (Acts 9: 3-5.) This vision is recognized by Christians as the major turning point in the life of one of the world's most devout saints and energetic missionaries. Other revelations ensued in which truths were unfolded to this resolute leader. When Paul addressed the Galatians, he reminded these converts that the gospel which he preached was "not after man," for he neither received it of man nor was taught it by mortals, but learned the things of God through revelation from Jesus Christ. (Galatians 1: 11-12.)

Sacred history clearly testifies that God has periodically directed his children through prophets. The Lord instructed Adam, Noah, Abraham, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Peter, John, Paul, and many other influential spokesmen. Amos astutely observed: "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets." (Amos 3:7.)

Although we know of many instances in which God has appeared to man, there are only a few accounts preserved in our scriptures in which the Father and Son have manifest themselves simultaneously. When Jesus was baptized, witnesses heard the voice of his Father affirm, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased;" and the "Spirit of God" descended "like a dove" and landed upon the Savior. (Matt. 3:16-17.) When Peter, James, and John returned from a "high mountain" on which Jesus had been transfigured, they too heard a voice declare, "This is my beloved Son: hear him." (Luke 9:28-36.) And in the midst of being stoned, Stephen was filled with the Holy Ghost "and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God." (Acts 7: 55.)

While manifestations of both the Father and Son together have occurred in only a few known instances, and theophanies (appearances of God to man) have been limited to special occasions in the history of mankind, these dramatic events have taken place; and undoubtedly, many communications between God and man have not been recorded nor preserved. Ecclesiastical history, however, informs us of a series of apostasies and restorations. Men have continually perverted the truth, and God has perennially intervened to restore the gospel for the benefit of mankind.

In the latter days, one of the most important manifestations in the history of mankind occurred in the beautiful Genesee country of western New York. The dispensation of the fulness of times was inaugurated by both the Father and the Son appearing and speaking to a young man who was kneeling in prayer. Since Joseph Smith's First Vision was one of the most significant events in the history of mankind, it is fitting that the precursors to the Restoration and the immediate historical setting of this vision be examined. In a work entitled American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism, I described the preliminaries to the Restoration, outlining developments occurring from the time of the disruption of the Primitive Church through the Reformation to the colonization of the New World and the birth of the early Republic. After describing the national historical setting of Mormonism in that publication, I decided to focus my attention on conditions existing in western New York at the time of the First Vision. A description of the immediate historical setting of Mormonism is followed in the present work by a discussion of the recitals of the First Vision and an analysis of the concepts unfolded to the Prophet in 1820.

After learning of Joseph's remarkable experience in the sacred grove, some ask, What evidence exists that Joseph Smith was a prophet and received a visitation from the Father and Son? Since this question arises, this book concludes with a brief summary of several distinct evidences of the divine calling of Joseph Smith.
