Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith's First Vision: Confirming Evidences and Contemporary Accounts ( 1971)

Acknowledgments

This publication could not have been completed without the generous support of Dr. Truman G. Madsen, director of the Institute of Mormon Studies, and Dr. Lane Compton, director of the Research Division, of Brigham Young University. As a result of two grants, I was able to devote part of two summers in Palmyra and vicinity and along the East coast gathering information.

I am also indebted to many gracious and competent librarians, especially individuals working in the Brigham Young University Library; the LDS Church Historian's Office; the Palmyra Public Library; the American Baptist Historical Society; the Presbyterian Historical Society; the New York Public Library; the Library of Congress; the Rochester Public Library; the Ontario, Geneva, Rochester, and Pennsylvania historical societies; and the Wyoming Seminary located in Kingston, Pennsylvania. I further extend appreciation to Elder Howard W. Hunter, LDS Church Historian, and Earl Olson, Assistant Church Historian, for permission to include in this book Appendixes A-I, which are selections from some of the valuable manuscripts located in the Church Historian's Office; and to Don Perry of Shortsville, New York, for permission to reproduce from the files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press valuable information on the early history of the town of Manchester.

In the preparation of this book, I have been helped immeasurably by the counsel of a number of scholars. I am grateful to my father, Milton V. Backman, and to Dr. Richard L. Anderson for reading the manuscript and offering many perceptive suggestions throughout the writing of this work. I wish to thank Dr. Leonard J. Arrington and Dr. Charles D. Tate for their constructive criticisms of the portion of Chapter 3 which appeared in the Spring, 1969, issue of BYU Studies.

I further extend my gratitude to Dr. Paul R. Cheesman for locating many of the recitals of the First Vision which he included in his Master's thesis and for supplying me with many of the pictures included in this work. Other pictures were provided through the assistance of the LDS Church Information Services. Maps included in this work were prepared by Dr. Robert L. Layton.

A number of students enrolled at Brigham Young University helped in the research and typing, and to these individuals I extend my appreciation, especially to John and Susan Matthews, Mark Grover, Katherine A. Taylor, and Nora Sue Andersen.

To my wife, Kathleen, I owe a special debt of gratitude for sustaining me during a most busy period in life and, while raising three children, reading and re-reading the manuscript and offering many pertinent recommendations concerning content and style.
