Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith's First Vision: Confirming Evidences and Contemporary Accounts ( 1971)

Chapter 1

The Yankee Expansion

Early in the decade of the 1840's a unique community rapidly emerged in the American wilderness adjacent to the graceful banks of the Mississippi. This city, known as Nauvoo the beautiful, was a peaceful but temporary refuge for members of the most bitterly persecuted religious society in American history.

The leader of the denomination, which had been organized in 1830, was a tall, robust farm boy, named Joseph Smith. He was a man of remarkable ability, a religious leader, a city planner, mayor of the largest city in Illinois in the early 1840's, a commander of migrations, the highest ranking officer of the local militia, a presidential candidate, and a competent author and historian. One of the visitors to Nauvoo—Josiah Quincy, the mayor of Boston—recognized that Joseph Smith was directing a movement that would grow and expand and would continue to influence profoundly the lives of innumerable people. "It is by no means improbable," Quincy astutely observed,

that some future text-book, for the use of generations yet unborn, will contain a question something like this: What historical American of the nineteenth century has exerted the most powerful influence upon the destinies of his countrymen? And it is by no means impossible that the answer to the interrogatory may be thus written: Joseph Smith, the Mormon Prophet. [^1]

Today, Latter-day Saints living throughout the world solemnly testify that Joseph Smith was one of the greatest leaders of the ages and one of the most influential prophets to be guided by the hand of God

The event that initially directed Joseph Smith along a path leading to the rise of a powerful religious movement occurred in a beautiful, peaceful grove located in western New York.

Born in 1805, amidst the rugged mountains of Sharon, Windsor County, Vermont, Joseph Smith had grown up in Vermont and New Hampshire; and when he was about ten migrated with his family to Palmyra, New York. When the family arrived in this village, the region had already evolved from a primitive wilderness to a settled community. In fact, the rapidity of the settlement of western New York was one of the remarkable episodes in the history of America.

When the first battles of the American Revolution erupted, a priceless history, later published as the Book of Mormon, lay hidden in a virtually unknown wilderness. During the colonial era, Americans had pushed their frontiers to western Massachusetts and Connecticut; they had moved into western Pennsylvania and had expanded their civilization into the fertile Shenandoah Valley and the western sections of what is today the Carolinas. One area, however, which the colonists had not penetrated with success, was western New York. The only serious white penetrations into this region were the small settlements located near the banks of the Mohawk from Schnectady to a few miles east of the area called German Flats. [^2]

Western New York, Home of the Iroquois

One of the facts which hindered an expansion of the new American culture into the primitive New York wilderness, was the powerful confederation of Indians known as the Iroquois. About 1500 A.D. five tribes of the same linguistic stock united for the purpose of waging war and defending themselves from other Indians.

Fig. 1. New York, 1776, Indicating Indian Possessions and Areas Settled By Whites

Under the probable leadership of a Mohawk named Hiawatha, the Mohawks, the Oneidas, the Onondagas, the Cayugas, and the Senecas agreed to resolve their internal problems through arbitration; and when all were in harmony with a declaration of war, the warriors from all these tribes vowed to fight together against their enemy. The Mohawks, located between Utica and Albany, protected the eastern door of the confederation; and the Senecas, located west of Seneca Lake, were the guardians of the west; while the other three tribes protected the center of the Indian nation. About 1715, the Tuscaroras migrated from the Carolinas and joined the confederation, expanding the five nations to a confederation of six nations. [^3]

The Iroquois were among the most formidable Indian foes the European immigrants encountered. They not only established an effective organization, but they enjoyed a much higher standard of living than most North American Indians. The people lived in long bark-covered houses. The women cultivated the fields, raising maize, beans and squash; and they produced maple sugar. Meanwhile, the men were active as hunters, spending much time hunting deer. Although most of their clothes were made of deerskin, they produced some cloth and were skilled in the production of black pottery. [^4]

For several centuries, the Iroquois succeeded in protecting their lands from encroachment by other Indians and by the white settlers from the east. But during these years, their strength was gradually dissipated because of constant fighting with other Indians. Although the six nations succeeded in winning the wars against those of their race, they were unable to combat the devastating attack launched by the whites during the patriots' struggle for independence.

After the American Revolution erupted, the six nations could not agree concerning which power they should support. The confederation therefore remained neutral but, except for the Oneidas and some Tuscaroras who supported the Americans, most of the Iroquois united with the British. Since these warriors were a constant threat to the inhabitants of border settlements and occasionally terrorized and massacred frontiersmen, General George Washington ordered American troops to drive this enemy from their beloved lands. [^5]

Sullivan's Campaign Against the Indians

The devastating maneuver which opened the door for expansion by a maturing civilization occurred in 1779. Under the effective command of General John Sullivan, Continental troops plunged into the heart of the Seneca territory, destroying fields, orchards, shelters, and harvested corn. Burning about forty villages, this army drove most of the Senecas to the Niagara country, and transformed an Indian paradise into a desolate wilderness. [^6]

Fig. 2. General John Sullivan'S Route Into Western New York

Sullivan's men not only crushed the power of the Indian confederation, but the troops advertised their adventures with spirited enthusiasm. They informed Americans that western New York was a beckoning paradise, containing an abundance of fertile land, scenic lakes, running streams, extensive forests, and wild fruits and game. After learning that choice inexpensive land was available to industrious pioneers, many veterans returned home to a postwar depression and eventually succumbed to the lure of the west.

The Hartford Convention, 1786

In addition to subduing the Indians and publicizing the fact that choice land was available in the Genesee country, it was necessary to resolve the problem of ownership before conditions could be favorable for the rapid colonization of western New York. This disputed territory was not only considered the land of the Iroquois but was regarded as the property of New York and Massachusetts, and one section was also claimed by Connecticut. Early charters of Massachusetts and Connecticut provided that their boundaries were to extend from the Atlantic to the Pacific and were to include all lands uninhabited by Christians. A portion of this same country had also been conveyed by the king to the Duke of York. During the American Revolution, the states examined their conflicting claims, agreeing to surrender title to their western lands. After the initial secessions had been made, a vast region in western New York remained a source of contention. An agreement concerning most of this disputed land was finally adopted at an assembly held in Hartford, Connecticut, in 1786. At this convention, Massachusetts was granted the right of purchasing from the Indians and selling 6,000,000 acres lying east of the preemption line, a line running north and south from the Pennsylvania border to Lake Ontario and located immediately east of Geneva, New York. Massachusetts also secured the right of preemption to 230,000 acres located along the Susquehanna River in Broome and Tioga counties. In return, New York was granted all rights of sovereignty and jurisdiction over this territory, including the power of government. Eventually, Connecticut relinquished her title to southwestern New York, but secured the right to sell land in northeastern Ohio, known as Connecticut's Western Reserve. [^7]

Phelps and Gorham's Purchase

Fearful that the compromise adopted at Hartford might not be enduring and might be plagued with heavy debts, politicians in Massachusetts decided not to complicate matters in New York by holding her western lands for speculative purposes and agreed to dispose immediately of this property. The most enticing offer of purchase was submitted by Oliver Phelps and Nathaniel Gorham, two wealthy speculators who had combined forces. Born in Windsor, Connecticut, Phelps had settled in Massachusetts shortly before the Revolution and had accumulated a fortune through trading and merchandising. While serving in the army during the Revolution, he had become acquainted with several officers who participated in Sullivan's campaign and had been favorably impressed with their descriptions of the beautiful Genesee country.

Fig. 3. New York, 1786, Showing the Phelps and Gorham's Purchase

Gorham had also acquired wealth by his own initiative and had been a participant in framing the Constitution of the United States. These bold entrepreneurs secured from Massachusetts, in 1788, the vast section of western New York for what amounted to less than three cents an acre.

The purchase price of the land west of the preemption line was low, but Phelps and Gorham were to pay the money to the state during a three-year period. Seeking about fifty associates to assist them, the speculators sold large sections of land to other financiers. They also had to persuade the Indians to sell or relinquish all claims to lands stretching from the preemption line to the Genesee River. With the help of others, Phelps accomplished the mission with the Indians at a council held at Buffalo Creek in the summer of 1788. The approximate 2,600,000 acres ceded by the Indians became known as Phelps and Gorham's Purchase. The two businessmen were unable, however, to meet their original financial obligations to Massachusetts; and although the period for payment was extended, Phelps and Gorham retained only one-third of their original purchase. Robert Morris, the financier of the Revolution, expanded his business interests, secured the region west of the Genesee River, and promoted the colonization of that country. [^8]

Jemima Wilkinson, the Public Universal Friend

While Phelps and Gorham were securing title to choice land in the Genesee country, the first group of pioneers established their homes in the region which had belonged to the Senecas. These settlers were devout disciples of Jemima Wilkinson, the first native-born American to organize a religious society in the New World. After asserting that during a serious illness she died and that her body was repossessed by another spirit, this former Quaker commenced her ministry in Rhode Island in 1776. She was no longer Jemima Wilkinson, she declared, but the Public Universal Friend. She had been commissiond by God to preach repentance to "a lost and guilty, perishing, dying World, to flee from the wrath which is to come; and to give an Invitation to the lost Sheep of the house of Israel to come home." After announcing to others that she had been transformed during a miraculous vision, the Universal Friend was condemned and maligned by innumerable critics. In the midst of growing opposition and oppression, this controversial woman decided to seek an asylum from the unregenerate world and establish a new Jerusalem in the wilderness of New York.

In the spring of 1788, an advance party of Universal Friends, primarily New Englanders, located a site for the religious community about a mile west of Seneca Lake (southwest of Fayette). Two years later, the Universal Friend assumed direction of the Jerusalem community. There she remained until her death on July 1, 1819; whereupon the small society, which had already begun to wither, slowly disintegrated. [^9]

Migration into the Hill Cumorah Country

In order to stimulate colonization of western New York, Phelps sent an expedition into the region in 1788, and a base of operations was established near the north shore of Lake Canandaigua. Surveyors hastened into this region, dividing the land into townships (six-mile squares) according to the pattern employed by the federal government in its division of the Northwest Territory. During the summer and fall of 1788, Phelps also hired workmen to construct a crude road from Geneva to Canandaigua, the first to be blazed in that region. Immediately after this road was completed, an extension was built northward from Canandaigua into the wilderness where the town of Manchester is now located. [^10]Consequently, the path had been opened for the Yankee invasion of the Genesee country.

Ontario County, a Mother of Counties

Shortly after the convention at Hartford, the New York legislature anticipated the imminent settlement of western New York and in January, 1789, created a new county from Montgomery which was named Ontario after the great lake which originally formed its northern boundary. This county embraced not only the territory within its current boundaries, but also included the land located in Steuben (a county formed in 1796), Genesee (created in 1802), parts of Monroe and Livingston (formed in 1821), Yates and part of Wayne (the last two counties being formed in 1823). Eventually, Ontario County was divided into towns. In 1790, there were four towns in this extensive area; and in 1800, nineteen. One of the towns created between 1790 and 1800 was named Palmyra and was originally an area twelve miles by six miles. In the year that Wayne County was formed, the town of Palmyra was divided into two townships, the western half being named Macedon and the eastern section (an area six miles square) retaining the name of Palmyra.

Located immediately south of the town of Palmyra was another geographical unit created in the 1790's named Farmington Town, which originally consisted of two townships. In 1821, Farmington was divided. The west portion retained the name Farmington; the eastern section was named Burt, but was renamed Manchester Town (and is also called the township of Manchester) in 1822. At the time of the First Vision, the Smith family was living in the town of Farmington, but the area where they lived was first renamed Burt and then Manchester.

After clusters of homes and businesses emerged within the towns, villages were named and later incorporated, and many of these communities adopted the name of the town or township in which the settlements were located. [^11]

Fig. 4. Towns of Palmyra and Farmington, 1820

Probably no one spent the winter of 1788-1789 in Canandaigua, but early in 1789 permanent settlers migrated west to Canandaigua village where Phelps and Gorham established one of the first land offices in the United States. There the pioneers erected homes, stores and taverns, farmed the land, and prepared for a massive migration. [^12]

Initial Settlement of Farmington

In the year that the first permanent colonists located immediately west of Lake Canandaigua, the original Yankee immigrants established their homes in the region northwest of this beautiful lake. After purchasing the first property sold directly to settlers by Phelps and Gorham, a group of Quakers from Adams, Berkshire County, emigrated to the Genesee country. During the summer of 1789, Nathan Comstock, his two sons Otis and Darius, and Robert Hathaway erected a log cabin, cleared four acres of ground and sowed wheat in the northern section of the town of Farmington, a few miles west of the Joseph Smith farm. Another pioneer who migrated to Farmington that year was Nathan Aldrich.

All these men except Otis Comstock returned to Massachusetts for the winter. Otis was left in Farmington to care for the stock, but was rejoined by his comrades the ensuing year. By the end of 1790 there were about twenty-eight settlers in Farmington, many being members of the Society of Friends, who had emigrated from Berkshire County. [^13]

Two other adventurers who explored and farmed the region north of Lake Canandaigua in 1789 were Ezra and Stephen Phelps. Accompanied by a few comrades, these brothers left Westfield, Massachusetts, in June, 1789, and settled near one of the highest drumlins located in the Erie-Ontario lowland, later known as "Hill Cumorah" or the "Mormon Hill." After burning brush and clearing land, these industrious men planted corn and ascertained that the area was fertile and productive. A few years after returning to Massachusetts, they again traveled west and settled permanently in the Finger Lake country. [^14]

FIG. 5 THE HILL CUMORAH The earliest known artist's sketch of the Hill Cumorah, published in J.W. Barber and Henry Howe's Historical Collections of the State of New York (1841)

Meanwhile, "Bob" Robinson located his home in the land which had been cultivated by the Phelps brothers, and in 1790 purchased as part of his farm the property which included the Hill Cumorah. [^15]

Colonization of Palmyra

While Farmington was being settled, other pioneers commenced clearing the heavily wooded region north of this town. Township No. 12, range 2, containing 21,120 acres, was purchased by John Swift and Colonel John Jenkins for Â£ 1,320, or about one shilling an acre. During the summer of 1789, these land speculators worked long hours surveying their property; and the subsequent year, John Swift moved into the region with his family, building the first log home located within the present limits of Palmyra village. In the year that Swift located his home in Palmyra, Webb Harwood and his wife (other pioneers from Adams, Berkshire, Massachusetts) and three of theft friends—Noah Porter, Jonathan Warner, and Bennet Bates—settled in this same town. Two other settlers who arrived in Palmyra in 1790 were David White and Lemuel Spear, Spear being a veteran from Massachusetts who arrived with his family of eleven children. Originally, the pioneer settlement founded by John Swift was called "Swift's Landing" or "Swift Town," but soon was changed to "Toland," and in 1796 was renamed "Palmyra." [^16]

Another early settler of Palmyra was Nathan Harris, who was accompanied by his wife Rhoda Lapham Harris. Nathan migrated from Rhode Island in 1793 and in February, 1794, purchased six hundred acres of land from John Swift for $300 in New York currency. After securing this land, he built a log home on the north end of Wintergreen Hill, one of the few hills in that area which at the time was barren of timber. Occasionally neglecting his farm, Nathan spent much of his time fishing and hunting deer and wild ducks. This rugged outdoorsman gained the reputation of being one of the most skilled hunters and fishermen of the area. "Uncle Nathan" was not only called "Trout Harris" but was often referred to as the Nimrod of the settlement; and according to Palmyra folklore, Nathan shot the last wolf killed in that vicinity.

Part of the land which Nathan purchased was deeded to his son, Martin, who mortgaged his farm on August 5, 1829, for $3,000 to E. B. Grandin to pay for the printing of the Book of Mormon. This money was to be paid to Grandin, the printer of the sacred record, within eighteen months. In case of default, Grandin was authorized to sell, at public auction, sufficient land to pay the accrued debt. Partly due to the boycott of the translated record by the people of Palmyra, Joseph Smith was unable to raise sufficient funds to pay Grandin within the eighteen-month period specified by the contract. Martin Harris, therefore, again aided the Prophet by selling 151 acres of his farm to Thomas Lakey, at a private sale on April 1, 1831. This land was sold for approximately $3,000, which was undoubtedly paid to Grandin. [^17]

The extreme eastern section of the town of Palmyra was originally colonized by settlers from Southampton, Long Island. In 1788, eleven bold adventurers agreed to relocate theft homes somewhere in the American west. After three years of searching, two explorers from this group wandered into a heavily forested valley containing rich soil and a meandering stream. That same year these men convinced their partners of the advantages of this site, and part of the group—consisting of Elias Reeves, William Hopkins, Joel Foster, Abraham Foster, and Luther Sanford—purchased the land from John Swift. The following year these Long Island settlers migrated to East Palmyra with their families and commenced building a society where that village stands today. [^18]

While frontiersmen were erecting log homes in East Palmyra, the west portion of Palmyra Town (the area that became the township of Macedon in January, 1823) was settled primarily by immigrants from Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Rhode Island. A number of these pioneers were Quakers who worshipped for many years with the members of the Society of Friends living in the northern part of Farmington. Eventually church buildings and small businesses emerged near the heart of this town, and the community was named Macedon Center. [^19]

Settlement of Manchester

Early in the decade of the 1790's, frontiersmen also began clearing the forests where the communities of Manchester and Shortsville are now located. After purchasing land from Phelps and Gorham, Lot 19 Township 12, Joab Gillet, accompanied by his wife, three sons, and six daughters, erected the first log home in Manchester village in 1793. Settlements southwest of this village commenced three years earlier when Sharon Booth located his home in a hamlet named Shortsville. After initiating the colonization of that area, Booth moved to Manchester in 1794, and there became one of the influential leaders in organizing the Methodists living south of the Hill Cumorah. Stephen Phelps also was one of the earlier settlers of Manchester, but after living there for a few years moved to Palmyra where he opened a tavern. [^20]

The eastern section of Manchester commenced in 1800, when John Shekell left his home in Maryland and settled east of Shortsville in a village that was named Sulphur Springs and then renamed Clifton Springs. Although Shekell was a southerner who transported the first slaves into the area, the three blacks were eventually freed. Earlier the New York legislature had passed a law providing for the gradual emancipation of slaves, and since a strong sentiment existed in that state against slavery, and the Finger Lake country was settled primarily by immigrants from the North, few slaves and few Negroes lived in the area where the Smiths settled in the early nineteenth century. [^21]

Methods of Travel by Yankee Invaders

Many of the earliest immigrants to the Genesee country journeyed into the wilderness by boat. Ezra Phelps and his companions traveled from Massachusetts to Manchester by sailing along the Mohawk River, transported their boat to Wood Creek, and followed that stream to the largest lake located within the borders of New York, Lake Oneida. After traversing this body of water, the men proceeded down the outlet to the Seneca River and sailed down this river to Geneva. Then they walked to Canandaigua and continued northward to the Hill Cumorah. [^22]

The Long Island settlers of East Palmyra also employed the network of the river highways to transport themselves and their belongings to their new home in the west. During the winter of 1791-1792, these craftsmen built a two-and-a-half-ton sailboat and on April 1, 1792, proceeded down an inlet to the Atlantic. After sailing up the Hudson, the party of six men and two women entered the Mohawk River and continued to Albany. After arriving at Albany, they transported their vessel sixteen miles overland to Schenectady. Then they continued along the Mohawk to Fort Stanwix, now Rome.

Fig. 6. Main Roads and River Highways Leading into Western New York about 1800

For the second time the Long Island settlers were forced to hoist their vessel from the water. After being placed on rollers made of logs, their boat was pushed almost a mile to Wood Creek. Upon their arrival at this stream, the immigrants met five other groups migrating west, three traveling to Geneva, one to Palmyra, and the other to Cayuga. Accompanied by a parade of boats, the adventurers continued by sailing down the creek to Lake Oneida. In two-and-a-half hours they sailed across the twenty-one-mile lake. They traveled down the Oneida Outlet, followed the Clyde River to Mud Creek, and continued along this stream. After traveling for weeks in an open boat, being exposed to heavy rains and chilling winds, they arrived at East Palmyra where they had selected home sites the preceding year. Since they were welcomed by a turbulent, pelting storm, they overturned their boat and used this vessel as a temporary shelter until they succeeded in building log homes. [^23]

While some immigrants were traveling west by boat, others packed corn, wheat, beans, cooking utensils, clothes, and additional supplies in covered wagons, and had their goods pulled across the primitive roads by oxen, or sometimes by horses. Some of the early settlers also drove cattle and horses across the rolling hills, and took geese, ducks, and chickens west by fastening them to their wagons. [^24]

Other pioneers of this era penetrated the frontier without the aid of boats or wagons and walked two hundred miles or more carrying on their backs or in theft arms the possessions which they considered most vital for the inauguration of a new life. When the Comstocks and Robert Hathaway traveled to Farmington in 1789, some proceeded part way by boat, one rode a horse, and the others walked, driving cattle before them. Since a calf was born during the journey, Otis Comstock carried the young, struggling animal miles across the Genesee plains. The following year, some of these same Quakers, accompanied by their families, traveled for more than a month in drenching rains as they carved their own paths into the New York woodlands. [^25]

During the winter, when a mantle of snow covered the ground, many immigrants traveled by sleigh, but as the snow thawed and the land became bogs of mud, the pioneers sometimes exchanged their sleighs for wagons and plodded the remainder of the way west through ridges of spongy soil.

Migration of Smith Family from Vermont to New York

During the first two decades of the nineteenth century, methods of transportation did not change appreciably as far as most immigrants were concerned; and the Smith family, who in 1816 or thereabouts followed the early wave of immigrants, experienced the same kind of trials and inconveniences that many other pioneers endured. Joseph Smith, Sr., had preceded the other members of the family west, had located a new residence in Palmyra, and had hired Caleb Howard to assist his wife and children in the move from Norwich, Vermont. [^26]Howard, however, did not prove to be a trustworthy hand. He squandered the family's funds by drinking and gambling and then rode in the Smith wagon, forcing Joseph and others to walk. Under normal conditions the trek would not have been so difficult for Joseph, but the young boy, who was about ten, had not fully recovered from an operation which had been performed a few years earlier while the Smiths were living in Lebanon, New Hampshire. Portions of the bone had been removed from Joseph's left leg, and the boy was still hobbling on crutches when he started for New York. On occasions, during the biting winter weather, they would journey twenty, thirty and almost forty miles along snow-covered trails. Fortunately, while the Smiths owned a wagon, they were accompanied by another family, named Gates, who owned several sleighs; and occasionally the Smiths were invited to ride with that family. [^27]

The Prophet's grandmother, Lydia Mack, also started west with the family, but after traveling only a few miles this elderly woman was injured by the upsetting of one of the vehicles. Deciding to tarry with relatives living in Royalton, Vermont, Lydia failed to fully recover and died a few years later before rejoining the others. [^28]

As the Smith family traveled through Utica, New York, Caleb Howard attempted to steal the wagon belonging to this group of pioneers. Lucy immediately summoned help, convincing others that she was being robbed; and the men who were present intercepted Howard, preventing him from accomplishing his malicious plan. The remainder of the journey was completed without the interference of Howard, but the family was so poor, especially after their meager funds had been squandered, that Lucy paid several managers of roadside inns with cloth and clothing, the last payment being made with a pair of Sophronia's earrings. During the final portion of the journey, Joseph was invited to ride in one of the sleighs belonging to the Gates family, one that followed the other vehicles. For some unknown reason, shortly before the family arrived at their destination, Joseph was beaten and "knocked down" by one of the Gates boys, the driver of the last sleigh. He was left on the trail while others, undoubtedly not knowing of his plight, rode into Palmyra. A stranger discovered the injured youth, picked him up, and carried the boy to the village where his father had decided to settle. Commenting on this journey, Lucy Smith exclaimed: "We Â� arrived at Palmyra, with a small portion of our effects, and barely two cents in cash." [^29]

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Josiah Quincy, Figures of the Past (Boston, 1883), 376-400.
[^2] 2 W. Pierrepont White, "Indian Possessions and Settled Areas in New York State from 1771 to 1820," The Rochester Historical Society Publication Fund Series, VII (1928), 225, 227.
[^3] 3 lbid., 226-27; Clark Wissler, Indians of the United States (Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1948), 110-12.
[^4] 4 Wissler, op. cit., 118, 125.
[^5] 5 Diedrich Willers, Jr., The Centennial Celebration of General Sullivan's Campaign against the Iroquois in 1779 (Waterloo, 1880), 97-99.
[^6] 6 Ibid., 157-58. See also Charles P. Whittemore, A General of the Revolution, John Sullivan of New Hampshire (New York: Columbia University Press, 1961), ch. 9.
[^7] 7 Alexander C. Flick, ed., History of the State of New York (New York City: Columbia University Press, 1935), V, 115-17, 145.
[^8] 8 Flick, op. cit., 152-58;[O[rsamus] Turner, History of the Pioneer Settlement of Phelps and Gorham's Purchase, and Morris' Reserve (Rochester, 1852), 140-42, 162.
[^9] 9 Herbert A. Wisbey, Jr., Pioneer Prophetess: Jemima Wilkinson. the Publick Universal Friend (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1964), 105-112. 163, 168.
[^10] 10 Turner, op. cit., 163.
[^11] 11 White, op. cit., 229; Hamilton Child, Gazetteer and Business Directory of Ontario County, New York for 1867-8 (Syracuse, 1867), 45-46, 49-52; Horatio Gates Spafford, A Gazetteer of the State of New York (Albany, 1824), 400-401.
[^12] 12 The first known white pioneer to settle Canandaigua (and first known settler west of Seneca Lake) was named Joseph Smith. He erected a block house on Main Street where he opened a tavern. A few years later, he moved to Farmington and there erected the first frame building and with the assistance of Jacob Smith built the first sawmill in that town in 1795. Turner, op. cit., 163, 222.
[^13] 13 Ibid., 217-19; "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, August 4, 1871, 3.
[^14] 14 "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, January 26, 1872, 3; February 2, 1872, 3.
[^15] 15 Ibid., January 19, 1872; 3.
[^16] 16 Book of Deeds, I, 223, Ontario County Clerk's Office, Canandaigua, New York, hereafter cited as Deeds. Turner, op. cit., 378-80; "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, August 4, 1871, 3; [W. H. McIntosh, ed.], History of Wayne County, New York (Philadelphia, 1877), 134.
[^17] 17 Deeds, VI, 45; "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, May 3, 1872, 3; Wayne Cutler Gunnell, "Martin Harris—Witness and Benefactor" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1955), 37-38. Copies of the contracts between Martin Harris and E. B. Grandin and Thomas Lakey are located in the appendix of his thesis.
[^18] 18 History of Wayne County, 136; Turner, op. cit., 388; Deeds, I, 230-31.
[^19] 19 History of Wayne County, 117-19.
[^20] 20 Charles Brown, "Manchester in the Early Days," Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, October 18, 1902; October 25, 1902, copy located in the Brigham Young University Library. This collection contains selections of articles which appeared in the Shortsville Enterprise and typewritten copies were placed on file in the publisher's office. See also "Old Time School Matters," Files, June 7, 1889.
[^21] 21 Brown, op. cit., February 27, 1903.
[^22] 22 "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, January 26, 1872, 3; February 2, 1872, 3.
[^23] 23 "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, March 1, 1872, 3.
[^24] 24 "Obituary of Sunderland P. Gardner," Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, February 18, 1893; "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, March 15, 1872, 3.
[^25] 25 Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier. August 4, 1871, 3; Turner. op. cit., 218.
[^26] 26 Joseph Smith, History, Note A, LDS Church Historian's Office, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereafter referred to as LDS Church Historian's Office.
[^27] 27 Ibid.
[^28] 28 Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, ed. Preston Nibley (Salt Lake City: Bookeraft, 1958), 61. Although this later edition has been cited, the references cited in this work have been compared with the first edition and the quotations harmonize with the original publication.
[^29] 29 Joseph Smith, History, Note A; Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., 62-63.
