Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith's First Vision: Confirming Evidences and Contemporary Accounts ( 1971)

Chapter 2

From Wilderness to Civilization

For several years after the initial colonization of the Genesee country there were no stores, no mills, no physicians, no ordained ministers and few implements of labor in the towns of Palmyra and Farmington. Nevertheless, through ingenuity and vigorous work, the early settlers secured the food, clothing, and shelter which they needed. The people were prepared to sacrifice, and their immediate success encouraged others to join them in transforming the virgin forest into productive communities.

Securing the Land

Since land was plentiful and labor was scarce, it was not difficult for the original white inhabitants to purchase large farms for themselves and their sons. Some of the first settlers of that region purchased land for twenty-five cents an acre and earned a dollar a day for their labors. Although money was scarce, a few frontiersmen earned sufficient in one day to procure four acres of land; and in the early years of the nineteenth century, annual sales from wheat produced sufficient revenue for a few industrious laborers to purchase yearly a new farm for one of their sons. [^1]

Much of the land purchased by John Swift was surveyed into one-hundred- and two-hundred-acre lots; the smaller lots being situated adjacent to Mud Creek, and the two-hundred-acre plots being located in the northern part of the town. Many purchased this land from Swift for less than one dollar an acre. One immigrant, for example, bought a hundred-acre lot for what amounted to seventy-five cents an acre; and another pioneer secured from Swift two hundred acres for sixty-two cents an acre. [^2]

Between 1790 and 1800, land in the area currently known as Manchester had increased from about twenty-five cents to approximately four dollars an acre. Some of the most valuable property in that country was located on either side of the Canandaigua Outlet where the falls provided valuable sites for mills. Five hundred acres of this more expensive land was sold in 1804 for five dollars an acre to Theophilus Short, the entrepreneur known as the founder of the small industrial complex which became Shortsville. [^3]

Some of the early pioneers of the Finger Lake country exchanged farms in New England for unsold land in New York. Nathan Herendeen was offered one thousand acres in Farmington for his farm in Berkshire County, Massachusetts; and one frontiersman of Manchester exchanged his farm in Windham County, Connecticut, which was valued at twenty dollars an acre, for land selling for four dollars an acre in western New York. [^4]

Even though land on the basis of prices in the east was inexpensive during the initial phase of colonization, some of the pioneers could not afford to buy property and squatted in the area near Hill Cumorah. Eventually the land which the squatters had improved was sold and those uprooted were forced to more further west, where all too frequently a repetition of their unfortunate experiences occurred. [^5]

Life on the New York Frontier

Although the earliest settlers of the Genesee country began farming immediately after their arrival in that wilderness, the wild fruits growing on the land, the game in the forests, and the fish in the streams provided these frontiers-men with a valuable source of food. In addition to wild plums, a variety of berries were growing in the Finger Lake country, such as blackberries, strawberries, raspberries, and cranberries. During the initial years of colonization, venison provided the settlers with much of their winter supply of meat; and the outlet which flowed from Manchester to Lake Canandaigua was well stocked with trout, white fish, black bass, and other fish. Mud Creek also contained a variety of fish, including some salmon. For a number of years, fishing was principally done with nets; and occasionally a few men supplied an entire community with the fish which the settlers desired. [^6]

Not all the animals of that area were considered beneficial, for wolves and bears often preyed upon the sheep and swine. On occasions, entire flocks of sheep would be slaughtered in a night by the wolves, and bears frequently attacked the hogs which ran wild in the commons. [^7]

During the 1790's, small bands of Indians roamed the Genesee country, trapping, hunting, and trading; exchanging beaver pelts for baskets, flour, tobacco, and gunpowder. But the number of Indians seen in that region declined rapidly, just as the supply of venison and fish diminished as the area was transformed. [^8]

One of the major tasks facing the frontiersmen of western New York was that of penetrating the heavily wooded land. Originally, most of the land was cleared by "slashing." Trunks would be chopped so that they would fall into a huge pile, after which they would be burned. Some trees were growing in areas where they could not be cut so as to form a pile. These isolated plants were chopped into logs and then dragged to the areas where the timber was burned. In order to expedite this project, many pioneers sponsored work parties, inviting their neighbors and other friends to assist them not only in levelling the trees but also in raising part of their homes. [^9]

After the land had been cleared the farmers tilled the soil with crude wooden plows, usually drawn by oxen, and with a hoe made the final preparation for planting. They sowed seeds and harvested large crops of wheat and corn. They planted fruit trees and nurtured their apple and peach orchards. They cared for their cows, horses, sheep, hogs, chickens, and oxen. They gathered the winter supply of wood and from the local trees secured the wood used for making furniture and household items, such as eating utensils, mixing bowls, and chopping boards. Self-sufficiency was the rule of that age; and people worked from sunrise to sunset, six and sometimes seven days a week, in order to procure the goods they desired.

While raising large families the women, with the aid of their daughters, performed innumerable household chores, employing techniques that had been adopted by their pioneer ancestors. They ground corn on stumps hollowed out for that purpose. They spun and wove woolen and linen cloth from which they made the family clothes. They also made clothes from animal skins, and many Genesee farmers wore buckskin breeches throughout the cold winter months. [^10]The women also helped outside. They aided their husbands and sons in maintaining the kitchen garden, successfully growing white potatoes, turnips, cabbages, squash, and other vegetables. They milked the cows, fed the animals, and sometimes helped the boys in herding the sheep and cows. Through mutual cooperation, families worked ceaselessly in creating a new environment.

The original homes of the settlers were crude in comparison to the mansions then located along the east coast and the homes constructed in the area in the early decades of the nineteenth century. Most of the log cabins built in the early 1790's were made without wooden doors or glass windows, these openings occasionally being covered with blankets. Much of the furniture was homemade and the dirt floors were sometimes covered with split logs. When the logs became too soiled, the inhabitants cleaned them by chipping, thereby creating a fresh layer of wood. [^11]

Journeys of the Genesee Settlers

While there was much work which constantly needed to be accomplished at home, the Genesee farmers traveled long distances in order to secure the goods and services which they desired and in order to find markets for their grain. During the summer of 1789, Darius Comstock walked almost twenty miles weekly to Geneva in order to secure provisions, and then returned to his cabin in the Farmington wilderness. [^12]In 1790 Ebenezer Spear was requested by one of his friends, Webb Harwood, to procure wine for Harwood's wife who was in a "delicate state of health." Spear walked from Palmyra to Canandaigua but, failing to locate the wine there, headed east, continuing to Utica and thence to Schenectady. At Schenectady he finally located the beverage, purchased six quarts for medicinal purposes, and then returned to Palmyra. During this fourteen-day journey in which Spear walked approximately thirty miles a day, he slept on the ground in a knapsack on all except four of the nights. [^13]

Until mills appeared in 1794 and 1795 on Mud Creek and the Canandaigua Outlet, the closest mill to the settlers of Palmyra and Farmington was located near Seneca Lake at the Jerusalem community. Occasionally farmers living in these towns loaded their wagons with wheat and rode in ox-drawn carts for four or five days along the winding trails leading to the Jerusalem mill, returning home after a ten-day trip. [^14]

Early pioneers of the Genesee country also rode or sailed to Syracuse, a distance of about 70 miles from Palmyra, where they exchanged wheat for salt; and others journeyed along the roads leading to Utica, a distance of 120 miles from Palmyra, to sell their grain or to exchange agricultural products for nails, glass, and other finished products. [^15]

Western Highways

Men walked and rode great distances during that era, but they also converted the rivers into major highways. Before the completion of the Erie Canal, not only was grain shipped east in large wagons but wheat and other goods were loaded on boats at and near Palmyra and shipped to many eastern markets. [^16]

One of the frequently traveled paths of western New York, especially by those living in Palmyra and Farmington, was the Canandaigua road. It proceeded south from Palmyra village, ran less than a mile east of the Joseph Smith farm, passed the Hill Cumorah, bisected Manchester Village and entered Canandaigua, a distance of fifteen miles from Palmyra. In the early nineteenth century there were two main roads stretching west across western New York. One crossed the state in the area where the Erie Canal was constructed, passing through the main sector of Palmyra Village. Another artery west was located immediately north of the Finger Lakes. These two main routes were connected by the Canandaigua road.

For the convenience of the settlers of that region, a stage coach made daily runs along the Canandaigua road. According to the schedule of 1824, a coach left the Eagle Hotel in Palmyra Village daily at 7:00 A.M. and arrived at Canadaigua before 10:00 A.M. Leaving Canandaigua at 2:00 P.M. the stage returned along the same road and arrived each evening in Palmyra. The advertised one-way fare for such a trip was seventy-five cents. [^17]

Fig. 7. Towns and Villages Located Near the Joseph Smith Farm

Many settlers living in Farmington regularly trekked along the Canandaigua road to Manchester village in order to conduct their business. Before Farmington was divided into two towns the residents of what became the town of Manchester participated in the Farmington town meetings. Many of the men elected to serve as local officials resided in Manchester and sessions were often held in the area which was formerly the eastern part of Farmington. During the period when the Smith family lived in western New York, local political matters were often discussed in buildings located in Manchester village, such as Nathan Barlow's store, Ebenezer Pratt's tavern, the local hotel, and the woolen factory. [^18]

The justice of the peace court also drew many settlers in the 1820's to Manchester village. On January 19, 1830, for example, Joseph Smith, Sr., and Abraham Fish appeared before Nathan Pierce, justice of the peace, and confessed owing Lemuel Durfee "damages" amounting to $37.92. Although the records do not reveal the nature of the damages, the judge recorded that the accused admitted their guilt and on September 13, 1830, paid not only Durfee, but also the interest and the courts costs. And on June 28 of the same year, Joseph Smith, Sr., the father of the defendant Hyrum Smith, appeared before the justice of the peace in Manchester, admitted that his son owed $20.07 for "shoeing horses," and directed the justice to enter judgment against the defendant. [^19]

Many settlers of Palmyra and Farmington also walked or rode through Manchester village on their way to Canandaigua. Canandaigua was not only a transportation center but was also the seat of government for the settlers of Ontario County and was an important business community for the farmers of that region of New York. [^20]

While many settlers of the Genesee country journeyed to Canandaigua, others traveled to Geneva, located twenty-two miles from Palmyra, following various routes to their destination. Although the settlers of Palmyra and vicinity could have followed the road to Canandaigua and then proceeded east to Geneva, there were more direct routes to that community which passed through the village of Vienna, later renamed Phelps. The Vienna road, for instance, was situated north of Palmyra village and ran south towards Phelps and Geneva. Other well-trodden paths were blazed south of the Hill Cumorah, connecting Manchester center and Phelps.

Since Geneva became an important merchandising and banking center, there were many factors which served as magnets drawing travelers to the village located near the shore of Seneca Lake. Palmyra merchants secured a major portion of theft supplies from Geneva; and many residing in that section of western New York took advantage of the banking services available there. [^21]While Martin Harris was attempting to raise money to pay for the publication of the Book of Mormon, this farmer hastened to Geneva to secure a loan from one of the bankers living in that village. Recalling this visit, an inquisitive businessman wrote: [^22]

Among the applicants for money who came to me at Geneva, as I now recollect, was one Martin Harris, of Palmyra, Wayne County. He brought a letter of introduction to me from a highly respectable citizen of that town, a Mr. Jessup, who was a leading man and an elder in the Presbyterian Church and on whose judgment I depended in respect to the character of the borrower and the value of the property in all cases of applications for loans from that quarter. From the letter of Mr. Jessup the bearer was introduced to me as a very worthy and substantial farmer, possessing a very excellent farm which would furnish a very ample security for the amount of money which he wished to obtain, viz. $1,300.00, and he commended Mr. Harris to me as a desirable borrower. As usual, my first inquiry of Mr. Harris was for what purpose he wanted the money. In reply to this, with some hesitation, he stated that he wanted it to pay for publishing a book. This excited my curiosity to know what sort of book it was that a farmer desired to mortgage his farm to publish. His answer to this was, that it was the Mormon Bible. This was the first that I had ever heard of the Mormon Bible and my curiosity was further excited in regard to it. I interrogated him as to its character and what it was. He then informed me that the plates for it had been discovered by one Joseph Smith, a young man then living at Palmyra, whom he knew well and who had been guided in his discoveries by divine inspiration.

Although the banker was impressed with Harris' credentials, Martin Harris did not at this time secure the loan which he was seeking.

Barter and Exchange

Since money was scarce, the early farmers of the Genesee country were required to secure the necessary goods and services primarily through barter and exchange. Many merchants received wheat and cattle from the pioneers and sold to the people in return spices, cooking utensils, paper, shoes, and other commodities which the farmers desired but found difficult to produce. Because of the shortage of money, many were also unable to pay their taxes, and much property was constantly being placed on public sale because of the failure of farmers to pay their assessments. [^23]

The Frontier Becomes a Community

While farmers and merchants continued to travel slowly along the well-trodden dirt trails leading to the political and economic centers of the Genesee country, the frontier posts rapidly evolved into bustling communities. Before 1800, log cabins began to be replaced by larger and more comfortable frame homes in what became Manchester township; and at the turn of the century a shop to repair agricultural implements and a blacksmith shop appeared in the area of Manchester village. [^24]Early in the nineteenth century, other manufacturers emerged along the Canandaigua Outlet. This river flowed across the entire length of the township and was navigable up to Manchester village, where the flow was interrupted by a fall which provided a valuable source of power. Another waterfall of about twenty-two feet was located about a mile southeast of this village at Shortsville; and many speculators living in that town believed that important industrial complexes would emerge near these two sites. Since the early promoters of Manchester village anticipated the rise of many factories in that area, they named their community after Manchester, New Hampshire, and a town in England of the same name. [^25]In 1811 an enterprising group of citizens organized the "Ontario Manufacturing Company," and immediately thereafter constructed a woolen factory adjacent to the Canandaigua Outlet. This factory included a spinning jenny with seventy-five spindles, a jack with forty spindles, six looms, a fulling mill, and a coloring and dyeing shop. At that time there were only two other similar manufacturing establishments in New York state. [^26]

Many other structures were erected in Manchester village during the first two decades of the nineteenth century. About 1809, Nathan Barlow built the first store in the village, and during the War of 1812 his merchandising establishment became a popular gathering place for individuals who desired to discuss the war and related topics. Meanwhile, one of the first settlers of the community, Ebenezer Pratt, erected a tavern which served for years as a rest stop for immigrants. In 1814 a hotel was built there. [^27]Three years later, on January 14, 1817, the inhabitants of Manchester organized a library which contained histories, biographies, geographies, religious treatises, and other popular works of that age. [^28]

Another manufacturing center began to emerge in the early nineteenth century at Shortsville. In 1804, Theophilus Short erected a flour mill and a saw mill in this hamlet, and eighteen years later constructed another flour mill north of his original business. Encouraged by Short's initial success, another industrious pioneer, William Grimes, erected a woolen mill on the south bank of the Outlet in 1816. During the early years that this business was in operation Grimes hired eight men to work in the factory, and in 1818 the mill was sold to Stephen Brewster who doubled its capacity. One year before Brewster purchased the woolen mill, E. K. Case, Jet Abbey, and Alvin West erected a paper mill in the community and began producing paper from cloth pulp, providing printers and farmers throughout the area with this commodity. According to the reminiscences of one old settler, while Stephen Brewster was one of the proprietors of the Shortsville paper mill the paper produced was that sold to E. B. Grandin and used for the printing of the first edition of the Book of Mormon. Prior to 1820 a blast furnace was also constructed along the Outlet which contributed to the continued growth of this small manufacturing center. [^29]

Although the growth of Manchester was rapid during the first two decades of the nineteenth century, the population increased slowly. In 1800, for example, there were only 633 settlers in Farmington (which included the town of Manchester). During the ensuing ten years the population of that town tripled (being 2215 in 1810) and then doubled during the period from 1810 to 1820 (there being 4,214 settlers in Farmington in 1820). In 1830, after Farmington had been divided, there were 1773 inhabitants in the township of Farmington and 2811 in Manchester, or a total in the two towns of 4,575, representing a growth of only 570 during the decade when the Smith family lived there. Since the Erie Canal was constructed a few miles north of the farms and factories of Manchester, the ambitious plans of the industrialists of Manchester were not fully realized. The inhabitants of this town failed to reap the harvest created by this transportation artery.

The Transformation of Palmyra

While the first generation of white settlers were constructing mills and shops near the Canandaigua Outlet, others were conquering the wilderness adjacent to Mud Creek. Before the Smith family arrived in western New York, farms, homes, and clusters of shops had been established throughout the town of Palmyra; and the village of Palmyra had evolved from a primitive frontier outpost to a civilized community.

Within a few years after pioneers erected log cabins near Mud Creek, Yankee invaders began forming a village about one block south of this stream. As early as 1792 the main street of Palmyra was laid out near its present location. Trees were cut, stumps and logs were removed, and grass was levelled, thereby creating a path for the oxdrawn carts. Although the trail was not graded, wagons could pass through the area without encountering innumerable obstacles. In the spring of 1793 a number of uprooted Americans purchased land along this trail, and in that same year a log school house was constructed in the emerging community on land donated by John Swift. [^30]Before 1800, frame homes began replacing the rough log cabins and a tavern appeared along Mud Creek. Shortly after the turn of the century a copper shop, a tannery, a merchandising store, and the first two-story home were also constructed in Palmyra village. [^31]

The energetic leader who more than any other individual promoted the transformation of Palmyra was the same speculator who was partly responsible for the settlement of that community. John Swift was a man of tremendous energy, diverse activities, and humanitarian spirit. He built Palmyra's first wool-carding machine and grist mill. He served as the first moderator of the Palmyra town meeting and was chosen supervisor and pound-tender. He became captain of the local militia, and not only donated land for the first school erected in the village but also gave to the community land for a graveyard and church. After serving in many capacities he died in poverty in 1814; and later his remains were exhumed and placed in the cemetery which he had donated to the citizens of Palmyra. [^32]

In 1812, a few years before the Smith family arrived in Palmyra, the main street of the village was crossed by one major road. Running south from Main, this road was called Canandaigua; and continuing north towards the Martin Harris farm, the same road was called Church Street. Today, four Protestant meetinghouses are located on the four corners made by the intersection, but the only meetinghouse in Palmyra village from 1811 to 1822 was located on Church Street, a short distance from the village's one intersection and immediately next to the cemetery. Across from the old Western Presbyterian church on the east side of Church Street were two homes. Only one home was located near the intersection along the Canandaigua road. [^33]

While only a few buildings had been erected on Canandaigua and Church Streets, there were structures in 1812 on nearly every lot on either side of Main between the intersection and Durfee's mill.

Approximate Location of the Homes and Business Establishments Along the Main Street of Palmyra About 1812 [unless otherwise indicated]

1 Shirtliff homestead 2 Solomon Tice's property 3 Silas Hart's home 4 Azel Ensworth's tavern and stables 5 James and Orin White's two-story brick store [c. 1817] 6 Clothiery of Andrew G. Howe 7 Franklin House (stage tavern and saddler and harness shop of Solomon Hathaway) 8 Residence, law office and store of William Howe Cuyler 9 Joseph Colt's home 10 Ira Selby and Stephen Phelps' long, wooden two-story store 11 Steven Phelps' tavern (two-story frame building) 12 House belonging to Dr. Robinson 13 Johnson, the tailor 14 Samuel Jennings' store 15 William T. Hussy's home 16 "Democratic" school house 17 Stephen Skellinger's home 18 William Cook's cooper shop 19 Henry Jessup's property (tannery and home) 20 Dr. Gain Robinson's home and drug store [Located further west, near present town line] 21 Zebulon Williams' property 22 William Jackway's home and blacksmith shop 23 John Hurlbut's home and distillery 24 Benjamin Cole's two-story home 25 Zachariah Blackman's blacksmith shop and shelter for teams 26 Asa Lilly's tavern (Lilly's Coffee House) 27 Timothy C. Strong's book store [c. 1817] 28 Washington Hall 29 Western Presbyterian Church 30 Old Cemetery 31 James Bensoh's home 32 Abner Cole's law office 33 Ezra Shepardson's home 34 Store of Nathaniel H. and George Beckwith 35 A. H. Reed's tailor shop 36 Abraham Shattock's saddlery 37 A. McIntyre's drug store 38 John B. Robson's home 39 Nathan Thayer's store 40 Levi Thayer's home 41 Joseph Colt's store 42 Samuel Wagstaff's store 43 Patrick O'Rourke's store 44 Peleg Holmes' home 45 John Swift's home

Fig. 8. Main Street of Palmyra About 1812

Fig. 9 Main Street of Palmyra About 1840 As the street appeared looking west from the area near the Eagle Hotel and as published by J.W. Barber and H. Howe's Historical Collections of the State of New York (1841)

The mill had been constructed adjacent to the creek on the east edge of the village. Located along this main thoroughfare were about eighteen homes, a number of offices, several saddler and harness shops (one at either end of the village), two tailor shops, a blacksmith shop, a tannery, a distillery, a shelter for animals, and a schoolhouse. All the frame homes, which had replaced the log cabins, were interspersed among the shops, offices, and store; and many proprietors were living in dwellings located at the rear of theft place of business. Most of the homes were surrounded with picket fences, and large poplars shaded the residential property. [^34]

The rapid transformation of Palmyra continued while the Smith family lived in the Genesee country. According to the census of 1820, 748 persons were engaged in agriculture, 190 in manufacturing, and 18 in commerce in the town of Palmyra (which included Macedon). This enumeration further specified that forty-six free blacks and no slaves resided in the town. [^35]In the early 1820's, there were also within the present limits of Palmyra town three grist mills, eight saw mills, one fulling mill, one iron works, five distilleries, and two asheries. One of the grist mills was located along Mud Creek near the eastern edge of Palmyra village, and another was situated about a mile west of the village. At that time, within the village there were thirteen dry good stores, three drug stores, three inns, two tanneries (one of which employed forty hands), and a number of other businesses. [^36]

Economic Pursuits of the Smith Family

According to tradition, after the Smith family arrived in Palmyra they "rented a small frame building on the eastern outskirts of the village near where Johnson Street takes off Vienna." [^37]The mother of the Prophet, Lucy Mack Smith, recalled that although the family possessed few material goods, "not from indolence, but on account of many reverses of fortune," she "was quite happy," for the family had been reunited and she was again partaking of her husband's affection. Lucy also said that, in order to earn sufficient money to begin payments on a farm, she established a business in the village, painting oil cloth coverings for tables. By her exertions this industrious mother succeeded in paying for the furniture which was placed in the Smith home. [^38]Meanwhile, Joseph Smith, Sr, and the oldest sons Alvin and Hyrum, also undoubtedly secured employment in and near the village, where, according to one contemporary (Pomeroy Tucker, whose memory was not always reliable), they engaged in gardening, harvesting, well-digging and merchandising. Tucker also specified that they sold in their shop "gingerbread, pies, boiled eggs, root-beer, and other like notions of traffic," and mentioned that sometimes they sold goods on the village streets from a mobile cart. [^39]Within a few years, they had saved sufficient funds to begin payments on a farm.

Smiths Move to Farmington (Now Manchester)

After living in Palmyra village for about two years, the family moved in 1818 to a heavily wooded region known as "the North Woods." Having initiated payments on a hundred-acre farm, according to Lucy they cleared about thirty acres of land during the first year. They also erected a "snug log-house" which was "neatly furnished" and provided, in Lucy's opinion, comfortable living. This home has also been described as "a small, one-story, smoky log house," which was divided into two rooms on the ground floor, and had a low garret, where there were two rooms. "A bedroom wing, built of sawed slabs, was added afterward." [^40]Conditions must have been crowded in this home, for as the year 1820 unfolded there were nine in the family. Alvin, the oldest boy was about twenty-one; Hyrum was nineteen; Sophronia was sixteen; Joseph, Jr., had just turned fourteen; Samuel was eleven; William was eight; and Don Carlos was three. One-and-a-half years later, on July 18, 1821, Lucy, the last of the Smith children, was born. Shortly after the birth of Lucy, the family initiated the construction of a much larger frame home. This project was under the direction of Alvin, who undoubtedly was an excellent carpenter; and before Alvin's death in November, 1823, the frame of the new home had been raised. According to Lucy, the material was procured for the "speedy completion" of this residence shortly after Joseph learned that a priceless, sacred record was located in a hill three miles southeast of the Smith faith. [^41]

The property which the Smiths improved was situated about a half-mile west and two miles south of the intersection of Main and Canandaigua in Palmyra village and was located on the south side of the line which, in 1818, divided the towns of Palmyra and Farmington. Between 1821 and 1823, the northern edge of this farm became the boundary separating the town of Palmyra (which was included in the new county of Wayne in 1823) and Manchester, a new town in Ontario County created from Farmington.

Originally, Township No. 11, Lot 1, the land on which the Smith family located, had been given by Phelps and Gorham to their wives, Rebecca Gorham and Mary Phelps, and from these women had been conveyed in 1790 to Israel Chapman. Four years after Chapman secured the land, he sold about 5700 acres to William Bacon for Â£616, or two shillings an acre. In the same year that Bacon obtained the property, he sold this lot and 7,600 additional acres for eleven shillings an acre to Thomas Morris and James Wadsworth. These men in turn sold this 300-acre lot and nine other lots of similar size to Nicholas Evertson of New York City in 1795 for Â£2,400, or sixteen shillings per acre.

Fig. 10. The Joseph Smith Farmhouse as It Appears Today

It was during the thirty years in which the Evertson family retained the land that the Smiths initiated payments on the farm. [^42]

According to Lucy Mack Smith, the final payment on their farm was not due until December 25, 1825, but through deception and intrigue others sought to prevent the family from securing the deed. Although the enemies of the Smiths succeeded in preventing these people from securing title to the land, the family received assistance from their friends; and on December 20, 1825, Lemuel Durfee purchased from the heirs of the deceased Nicholas Evertson the one-hundred-acre Smith farm, including their home and barn, for $1,135, or $11.35 an acre. After purchasing the land at the request of the Smiths, Durfee allowed the family to continue living on the farm for a number of years. [^43]

Activities of the Smith Family

Even though the Smith family lived in Manchester for more than a decade, during their residence in that town they undoubtedly traveled to Palmyra village more frequently than to the other villages in that area. Palmyra village was only two-and-a-half miles distant, while New Salem was four miles west, Manchester five miles south, Canandaigua about nine miles south, and Vienna (now Phelps) about thirteen miles southeast of the Smith farm.

Members of the Smith family regularly traveled to Palmyra village to purchase needed supplies and attend church. According to one contemporary, Orsamus Turner, Joseph Smith, Jr., frequently visited the village to secure a copy of the local paper, The Palmyra Register, and to "find an odd job" in the "store of Seymour Scovill." Turner further recalled that the young man also attended sessions of the "juvenile debating club," a society that moved from the village to "the old red school house on Durfee street." [^44]

The economic pursuits of the Smith family were not limited to developing the land in northern Manchester and working in Palmyra village. Since the family was poor and was striving to improve living conditions, including making annual payments on their farm, young Joseph and his older brothers engaged in various activities including farming, digging wells, manufacturing, and selling goods produced at home—such as black-ash baskets, birch brooms, cakes, sugar, and molasses. [^45]In the earliest known recorded recital of the First Vision, Joseph Smith emphasized that after settling in western New York his family was in "indigent circumstances," and that therefore all the children who "were able to render any assistance Â� were obliged to labor hard for the support of" the family. [^46]The fact that Joseph Smith, Jr., was not enumerated in the census of 1820 indicates that the fourteen-year-old boy was perhaps not living at home when this census was taken, possibly being employed by others. [^47]Contemporaries have reported that Joseph worked for William Stafford, who lived about one mile from the Smith farm. [^48]There is also a reference (which might not be valid) concerning Joseph's working for Jacob Chamberlain and "occasionally for others" in the vicinity of Waterloo; [^49]and there are various reports of Joseph's engaging in unusual economic activities, some of which seem fantastic and are undoubtedly rumors designed to discredit the Prophet. [^50]Nevertheless, contemporaries have asserted that Joseph Smith worked in various towns located in the Genesee country.

Remarkable Growth of Palmyra

Although the number of inhabitants in Manchester town increased slowly while the Smith family lived there, the population of Palmyra continued to increase. At a time when the population of the United States was almost doubling every twenty years, the number within the town of Palmyra doubled during the first decade of the nineteenth century, increasing from 1,137 to 2,614. Then during the subsequent twenty years from 1810 to 1830, census reports indicate that the population had reached 3,724, and in 1830, after the town had been divided, there were 3,427 residents in Palmyra and 1,989 in Macedon, or a total of 5,416 in the region which was originally the town of Palmyra. At the time of the First Vision, there were almost 100 families and about 700 inhabitants living in Palmyra village; in 1822 the population was estimated at 800 and three years later there were close to 1,000 settlers there, repesenting approximately 37 percent of the entire town's population. [^51]By 1830, the population of the village had increased to almost 2,000, which represented about 60 percent of the citizens living in that town. [^52]

Palmyra a Canal Town

While describing the remarkable alteration of Palmyra village during the 1820's, one reporter enthusiastically proclaimed, "The whole village has undergone a visible change." The most noticeable transformation he observed occurred in 1822 when a section of the Erie Canal was constructed between Mud Creek and Main Street. In fact, he said with a passionate bias, "There is no village on the line of our famed canal, that has felt the benefits which flow from the internal channel of commerce, more sensible than Palmyra." [^53]Although he incorrectly speculated that Palmyra would become one of the major business centers of the state, that community did become one of the important canal towns of western New York.

It is almost impossible to exaggerate the impact of this waterway on the economic lives of the settlers, not only in Palmyra and other sections of New York but in many other states. As early as 1817, under the direction of Governor DeWitt Clinton, New York undertook this mammoth project, regarded as the greatest engineering feat in American history up to that time. A fifteen-mile stretch of the canal was completed in 1819, connecting Rome and Utica. In November of that year, while one group of engineers were working within four miles of Palmyra village surveying the area, another body of men who were supervising the construction of this mammoth project were considering three possible routes, one of which passed through the village of Palmyra. In December it was announced that the big ditch would be built parallel to the Main Street of the village, and contracts were soon released. In 1822, a 250-mile stretch of the canal was completed connecting Rochester and Utica, and the following year boats could travel from Rochester to the Hudson. The marriage of the waters of the Erie and of the Atlantic was finally consummated in 1825.

The 363-mile canal was an immediate financial success. Although the canal cost about seven or eight million dollars to construct, the traffic was so extensive that tolls collected during the first nine years more than paid for that original cost. Most important, this canal reduced the time required to ship goods from Buffalo to New York City from 20 to 6 days and the cost of such shipments from $100 to $8 a ton. [^54]

As the canal was being constructed one block north of the Main Street of Palmyra, shipping docks, warehouses, and other buildings needed for the canal trade appeared in the heart of the village. Then after the big ditch had been dug across the town of Palmyra, innumerable long, shallow boats, drawn by mules, constantly traversed the village, moving parallel to Main and passing over an aqueduct constructed on the outskirts of the village. Countless immigrants heading west, innumerable tourists, and many businessmen seeking wheat to ship to eastern markets arrived in the community. To accommodate the increased number of travelers, the Phelps tavern was rebuilt, enlarged to a three-story building in December 1824 under new proprietors, and renamed the Eagle Hotel. It is apparent that Clinton's big ditch precipitated the establishment of new businesses and the construction of many buildings in the community which reminded some observers of a quaint village in the Netherlands. [^55]

Palmyra Newspapers

Shortly before the transportation revolution began in western New York, the first newspaper constituted in what is now Wayne County appeared in Palmyra village. On November 26, 1817, Timothy C. Strong began publishing a weekly entitled the Palmyra Register, and he continued editing this newspaper until the fall of 1823—with occasional changes in title, such as Western Farmer and Palmyra Herald, Canal Advertiser. In October of 1823 the newspaper was sold to Pomeroy Tucker and E. B. Grandin, the latter of whom subsequently became the publisher of the Book of Mormon. The new editors changed the name of this newspaper to The Wayne Sentinel.

Two other newspapers, both having short lives, appeared in Palmyra during the 1820's, The Palmyra Freeman and The Reflector. The Reflector, initiated in September, 1829, was published by Abner Cole, ex-justice of the peace who published under the pseudonym Obadiah Dogberry, Jr. This newspaper published on "Winter Green Hill" was devoted to "science, amusement, and ironical castigation." [^56]While the Book of Mormon was being printed, Cole secured a copy of portions of the manuscript and commenced issuing that work in serial form in January, 1830, in violation of the copyright. After learning of this activity, Joseph traveled from his home in Harmony, Pennsylvania, to Palmyra and threatened to sue Cole. Immediately the publication of this serial discontinued. Meanwhile, the inhabitants of Palmyra had gained their first glimpse of the new witness for Christ. [^57]

Libraries in Palmyra and Vicinity

The early Genesee settlers' zeal for knowledge is not only reflected by the appearance of a growth of newspapers but also by their establishment of libraries and bookstores throughout western New York. A library was organized in the village of Palmyra during the winter of 1822-1823. In January, 1817, also, settlers of Manchester village established a public library. For many years the Manchester library was located in the home of the librarian, John Pratt. Eventually, the collection was given to the Ontario Historical Society where it is currently being preserved. [^58]

Bookstores in the Genesee Country

While the Smith family resided in Palmyra, many works were available in the T. C. Strong bookstore. During the month of October, 1818, for example, approximately three hundred volumes were advertised in The Palmyra Register, which included fiction works such as Arabian Nights and Charlotte Temple; Alexander Pope's An Essay on Man; biographies of Benjamin Franklin, George Washington, and Thomas Jefferson; Alexander Humbolt's history of New Spain and many other historical works; and approximately thirty religious treatises, including the works of Jonathan Edwards, John Wesley's Sermons, Benjamin Bell's Strictures, upon the Doctrine and Discipline, of the Methodist Episcopal Church, Ezra Ely's Contrast Between Calvinism and Hopkinsianism, Richard Baxter's A Call to the Unconverted, Hugh Blair's Sermons, Daniel Whitbey's Six Discourses, Alden Bradford's Evangelical History, or a Narrative of the Life, Doctrines, and Miracles of Jesus Christ, and Elhanan Winchester's Lectures on the Prophecies. In addition to the works which were identified, Strong sold classical, medical and law books; Bibles; "together with a general supply of School Books, and Stationary." [^59]

While many works were available in Palmyra village, countless other books and pamphlets were being sold in Canandaigua, Geneva, West Bloomfield, and other surrounding communities. As early as 1815, a proprietor in West Bloomfield advertised that he had for sale more than one thousand volumes. [^60]Therefore, while the Smith family resided in western New York, many of the publications of that age were being circulated in the area, and the ideas of many eastern intellectuals and theologians were being disseminated among the settlers of the Finger Lake country.

Early Publishers in the Genesee Country

Books were also published in increased numbers by the inhabitants of western New York while the Smith family was living there. Writings of the Genesee farmers were printed in Canandaigua, Geneva, Auburn, Ithaca and other New York villages. In 1820, Benjamin Bell published a work in Palmyra reflecting some of the contention which existed during that age. Bell unfolded the nature of the work in his title, The Mystery of Iniquity Unveiled; or, a True History of the Rise and Progress of the Difficulties Between Rev. Wm. Clark, and some of the People in the Town of Wolcott, Seneca County. Together with the Trials of Benjamin Bell.

Education in Western New York

As the population increased, new schools were established throughout the towns of Palmyra and Farmington. The earliest public school records of Manchester which have been preserved, reveal that in 1828, classes were being held in fourteen districts. This record further states that schools were in session on an average of about eight months a year, and children from five to sixteen were attending the one-room schools. The students studied the three R's and geography, using as texts, Lindley Murray's English Grammar; Noah Webster's The American Spelling Book; Lyman Cobb's A Just Standard for Pronouncing Dictionary; Jedediah Morse's The American Universal Geography and Geography Made Easy; William Channing Woodbridge's A System of Universal Geography; and Jacob Abbot Cumming's First Lessons in Geography and Astronomy, An Introduction to Ancient and Modern Geography, and The Pronouncing Spelling Book. [^61]

The school system of Palmyra was similar to that of Manchester and other sections of New York; and inhabitants, such as the Smiths, who lived on the border of two towns were served by a common school. One summary of educational developments within New York state and Ontario County was published in 1820. According to this report, nine-tenths of all children living in that state who were five to sixteen years of age were receiving some education. Within the thirty-four towns of Ontario County there were at that time 434 schools with 23,439 children being taught. After presenting this analysis, the editor of the Ontario Repository asserted, "This certainly presents a flattering picture for all who feel an interest in the moral character of the rising generation." [^62]

The school teachers of that age were poorly paid, receiving in Manchester in 1828 less than $45 annually. Many of the teachers boarded with the parents of the children; and families who provided room and board for the teachers were not required to pay as much as others for the schooling of their children. Consequently teachers, such as Oliver Cowdery—who taught on Stafford Street—were welcomed to reside temporarily with families such as the Smiths. [^63]

In the summer of 1820 an academy was opened in Palmyra village where students studied Latin and Greek. Four years later an independent school was also established there and pupils gathered in the upper room of the academy where they were taught geography, mathematics, astronomy, surveying, grammar, reading, and writing. [^64]

Education of a Latter-day Prophet

Joseph Smith's BoyhoodHCThe formal education of Joseph Smith was apparently neglected while he was living in the Genesee country. Joseph said that because he was obliged to assist in supporting his family, he was "deprived of the benefit of an education." The Prophet admitted, however, that he received instructions in reading, writing, and arithmetic, "which constituted his entire literal acquirements." [^65]Since Joseph was not able to attend the local elementary school as often as he desired, the young man undoubtedly was not enrolled in the grammar school nor the private school established in Palmyra village.

Joseph Smith's BoyhoodHCWhile commenting on the character and intellectual traits of her son, Lucy Mack Smith observed that Joseph was a "remarkably quiet, well-disposed child," adding that "he seemed much less inclined to the perusal of books than any of the rest of our children, but far more given to meditation and deep study." [^66]

Joseph Smith's BoyhoodHCEven though young Joseph was probably not an avid reader and received a meager formal education, he was a humble, inquisitive youth who sought knowledge concerning the world in which he lived and God's plan of salvation.

Joseph Smith's BoyhoodHCHis interest in religion led to innumerable questions, the questions resulted in conflicting replies, and the inconsistent answers precipitated additional inquiries. "How can I know the truth?" Joseph asked. His seeking and searching were not in vain, for the quest of the fourteen-year-old boy eventually guided him along a path leading from a primitive log cabin to a peaceful grove. On a glorious spring day in 1820, while the young man was kneeling in prayer, the genuine education of a prophet commenced.

1 Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, March 13, 1903.

2 "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, October 13, 1871, 3; December 1, 1871, 3; February 16, 1872, 3.

3 Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, January 9, 1903; February 27, 1903; File No. XXIV.

4 Ibid., September 6, 1890; March 21, 1903.

5 Ibid., January 16, 1903.

6[O[rsamus] Turner, History of the Pioneer Settlement of Phelps and Gorham's Purchase, and Morris' Reserve (Rochester, 1852), 168, 211.

7 Ibid.. 191.

8 "The Old and the New," The Palmyra Courier, April 12, 1872, 3.

9 Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, May 8, 1903.

10 Ibid., February 14, 1903.

11 Ibid., December 26, 1902; January 2, 1903.

12 Turner, op. cit., 218.

13 lbid., 381.

14 Ibid.; "Old Newspapers, No. 18," The Palmyra Courier, March 15, 1872, 3.

15 Turner, op. cit., 212; Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, January 2, 1903; March 6, 1903; April 23, 1887.

16 Turner, op. cit, 383; "The Old and the New," The Palmyra Courier, April 12, 1872, 3.

17 The Wayne Sentinel (Palmyra), September 28, 1824.

18 Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, November 28, 1902; February 20, 1903; December 4, 1903.

19 Justice Records, 1827-1830, Town Clerk's Office, Clifton Springs, New York, microfilm copy located in Brigham Young University Library.

20 While the Smith family resided in Palmyra, this village was located in Ontario County. After moving to Farmington, the family continued to reside in that county.

21 Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, April 23, 1887; January 2, 1903; March 21, 1903.

22 A portion of a typewritten copy of a letter presumably written by Charles Butler is located in the Charles Butler Collection, Library of Congress.

23 Turner, op. cit., 383. The Palmyra newspapers of the early nineteenth century contain numerous advertisements of land sales resulting from the failure of settlers to pay their debts.

24 Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, November 28, 1902; April 17, 1903.

25 Ibid., April 3, 1903.

26 Ibid., April 17, 1903.

27 "Reminiscences of Russell M. Rush," Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, March 6, 1903.

28 Miscellaneous Records, Book C, 178, Ontario County Court House, Canandaigua, New York. Many of the books which were originally located in the Manchester library are now in the possession of the Ontario Historical Society, Canandaigua, New York.

29 Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, April 17, 1903.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Josiah Quincy, Figures of the Past (Boston, 1883), 376-400.
[^2] 2 W. Pierrepont White, "Indian Possessions and Settled Areas in New York State from 1771 to 1820," The Rochester Historical Society Publication Fund Series, VII (1928), 225, 227.
[^3] 3 lbid., 226-27; Clark Wissler, Indians of the United States (Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1948), 110-12.
[^4] 4 Wissler, op. cit., 118, 125.
[^5] 5 Diedrich Willers, Jr., The Centennial Celebration of General Sullivan's Campaign against the Iroquois in 1779 (Waterloo, 1880), 97-99.
[^6] 6 Ibid., 157-58. See also Charles P. Whittemore, A General of the Revolution, John Sullivan of New Hampshire (New York: Columbia University Press, 1961), ch. 9.
[^7] 7 Alexander C. Flick, ed., History of the State of New York (New York City: Columbia University Press, 1935), V, 115-17, 145.
[^8] 8 Flick, op. cit., 152-58;[O[rsamus] Turner, History of the Pioneer Settlement of Phelps and Gorham's Purchase, and Morris' Reserve (Rochester, 1852), 140-42, 162.
[^9] 9 Herbert A. Wisbey, Jr., Pioneer Prophetess: Jemima Wilkinson. the Publick Universal Friend (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1964), 105-112. 163, 168.
[^10] 10 Turner, op. cit., 163.
[^11] 11 White, op. cit., 229; Hamilton Child, Gazetteer and Business Directory of Ontario County, New York for 1867-8 (Syracuse, 1867), 45-46, 49-52; Horatio Gates Spafford, A Gazetteer of the State of New York (Albany, 1824), 400-401.
[^12] 12 The first known white pioneer to settle Canandaigua (and first known settler west of Seneca Lake) was named Joseph Smith. He erected a block house on Main Street where he opened a tavern. A few years later, he moved to Farmington and there erected the first frame building and with the assistance of Jacob Smith built the first sawmill in that town in 1795. Turner, op. cit., 163, 222.
[^13] 13 Ibid., 217-19; "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, August 4, 1871, 3.
[^14] 14 "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, January 26, 1872, 3; February 2, 1872, 3.
[^15] 15 Ibid., January 19, 1872; 3.
[^16] 16 Book of Deeds, I, 223, Ontario County Clerk's Office, Canandaigua, New York, hereafter cited as Deeds. Turner, op. cit., 378-80; "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, August 4, 1871, 3; [W. H. McIntosh, ed.], History of Wayne County, New York (Philadelphia, 1877), 134.
[^17] 17 Deeds, VI, 45; "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, May 3, 1872, 3; Wayne Cutler Gunnell, "Martin Harris—Witness and Benefactor" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1955), 37-38. Copies of the contracts between Martin Harris and E. B. Grandin and Thomas Lakey are located in the appendix of his thesis.
[^18] 18 History of Wayne County, 136; Turner, op. cit., 388; Deeds, I, 230-31.
[^19] 19 History of Wayne County, 117-19.
[^20] 20 Charles Brown, "Manchester in the Early Days," Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, October 18, 1902; October 25, 1902, copy located in the Brigham Young University Library. This collection contains selections of articles which appeared in the Shortsville Enterprise and typewritten copies were placed on file in the publisher's office. See also "Old Time School Matters," Files, June 7, 1889.
[^21] 21 Brown, op. cit., February 27, 1903.
[^22] 22 "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, January 26, 1872, 3; February 2, 1872, 3.
[^23] 23 "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, March 1, 1872, 3.
[^24] 24 "Obituary of Sunderland P. Gardner," Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, February 18, 1893; "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, March 15, 1872, 3.
[^25] 25 Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier. August 4, 1871, 3; Turner. op. cit., 218.
[^26] 26 Joseph Smith, History, Note A, LDS Church Historian's Office, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereafter referred to as LDS Church Historian's Office.
[^27] 27 Ibid.
[^28] 28 Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, ed. Preston Nibley (Salt Lake City: Bookeraft, 1958), 61. Although this later edition has been cited, the references cited in this work have been compared with the first edition and the quotations harmonize with the original publication.
[^29] 29 Joseph Smith, History, Note A; Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., 62-63.
[^30] 30 "Old Newspapers," The Palymyra Courier, February 23, 1872, 3.
[^31] 31 "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, September 1, 1871, 3; February 28, 1872; History of Wayne County, New York (Philadelphia, 1877), 137.
[^32] 32 "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, September 1, 1871, 3; February 23, 1872, 3; History of Wayne County, 140-41.
[^33] 33 History of Wayne County, 142. It was not until about 1870 that four churches were located on the famous Four Corners. In 1832 a Presbyterian meeting house was erected on the site where the present Western Presbyterian church stands. A Baptist stone meeting house was built on the Four Corners in 1841 and then rebuilt in 1871. In 1867, the Methodists erected a church on this corner; and in 1873 the Episcopalians completed their church which replaced the wooden structure which had been used for about forty-five years. See Wayne County Journal (Palmyra), June 6, 1872; Thomas Cook, Palmyra and Vicinity (Palmyra, 1930), 249-54.
[^34] 34 History of Wayne County, 142. See Appendix L.
[^35] 35 Population schedules of the Fourth Census of the United States, 1820 (Washington: National Archives, 1959) Microfilm Roll 62, New York, Vol. 1.
[^36] 36 Horation Gates Spafford, A Gazetteer of the State of New York (Albany, 1824), 400-01.
[^37] 37 Willard W. Bean, A.B.C. History of Palmyra and the Beginning of Mormonism (Palmyra, 1938), 12.
[^38] 38 Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith. ed. Preston Nibley (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft), 63-64.
[^39] 39 Pomeroy Tucker, Origin, Rise and Progress of Mormonism (New York, 1867), 12.
[^40] 40 Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, April 3, 1903: Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., 64; Tucker, op. cit., 13.
[^41] 41 Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit.. 85, 331-46.
[^42] 42 Deeds, I, 187-88; II, 267-68; III, 118; XX, 39; XXXXIV, 232-34.
[^43] 43 Ibid., XXXXIV, 232-34; Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., 93-99.
[^44] 44 Lucy, Samuel and Hyrum were active members of the Western Presbyterian Church until 1828. Records of the Session of the Presbyterian Church in Palmyra, II, located in the Western Presbyterian Church, Palmyra, New York, 11-13, microfilm copy located in the Brigham Young University Library. Turner, op. cit, 213-14.
[^45] 45 Tucker, op. cit., 14.
[^46] 46 Kirtland Letter Book, 1829-1835, 1-2, located in the LDS Church Historian's Office. Although the account appears in Appendix A with the punctuation and spelling as it appears in the original, in the main body of this work the spelling in the quotations has been corrected.
[^47] 47 Census of 1820, Farmington, No. 524.
[^48] 48 E. D. Howe, Mormonism Unvailed (Painesville, 1834), 237-40.
[^49] 49 Scrapbook of articles from old newspapers located in the Waterloo Historical Society, 46.
[^50] 50 Tucker, op. cit., 232, 248-49.
[^51] 51 Spafford, op. cit., 400-01; Palmyra Herald. Canal Advertiser. June 19, 1822, 2.
[^52] 52 Wayne Sentinel. September 26, 1828.
[^53] 53 Ibid.
[^54] 54 Harry J. Carman and Harold C. Syrett, History of the American People (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1959), I, 473-75: Palmyra Register, November 10, 1819, November 17, 1819, December 8, 1819; Palmyra Herald, October 9, 1823, November 13, 1823.
[^55] 55 History of Wayne County, 141.
[^56] 56 Ibid., 145.
[^57] 57 The Palmyra Reflector, January 2, 1830; January 13, 1830; January 22, 1830. Cole published selections from the First Book of Nephi and from the Book of Alma.
[^58] 58 Wayne Sentinel, December 3, 1823; Miscellaneous Records, Book C, 178, located in the Ontario County Court House, Canandaigua, New York; Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, July 26, 1890.
[^59] 59 Palmyra Register, October 6, 1818; October 13, 1818; October 20, 1818.
[^60] 60 Ontario Messenger, April 25, 1815.
[^61] 61 Public Schools, 1828-1915, located in the Town Clerk's Office, Clifton Springs, New York, microfilm copy located in the Brigham Young University Library. See also, Palmyra Herald, March 12, 1823, p. 4.
[^62] 62 Ontario Repository, March 21, 1820. A few early nineteenth-century records of the Palmyra schools have been preserved and are located in the Public Library in Palmyra. A microfilm copy of these records has been placed in the Brigham Young University Library.
[^63] 63 Public Schools, 1828-1915; Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, File No. XXXIII.
[^64] 64 Palmyra Register, May 10, 1820; December 15, 1824; June 21, 1825.
[^65] 65 Kirtland Letter Book, LDS Church Historian's Office.
[^66] 66 Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., 67, 82.
