Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith's First Vision: Confirming Evidences and Contemporary Accounts ( 1971)

Chapter 3

Awakenings in the Burned-Over District

First VisionHCThe Yankee invasion of western New York not only precipitated tremendous economic, political, and educational advancements in that section of the nation, but also led to ecclesiastical transformation of the Genesee country. While the industrious pioneers were clearing forests, harvesting crops, erecting mills, creating villages, establishing schools, and forming town governments, they were also organizing congregations and building houses of worship. This conquest of the Genesee wilderness paralleled the initial phase of the Second Great Awakening, for at the same time that Protestantism was being transplanted from New England, Pennsylvania, and eastern New York to the former home of the Iroquois, a spiritual quickening occurred in the early Republic. Eventually, western New York became the ecclesiastical storm center of this en-livenment. As countless unchurched Americans engaged in a quest for religious truth, religious enthusiasm increased, piety seemed more evident, and church membership increased at a steady, rapid pace. [^1]

Neglect of Formalized Religion

When the immigrants of the 1790's initiated the colonization of the Finger Lake country, organized religion was probably at its lowest ebb in the history of America. As the eighteenth century drew to a close, there were fewer churches and less ministers per population than during any other era, whether it be the colonial period or the decades of the twentieth century; and church membership at that time was probably lower in this land than in any other Christian nation. In 1800, only about 7 percent of the American population was classified as active church members. [^2]

There are many factors which explain the reason for the neglect of organized religion in late eighteenth and early nineteenth century America. Most inhabitants of the new nation lived on isolated farmsteads and, not being in a position to attend church regularly, became indifferent toward formalized religion. Many children matured without reading the Bible, attending church, or receiving even occasional edification from spiritual leaders. In most homes, not only were Bible study and church attendance neglected, but family prayers and observance of the Sabbath were not adhered to as taught by the Puritans.

Since many Protestant churches attempted to limit membership to the recognized believers or the acknowledged elect, strict requirements for membership were maintained in most congregations. Excommunications were frequent. Individuals convicted of immorality, using profane language, neglecting to attend church, or failing to observe the Sabbath were sometimes disfellowshipped or excluded from the privilege of being enumerated among the visible saints. Also, members of the Society of Friends were occasionally excommunicated for marrying without authorization outside the denomination. The fact that few blacks had been converted to Christianity and that young children were not enumerated on most membership reports provides further insight into the reasons church membership was at such a low level in early America. Negroes comprised about 20 percent of the population and young children about double that proportion at the turn of the century. Consequently, most membership records of the eighteenth century reflected only the names of white adults who had expressed a converting experience, endorsed one of the popular creeds of Christendom, and faithfully complied with the laws of the church to which they belonged.

While the percentage of active church members probably declined very gradually during most of the eighteenth century, the American Revolution played a role in precipitating the continued decline of religious activity in America. During this irrepressible conflict, the Church of England, which had been one of the dominant religions of colonial America, was nearly destroyed. This faith having been branded as the Tory church, its members witnessed the destruction of some of their meetinghouses and the exodus of many of their rectors. Before the war, there were about three hundred Anglican clergy in the thirteen colonies. When the church was reorganized after peace had been restored there were only approximately one hundred recognized ministers to serve the needs of the members of the Protestant Episcopal Church. Following the most critical period in the history of this denomination, membership in 1800 was reported at but twelve thousand. [^3]

The Dutch Reformed Church also suffered as a result of the war. Many of their meetinghouses were located in the Hudson River valley, one of the areas where invading armies continually maneuvered; and some of the Dutch ministers fled the land, leaving their members without spiritual guidance.

Since members of the Society of Friends were conscientious objectors, Quakers sometimes experienced the pains of oppression; and when members of this faith united under the leadership of George Washington, the fighting Quakers were excommunicated.

During the war for independence, a militant form of deism was transplanted from France to America, resulting in the post-war publication of the initial anti-Christian books to be circulated in America. The first widely read work in this country which critically attacked the Bible and the Christian religion was Thomas Paine's The Age of Reason, published in 1795. Converts to this movement tended not to join deistic societies, but concentrated on condemning organized religion, thereby contributing to the decline of religious activity in the new nation.

As pioneers pushed the boundaries of settlement further and further west, the problems created by the frontier environment increased. Following the Revolution there were not sufficient ministers in most faiths to fill the vacant pulpits located along the eastern seaboard, and the deficiency in the east could not be compared with the lack of trained clergy in the west. As a new century approached, the problem of providing rural Americans with formalized religion seemed almost insurmountable to many inhabitants of the early Republic.

Recognizing that vast numbers of Americans were without a formal religion and that many pioneers were seeking God, spiritual leaders of several Protestant faiths launched effective missionary programs. The societies which overcame the handicaps created by the American frontier and established programs designed to carry their version of the gospel to rural America increased rapidly in membership and became, numerically speaking, the dominant faiths of the pre-Civil War era.

Baptist Farm Preachers

The first major convert faith, the first religion to grow primarily by converting unchurched Americans rather than by immigration, was the Baptist denomination. These Protestants solved the problem of a shortage of ministers by not requiring their elders to be college graduates, but ordained many men who claimed an inward call to preach. For most Baptist elders of the early Republic, preaching was an avocation rather than a profession. They did not rely on parish contributions for their support, earning much of their livelihood from farming and other economic pursuits. Their farms became bases of operation. In addition to providing spiritual edification for members of their parishes, these farm preachers periodically traveled to other neighborhoods where they spread their innermost convictions. Although there were few Baptist congregations in this land prior to 1750, by 1800 this denomination had become the nation's largest religious community. [^4]

Methodist Circuit Riders

Even though the Baptist faith was America's first convert religion, the fastest growing church in the early Republic was the Methodist society. By 1820 this faith had approximately the same numerical strength as the Baptists, but it surpassed that religion in membership during the decade of the 1820's, becoming the largest body of Protestants in America during the remaining years of the nineteenth century. [^5]The Methodists divided America into conferences and districts and then subdivided the districts into circuits and stations. Although resident ministers were generally assigned to communities where there was a Methodist meetinghouse, most groups were served by traveling ministers. After preaching locations were determined within the circuits, itinerants were appointed to preach regularly in the designated places of worship. The circuits were called two-week, three-week, or four-week circuits, depending on the period required to contact the members at each station. Ministers were usually appointed to a circuit for only one or, at the most, two years, and the presiding elders of each district were assigned to a region for no longer than four years. By this ingenious system, vast numbers of Americans living in rural communities received regular spiritual edification. [^6]

Congregationalism in the New Nation

Since most of the original settlers of western New York emigrated from New England, the Congregational church was in the best position to benefit from the Yankee invasion of the Genesee country. These Protestants, however, failed to develop an effective missionary program and continued to maintain an educated clergy. There were not only few Congregational clergy to send west, but the well-trained college graduates sometimes were not the most effective preachers among the woodsmen of rural America. In an attempt to promote missionary work, the Connecticut General Association decided to cooperate with the General Assembly of the Presbyterian church. A Plan of Union was adopted in 1801 specifying that the inhabitants of the west could decide whether they were to function under a Presbyterian or a Congregational system of church government. By this maneuver, competition between Presbyterians and Congregationalists was minimized and members of these societies (whose Calvinistic theology was similar) united their efforts in organizing congregations in the west. The plan, however, proved to be most advantageous to the Presbyterians, for most congregations who united hired a Presbyterian minister and adopted a representative system of church government rather than a Congregational polity that maintained the autonomy of each congregation. The majority of settlers probably believed that the system of government which stimulated increased cooperation of societies was most advantageous. Presbyterianism, therefore, triumphed at the expense of Congregationalism in many areas, including the region where the Smith family lived. By 1822, the Association of Ontario had been dissolved and most Congregational societies had joined the Presbytery of Geneva. [^7]

Expansion of Presbyterianism

Multiple forces placed the Presbyterian church in a favorable position to expand into western New York. In addition to benefiting from the alliance with the Congregationalists, Presbyterian theology was similar to New England Calvinism, the historic faith of many of the early immigrants. Furthermore, many uprooted Pennsylvanians pushed across the border into the Genesee country. Some of these settlers had once lived in New England or had descended from Puritans who had colonized Massachusetts or Connecticut. Other emigrants from the Keystone state had descended from pioneers who had been reared in northern Ireland or Scotland where Presbyterianism was the dominant faith.

Although Presbyterianism became one of the leading faiths of the Genesee country, there were factors which impeded the thrust of Presbyterianism into western New York. Leaders of this denomination, with few exceptions, refused to ordain men who had not been trained in a recognized theological school; and there were insufficient educated clergy to supply the Genesee farmers with adequate spiritual guidance. Since some congregations were not favored with a full-time minister, members residing in certain communities, such as Manchester, did not receive regular spiritual direction; and instead of prospering, some groups dissolved. Even though Presbyterianism became the third largest Protestant society in the new nation, this denomination did not maintain the remarkable pace of growth set by the Methodists and Baptists. [^8]

Roman Catholicism in Early America

Partly because of oppressive legislation and religious bigotry, the Roman Catholic church did not prosper in the thirteen colonies; and few members of this faith participated in the Yankee invasion of the Genesee country. Early in the nineteenth century, Roman Catholicism had been branded as an illegal form of worship in New York. Members of this communion were not permitted to proselyte, erect cathedrals, nor celebrate public Mass in that province. Although the English Toleration Act of 1689 was extended to America, granting Trinitarian Christians the right to organize congregations, this privilege was not extended to the Roman Catholics. [^9]Moreover, before the end of the first decade of the eighteenth century, the Church of England had become the tax-supported state religion in the four lower counties of New York and in all the South. In New York and portions of the South, however, this legislation was ineffective. Nevertheless, Trinity church, an Anglican society in New York City, received some financial support from the state.

Birth of Religious Liberty

During the American Revolution, a new religious era was inaugurated. While Americans were struggling to advance democracy and preserve their inalienable rights, the patriots effectively expanded the religious rights of mankind. At that time, America became a laboratory for the framing of constitutions which included, in many instances, a state bill of rights. The right of freedom of conscience became a legal reality in many of the new states, and accompanying this extension of freedom was the dissolving of the Anglican establishments. During the debates in New York a few critics sought to retain curtailments on the rights of Catholics and non-Trinitarian Protestants. When restrictions were proposed, outspoken legislators raised the same question which Roger Williams had asked a century earlier, "Who is the authority capable of judging which faith is correct?" [^10]Suggestions for limitations on the religious rights of men were buried under the new spirit of the enlightenment and the practical politics created by the religious pluralism which engulfed the new nation. Amidst the growing spirit of toleration, which was fanned by the Revolution, delegates of New York framed the state constitution of 1777. One of the priceless milestones along the path leading to religious liberty was Article 38 which declared:

Whereas we are required by the benevolent principles of rational liberty, not only to expel civil tyranny, but also to guard against the spiritual oppression and intolerance, wherewith the bigotry and ambition of weak and wicked priests and princes, have scourged mankind:

This Convention doth further, in the name and by the authority of the good people of this State, ORDAIN, DETERMINE AND DECLAIR that the free exercise and enjoyment of religious profession and worship, without discrimination or preference, shall forever hereafter be allowed within this State to all mankind. Provided that the liberty of conscience hereby granted shall not be so construed, as to excuse acts of licentiousness, or justify practices inconsistent with the peace or safety of this State. [^11]

By this and other such maneuvers, a new religious climate was created in the young Republic and ministers of all denominations—Christians and non-Christians, Protestants and Catholics, Trinitarians and Arians—were granted the legal right to preach and to organize societies not only in western New York but in many other sections of America.

First VisionHCTHE EMERGENCE OF PROTESTANTISM IN THE HILL CUMORAH COUNTRY

The Society of Friends

Shortly after arriving in Farmington and Palmyra, the immigrants of western New York commenced holding religious services in their log homes. Probably the first Protestant meetings conducted in these towns were held about 1790 in the cabins of the Quakers of Farmington; and possibly these services were the first held by Protestants on a regular basis in the area west of the Jerusalem Community. [^12]Since members of the Society of Friends did not believe in a paid ministry, lay members were appointed to supervise the ecclesiastical activities of these Christians. After gathering in theft small homes, the men sitting on one side of the main room and the women on the other, the Friends sat and meditated until one of their number arose, bore his or her testimony and then sat down. There were no opening nor closing hymns, no formal prayers, and no ministerial sermons in the meetings, only silent worship interrupted periodically with solemn expressions of faith.

Fig. 11. Quaker Meetinghouse Erected in 1816 and located about four miles west of the Joseph Smith farm, this meetinghouse is the only building standing today that was a religious edifice in the area at the time of the First Vision. The Stucture has been moved a short distance from its original site and is currently used as a storage shed.

The "unprepared" messages delivered by the Quakers were based on what Friends believed were the promptings of the Spirit.

About six years after these Christians began worshipping in their cabins, they erected the first Quaker meetinghouse located west of Utica. One section of this double-log building was used for religious services, the other served as a school for the children. This early meetinghouse was used from 1796 to December, 1803, when it was destroyed by fire. During the ensuing winter, Quakers living in that section of the Genesee country worshipped in Palmyra and then, during the summer of 1804, constructed a frame building, 44 feet by 32 feet, on the site of their log meetinghouse. At that time the society was composed of about seventy-five families, approximately forty-five of whom lived in the town of Palmyra, mainly in the area known today as Macedon. [^13]Membership increased so rapidly that by 1816 their meetinghouse was considered too small. Instead of enlarging their church, the Friends constructed a larger building across the road, about four miles due west of the Joseph Smith farm and immediately east of New Salem village, sometimes referred to today as "Pumpkin Hook." Since a schism occurred in this society in 1828, the edifice was used by the Hicksites until 1926, when it was sold and moved a short distance down the hill to the point where it stands today as a storage shed. This structure is the only building standing today near the Smith farm which served as a house of worship at the time of the First Vision. After the division of the congregation the Orthodox Quakers returned to the old frame building, where they resumed their testimony meetings. These Friends continued to meet there until 1876 when the edifice was replaced by the attractive white church which stands today. [^14]

Since it was more convenient to hold Sabbath services in homes or schools situated near clusters of Quakers rather than to travel four, five or sometimes ten or more miles to the meetinghouse located near New Salem village, Friends were authorized to hold regular services in the southern section of Farmington and in the town of Palmyra. The Friends living near Macedon Center were granted permission to hold meetings in the home of Asa Aldrich in 1808. These energetic Protestants also constructed a meetinghouse in 1816 which was about 30 feet by 40 feet. [^15]In the same year that the houses of worship were erected in Farmington and Macedon, Quakers living in the southern section of Farmington and in Canandaigua were authorized to hold services in a school; and members residing near Palmyra village were authorized to meet in the home of Anna Durfee. Three years later the Palmyra services were held alternately in the homes of Pardon Durfee and Peter Harris. [^16]Both of these societies constructed meetinghouses in 1823. The Palmyra church was a one-story building, 24 feet by 40 feet. It was located on Walker Road near the farms of Lemuel Durfee and Peter Harris, [^17]being situated less than one mile northeast of the Martin Harris farm and about two miles from Palmyra village.

The Baptist Denomination

The Baptists who settled in the vicinity of the Smith home were also among the first to create a religious society in western New York. The initial steps to establish a Calvinist Baptist congregation were taken in 1796 when a few believers in the area known today as Manchester, organized. While meeting in the homes of members, the society continued to increase in membership. By 1804, eighty-two had been baptized into fellowship; and six years later these Baptists built a log church. This wooden building served the needs of these Protestants for only a few years. In 1815 the Baptists constructed a larger stone edifice which was the only meetinghouse in Manchester village at the time of the First Vision. [^18]

Four years after the Baptists of Manchester united, nineteen believers living in and near Palmyra village began holding services in the home of Lemuel Spear. A number of these Calvinist Baptists had belonged to the congregation in Manchester but withdrew to form their own society. These Protestants were the first to hold religious services in Palmyra village, and in 1802, membership had grown to nearly seventy. In the summer of 1808 a productive awakening erupted in that community and about one hundred joined this Christian communion. During that year of religious quickening, these Protestants constructed a meetinghouse (approximately 40 feet by 50 feet) about two miles west of Palmyra village. [^19]

Between 1816 and 1820 the Baptist society located in what is today the towns of Palmyra and Macedon continued to prosper, adding about one hundred to their faith during this period. After a number of members had been dismissed from the mother church to join other Baptist communions, membership in 1820 was enumerated at 151. [^20]

Records dating back to the nineteenth century reveal many other incidents in the historic life of the Calvinist Baptist congregation of Palmyra. In December, 1821, Elder Eliphalet Spencer replaced Reverend Jeremiah Irons, the original preacher who had served the church during the years of its initial development and growth. After Elder Spencer resigned in November, 1822, James C. Barrett commenced serving as preacher in March, 1823; but since Barrett had not been ordained, ministers from neighboring communities performed the ordinances of baptism and the Lord's Supper. A significant awakening began shortly after Barrett commenced ministering to the Baptists of Palmyra and Macedon, and 96 were baptized in less than two years. [^21]In the mid-1830's the Baptists of Palmyra separated from the Macedon congregation, occupying the old Presbyterian church located adjacent to burial hill until November 1838, when this historic church burned. Three years later the Baptists of Palmyra dedicated a new church in the village. The present brick edifice, located on the Four Corners, was dedicated in 1871, replacing the stone church which had been torn down. [^22]

The Presbyterian Church

In the same decade that the Quakers and Baptists of Farmington organized, devout Calvinists united in worship in East Palmyra. Shortly after these emigrants from Long Island settled on the land which they purchased from John Swift, they gathered to pray, thanking their Creator for a safe journey into the American wilderness. In the latter part of 1793, Reverend Ira Condit, who was laboring as a missionary in Canandaigua, assisted eleven pioneers in organizing a Congregational society in the home of David H. Foster, which was one of the first groups of this faith to be constituted in western New York. By the end of 1806 the society had grown to about fifty members; and since the annex of one of their homes was too small to accommodate the congregation, members built a church in 1806 which was 54 by 64 feet. The following year they adopted a Presbyterian form of church government and united with the Geneva Presbytery, thereby becoming one of the earliest Presbyterian societies of the Genesee country. [^23]

During the summer of 1816 a powerful revival erupted in the town of Palmyra, and the spiritual enlivenment continued throughout the winter. During this productive spiritual quickening, membership in the Presbyterian church nearly doubled. Consequently the congregation was divided in 1817. Fifty-six members separated from the mother church and formed the Western Presbyterian Church of Palmyra with Jesse Townsend as the first installed pastor. [^24]

Members of the Presbyterian communion who organized three years prior to the First Vision immediately began holding services in the only church building which stood at that time in the village of Palmyra. This meetinghouse had been constructed in 1811 on land donated by John Swift, and was located on Church Street north of the Four Corners, adjacent to the cemetery where John Swift and Alvin Smith are buried. Originally the parish was an interdenominational church, but since most of the members leaned toward Presbyterianism, the assembly was periodically supplied by the Calvinist minister who resided in East Palmyra. While the Smiths lived in Palmyra village, members of this family probably worshipped occasionally with these Christians. Joseph stated that his mother, Lucy, his brothers Hyrum and Samuel, and his sister Sophronia, joined the Presbyterian church about the time of his sacred experience in the grove.

Fig. 12. The Churches of Palmyra and Farmington in 1820

Although records of the Western Presbyterian Church have not been preserved prior to 1828, the earliest available session book reveals that members of the Smith family attended the services of this society regularly until 1828; and then in March, 1830, Lucy, Hyrum, and Samuel were dismissed from the Lord's Supper, not because of any indictment concerning their moral or religious character, but because they had neglected to attend church for a year and a half and no longer desired to be affiliated with that body. [^25]

Jesse Townsend continued to serve as minister of the Western Presbyterian Church from 1817 to the winter of 1819-1820, and then early in 1820 moved to Illinois, after which he served in Missouri. Returning to Palmyra in 1826, he became the minister in a neighboring town of Sodus from 1827 to 1831 and then continued to reside in Palmyra village, where he died in 1838 at the age of 72. Since a preacher had not been assigned to replace Townsend during the spring of 1820, undoubtedly Benjamin Baily, pastor of the church in East Palmyra, occasionally supplied the Presbyterians of Palmyra village with spiritual leadership. In January, 1822, Rev. Daniel C. Hopkins became the minister of that parish and continued to serve in that capacity for about two years. In February, 1824, Benjamin B. Stockton initiated his three-year period of leadership; and about the time of his arrival a major awakening erupted in that area which was one of the most powerful revivals that occurred in Palmyra. [^26]

Another Presbyterian congregation was organized in the neighborhood where Joseph Smith lived in the year that the Western Presbyterian Church was constituted. This society consisted of only eighteen members who met in homes in the town of Manchester. Since these Presbyterians were unable to support a settled minister, they were supplied irregularly by preachers appointed by the Geneva Presbytery. After about fifteen years of vicissitudes, they discontinued holding their meetings. [^27]

The Methodist Society

The Methodists were also among the earliest Protestants to organize in the Genesee country. As early as 1798 members of this religious persuasion began holding prayer meetings in the home of Sharon Booth, one of the earliest pioneers of Manchester. Approximately four years before the Smith family arrived in the Empire state, not only had a Methodist class been constituted in Manchester village but small groups had commenced gathering on a regular basis in and near Palmyra village, Macedon Center, and Clifton Springs. At the time of the First Vision these classes, which usually consisted of less than thirty members, met in homes, barns, schools, and groves. Of these four groups, only the Methodists of Clifton Springs were holding services in a church building. The first Methodist meetinghouse constructed in Palmyra village was completed in 1822 and it was not until 1840 that the Methodists of Manchester, who numbered about forty at the time, erected a religious edifice in that community. [^28]

Palmyra and Manchester were included in the Ontario circuit of the Genesee Conference in 1820. [^29]This three-week circuit was divided into preaching stations so that every three weeks an itinerant minister would have contacted the people living in Palmyra, Manchester and other stations, thereby providing the settlers with constant spiritual edification and guidance. Between the summer of 1819 and 1820, Andrew Peck and William Snow were assigned to this circuit. [^30]Consequently, one of these itinerants would have preached regularly in Palmyra and Manchester and probably would have traveled frequently along the Canandaigua Road located within a mile of the Smith farm. The circuit-rider preachers not only delivered sermons to members of the Methodist classes who gathered at the designated preaching stations, but these conscientious crusaders periodically expounded Methodist tenets at district conferences, annual conferences, and other such gatherings.

Camp Meetings

One of the most effective missionary programs adopted by the Methodists to promulgate their faith was the camp meeting. Although Baptists, Presbyterians, and members of other religious societies also sponsored such meetings, and while Christians of various faiths participated in these services, the Methodists in western New York conducted more camp meetings in the early nineteenth century than did members of any other denomination. These meetings were usually held on the edge of a grove of trees or in a small clearing in the midst of a forest.

FIG. 13. Camp Meeting in the West, 1830-1835 A drawing by A. Rider depicting an American expression of religious fervor. Courtesy Library of Congress

After traveling many miles along dusty or water-logged roads, the settlers would locate their wagons and pitch their tents on the outskirts of the encampment Farmers' markets and grog or liquor shops often sprang up near the camp grounds, thereby providing some farmers with unusual economic opportunities. The meetings frequently continued for several days, and sometimes one session would last nearly all day and into the night. Ministers would rotate preaching assignments so that one minister would immediately be followed by another, and at times two or three ministers would preach simultaneously in different parts of the camp ground. Itinerants not only preached lengthy sermons but devoted much of their time to counseling and to directing prayer circles and group singing. [^31]

The numbers who attended camp meetings in New York in the decade of the 1820's varied considerably. There were times when only a few hundred gathered, and on other occasions thousands witnessed the proceedings. In a camp meeting held in Palmyra in 1826, one reporter estimated that 10,000 people assembled on the grounds to behold the spiritual drama. [^32]

In some sections of early America, camp meetings frequently erupted into exciting spectacles in which enthusiasts demonstrated their emotional aspirations with a variety of physical demonstrations. During these exuberant meetings people went into trances, jerked, rolled and crawled on the ground, barked like dogs, and fell to the ground as though they had been hit by a piercing cannon ball, remaining unconscious for minutes or even sometimes for hours. In western New York at the time of the First Vision, however, physical demonstrations were rarely manifest, except for the occasional practice of falling to the ground and crying out for mercy. Nevertheless, some settlers who were attending these New York meetings for the first time were alarmed by the piercing, dissonant commotions that would occasionally erupt. Some viewed with mixed emotions the weeping, the crying, the mourning, and the sighing which created loud noises in the encampment. [^33]

In the neighborhood where Joseph lived, camp meetings and other services conducted by Methodists were held periodically at the time of the First Vision. Notices of such gatherings seldom appeared in the local newspapers, except when an unusual event occurred in connection with a particular meeting. [^34]In June, 1820, the Palmyra Register reported a Methodist camp meeting in the vicinity of Palmyra because an Irishman, James Couser, died the day after attending the gathering and after becoming intoxicated. "It is supposed," the editor commented, that Couser "obtained his liquor, which was no doubt the cause of his death, at the Camp-ground, where it is a notorious fact, the intemperate, the lewd and dissolute part of community too frequently resort for no better object, than to gratify their base propensities." A quasi-apologetic clarification of this report was printed in a later edition of the Palmyra paper in which the editor stated that when he wrote that Couser "obtained his liquor at the Campground," he did not mean that the Irishman obtained it within the enclosure of their [Methodist] place of worship, or that he procured it of them, but at the grog-shops which were established at, or near if you please, their camp ground." [^35]

The Protestant Episcopal Church

As early as 1806, Episcopalians of Palmyra organized in one of the homes of the settlers and selected two church-wardens and eight vestrymen, John Swift being chosen one of the wardens. For almost twenty years this small group met sporadically, as did the Episcopalians of Farmington who organized in the home of John Shekell in 1807. [^36]There were few traveling Episcopalian preachers who penetrated western New York in the early nineteenth century, and these supervising bishops or missionaries did not preach according to a regular schedule. Consequently, for many years most Episcopalians living in the Genesee country were without spiritual leadership and many small congregations disbanded.

After meeting irregularly for several decades, under the direction of Rev. Rufus Murray, the Episcopalians of Palmyra. organized on a permanent basis in June, 1823. Murray served as rector for three years, and during this period meetings were held in the academy located across the street from the old Western Presbyterian Church. In 1827, during the pastorate of Rev. John Clark, these Protestants erected a wooden chapel on Main Street and then in 1873 completed the Gothic structure which stands today at the Four Corners. Originally this society, which was the first permanent Episcopalian communion to be organized in Wayne County, was named Zion's Church, but eventually it was renamed Zion's Episcopal Church. [^37]

Other Protestant Faiths

Beyond the town limits of Palmyra and Farmington, but within fifteen miles of the Smith farm, other Protestants had organized and were meeting on a regular basis at the time of the First Vision. Episcopalians and Congregationalists were worshipping in Canandaigua and were spreading from that community the basic tenets of these faiths. Freewill Baptists were holding services east of the Smith home in an area known as Junius; and southwest of the Smith farm in West Bloomfield, a society known as the Christians, Eastern Christians, or Eastern Christian Connection had been constituted in 1818 under the leadership of Rev. David Millard. Moreover, a few Universalists were living in the town where Joseph resided. Although the Universalists had not organized a religious society in that immediate locality, the controversial beliefs of these Protestants were being fanned through the Genesee country. [^38]

The Second Great Awakening

The religious societies of Palmyra and Farmington and neighboring towns were organized during an era of increasing spiritual vitality that was not only evident in western New York but in many other parts of the new nation. In fact, during the six decades preceding the Civil War, innumerable spiritual quickenings erupted throughout this country; and many Americans living in the rugged frontier communities, in the rapidly growing urban area, and in the villages and towns of northern and southern United States turned their attention to organized religion. (This is often referred to as the second great awakening, as distinguished from the first great awakening which occurred from about 1739 to 1745.) Subsequently, church membership and religious zeal soared. Although in 1800 approximately 7 percent of the population was churched, in 1820 about 11 percent of Americans were active members of religious societies; in 1850 the percentage had increased to about 17; and by 1860, membership had reached 23 percent of the rapidly expanding population. [^39]

A Burned-Over District

Although the innumerable spontaneous revivals which occurred during this second great awakening did not proceed from one community to another in a definable manner, and the quickenings did not spread from one state to another like a path created by a raging fire, one region in this land which was in an almost constant state of revivalism during the early nineteenth century was western New York. During the decades preceding the Civil War, revivals were so habitual and powerful in the area west of the Catskill and Adirondack Mountains that historians have labeled this ecclesiastical storm center the "Burned-over District." [^40]

As in Kentucky, the winter of 1799-1800 was the era of a "Great Revival" in western New York. Since an innumerable series of spiritual quickenings followed this first major wave of enthusiasm, this powerful awakening initiated a new religious epoch in that region of America. Although one can locate evidence of spiritual enlivenment in a number of New York communities every year of the early 1800's, peak periods occurred when revivals erupted in more than the customary number of towns and villages, and unprecedented numbers joined the popular churches of that age. One of these apexes of religious fervor followed the low ebb which occurred during the War of 1812. Between 1816 and 1821, revivals were reported in more towns and a greater number of settlers joined churches than in any previous period of New York history. After a brief calm in which awakenings continued in a less spectacular manner, the grand climax in the "series of crests in religious zeal" occurred between 1825 and 1837. [^41]

A Fruitful Field All Ready to Harvest

For a variety of reasons, western New York was in a favorable position for rapid church growth in the early nineteenth century. New York was not only growing and developing more rapidly than any other part of the nation, but the Genesee country had been invaded by pioneers who had emigrated from the section of the land where religious activity was higher than in any other portion of the United States. In 1776, for example, about 12 percent of the inhabitants of New England were churched in comparison to about 10 percent in the Mid-Atlantic states, and approximately 5 percent in the south. [^42]Many of the unchurched New Englanders, however, were religious-minded people, like the Smiths, who were seeking God and were desirious of joining God's true church. The reason why some of these immigrants were not members of a Christian denomination was that there was no meetinghouse in the neighborhood where they lived. Even though the church was the center of religious activity in the compact agricultural villages, many New Englanders lived on isolated farms located more than three miles from a church building, and farmers who lived far from a meetinghouse found it most inconvenient to attend church with any degree of regularity. Other immigrants were unchurched because they could not accept Congregationalism, which was the dominant faith in that section, or rejected the Calvinism proclaimed by most itinerant Baptists who were preaching in America at that time. If one did not endorse the five points of Calvinism, including predestination, there was in most instances no religious society in New England to which he could conscientiously unite. Consequently, many of the pioneers living in western Massachusetts, western Connecticut, and Vermont belonged to a generation in which vast numbers were un-churched but whose grandparents or parents had been active members of a Christian society.

Recognizing that many, but probably not the majority, of early settlers of the Genesee country were seeking organized religion, innumerable preachers of various denominations followed the immigrants and commenced preaching and organizing societies in the Finger Lake country. At the time of the First Vision, only about 11 or 12 percent of the settlers residing in the towns of Farmington and Palmyra were members of a Christian faith (which was the national average at that time), but many of these pioneers were interested in joining one of the communions which had been or was on the verge of organizing. Confronted with a perpetual stream of revivalistic sermons and witnessing the creation of many different religious societies which espoused a variety of doctrines, large numbers of settlers residing in western New York (and many other parts of America) asked the question, "Which church should I join?" In the early nineteenth century, religious liberty was becoming a reality. The beliefs of many were being brought into harmony with many of the doctrines of the Restored Church; and vast numbers of Americans were engaged in a quest for religious truth. The field was white all ready to harvest.

Unusual Religious Excitement

One who was spiritually quickened while living in the Burned-over District was Joseph Smith. Joseph became keenly interested in organized religion during one of the higher waves of revivalism which swept across western New York. Approximately eighteen years after witnessing this spiritual phenomenon, Joseph recalled his experience from a distant vantage point. The Prophet asserted that in the second year after his removal to Manchester (which in 1820 was Farmington town), an "unusual excitement on the subject of religion" occurred in "the place" where he lived. "It commenced," he said, "with the Methodists, but soon became general among all the sects in that region of country." Then probably placing this religious quickening in an enlarged historical setting, Joseph declared, "Indeed, the whole district of country seemed affected by it, and great multitudes united themselves to the different religious parties." [^43]

It is difficult to determine precisely what Joseph Smith meant when he said that there was unusual religious excitement in the place where he lived, for the Prophet did not elaborate on this statement, nor did he define the terms which he employed. The religious excitement mentioned by the Mormon Prophet might or might not have precipitated an immediate, substantial increase in church membership in his neighborhood. Although revivals, quickenings, awakenings, and religious excitement were terms used interchangeably by authors of the early nineteenth century, these words were employed to describe an increased interest in religion, a conversion of settlers from darkness to light, a reconversion of former members, an extension of the power of godliness, an outpouring of the spirit, and a visible change in the patterns of conduct of individuals. [^44]Although significant increases in church membership are often indicators of the reality of a revival in a region, the absence of substantial membership increases is not evidence that a spiritual quickening did not occur in a community. Countless individuals joined churches many years after they had experienced a profound spiritual change. Baptist and Quaker records and reports appearing in newspapers and religious journals do not indicate any special revival in Palmyra village in 1819 or 1820, but not all awakenings were reported and records of the early 1820's are not available for the Western Presbyterian Church and the Palmyra Methodist society. When Joseph stated that great multitudes united themselves to the different religious parties, he was not referring to the neighborhood where he lived, but identified the membership increase with the "whole district of country."

There are many plausible explanations of what Joseph meant by a religious excitement initiated by the Methodists in the place where he lived. He might have had a spiritual experience while listening to a circuit rider enthusiastically proclaim his interpretation of the word of God in a home, school, field, or grove in or near Palmyra or Manchester village. He might have been awakened while attending a district conference or a Methodist camp meeting held near Palmyra village or along the Vienna road near Phelps. One of the contemporaries of Joseph, 0rsamus Turner, concluded that the Mormon Prophet became excited about religion while he was attending a camp meeting held "away down in the woods, on the Vienna road," a road that ran east of Palmyra village and led to the village of Phelps. [^45]This report of Joseph's catching a "spark of Methodist fire" while attending a camp meeting along the Vienna road has been interpreted by several town historians as a meeting held in or near Phelps or in Oaks Corners, a small farming community situated southeast of Phelps village. [^46]

Another possible explanation of Joseph's description of the historical setting of the First Vision is that his religious interests might have been enhanced directly or indirectly as a result of the many memorable services which were held in the town of Phelps, meetings which precipitated a powerful spiritual awakening in that section of western New York.

The historic gatherings which led to a great revival and created such an impression on the settlers in the town of Phelps began in July, 1819, when the Methodists of the Genesee Conference held their annual meetings in Phelps village, which was then called Vienna. Approximately one hundred Methodist ministers gathered in this small village during that summer to deliberate, to develop programs, to resolve controversies, and to receive edification, instruction, and annual appointments. The sessions of this conference were held in a clapboard meeting house, a newly completed Methodist church which was painted with yellow ochre and crowned with a diminutive cupola. Although this building contained no classrooms, carpets, or cushions, fairly comfortable seats with backs were installed shortly before the conference began. [^47]

In addition to the special services which were held in connection with this conference, camp meetings were conducted following the deliberations; and during the ensuing twelve months (from the summer of 1819 to the summer of 1820) a "flaming spiritual advance" occurred in that region. [^48]

Since the boundaries of the Genesee Conference stretched from the Catskill Mountains in the east to Detroit in the west, a distance of about five hundred miles, and from Upper Canada in the north to central Pennsylvania in the south, a distance of about three hundred miles, many itinerant preachers—from western New York, northwestern Pennsylvania, portions of Canada, Ohio, and other western regions—traveled through or near Palmyra and Farmington in the summer of 1819. It was common for those ministers to preach and participate in camp meetings while they were traveling to and from their annual conferences. It is not unreasonable, therefore, to assume that Joseph Smith might have attended meetings convoked by ministers of this conference held immediately before, during or shortly after the deliberations which took place in Phelps. And, since Joseph employed the phrase "place where we lived" while preparing a history of the Church in Missouri and Illinois, and since many farmers of that age traveled ten or fifteen miles to attend Methodist conferences or camp meetings, the unusual excitement might have occurred in the town of Farmington or one of the neighboring towns such as Phelps or Palmyra.

Ecclesiastical records clearly reveal that unusual gains in church membership occurred in 1819 and 1820 in many communities located within a radius of twenty miles of the Smith farm. Evidence that Baptists in the neighborhood where Joseph lived prospered from the religious stirrings is found in the membership reports of the Baptist society of Manchester village located about six miles south of the Smith farm. Twenty-two converts were added to this congregation in 1819, which was a significant growth for a church consisting of only 87 members in 1818. [^49]When representatives of the Presbyterian churches assembled in Phelps in February, 1820, members of the Presbytery of Geneva reported that "during the past year more have been received into the communion of the Churches than perhaps in any former year," and the word "perhaps" has been crossed out by pencil in the manuscript. [^50]Presbyterian records further reveal that revivals were occurring in 1819-1820 in Geneva, Phelps, Rochester, Penfield, West Bloomfield, and Lima, all communities located within twenty miles of the Smith farm, and prospects of revivals were reported in Canandaigua and Waterloo, which probably means that an unusual religious excitement had commenced in these communities. [^51]Freewill Baptist records indicate an unusual growth in the area of Junius, and Episcopalians issued encouraging reports from missionaries laboring in Phelps and Waterloo. [^52]Methodist reports specify that in 1820, membership in the Lyons circuit, a circuit located immediately east of the Smith farm, doubled, increasing from 374 to 654 members. [^53]

Quaker records of the Farmington Monthly Meeting, which included congregations located in Riga, Rochester, Palmyra, Macedon, Farmington, South Farmington, and Deerfield (the last-named group being located about forty or fifty miles south of Palmyra), further reveal unusual increases in church membership in the months immediately preceding the First Vision. [^54]From 1803 to 1814 about thirteen new members were added to this monthly meeting annually, with the largest increase occurring in 1808, when twenty-two were added to the societies. Between 1815 and 1820, however, more than thirty-three persons were added annually to the worship meetings that comprised this body of Quakers. The largest increases occurred in 1817 when more than fifty were added, but many of these new members were children who had matured and were finally admitted into the church. The second largest increase in the early history of this monthly meeting occurred in 1819 when thirty-seven were admitted, nearly all of whom were adults. A comparison of these converts with individuals enumerated on the census of 1820 and the Quaker membership summary of 1828 indicates that at least thirteen of these newly admitted Quakers resided in Farmington, the town where Joseph lived. Evidence that the religious excitement among the Quakers reached a crescendo in 1819 is apparent when one continues to examine the copious records kept by this Protestant group. In 1820 there was an addition of twenty-six; then from 1821 to 1828, when a schism interrupted the growth of this society, an average of only sixteen new members were admitted annually. [^55]Quaker records therefore inform us that in Joseph's neighborhood there were greater increases in church membership in the years immediately preceding the First Vision than during any other period in the early history of this denomination; and the Quakers were the largest religious society, numerically speaking, in the area where Joseph lived at the time of his remarkable experience in the sacred grove.

Membership Increases in the "Whole District of Country"

Ecclesiastical records further reveal that there was a great awakening in many other sections of western and eastern New York in 1819 and 1820. Although not complete nor always reliable, records compiled by the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church provide one indication of the numbers affected during the initial phase of this great awakening. The average annual increase of membership in this church in western New York between 1812 and 1816 was about five hundred. In 1816, however, Presbyterian membership in the region west of the Catskill Mountains increased by 1050; in 1817, the increase was 1989; in 1818, 1516; and in 1819, 1513. During the year preceding the First Vision, the national increase in Presbyterian Church membership was approximately 6500, and the increase in the state of New York alone was 2250, representing 35 percent of the national total. But what is also most significant is the fact that more than 67 percent of the New York converts came from the area west of the Catskill mountains. That means that 23 percent of the national increase in Presbyterian Church membership occurred in the "Burned-over District." The General Assembly of this church also reported in 1820 that awakenings were occurring in 54 congregations in New York, and the enumeration did not include the congregations in the Albany region where 1400 were added to the churches. [^56]

National Calvinist Baptist records, which are very incomplete, reveal that about 22 percent of the reported additions to theft societies during the period immediately preceding the First Vision, occurred in congregations located in western New York. [^57]The 1820 minutes of fourteen of the nineteen Baptist associations of New York are available in the American Baptist Historical Society, and these records reflect that 2,425 believers were baptized into the Baptist faith in 1819. Reports for that year from six of the nine associations located west of the Appalachian Mountains indicate that 1,410 additions occurred in the churches located in western New York. According to the national statistics published by the Baptists, the most significant increase in the United States in 1819 occurred in the Madison Association where more than 500 converts were baptized, the largest additions taking place at Homer, Truxton, Petersburg, and Nelson, New York. [^58]In that year too, more than two hundred were admitted by baptism into the Saratoga, Cayuga, and Otsega associations. Except for Saratoga, all of the churches included in these alliances of Baptist societies were located in western New York. Baptist membership records further reveal that in 1820, 2,137 were baptized into the New York societies (based on reports from sixteen associations).

FIG. 14. The Great Revival of 1819-1820 in Western New York

The largest additions in that year occurred in the Cayuga Association, where 199 were baptized, and which included the societies located in the vicinity where Joseph lived. Also the congregations located in Phelps, Gorham, Sodus, and Williamson experienced unusual increases in church membership at the time of the First Vision. [^59]

Methodist membership figures further reveal substantial increases in membership in the "Burned-over District" at the time of the First Vision. In 1820 there was an increase of 2,256 members in that region, which was the largest annual increase reported by this group for that section of America. [^60]

Not only were there substantial increases in church membership of the Methodist, Presbyterian, and Calvinist Baptist societies in the region of country where Joseph Smith lived, but there were also additions in the Christian denomination, the Freewill and Seventh-day Baptist societies, and other Protestant faiths.

While summarizing the spiritual quickenings that awakened America into a new reality of the divinity of Christ, one editor declared in 1820 that there were currently more reports of revivals in religious publications than in any previous era. [^61]Although an unusual spiritual phenomenon was occurring in various sections of America, New York state, especially the area stretching from Albany to Buffalo, was the ecclesiastical storm center of the new nation at the time one of the most remarkable visions was unfolded to mankind. Accounts of the enlivenments which occurred in western and upstate New York in 1819 and 1820 were advertised in Palmyra, and the record number of baptisms occurring in the area east of Lake Cayuga and in the region of Albany was enumerated in the local newspaper, the Palmyra Register. [^62]Joseph Smith therefore undoubtedly knew that unusual religious quickenings were occurring in New York in 1819 and 1820, that great numbers were joining churches, and that additions were being made in the various denominations located in the vicinity where he lived.

When Sarepta Marsh Baker, one of the converts of the Great Revival of 1819-1820, who lived in Phelps, recalled the quickenings which followed the annual Methodist conference held in her community in 1819, she employed an expression remarkably similar to Joseph's account. "The revival," she observed, "was a religious cyclone which swept over the whole region round about and the kingdom of darkness was terribly shaken." [^63]

Although one cannot define precisely what Joseph meant by "the place where we lived" and the "whole district of country" by employing the tools of modern historical research, various primary sources clearly demonstrate that there were substantial increases in church membership in many sections of western New York at the time of the First Vision. There is not only evidence of religious excitement occurring in the area where Joseph Smith lived in 1820, but one can substantiate the Prophet's accounts of great multitudes joining churches in the whole region of country by defining district of country as an area within twenty, fifty, or one hundred miles of the Smith farm, or by adopting a definition of western or upstate New York. The most reliable sources, therefore, reveal that Joseph Smith's brief description of the historical setting of the First Vision is in harmony with other contemporary accounts of the great awakening which occurred in New York in 1819 and 1820. Indeed, the Mormon Prophet penned a brief but reliable description of the enlivenment which occurred in the "Burned-over District" at the time he launched his quest for religious truth.

1 For additional information on the preliminaries to the restoration and the religious climate in America during the colonial period and the early Republic see Milton V. Backman, Jr., American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970).

2 lbid., 283; Edwin Scott Gaustad, Historical Atlas of Religion in America (New York: Harper and Row, 1962), 162.

3 James Thayer Addison, The Episcopal Church in the United States (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1951), 74; Walter H. Stowe, "The Clergy of the Episcopal Church in 1785," The Protestant Episcopal Church Historical Magazine, XX (September, 1951), 253.

4 Gaustad, op. cit., 52, 167.

5 lbid., 43, 52-53.

6 William Thacher, "A Sketch of the History and Present State of Methodism in Connecticut," The Methodist Magazine, V (January, 1822), 33-36.

7 David E. Ellis, and others, A Short History of New York State (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1967), ch. 16.

8 Backman, op. cit., 291-2.

9 John Webb Pratt, Religion, Politics, and Diversity: The Church-State Theme in New York History (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1967), 37-39. Trinitarian Christians in colonial America were defined as individuals who held that God was three persons of one essence.

10 lbid., 85.

11 The Constitution of the State of New York (Fishkill, 1777), 31.

12 A. B. Katkamier, ed., The History of the Township of Farmington. New York, (n. p., 1897), 22.

13 Records of Farmington Monthly Meetings, 1803-1816, 15-16, 19, microfilm copy located in the Genealogical Society of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; [W. H. McIntosh, ed], History of Ontario County, New York (Philadelphia, 1876), 194.

14 History of Ontario County, 194.

15 Prior to 1823, the society which met in Macedon was referred to as the Palmyra Friends and the society in Palmyra was named the East Palmyra Friends. Farmington Monthly Meetings, 1803-1816, 195: Farmington Monthly Meetings, 1816-1831 (Pt. 17), 17, 285.

16 Farmington Monthly Meetings, 1816-1831 (Pt. 17), 11, 42, 46, 57, 87, 93, 119.

17 Ibid., 269.

18 Minutes of the First Baptist Church of Farmington are located in the American Baptist Historical Society, Rochester, New York. See also Minutes of the Fifty-Eighth Anniversary of the Ontario Baptist Association (Canandaigua, 1871), 13; Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, August 4, 1883.

19 Minutes of the Twenty-Sixth Anniversary of the Wayne Baptist Association (Lyons, 1860), 11-15; The Massachusetts Baptist Missionary Magazine. II (March, 1810), 280-81; Fred G. Reynolds, One Hundred Years' History of the First Baptist Church of Macedon. N.Y. (Macedon, n.d.), 3-5. The earliest records of the First Baptist Church of Macedon (then called Palmyra) are located in the American Baptist Historical Society.

20 Minutes of the Twenty-Sixth Anniversary of the Wayne Baptist Association, 12.

21 Ibid., 12-13; Reynolds, op. cit., 5-6.

22 Wayne County Journal (Palmyra), June 6, 1872; Wayne Sentinel (Palmyra), November 17, 1838.

23 Harriett M. Wiles, comp., Church Records of the Presbyterian Church of East Palmyra, Wayne County, New York, 1933, copy located in the Church Genealogical Society; W. B. Dada, A History of the Presbyterian Church of East Palmyra, N.Y., 1876, 7, 11-12, located in the Presbyterian Historical Society, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; [Sarah Lines], One Hundred and Twenty-Five Years of the Western Presbyterian Church (Palmyra: n.p., 1942), 1-2.

24 Dada, op. cit., 31; [Lines], op. cit., 2; Palmyra Wayne County. New York (Rochester: Woman's Society of the Western Presbyterian Church. 1907), 40-41. Since the East Palmyra church retained about sixty members. membership in the two congregations remained about the same for several years.

25 Palmyra, Wayne County, 36; Records of the Session of the Presbyterian Church in Palmyra, II, 11-13, located in the Western Presbyterian Church, Palmyra, New York, microfilm copy in Brigham Young University Library. A selection from this record is reproduced in Appendix K. Sophronia might have withdrawn from this society earlier, being married in 1827.

26 Franklin Bowditch Dexter, Biographical Sketches of the Graduates of Yale College with Annals of the College History (New York, 1907), IV, 695-96; New York Observer, September 1, 1838, 140; Palmyra. Wayne County, 47; Records of the Presbytery of Geneva. Book C, 253-54, located in the Presbyterian Historical Society, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. A description of the revival that was occurring in Palmyra and vicinity in 1825 appeared in the Wayne Sentinel. March 2, 1825, which was a quotation from the Religious Advocate of Rochester, a Rochester newspaper that was first issued in the fall of 1824. See The Rochester Telegraph. September 7, 1824.

27 Charles H. Dayton and John Garth Coleman, A Brief History of the Presbytery of Geneva and a Tribute to Some Early Ministers (Shortsville, New York: Geneva-Lyons Presbytery, 1955), 5: Records of the Presbytery of Geneva, Book C, 92, 121; History of Ontario County, 195.

28 Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, December 19, 1902; Palmyra Wayne County 51; History of Ontario County, 181-82; Mary Louise Eldredge, comp., Pioneers of Macedon and other Papers of the Macedon Center Historical Society (Macedon Center, 1912), 132-33; [W. H. McIntosh, ed.], History of Wayne County, New York (Philadelphia, 1877), 148.

29 Miscellaneous Records, Book C, 154, Ontario County Court House, Canandaigua, New York; History of Wayne County, 148.

30 Methodist Minutes (New York, 1819), 51. From July, 1820, to July, 1821, the Ontario Circuit was supplied by Thomas Wright and Elihu Nash. Methodist Minutes (New York, 1820), 44. Some LDS historians have identified Rev. George Lane as possibly one of the ministers who participated in the religious excitement of 1819-1820. Rev. George Lane was appointed presiding elder of the Susquehanna District in northern Pennsylvania at a canference held in Vienna (now Phelps) during the summer of 1819. The following summer, Elder Lane attended the annual conference held in Niagara. Therefore, before and after the First Vision, this minister could have been in the area where Joseph lived. However, the Prophet did not identify the Methodist preacher who initiated the religious excitement in the place where he lived nor the individual he contacted following this memorable experience. For additional information on this preacher and his possible connections with Mormonism, see Larry C. Porter, "Reverend George Lane," BYU Studies, IX (Spring, 1969), 321-340.

31 Charles Giles, Pioneer: A Narrative of the Nativity. Experiences. Travels, and Ministerial Labours of Rev. Charles Giles (New York, 1844). 266-70; "Religious and Missionary Intelligence," Methodist Magazine. II (December, 1819), 474-76; Eben Smith, "Progress of the Work of God on Hudson-River District," Methodist Magazine. V (December. 1822), 474-75.

32 Theophilus Armenius, "Account of the Rise and Progress of the Work of God n the Western Country, Methodist Magazine. II (July, 1819), 272; Thomas Madden, "Good Effects of Campmeetings," Methodist Magazine. I (1818), 152-53: "Genesee Conference," Methodist Magazine. IX (August, 1826), 313.

33 Giles, op. cit., 268; R. Smith, Recollections of Nettleton and the Great Revival of 1820 (Albany, 1848), 31-33, 71, 74, 123; T. Spicer, "A Short Sketch of the Revival of Religion in the City of Troy, A.D. 1816," Methodist Magazine, I (1818), 152-53.

34 M. P. Blakeslee, Notes for a History of Methodism in Phelps, 1886, 7, copy located in Brigham Young University Library. Blakeslee discusses in his manuscript history a camp meeting held near Palmyra in 1818, in which twenty were baptized and forty converted to the Methodist society, and which was not reported in the newspapers and religious journals of that age.

35 Palmyra Register, June 28, 1820; July 5, 1820.

36 Miscellaneous Records, Book B, 51-52, 60, Ontario County Court House.

37 Rev. John S. Carrie, Zion Episcopal Church. Palmyra. New York (n.p., n.d.); Palmyra Courier. August 17, 1866, November 26, 1858; The Zion Episcopal Church Records of Palmyra, Wayne County, N.Y., Part I, 1-2, located in New York Public Library.

38 History of Ontario County, 111-12, 220-21; G. A. Burgess and J. T. Ward, Free Baptist Cyclopaedia (Chicago, 1889), 474.

39 Backman, op. cit., 308.

40 "Whitney R. Cross, The Burned-over District (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1950), 3-4.

41 lbid., 13; See also Smith, Recollections of Nettleton and the Great Revival of 1820.

42 Backman, op. cit., 277.

43 Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1952), 46.

44 Wm. Neill, "Thoughts on Revivals of Religion," The Christian Herald, VII (April 7, 1821), 708-11.

45 O. Turner, History of the Pioneer Settlement of Phelps and Gorham's Purchase, and Morris' Reserve (Rochester, 1852), 214.

46 Mabel E. Oaks, History of Oaks Corners Church and Community (Phelps, 1954), 11: Hamilton Child, Gazetteer and Business Directory of Ontario County. New York. for 1867-8 (Syracuse, 1867), 52.

47 Journal of the Genesee Conference, 1810 to 1828, 76-84, copy located in Brigham Young University Library; Blakeslee, op. cit., 6-7: Helen Post Ridley, When Phelps Was Young (Phelps, 1939), 55.

48 Blakeslee, op. cit., 7-8; Ridley, op. cit., 55.

49 Minutes of the Ontario Baptist Association (Canandaigua, 1818), 3; Minutes of the Ontario Baptist Association (New York, 1819), 2.

50 Records of the Presbytery of Geneva, Book C, 37-38.

51 Idem.; Extracts from the Minutes of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church (Philadelphia, 1821), 22.

52 Marilla Marks, ed., Memoirs of the Life of David Marks (Dover, N.H., 1846, 26; Charles W. Hayes, The Diocese of Western New York (Rochester, 1904), 53.

53 Methodist Minutes (New York, 1820), 7; Methodist Minutes (New York, 1821), 27.

54 S. Ricketson, An Account of the Times and Places of Holding the Meetings Constituting New York Yearly Meeting of Friends (Poughkeepsie, 1821), 10.

55 Records of the Farmington Monthly Meetings, Pt. 11, Pt. 17. A summary of Quaker membership in Palmyra, Macedon, and Farmington in 1828 is located in Pt. ll (1821-1843), 58-77.

56 Minutes of the General Assembly of the Presybterian Church in the United States of America from its Organization A.D. 1789 to A.D. 1820 (Philadelphia, n.d.), 516, 574-75, 634-35, 667, 696, 742.

57 Proceedings of the Baptist General Convention in the United States, at their Second Triennial Meeting (Philadelphia, 1820), 308-309.

58 Idem., Minutes of the Madison Baptist Association (Morrisville, 1820).

59 Minutes of the Ontario Baptist Association (Canandaigua, 1820), 2-4.

60 Methodist Minutes (1820), 27-28; Methodist Minutes (1821), 27. Since the district of Ontario was created in 1819, there was a realignment of the districts in the area where the Smith family lived prior to the First Vision. It is therefore difficult to determine the precise increase in membership of the Methodists at that time. Nevertheless, the records indicate a doubling of membership in 1820 in the area where the Smith family lived.

61 "Revivals of Religion," The Western New York Baptist Magazine, III (August, 1820), 91.

62 Palmyra Register, September 13, 1820; August 16, 1820.

63 Blakeslee, op. cit., 7-8.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Josiah Quincy, Figures of the Past (Boston, 1883), 376-400.
[^2] 2 W. Pierrepont White, "Indian Possessions and Settled Areas in New York State from 1771 to 1820," The Rochester Historical Society Publication Fund Series, VII (1928), 225, 227.
[^3] 3 lbid., 226-27; Clark Wissler, Indians of the United States (Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1948), 110-12.
[^4] 4 Wissler, op. cit., 118, 125.
[^5] 5 Diedrich Willers, Jr., The Centennial Celebration of General Sullivan's Campaign against the Iroquois in 1779 (Waterloo, 1880), 97-99.
[^6] 6 Ibid., 157-58. See also Charles P. Whittemore, A General of the Revolution, John Sullivan of New Hampshire (New York: Columbia University Press, 1961), ch. 9.
[^7] 7 Alexander C. Flick, ed., History of the State of New York (New York City: Columbia University Press, 1935), V, 115-17, 145.
[^8] 8 Flick, op. cit., 152-58;[O[rsamus] Turner, History of the Pioneer Settlement of Phelps and Gorham's Purchase, and Morris' Reserve (Rochester, 1852), 140-42, 162.
[^9] 9 Herbert A. Wisbey, Jr., Pioneer Prophetess: Jemima Wilkinson. the Publick Universal Friend (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1964), 105-112. 163, 168.
[^10] 10 Turner, op. cit., 163.
[^11] 11 White, op. cit., 229; Hamilton Child, Gazetteer and Business Directory of Ontario County, New York for 1867-8 (Syracuse, 1867), 45-46, 49-52; Horatio Gates Spafford, A Gazetteer of the State of New York (Albany, 1824), 400-401.
[^12] 12 The first known white pioneer to settle Canandaigua (and first known settler west of Seneca Lake) was named Joseph Smith. He erected a block house on Main Street where he opened a tavern. A few years later, he moved to Farmington and there erected the first frame building and with the assistance of Jacob Smith built the first sawmill in that town in 1795. Turner, op. cit., 163, 222.
[^13] 13 Ibid., 217-19; "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, August 4, 1871, 3.
[^14] 14 "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, January 26, 1872, 3; February 2, 1872, 3.
[^15] 15 Ibid., January 19, 1872; 3.
[^16] 16 Book of Deeds, I, 223, Ontario County Clerk's Office, Canandaigua, New York, hereafter cited as Deeds. Turner, op. cit., 378-80; "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, August 4, 1871, 3; [W. H. McIntosh, ed.], History of Wayne County, New York (Philadelphia, 1877), 134.
[^17] 17 Deeds, VI, 45; "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, May 3, 1872, 3; Wayne Cutler Gunnell, "Martin Harris—Witness and Benefactor" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1955), 37-38. Copies of the contracts between Martin Harris and E. B. Grandin and Thomas Lakey are located in the appendix of his thesis.
[^18] 18 History of Wayne County, 136; Turner, op. cit., 388; Deeds, I, 230-31.
[^19] 19 History of Wayne County, 117-19.
[^20] 20 Charles Brown, "Manchester in the Early Days," Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, October 18, 1902; October 25, 1902, copy located in the Brigham Young University Library. This collection contains selections of articles which appeared in the Shortsville Enterprise and typewritten copies were placed on file in the publisher's office. See also "Old Time School Matters," Files, June 7, 1889.
[^21] 21 Brown, op. cit., February 27, 1903.
[^22] 22 "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, January 26, 1872, 3; February 2, 1872, 3.
[^23] 23 "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, March 1, 1872, 3.
[^24] 24 "Obituary of Sunderland P. Gardner," Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, February 18, 1893; "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, March 15, 1872, 3.
[^25] 25 Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier. August 4, 1871, 3; Turner. op. cit., 218.
[^26] 26 Joseph Smith, History, Note A, LDS Church Historian's Office, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereafter referred to as LDS Church Historian's Office.
[^27] 27 Ibid.
[^28] 28 Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, ed. Preston Nibley (Salt Lake City: Bookeraft, 1958), 61. Although this later edition has been cited, the references cited in this work have been compared with the first edition and the quotations harmonize with the original publication.
[^29] 29 Joseph Smith, History, Note A; Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., 62-63.
[^30] 30 "Old Newspapers," The Palymyra Courier, February 23, 1872, 3.
[^31] 31 "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, September 1, 1871, 3; February 28, 1872; History of Wayne County, New York (Philadelphia, 1877), 137.
[^32] 32 "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, September 1, 1871, 3; February 23, 1872, 3; History of Wayne County, 140-41.
[^33] 33 History of Wayne County, 142. It was not until about 1870 that four churches were located on the famous Four Corners. In 1832 a Presbyterian meeting house was erected on the site where the present Western Presbyterian church stands. A Baptist stone meeting house was built on the Four Corners in 1841 and then rebuilt in 1871. In 1867, the Methodists erected a church on this corner; and in 1873 the Episcopalians completed their church which replaced the wooden structure which had been used for about forty-five years. See Wayne County Journal (Palmyra), June 6, 1872; Thomas Cook, Palmyra and Vicinity (Palmyra, 1930), 249-54.
[^34] 34 History of Wayne County, 142. See Appendix L.
[^35] 35 Population schedules of the Fourth Census of the United States, 1820 (Washington: National Archives, 1959) Microfilm Roll 62, New York, Vol. 1.
[^36] 36 Horation Gates Spafford, A Gazetteer of the State of New York (Albany, 1824), 400-01.
[^37] 37 Willard W. Bean, A.B.C. History of Palmyra and the Beginning of Mormonism (Palmyra, 1938), 12.
[^38] 38 Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith. ed. Preston Nibley (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft), 63-64.
[^39] 39 Pomeroy Tucker, Origin, Rise and Progress of Mormonism (New York, 1867), 12.
[^40] 40 Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, April 3, 1903: Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., 64; Tucker, op. cit., 13.
[^41] 41 Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit.. 85, 331-46.
[^42] 42 Deeds, I, 187-88; II, 267-68; III, 118; XX, 39; XXXXIV, 232-34.
[^43] 43 Ibid., XXXXIV, 232-34; Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., 93-99.
[^44] 44 Lucy, Samuel and Hyrum were active members of the Western Presbyterian Church until 1828. Records of the Session of the Presbyterian Church in Palmyra, II, located in the Western Presbyterian Church, Palmyra, New York, 11-13, microfilm copy located in the Brigham Young University Library. Turner, op. cit, 213-14.
[^45] 45 Tucker, op. cit., 14.
[^46] 46 Kirtland Letter Book, 1829-1835, 1-2, located in the LDS Church Historian's Office. Although the account appears in Appendix A with the punctuation and spelling as it appears in the original, in the main body of this work the spelling in the quotations has been corrected.
[^47] 47 Census of 1820, Farmington, No. 524.
[^48] 48 E. D. Howe, Mormonism Unvailed (Painesville, 1834), 237-40.
[^49] 49 Scrapbook of articles from old newspapers located in the Waterloo Historical Society, 46.
[^50] 50 Tucker, op. cit., 232, 248-49.
[^51] 51 Spafford, op. cit., 400-01; Palmyra Herald. Canal Advertiser. June 19, 1822, 2.
[^52] 52 Wayne Sentinel. September 26, 1828.
[^53] 53 Ibid.
[^54] 54 Harry J. Carman and Harold C. Syrett, History of the American People (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1959), I, 473-75: Palmyra Register, November 10, 1819, November 17, 1819, December 8, 1819; Palmyra Herald, October 9, 1823, November 13, 1823.
[^55] 55 History of Wayne County, 141.
[^56] 56 Ibid., 145.
[^57] 57 The Palmyra Reflector, January 2, 1830; January 13, 1830; January 22, 1830. Cole published selections from the First Book of Nephi and from the Book of Alma.
[^58] 58 Wayne Sentinel, December 3, 1823; Miscellaneous Records, Book C, 178, located in the Ontario County Court House, Canandaigua, New York; Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, July 26, 1890.
[^59] 59 Palmyra Register, October 6, 1818; October 13, 1818; October 20, 1818.
[^60] 60 Ontario Messenger, April 25, 1815.
[^61] 61 Public Schools, 1828-1915, located in the Town Clerk's Office, Clifton Springs, New York, microfilm copy located in the Brigham Young University Library. See also, Palmyra Herald, March 12, 1823, p. 4.
[^62] 62 Ontario Repository, March 21, 1820. A few early nineteenth-century records of the Palmyra schools have been preserved and are located in the Public Library in Palmyra. A microfilm copy of these records has been placed in the Brigham Young University Library.
[^63] 63 Public Schools, 1828-1915; Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, File No. XXXIII.
