Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith's First Vision: Confirming Evidences and Contemporary Accounts ( 1971)

First VisionHCAPPENDIX C

1838 Recital of the First Vision

First VisionHCThe account of the early history of the Church, including a description of the First Vision, which appears in the Pearl of Great Price was originally dictated by the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1838. The manuscript copy located in the Church Historian's Office is in the handwriting of James Mulholland, who was Joseph's scribe in 1839.

First VisionHCOwing to the many reports which have been put in circulation by evil disposed and designing persons in relation to the rise and progress of the Church of ccc Jesus Christ of Latter day Saints, all of which have been designed by the authors thereof to militate against its Character as a Church, and its progress in the world I have been induced to write this history so as to disabuse the publick mind, and put all enquirers after truth into possession of the facts as they have transpired in relation both to myself and the Church as far as I have such facts in possession.

First VisionHCIn this history I will present the various events in relation to this Church in truth and righteousness as they have transpired, or as they at present exist, being now the eighth year since the organisation of said Church. I was born in the year of our Lord One thousand Eight hundred and five, on the twenty third day of December, in the town of Sharon, Windsor County, State of Vermont. ccc Note A 131 My father Joseph Smith Senior

First VisionHCccc see note E. page 2.

First VisionHCadenda. My Father left the State of Vermont and moved to Palmyra, Ontario, (now Wayne) County, in the State of New York when I was in my tenth year. or ccc thereabout.

First VisionHCIn about four years after my father's arrival at Palmyra, he moved with his family into Manchester in the same County of Ontario. His family consisting of eleven souls, namely, My Father Joseph Smith, My Mother Lucy Smith whose name previous to her marriage was Mack, daughter of Solomon Mack, my brothers Alvin (who sss is now dead) ccc died Nov 19th 1823 in the 25 year of his age Hyrum, Myself, Samuel-Harrison, William, Don Carloss, and my Sisters Sophonia, Cathrine and Lucy. Sometime in the second year after our removal to Manchester, there was in the place where we lived an unusual excitement on the subject of religion. It commenced with the Methodists, but soon became general among all the sects in that region of country, indeed the whole district of Country seemed affected by it and great multitudes united themselves to the different religious parties, which Created no Small stir and division among the people, Some Crying, "Lo here" and some Lo there. Some were contending for the Methodist faith, Some for the Presbyterian, and some for the Baptist, for notwithstanding the great love which the Converts to these different faiths expressed at the time of their conversion, and the great Zeal manifested by the respective Clergy who were active in getting up and promoting this extraordinary scene of religious feeling, in order to have everybody converted as they were pleased to Call it, let them join what sect they pleased. Yet when the Converts began to file off some to one party and some to another, it was seen that the seemingly good feelings of both the Priests and the Converts were sss more pretended more pretended than real, for a scene of great confusion and bad feeling ensued, Priest contending against priest, and convert against convert So that all their good feelings one for another (if they ever had any) were entirely lost in a strife of words and a contest about opinions.

First VisionHCI was at this time in my fifteenth year. My Fathers family w sss as ere proselyted to the Presbyterian faith and four of them joined that Church, Namely, My Mother Lucy, My Brothers Hyrum, Samuel Harrison, and my Sister Sophonia.

First VisionHCDuring this time of great excitement my mind was called up to serious reflection and great uneasiness, but though my feelings were deep and often pungent, still I kept myself aloof from all these parties though I attended their several meetings as often as occasion would permit. But in process of time my mind became somewhat partial to the Methodist sect, and I felt some desire to be united with them, but so great was the confusion and strife amongst the different denominations that it was impossible for a person young as I was and so unacquainted with men and things to come to any certain conclusion who was right and who was wrong. My mind at different times was greatly excited sss for the cry and tumult were so great and incessant. The Presbyterians were most decided against the Baptists and Methodists and used all their powers of either reason or sophistry to prove their errors, or at least to make the people think they were in error. On the other hand the Baptists and the Methodists in their turn were equally Zealous in endeavoring to establish their own tenets and disprove all others.

First VisionHCIn the midst of this war of words, and tumult of opinions, I often said to myself, what is to be done? Who of all these parties are right? Or are they all wrong together? And if any one of them be right which is it? And how shall I know it? While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by the contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day reading the Epistle of James, First Chapter and fifth verse which reads, "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him. Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man that this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did, for how to act I did not know and unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, would never know, for the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passage of Scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible. At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in darkness and confusion or else I must do as James directs, that is, Ask of God. I at last came to the determination to ask of God, Concluding that if he gave wisdom to them that lacked wisdom, and would give liberally and not upbraid, I might venture. So in accordance with this my determination to ask of God, I retired to the woods to make the attempt. It was on the morning of a beautiful clear day early in the spring of Eighteen hundred and twenty. It was the first time in my life that I had ccc made such an attempt, for amidst all my anxieties I had never as yet made the attempt to pray vocally.

First VisionHCAfter I had retired into the place where I had previously designed to go, having looked around me and finding myself alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desires of my heart to God, I had scarcely done so, when immediately I was ccc siezed upon by some power which entirely overcame me and ccc had such astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue So that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction. But exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out of the power of this enemy which had siezed upon me, and at the very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction, not to an imaginary ruin but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world who had such a marvelous power as I had never before felt in any being. Just at this moment of great alarm I saw a pillar ccc of light exactly over my head above the brigtness of the sun, which descended gradually untill it fell upon me. It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me I saw two personages (whose brightness and glory defy all description) standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me calling me by name and said (pointing to the other) "This is my beloved Son, Hear him." My object in going to enquire of the Lord was to know which of all the sects was right, that I might know which to join. No sooner therefore did I get possession of myself so as to be able to speak, than I asked the personages who stood above me in the light, which of all the sects was right, (for at this time it had never entered into my heart that all were wrong) and which I should join. I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong, and the Personage who addressed me said that all their Creeds were an abomination in his sight, that those professors were all corrupt, that "they draw near to me with their lips but their hearts are far from me; They teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of Godliness but they deny the power thereof." He again forbade me to join with any of them and many other things did he say unto me which I cannot write at this time. When I came to myself again I found myself lying on ccc my back looking up into Heaven. ccc B Note P 132 Some few days after I had this vision I happened to be in company with one of the Methodist Preachers who was very active in the before mentioned religious excitement and conversing with him on the subject of religion I took occasion to give him an account of the vision which I had had. I was greatly surprised at his behavior, he treated my communication not only lightly but with great contempt, Saying it was all of the Devil, that there was no such thing as visions of revelations in these days, that all such things had ceased with the Apostles and that there never would be any more of them. I soon found however that my telling the story had excited a great deal of prejudice against me among professors of religion and was the Cause of great persecution which continued to increase and though I was an obscure boy only between fourteen and fifteen years of age ccc or thereabouts and my circumstances in life such as to make a boy of no consequence in the world, Yet men of high standing would take notice sufficient sss ly to excite the public mind against me and create a hot persecution, and this was common ccc among all the Sects: all united to persecute me. It has often caused me serious reflection both then and since, how very strange it was that an obscure boy of a little over fourteen years of age and one too who was doomed to the necessity of obtaining a scanty maintainance by his daily labor should be thought a character of sufficient importance to attract the attention of the great ones of the most popular sects of the day so as to create in them a spirit of the bitterest persecution and reviling. But strange or not, so it was, and was often cause of great sorrow to myself. However it was nevertheless a fact, that I had had a Vision. I have thought since that I felt much like Paul sss did when he made his defence before King Aggrippa and related the account of the vision he had when he saw a light and heard a voice, but still there were but few who beleived him, Some Said he was dishonest, others said he was mad, and he was ridiculed and reviled, But all this did not destroy the reality of his vision. He had seen a vision he knew he had, and ccc all the persecution under Heaven could not make it otherwise, and though they should persecute him unto death Yet he knew and would know to his latest breath that he had both seen a light and heard a voice speaking unto him and all the world could not make him think or believe otherwise. So it was with me, I had actualy seen a light and in the midst of that light I saw two personages, and they did in reality speak ccc un to me, or one of them did, And though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, Yet it was true and while they were persecuting me reviling me and speaking all manner of evil against me falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my heart why persecute ccc me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision, "and who am I that I can withstand God" or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen, for I had seen a vision, I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dare I do it, at least I knew that by so doing ccc I would offend God and come under condemnation. I had now got my mind satisfied so far as the Sectarian world was concerned, that it was not my duty to join with any of them, but continue as I was untill futher directed, sss for I had found the testimony of James to be true, that a man who lacked wisdom might ask of God, and obtain and not be upbraided....

NOTE A

When I was 5 years old or thereabouts I was attacked with the Typhus Fever, and at one time, during my sickness, my father despaired of my life. The Doctors broke the fever, after which it settled under my shoulder and sss The Dr. Dr. Parker called it a sprained shoulder and anointed it with bone ointment, and freely applied the hot shovel, when it proved to be a swelling under the arm which opened, and discharged freely, after which the disease removed and descended into my left Leg and ancle and terminated in a fever Sore of the worst kind, and I endured the most acute suffering for a long time under the care of Drs. Smith, Stone and Perkins, of Hanover.

At one time eleven doctors came from Dartmouth Medical College, at Hanover, New Hampshire, for the purpose of amputation, but young as I was, I utterly refused to give my assent to the operation, but I consented to their Trying an experiment by removing a large portion of the bone from my left leg, which they did. & fourteen additional peices of bone afterwards worked out before my leg healed, during which time I was reduced so very low that my mother could carry me with ease. & after I began to get about, I went on crutches till I started for the state of New York where sss he my father had gone for the purpose of preparing a place for the removal of his family, which he affected by sending a man after us by the name of Caleb Howard, who, after he had sss got started on the Journey with my mother and family spent the money he had received of my father by drinking and Gambling etc.—We fell in with a family by the name of Gates who were travelling west, and Howard drove me from the waggon and made me travel in my weak state through the snow 40 miles per day for several days, during which time I suffered the most excrutiating weariness and pain, and all this that Mr. Howard might enjoy the Society of two of Mr. Gates Daughters which he took in the waggon where I should have Rode, and thus he continued to do day day [sic] after day through the Journey and when my brothers remonstrated with Mr. Howard for his treatment to me, he would knock them down with the but of his whip.—When we arrived at Utica, N. York, Howard threw the goods out of the waggon into the Street and attempted to run away with the Horses and waggon, but my mother seized the horses by the reign, and calling witnesses forbid his taking them away as they were her property. On our way from Utica, I was left to ride on the last Sleigh in the company, (the Gates family were in sleighs) but when that came up I was knocked down by the driver, one of Gate's Sons, and left to wollow in my blood until a stranger came along, picked me up, and carried me to the Town of Palmyra.—Howard having spent all our funds My Mother was compelled to pay our landlords bills from Utica to Palmyra, in bits of cloth, clothing etc., the last payment being made with the drops [earrings] taken from Sister Sophronia's ears for that purpose. Although the snow was generally deep through the country during this Journey we performed the whole on wheels, except the first two days when we were accompanied by my mother's mother, grandmother, Lydia Mack who was injured by the upsetting of the sleigh. & not wishing to accompany her friends west, tarried by the way with her friends in Vermont, and we soon after heard of her death supposing that she never recovered from the injury received by the overturn of the Sleigh.

NOTE B

First VisionHCWhen the light had departed I had no strength, but soon recovering in some degree, I went home. & as I leaned up to the fire piece, Mother enquired what the matter was. I replied never mind all is well.—I am well enough off. I then told my Mother I have learned for myself that Presbyterranism is not True. It seems as though the adversary was aware at a very early period of my Life that I was destined to prove a disturbance & annoyer of his kingdom, or else why should the powers of Darkness combine against me, why the oppression & persecution that arose against me, almost in my infancy?

NOTE C

First VisionHCIn making this confession no one need suppose Me guilty of any great or malignant Sins: a disposition to commit such was never in My nature; but I was guilty of Levity, and sometimes associated with Jovial company, &c, not consistent with that character which ought to be maintained by one who was called of God as I had been, but this will not seem very strange to any one who recollects My youth & is acquainted with my native cheerly Temperment.
