Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith's First Vision: Confirming Evidences and Contemporary Accounts ( 1971)

First VisionHCAPPENDIX J

First VisionHC John Taylor's Testimony of Joseph Smith's Visions

First VisionHCIn a discourse delivered in Salt Lake City on December 7, 1879, John Taylor testified that Joseph informed him of the appearance of the Father and Son and of the visitation of the Angel Moroni, Nephi, and other heavenly messengers. See John Irvine, reporter, Journal of Discourses, XXI (London, 1881), 161-63, from which the following selection has been taken. Italics inserted by the present author.

First VisionHCNow, we will come to other events, of later date; events with which we are associated—I refer now to the time that Joseph Smith came among men. What was his position? and how was he situated? I can tell you what he told me about it. He said that he was very ignorant of the ways, designs and purposes of God, and knew nothing about them; he was a youth, unacquainted with religious matters or the systems and theories of the day. He went to the Lord, having read James' statement, that "If any of you lack wisdom let him ask of God that giveth to all men liberally and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him." He believed that statement and went to the Lord and asked him, and the Lord revealed himself to him together with his Son Jesus, and, pointing to the latter, said: "This is my beloved Son, hear him." He then asked in regard to the various religions with which he was surrounded. He enquired which of them was right. for he wanted to know the right way and to walk in it. He was told that none of them was right, that they had all departed from the right way. that they had forsaken God the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that could hold no water. Afterwards the Angel Moroni come to him and revealed to him the Book of Mormon, with the history of which you are generally familiar, and also with the statements that I am now making pertaining to these things. And then came Nephi, one of the ancient prophets, that had lived upon this continent, who had an interest in the welfare of the people that he had lived amongst in those days.
