Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith's First Vision: Confirming Evidences and Contemporary Accounts ( 1971)

APPENDIX L

Palmyra in 1812

A selection from History of Wayne County, New York (Philadelphia, 1877), p. 142.

We have seen the origin of Palmyra, twenty years before Rochester began to have an existence. In 1812, the village consisted of Main street, east and west, with a cross-street, which was known south of Main as Canandaigua, and north as Church street. At the corners stood the Ensworth tavern. [Azel Ensworth owned the property on the southwest corner where the Baptist church is currently located.] A low, wet ground on the northeast corner was unoccupied. East of this was the office of Abner Cole, and next beyond was the dwelling of Ezra Shepardson. Eliphalet Rowe, the Presbyterian minister, occupied the only house which stood on Canandaigua street. On Church street there were two residences—that of James Benson and "Washington Hall," a two-story house, occupied below by George Beckwith, above for societies. On the cemetery lot stood the old church. Down Main street the eye rested upon small one-story frame houses, with a few two-story exceptions. There were no log houses—their day was past. There were spacious lots fenced with pickets and board fences. Sidewalks were of rude character, and a row of poplars extended from the present Palmyra Hotel westward to Canandaigua street, with a break in front of the stores. North along Main street, from the west, in order, were the drug-store of Dr. Gain Robinson, a story-and-a-half frame; a large low building occupied by William Jackway, Platt Williams, and Zebulon Williams; and a dwelling occupied by William P. Wilson, the tanner. On the next lot were a house and a blacksmith shop. Levi daggett later occupied both. A daughter of Daggett, Sarah, married Henry Wells, prominent in connection with the express business.

Next stood the Hurlbut property. Here was a distillery—a favorite resort. A story-and-a-half dwelling, occupied by Benjamin, brother of Abner Cole, was adjacent the property, and eastward lived the Blackmans, on the grounds now the property of Mrs. Beckwith. On the Lilley lot was the blacksmith shop of [Zachariah] Blackman, and east of it was a long shed for shelter to the teams, whose drivers had business in the coffee-house. Before this house the militia were wont to parade for "convenience sake." Some distance below Shepardson's was the store of N.H. & G. [Nathaniel H. and George] Beckwith, the tailor-shop of A. H. Reed, the saddlery of Abraham Shattock, the drugstore of McIntyre, and the house and shop of John B. Robson. A daughter of Robson married L. B. Tousley, the well-known Sabbath-school worker and eloquent speaker. Admirers in large cities asked him of what institution he was a graduate. "Deacon Jessup's tannery, Palmyra," was the reply.

The store of Nathan Thayer came next, then the dwelling of Levi Thayer, and Colt's store. East of Market street of today was the store of Samuel Wagstaff, and then that of O'Rourke. The house of Peleg Holmes, afterwards occupied by General Rogers, came next. At the foot of the street was the residence of Swift, and below were the Durfee mill and dwelling.

Returning westward, the first improvements were [Henry] Jessup's residence and tannery, William Cooks' cooper-shop and dwelling, known as the "Long House," the house of Stephen Skellinger, and the "Democratic" school-house. Farther on stood the dwelling of William T. Hussy, and adjoining was the house of Samuel Jennings, the store-keeper, and beside him was Johnson, the tailor.

There was no other dwelling till that of Dr. Robinson, previously inhabited by Ira Selby, and by Rev. Jesse Townsend. Then came the Phelps tavern, and beyond was the store building of Selby & Phelps. The house of Joseph Colt, a large flat-roofed structure, stood next west, then the residence, office, and store of William Howe Cuyler. The Franklin House, owned by S. Hathaway, a saddler and harness-shop; and on the site of the Episcopal church was the clothiery of Andrew G. Howe. Passing the brick store of the Whites and the residence of Dyer Ensworth, we find the house of Silas Hart, and above him the Tice and the Shutliff places. Isolated upon the hill north of Main street was the residence of John Russel, conspicuous both as to location and architecture. The house stands on Canal street, in the rear of its former location. Such is an outline of residence, shop, store, and tavern which made up the Palmyra of 1812.
