Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith's First Vision: Confirming Evidences and Contemporary Accounts ( 1971)

APPENDIX N

Manchester in the Early 1820's

A selection from Horatio Gates Spafford, A Gazetteer of the State of New York (Albany, 1824), pp. 302-03.

Manchester, a Post-Township of Ontario County, 10 miles N. of Canandaigua, (that is, its centre is 10 miles N. from Canandaigua Village.) bounded N. by Palmyra, E. by Phelps, S. by Hopewell, W. by Farmington, being T.11, in the 2d Range, 6 miles square. In the 1st edition of this Work, this was the easternmost of the 2 townships that then constituted the Town of Farmington. It was erected into a separate Town in 1821, and called Butt; and in April, 1822, received its present name, by another act of legislation. The surface is gently uneven or waving, and the soil good, without exception, with good proportions of arable and meadow land. It is all thickly settled, divided into small farms, owned in fee simple by their occupants. The Canandaigua outlet, as it is here called, runs SW. to NE. across this Town, forming many valuable mill-seats, well improved. The Ontario Manufacturing Co., had their works on this stream, and the loss of them is much regretted by the inhabitants. They were destroyed by fire, in the winter of 1821-2. Manchester Village, in the W. part, on the W. side of the C. outlet, (or the Clyde, or any thing that is short,) has some manufactures, a small collection of houses, the Post-Office, 'and elegant stone Church, with a bell.' This village is on the post-road from Canandaigua to Palmyra, Williamson, &c., 8 miles from Canandaigua.—About 1 mile southerly, or up-stream, is the Village called Shortsville, where there are mills of various kinds, a paper mill, furnace, and a great deal of business. It is 7 miles from Canandaigua. The Sulphurous Fountains in the SE. corner of this Town, have very justly attracted considerable notice. They are situated about 10 miles NE. of Canandaigua, and 12 NW. of Geneva, and have somehow obtained the name of Clifton Springs. The principal issues are in 3 large springs, and the rocks are calcareous, filled with impressions generally imputed to petrification of testaceous shells; and, as I apprehend, very erroneously in most instances. The waters are strongly impregnated with sulphur, at first perfectly transparent, becoming opaque, and changing to a yellowish cream color, as the precipitates form, which consist of a carbonate of lime, and of sulphur, in the state of brimstone. In this state they emit great quantities of sulphuretted hydrogen, which diffuses the scent to very considerable distances. Yet plants grow in these springs, though covered with the deposition of sulphurous and calcareous matter, as are the stones also, and every other body resting in the water; and cattle drink freely of them without injury, or any perceptible effects. Where one of these springs rises, is a spot of 5 or 6 rods diameter, completely covered with these mineral precipitates, principally sulphur, which is found to be in some places near 6 feet deep: and cart-loads of it may be collected in a few minutes, though mixed with every substance which chance has thrown into the mass. And yet abundant as it is, I do not learn that any attempts have been made to cleanse or manufacture any of it for use. The rocks of this region partake very abundantly of that peculiar fetor noticed under MINERALOGY. These Springs have become places of considerable resort, especially by persons afflicted with scrofulous affections, in which the use of these waters has been found highly beneficial. The Clifton Hotel has a small library, with good accommodations for visitants. For the number of inhabitants, &c., see FARMINGTON, less than half of which are supposed to be in this Town, which was unfortunately erected just after the 2 late Censuses, and before any of the returns as to schools, &c., now in my possession, were made.
