Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith's First Vision: Confirming Evidences and Contemporary Accounts ( 1971)

APPENDIX Q

A Reply to the Critics

Some critics have challenged the reliability of Joseph Smith's description of the historical setting of the First Vision, have expressed concern because of differences in the four accounts of the First Vision which were written or dictated by the Prophet, and have asked, "What evidence exists that Joseph Smith was actually persecuted following his sacred experience in 1820?" Although this book is not limited to refutation of charges which have been leveled against the Prophet's writings, it does contain information which substantiates Joseph Smith's historical accounts and provides confirming evidence of the divine calling of this latter-day prophet.

The Revival of 1819-1820

Recognizing that one can neither prove nor disprove a vision by using the secular tools of modern researchers, investigators have attempted to substantiate or invalidate such claims by examining the validity of contemporary historical references. The supposition is that if the details of the historical framework are found to be true or false, they will likewise reflect on claims, such as visions, which cannot be objectively evaluated. One investigator examined contemporary records and failed to locate any evidence of an 1820 revival in Palmyra that led to an increase in church membership. His conclusion was that since there was an "absence" of a revival in 1820 in the churches in Palmyra and vicinity, Joseph Smith's historical account of the First Vision was not accurate, and he inferred that the reliability of his description of the vision itself should thus be questioned. [^1]

Before one can demonstrate that Joseph Smith's narrative of events which surrounded the First Vision is incorrect, however, he must determine what Joseph Smith meant by the statements he recorded. Reference to a revival at the time of the First Vision is made in the Prophet's history of the Church which he commenced in 1838. This account was written after the Prophet had traveled extensively from the eastern coast to the Missouri frontier and while he was living in western America. He was viewing an event in his life from a substantial distance in time and place, which makes plausible the assumption that such historical statements as he made in his account were of a more general nature. Joseph did not write in 1838 that great multitudes joined churches in Palmyra in 1820. Instead, the Prophet declared that in "the second year" after his "removal to Manchester, there was in the place where ... [he] lived an unusual excitement on the subject of religion," and that "it commenced with the Methodists, but soon became general among all the sects in that region of country." Then he added that "great multitudes united themselves to the different religious parties" in "the whole district of country." [^2]In this discussion, the Prophet did not describe what he meant by "religious excitement," "place where he lived," "whole district of country," and "great multitudes," nor did he identify a precise time period when all these events took place, or when or how he learned about these developments. [^3]

Although Joseph Smith noted that the religious excitement was occurring in the area where he lived during his fifteenth year and that his vision took place in the spring of 1820, he did not necessarily state that the revival which he described was limited to a few months or to a particular year. In his 1832 autobiography, the Prophet declared that for three years, from the ages of twelve through fifteen, he was involved in serious religious reflections and from about 1818 to 1820 he was searching for religious truth and the right church. Based on this long quest, the 1838 history may imply a longer time span for the revival he referred to than is generally assumed, and possibly Joseph Smith did not "intend to portray all revival events as happening just before his vision." Although Joseph Smith stated that "an unusual excitement" was in evidence in the second year after his removal to Manchester, the results of this religious quickening might well have extended beyond Joseph Smith's sacred experience in the grove, thus expanding the possible time period for the revival which initiated such great events in his young life. [^4]

It is also improper to assume that all religious excitement occurring in the early nineteenth century was associated with significant increases in church membership. There may or may not have been an increase in church membership in the neighborhood where Joseph lived at the time of the great religious excitement; membership reports do not always reflect accurately spiritual conditions within a congregation or community. Sometimes the first stage of a conversion process was the "awakening or conviction, when the preacher aroused fears in the prospective convert." During this experience, the awakened person often began worrying about pleasing God. Filled with anguish and concern, the awakened souls sometimes delayed joining a church. Others who were converted to the belief that Jesus was their Savior did not join a church because they were confused regarding which church they should join or because they felt that not all the churches in a particular area were patterned after New Testament Christianity. Consequently, increases in membership sometimes did not immediately follow mighty spiritual awakenings. Moreover, sometimes increases in membership resulted from families moving into a new region rather than from old residents being converted. At the same time, decreases in membership occurred because of the emigration of families or because of a redistribution of the boundaries of an ecclesiastical unit. In a year when there might be no reported increases in membership, there might be an increase from conversions that was not reflected because of the exodus of other families or of a reshuffling of ecclesiastical boundaries. Such circumstances indicate the possible inaccuracies caused by sole reliance on limited statistics. [^5]

In addition to the problem of interpreting the writings of the past, another major challenge that hinders contemporary his-

torians from reconstructing past events is the absence of many important records and the incomplete nature of the records that have survived. This might be especially true of a religious quickening in a neighborhood at the time of the Second Great Awakening. Protracted religious meetings were so common during that age that many were not reported in the newspapers and periodicals. Brigham Young declared in 1860 that he had "been brought up in the midst of those flaming, fiery reformations from his childhood." [^6]Sometimes publishers did not report developments in their local newspapers because they assumed that many residents knew of the event; instead they concentrated on printing events occurring in outlying regions. At the time of the First Vision there was only one meetinghouse in Palmyra village, that of the Western Presbyterian Church, and records of that church prior to 1828 have not been located. Similarly, records of the Methodists of Palmyra and Manchester who were meeting in homes and outdoors are not available. Therefore the absence of records or reports indicating no increases in membership does not necessarily mean that there was not a great religious excitement in a community.

Although Joseph Smith wrote that the religious excitement began with the Methodists and spread to other faiths in his neighborhood, he did not identify the gathering or gatherings that initiated this religious quickening. Such a meeting or meetings might have been generated by a traveling preacher in or near a farmhouse in Manchester or Palmyra township. An awareness of unusual religious excitement by the Prophet also might have occurred while he was attending a camp meeting near Palmyra village, in Manchester township, or in Phelps.

Many contemporary records confirm Joseph Smith's testimony of religious excitement in the place where he lived prior to the First Vision. Methodists held camp meetings east of the Smith farm, and many of these meetings could have been considered by an earnest seeker after truth as ones which generated unusual religious excitement. As described in this book, in the summer of 1819 Methodists of the Genesee Conference held an annual meeting in Phelps (then Vienna), and more than one hundred ministers, including the Reverend George Lane, attended this July gathering.

Members of the Smith family could very likely have been attracted to attend meetings held in that community in order to investigate Methodism, to socialize, and to sell goods which they had produced. One contemporary of Joseph Smith, Orsamus Turner, who resided in Palmyra for several years prior to 1822, wrote that "after catching a spark of Methodism in the camp meeting, away down in the woods, on the Vienna road, he [Joseph Smith] was a very passable exhorter in evening meetings." [^7]Another contemporary who lived in Palmyra in 1820, Pomeroy Tucker, verified the religious excitement that was occurring in that part of America at the time of the First Vision. "Protracted revival meetings," he wrote, were customary in some of the churches, and Smith frequented those of different denominations, sometimes professing to participate in their devotional exercises.... At one time he joined the probationary class of the Methodist Church in Palmyra.... and he soon withdrew from the class. The final conclusion announced by him, was, that all sectarianism was fallacious. [^8]

The Prophet's mother also confirmed portions of Joseph Smith's history when she inserted in her biography of the Prophet, after recording an event that took place in 1819, his most detailed account of the First Vision. Prior to her quoting from the Prophet's history of the First Vision as published in the Times and Seasons, Lucy Mack Smith wrote that "a great revival in religion" extended to "the surrounding country in which we resided." Moreover, the Prophet's mother declared that Joseph Smith refused to attend any meetings conducted during the religious excitement that was occurring following the death of her son, Alvin (November 19, 1823). She added that Joseph believed that none of the churches taught the pure gospel of Christ, but did not object to other members of the family worshipping in the churches of that day. Consequently, Lucy Mack Smith identified a widespread revival that was occurring about the time of the First Vision and a local revival that took place about 1824. [^9]

Contemporary records further indicate that great multitudes were joining churches in the whole region of country during the months surrounding the First Vision. As explained in this book, various ecclesiastical records state that there were substantial increases in church membership in many sections of western and upstate New York in 1819 and 1820. There is not only evidence of religious excitement occurring in the area where Joseph Smith lived in 1820, but one can substantiate the Prophet's accounts of great multitudes joining churches in the whole district of country by defining "that district of country" as an area within twenty, fifty, or one hundred miles of the Smith farm. New York was an ecclesiastical storm center at the time of the First Vision, and national and regional membership records clearly reveal that during this great revival there were substantial increases in Methodist, Presbyterian, and Baptist congregations located in that state. Since Joseph Smith did not write the account of this revival until 1838, he might have learned about the extensive nature of this religious quickening months or years after the event occurred. Accounts of the enlivenments which occurred in New York in 1819 and 1820 were advertised in Palmyra, and the number of conversions occurring in the area east of Lake Cayuga and in the region of Albany was enumerated in the local newspaper, the Palmyra Register. [^10]

Although some critics insist that the only proper interpretation of Joseph Smith's 1838 account of the background of the First Vision is that of a revival which led to a significant increase in church membership in Palmyra and vicinity, this limited view fails to consider that the Prophet might have associated great increases in church membership with a geographical region that extended beyond Palmyra and nearby villages. At least one contemporary of Joseph Smith, David Marks, who was approximately the same age as the Prophet, "ranged over a fairsized area in the process of participating in certain religious revivals" about 1820. [^11]In 1821, for example, David Marks learned that a great revival was progressing in Brutus and Camillus, communities located from twenty to thirty miles from his father's home. Anxious to witness it, Marks left home and walked fifteen miles to Brutus, where he tarried with strangers. For approximately one month, Marks remained in that area, attending some forty-four meetings. When Marks later summarized his travels during his early years he wrote that they were "confined to a few towns in the vicinity of Junius." [^12]Commenting on this narrative, which in some respects resembles writings of Joseph Smith, one Mormon scholar, Peter Crawley, wrote:

Marks's narrative demonstrates ... the fallacy in dogmatically requiring Joseph Smith's "the place where we lived" [or whole district of country] to lie within 10 or 15 miles of the Smith farm. Marks, at least, in 1821 could refer to an area including towns 30 miles to the east and to the west of his home as "the vicinity of Junius." [^13]

To recapitulate, sometimes when we write in general terms describing experiences of the past we are misunderstood by others. Information included in this book substantiates Joseph Smith's description of religious excitement in the neighborhood where he lived and provides evidence that there was a great revival which led to significant increases in church membership in many sections of western New York during the period surrounding the First Vision. Joseph Smith was a reliable historian. He not only wrote an accurate description of events that were occurring in New York at the time of the First Vision but prepared an accurate account of a remarkable vision that occurred in the tranquility of a grove in the spring of 1820.

Joseph Smith's Four Accounts

Critics have not only challenged the historical accuracy of Joseph Smith's description of the religious awakening which occurred at the time of his First Vision, but they have questioned the reliability of his writings because differences appear in his four descriptions of his 1820 vision. Some have suggested that if a person does not relate an experience in the same manner each time he discusses the event, then he is not to be considered a reliable witness. In an important way, however, the fact that the four recitals of the First Vision are different helps support the integrity of the Mormon Prophet. The variations indicate that Joseph Smith did not deliberately create a memorized version which he related to everyone. In the legal profession, attorneys and judges recognize that if a witness repeats an incident by using precisely the same language, the court might seriously challenge the validity of such a statement. While the wording in Joseph's accounts are different, a number of basic truths are disclosed in each of his recitals, clearly indicating a rich harmony in many details.

As one considers the variations in the four accounts of the First Vision as written or dictated by Joseph Smith, he should remember that the accounts are of various lengths (from a few paragraphs to several pages) and were prepared under different circumstances, at different periods in the life of the Prophet (from 1832 to 1842), and for different audiences. It is not surprising, therefore, that each of them emphasizes different aspects of his experience. Today when Latter-day Saints explain this remarkable vision to others, their descriptions often vary according to the audience or circumstances that prompt such recitals. If one were relating the incident to a group of high priests, for example, he would undoubtedly tell it somewhat differently than he would to individuals who had never heard of Joseph Smith or the restoration of the gospel.

One can better understand and appreciate the different emphases in Joseph's four recitals of the First Vision by examining their individual historical settings, by considering Joseph's efforts to write history, and by noting his attempts to improve the form in which the basic message of the Restoration was conveyed to others.

In the 1832 account Joseph Smith emphasized his long quest for religious truth which emerged from his desire to secure a remission of sins. A concern for the welfare of his soul led him to an investigation of religious communities, and this investigation convinced the boy that religious leaders were teaching doctrines that did not harmonize with New Testament Christianity. In 1832 when the Prophet described what he learned during his vision, he emphasized that the Lord forgave him of his sins, instructed him concerning the Atonement, and said that others had turned aside from the gospel and were not keeping the Lord's commandments. [^14]

Two accounts, the 1835 diary record and the brief history published in 1842 known as the Wentworth Letter, were directed to a non-Mormon audience. In these accounts the Prophet emphasized the confusion which developed in his mind because professors of religion proclaimed conflicting doctrines. In the 1835 recital the Prophet said:

Being wrought up in my mind respecting the subject of Religion, and looking at the different systems taught the children of men, I knew not who was right or who was wrong, but considered it of the first importance to me that I should be right, in matters of so much moment, matters involving eternal consequences. [^15]

A similar theme was included in the history which the Prophet wrote in the early 1840s:

Considering that all could not be right, and that God could not be the author of so much confusion I determined to investigate the subject more fully, believing that if God had a church it would not be split up into factions, and that if he taught one society to worship one way, and administer in one set of ordinances, he would not teach another principles which were diametrically opposed. [^16]

After emphasizing in the two accounts addressed to non-Mormons that he was perplexed because of the different religious systems that were being advanced by others, he wrote that he called upon the Lord in prayer. In the condensed version which was based on a conversation between Joseph Smith and Matthias, Joseph Smith's scribe recorded in the Prophet's diary that during this first communication Joseph learned that his sins were forgiven and that Jesus Christ is the Son of God (two concepts that were included in the 1832 autobiography). This account was not written for publication, nor did the Prophet include it with many other selections from his diary in his official history of the Church. Joseph Smith prepared for publication two more detailed accounts of this experience. Consequently, this 1835 diary entry mentioned only a few truths which he learned when he was "about" fourteen years old." [^17]

Even though the summary included in the Wentworth Letter of the truths which were unfolded in the 1820 vision was very different from the 1835 diary account, all except one concept disclosed in that account harmonized with details that had been included in the 1832 or the 1838 recital. After writing that he learned that all religious denominations believed in incorrect doctrines (a concept recorded in 1832 and 1838), Joseph added a concept that was not mentioned in any of the other accounts. He received the promise, he wrote, "that the fulness of the gospel should at some future time be made known unto me." [^18]

Although the Prophet testified in the two accounts which were addressed to non-Mormons that two personages appeared to him, he did not identify these heavenly beings in those recitals. Joseph had experienced cruel persecution for claiming that he beheld visions, and perhaps he hesitated in revealing to some that he had been instructed by God Himself. The First Vision, along with many other visions received by the Prophet, was a sacred experience. Perhaps the Prophet decided in some instances not to broadcast the fact that he had seen the Father and the Son, especially to individuals who might have said that with God all things were possible except appearing to a young boy in the new nation, ridiculing an experience that Joseph cherished because of its sacredness. According to the Prophet, one reason he commenced writing a history in 1838 was to correct many false reports that had been circulated regarding his religious experiences. He was the only one who knew many details concerning his remarkable visions. Therefore, he decided to write about many events in his life so that a reliable history would be available for earnest inquirers.

In the official history of the Church which he commenced in 1838, Joseph Smith identified the two personages as the Father and the Son. This history was the most carefully prepared account and contains many details not included in other records. This was the only account in which Joseph described in detail the religious awakenings and war of words which occurred at the time of the First Vision. It was also the only account in which Joseph Smith specified that during the vision he was told that the professors of religion had a form of godliness but denied "the power thereof." [^19]Meanwhile, other individuals, members and non-members, who were close associates of the Prophet or who interviewed the Mormon leader, wrote descriptions of the First Vision based on what they had learned from Joseph Smith, and they reported that he testified that during his First Vision he beheld the Father and the Son. [^20]Joseph Smith did not mention in his 1832 account the appearance of the Father nor of angels. He emphasized instead the truths conveyed to him by the Lord. Such an omission, however, does not preclude the fact that the Father appeared to the fourteen-year-old boy. After Joseph Smith wrote the account of this vision which was published in the official history of the Church, he prepared the Wentworth Letter, which, as previously explained, did not identify the personages who appeared to him. None of the accounts written by Joseph Smith are complete descriptions of this remarkable vision. In Joseph Smith's most extensive account, the 1838 history, the Prophet concluded by writing that during his First Vision he learned many other things. By examining the other three accounts we can learn some of the other truths which were unfolded in 1820, but probably not all. The experience in the Sacred Grove was undoubtedly so glorious that the Prophet found it difficult to explain in human language his innermost feelings and to delineate many concepts which he learned during this visitation of the Father and the Son.

Some critics have suggested that there was an evolutionary development in Joseph Smith's descriptions of his First Vision and that as the years passed the Mormon Prophet extended his claims concerning that which he learned in the Sacred Grove. Such a charge does not seem justified by a careful comparison of the four recitals. All emphasize different themes. The first two recorded accounts state, for example, that during his First Vision Joseph was told he was forgiven of his sins. All except the 1835 recital emphasize that during this vision he was instructed to join none of the churches. All except the 1832 account reported that two personages appeared, and in the 1835 diary report Joseph Smith stated that he saw many angels during this vision. The 1835 and 1838 accounts refer to the presence of an evil power prior to his visitation from the two glorious personages. All except the 1832 autobiography refer to his reading the admonition of James regarding prayer prior to his petitioning his Heavenly Father. The variations of the accounts, therefore, do not follow a particular pattern.

Harmony of Eight Contemporary Accounts of the First Vision

Instead of an evolutionary development, the following summary reflects the harmony and also the different emphases appearing in the four recitals prepared by the Prophet (and his contemporaries). [^21]The dates in the first set of parentheses refer to the approximate date when Joseph Smith wrote the account, and the letters in the second set of parentheses refer to four other accounts written or published by contemporaries before 1844: Orson Pratt's Several Remarkable Visions (1840, identified as P); Orson Hyde's A Cry from the Wilderness (1842, identified as H); an account written by a non-Mormon and printed in the New York Spectator, September 23, 1843 (identified as S); and an account recorded in the diary of Alexander Neibaur (identified as N). (See Appendixes A-H.)

THE HISTORICAL SETTINGTHE VISION(Truths revealed and descriptions of what Joseph beheld)THE MESSAGEAFTERMATHJoseph's quest for forgiveness of his sins, his concern for his soul and/or his preparation for a future estate.(1832, 1835, 1842)(P, H)Joseph's concern for mankind in general.(1832)(P, H)Joseph's investigation of various faiths.(1832, 1835, 1838, 1842)(P, H)Joseph's concern because faiths proclaimed conflicting doctrines.(1838, 1842) (P, H)Joseph's desire to know which church to join or his desire to join Christ's church.(1832, 1835, 1838, 1842)(P, H, S)Joseph's quest continued for several years.(1832)Unusual religious excitement in the area.(1838) (N)Contention among the faiths.(1838, 1842) (P, H)Joseph's searching the scriptures (Bible).(1832, 1835, 1838, 1842)(P, H, S, N)Joseph's reading James 1:5. (1835, 1838, 1842) (P, H, S, N)Joseph's seeking an answer through prayer.(1832, 1835, 1838, 1842)(P, H, S, N)Vision occurred when he was about fourteen or fifteen.(1832, 1835, 1838, 1842)(P, H, S, N)Vision occurred in the spring of 1820.(1838)God hears and answers prayers and intervenes in the affairs of men.(1832, 1835, 1838, 1842)(P, H, S, N)The power of evil is real and strong.(1835, 1838) (P, H)The power of God is stronger than the influence of evil.(1835, 1838)(P, H)Joseph was enwrapped in a pillar of light and/or filled with unspeakable joy (or the Spirit of God).(1832, 1835, 1838) (P, H)Joseph beheld two personages.(1835, 1838, 1842) (P, H, S, N)The two personages resembled each other in features and likeness.(1835, 1838, 1842) (P, H)The two personages were identified as the Father and the Son, and man was created in the image of God.(1838) (S)Joseph saw many angels.(1835)Jesus Christ is the Son of God.(1835, 1838) (S)The Lord was crucified for the world, and all who believe in him will have eternal life.(1832)The Second Coming of Christ is imminent.(1832)Joseph was forgiven of his transgressions.(1832, 1835) (P, N)God's true church was not upon the earth in 1820.(1832, 1838, 1842) (P, H, N)Professors of religion taught incorrect doctrines.(1832, 1838, 1842)(P, H, N)Professors of religion denied the power of God.(1838)The fulness of the gospel would be revealed to Joseph.(1842) (P, H)Joseph learned many other truths.(1838)Joseph rejoiced, for he was filled with peace and love.(1832) (P, H)Joseph's unsuccessful attempt to convince ministers and others outside his family of his vision.(1838) (N)Joseph persecuted after reporting his vision.(1832, 1838) (S)

(For additional references, by contemporaries, of Joseph Smith's testimony that he beheld the Father and the Son during his First Vision and reports of what he learned during this vision see Appendixes I-J. See also various accounts related by Orson Pratt in the Journal of Discourses, 12:353-55; 13:65-67; 14:140-41; 22:29.)

Early Persecution

Another question that has been raised about the accuracy of Joseph's writings pertains to the availability of evidence that Joseph Smith was persecuted in the early 1820s. In the 1838 recital of the First Vision, Joseph Smith declared that a "few days" after his experience in the Sacred Grove he happened to be in the company of a Methodist minister, and while conversing with this preacher he informed the minister of his theophany. "I was greatly surprised at his behavior," Joseph declared; he treated my communication not only lightly but with great contempt, Saying it was all of the Devil, that there were no such things as visions or revelations in these days.... I soon found however that my telling the story had excited a great deal of prejudice against me among professors of religion and was the Cause of great persecution which continued to increase and though I was an obscure boy, only between fourteen and fifteen years of age ... Yet men of high standing would take notice sufficient to excite the public mind against me and create a bitter persecution, and this was common among all the Sects: all united to persecute me. [^22]

What evidence exists, some have asked, that Joseph Smith was persecuted during the months and years immediately following his First Vision? In responding to such a question, one needs to remember that, generally speaking, persecutors do not describe their acts of oppression. Intolerant acts usually are recorded by those who have been subjected to persecution. In addition to the testimony of Lucy Mack Smith that someone attempted to assassinate her son when he was about fourteen, circumstantial evidence confirms Joseph Smith's testimony that in the early 1820s he was persecuted. Others living in the Burned-over District endured a similar form of persecution; and the same kinds of historical sources available today to substantiate the non-Mormon oppression vindicate Joseph's testimony regarding the prejudices exerted against him.

This book includes many references to individuals who lived in western New York during the early nineteenth century (for example, James Erwin, David Marks, William Lewis and Jemima Wilkinson) who complained they experienced harsh treatment from others because of their expressions of religious conviction. Moreover, the Hurlbut affidavits illustrate the type of "evil" stories that were circulated about the Smiths in the neighborhood where they lived during the 1820s.

Evidence of oppression experienced by various contemporaries of Joseph Smith who lived in the Burned-over District follows a common pattern. Many who endured the bigotry of that age complained in their writings that they were cruelly treated and misrepresented. Occasionally others bore witness that individuals of diverse religious and philosophical beliefs with whom they were acquainted were mistreated. Affidavits were sometimes circulated defaming men's characters; and writers published in their works, without restraint, exaggerated statements, unjustifiable opinions, and malicious lies denouncing individuals living in the Finger Lake country. These various forms of evidence tend to substantiate Joseph's testimony that, because of his unorthodox statements, others excited the public against him, and that people of various denominations united to persecute him.

Joseph Smith lived during an age of paradoxes. The early nineteenth century was an era when men boasted that freedom of conscience was one of man's inalienable rights but refused to extend this right to many with whom they disagreed. Like many other Christians of that age, Joseph Smith must have been continually perplexed as he endured bitter persecution throughout his life from his fellow citizens in a land built on the idea of individual liberty and freedom of conscience.

While tangible and circumstantial evidence confirms Joseph Smith's historical descriptions of events that occurred about the time of the First Vision, this evidence does not prove that he was visited by the Father and Son in a peaceful grove in upper New York in the spring of 1820. The only route by which earnest seekers after truth will learn of the reality of the Restoration is through the guidance and power of the Holy Ghost. Faith is a gift of God, and a conviction that one of the greatest visions in the history of the world occurred in 1820 is one important element of that gift.

When Joseph Smith walked from the Sacred Grove in 1820 he knew more about God and Christ and the conditions of the churches of that age than any other mortal soul, but that vision was merely the beginning. Other visions and revelations would follow that theophany, expanding, line upon line, Joseph's understanding of the connections between God and man. The young Joseph, filled with unspeakable joy and peace as he walked home from the grove that spring day, would usher in a new era in the religious history of mankind—the dispensation of the fulness of times.

2 Joseph Smith 2:5; see also Joseph Smith, "History," Times and Seasons, April 1, 1842, 748-49.

3 According to Richard L. Bushman, "At best, critics of Joseph's story can claim that there was not enough excitement close enough to Palmyra to satisfy them. But again that all depends on how near is near and big is big. I doubt very much that historical inquiry will ever settle that question to the satisfaction of all." Richard L. Bushman, "The First Vision Story Revived," Dialogue: A Journal of Morrnon Thought, IV (Spring, 1969), 86, 90-91.

4 Richard Lloyd Anderson, "Circumstantial Confirmation of the First Vision Through Reminiscences," BYU Studies, IX (Spring, 1969), 375.

5 Bushman, op. cit., 87-88.

6 Deseret News, April 11, 1860.

7 O. Turner, History of the Pioneer Settlement of Phelps and Gorham's Purchase, and Morris' Reserve (Rochester, 1852), 214.

8 Pomeroy Tucker, Origin, Rise, and Progress of Mormonism (New York, 1867), 17-18.

9 Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1958), 68-69, 90-91. This information was also included in the first edition of this biography: Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and His Progenitors for Many Generations (Liverpool, 1853), 74, 90-91.

10 See Chapter 3 and Appendix P.

11 Peter Crawley, "A Comment on Joseph Smith's Account of His First Vision and the 1820 Revival," Dialogue, VI (Spring, 1971), 106-07.

12 Marilla Marks, ed., Memoirs of the Life of David Marks (Dover, N.H., 1846), 29-32; David Marks, The Life of David Marks (Limerick, Maine, 1831), 39.

13 Crawley, op. cit, 107.

14 See Appendix A.

15 See Appendix B.

16 See Appendix D.

17 See Appendix B.

18 See Appendix D.

19 See Appendix C.

20 See Appendixes C, I and J.

21 See Appendixes A-D. There are not only variations in the accounts written by Joseph Smith but in accounts written by Joseph Smith's contemporaries as they recorded what they learned from the Prophet. "In the case of versions written by others," it is not surprising that people were impressed with different concepts and therefore recorded accounts differently, using their language and emphasizing points that most impressed them. James B. Allen, "Eight Contemporary Accounts of Joseph Smith's First Vision," The Improvement Era, LXXIII (April, 1970), 6.

22 See Appendix C.

---
Notas:
[^1] Wesley P. Walters, "New Light on Mormon Origins from Palmyra (N.Y.) Revival," Bulletin of the Evangelical Theological Society, X (Fall, 1967), 228.
[^2] 2 W. Pierrepont White, "Indian Possessions and Settled Areas in New York State from 1771 to 1820," The Rochester Historical Society Publication Fund Series, VII (1928), 225, 227.
[^3] 3 lbid., 226-27; Clark Wissler, Indians of the United States (Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1948), 110-12.
[^4] 4 Wissler, op. cit., 118, 125.
[^5] 5 Diedrich Willers, Jr., The Centennial Celebration of General Sullivan's Campaign against the Iroquois in 1779 (Waterloo, 1880), 97-99.
[^6] 6 Ibid., 157-58. See also Charles P. Whittemore, A General of the Revolution, John Sullivan of New Hampshire (New York: Columbia University Press, 1961), ch. 9.
[^7] 7 Alexander C. Flick, ed., History of the State of New York (New York City: Columbia University Press, 1935), V, 115-17, 145.
[^8] 8 Flick, op. cit., 152-58;[O[rsamus] Turner, History of the Pioneer Settlement of Phelps and Gorham's Purchase, and Morris' Reserve (Rochester, 1852), 140-42, 162.
[^9] 9 Herbert A. Wisbey, Jr., Pioneer Prophetess: Jemima Wilkinson. the Publick Universal Friend (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1964), 105-112. 163, 168.
[^10] 10 Turner, op. cit., 163.
[^11] 11 White, op. cit., 229; Hamilton Child, Gazetteer and Business Directory of Ontario County, New York for 1867-8 (Syracuse, 1867), 45-46, 49-52; Horatio Gates Spafford, A Gazetteer of the State of New York (Albany, 1824), 400-401.
[^12] 12 The first known white pioneer to settle Canandaigua (and first known settler west of Seneca Lake) was named Joseph Smith. He erected a block house on Main Street where he opened a tavern. A few years later, he moved to Farmington and there erected the first frame building and with the assistance of Jacob Smith built the first sawmill in that town in 1795. Turner, op. cit., 163, 222.
[^13] 13 Ibid., 217-19; "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, August 4, 1871, 3.
[^14] 14 "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, January 26, 1872, 3; February 2, 1872, 3.
[^15] 15 Ibid., January 19, 1872; 3.
[^16] 16 Book of Deeds, I, 223, Ontario County Clerk's Office, Canandaigua, New York, hereafter cited as Deeds. Turner, op. cit., 378-80; "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, August 4, 1871, 3; [W. H. McIntosh, ed.], History of Wayne County, New York (Philadelphia, 1877), 134.
[^17] 17 Deeds, VI, 45; "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, May 3, 1872, 3; Wayne Cutler Gunnell, "Martin Harris—Witness and Benefactor" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1955), 37-38. Copies of the contracts between Martin Harris and E. B. Grandin and Thomas Lakey are located in the appendix of his thesis.
[^18] 18 History of Wayne County, 136; Turner, op. cit., 388; Deeds, I, 230-31.
[^19] 19 History of Wayne County, 117-19.
[^20] 20 Charles Brown, "Manchester in the Early Days," Files of the Shortsville Enterprise Press, October 18, 1902; October 25, 1902, copy located in the Brigham Young University Library. This collection contains selections of articles which appeared in the Shortsville Enterprise and typewritten copies were placed on file in the publisher's office. See also "Old Time School Matters," Files, June 7, 1889.
[^21] 21 Brown, op. cit., February 27, 1903.
[^22] 22 "Old Newspapers," The Palmyra Courier, January 26, 1872, 3; February 2, 1872, 3.
