After Jesus died, a great Apostle named Paul wrote to members of the Church about how we can be an example of the believers, or a better follower of the Savior. When we do what the Apostle Paul taught, we honor the Savior and His name and we are an example for other people of the Savior’s teachings. Paul wrote, “Let no man despise [look down on] thy youth; but be thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity” (1 Tim. 4:12).

President Gordon B. Hinckley explained that when Paul says to be an example “in word,” he “is speaking here of language. … He is saying that coarse and lewd [wicked] words are incompatible with [against] one’s calling as a believer in Christ” (“Take Not the Name of God in Vain,” Ensign, Nov. 1987, 47). He said that we should use the name of Heavenly Father reverently.

There are other ways to show we are believers in Christ. In 1878, Aurelia Spencer Rogers suggested that children meet weekly to learn about the Savior and about how to be good examples of believers. President John Taylor, then President of the Church, approved this idea, and the first Primary was organized.

Now, 125 years later, Sister Coleen K. Menlove, Primary general president, encourages children to “live the gospel, and receive … a testimony” (“A Testimony Makes Me Feel Happy Inside,” Primary open house, Apr. 2002, 8).

When you choose the right and follow the Savior, you are an example of the believers.

1.  Review D&C 107:4 to help the children understand how names show reverence for Deity and explain different aspects of the Savior’s mission. On the chalkboard, write these references: Job 19:25 (“redeemer”); Isa. 9:6 (“Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace”); Luke 2:11 (“Saviour,” “Christ the Lord”); John 1:29 (“Lamb of God”); John 1:49 (“King of Israel”); John 10:14 (“good shepherd”); Rev. 1:8 (“Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending,” “Lord,” “Almighty”). Have the children locate and write the names of Deity by the reference. Discuss what it means to not take the Lord’s name in vain. Help the children memorize Exodus 20:7. Divide them into groups; write the scripture on a piece of paper for each group and cut the words apart. Have each group assemble the scripture.

2.  Help the children understand that we honor Jesus Christ by thinking about Him during the sacrament. Use Luke 22:19–20; D&C 20:77, 79; and a picture of the Last Supper to discuss the events of the Last Supper. What do the bread and water of the sacrament help us remember? (The Savior’s sacrifice of His flesh and blood.) What do we promise? (To take upon us His name, to always remember Him, and to keep His commandments.) What does He promise us? (His Spirit as we choose the right.) Discuss ways we can focus our thoughts on the Savior during the sacrament. Take the children to visit the area where the sacrament is prepared and blessed, and invite young men of the Aaronic Priesthood to explain the importance of preparing, blessing, and passing the sacrament. Sing songs or hymns about the sacrament.

1.  Mount this page on heavy paper. Cut out the two circles and the window in the “I Can Learn” circle.

2.  In the blank space on the circle with pictures, draw a picture of yourself and write something underneath it that you wish to learn in Primary about being a better example of a believer.

3.  Line up the centers of the circles, punch a hole through both circles, and insert a fastener (see illustration).

4.  Move the “I Can Learn” circle to read some of the things you can learn in Primary.

I Can Learn …

President Gordon B. Hinckley
“[that] safety and strength are found in holding close to the Church.”

The Apostle Paul
“[to] be … an example of the believers.”

President John Taylor
“to call upon the Lord in [my] secret places.”

Coleen K. Menlove
“to live the gospel, and receive … a testimony.”

Aurelia Spencer Rogers
“everything good and how to behave.”
