I like listening to stories about other Primary children like me. I have learned about keeping the Sabbath day holy and the right things to do on Sunday.
Jacob Kelly, age 7, is a member of the Baulkham Hills Ward, Sydney Australia Greenwich Stake.

I like to listen to the stories of Jesus’ miracles—how He healed people, raised the dead, and fed the 5,000. In Primary I see all my friends. I like to come every Sunday!
Penka Petkova, age 10, is a member of the Geo Milev Branch, Sofia Bulgaria District.

In Primary I’ve learned that when we say prayers, we close our eyes and fold our arms and bow our heads, and we get blessings sent down to us.
Brandon Checketts, age 6, is a member of the North Logan 11th Ward, North Logan Utah Green Canyon Stake.

Primary is very fun and spiritual, especially when we sing with our soul and not only our voices. My favorite thing about Primary is that we have wonderful leaders. I have learned many things, especially to be kind to everyone. I don’t think I would have turned out the way I am if it weren’t for Primary.
Rochelle Leavitt, age 11, is a member of the Granite Hills Ward, El Cajon California Stake.

I love to draw and write at Primary. I also like the pictures that my teacher shows me. I learn to do good to others and to members of my family.
Petero Bola, age 8, is a member of the Toga Branch, Nausori Fiji Stake.

Singing is my favorite part of Primary. I have learned to be reverent and listen to the Holy Ghost.
Makiah Barnhart, age 6, is a member of the Williamsport Ward, Williamsport Pennsylvania Stake.

I like learning about the scriptures and painting pictures of Jesus. I’ve learned not to eat or drink things that may hurt me.
Eddy Emanuel Castillo, age 11, is a member of the Comalapa Branch, Chimaltenango Guatemala Stake.

In Primary, we learn about Jesus being our friend, about the temple, to listen to Mummy and Daddy, and to choose the right. Sometimes that’s difficult, but Jesus helps me when I pray for help.
Naomi Mesotten, age 7, is a member of the Leuven Branch, Antwerp Belgium Stake.

I love my teachers and my friends in Primary. My favorite thing is giving a talk or saying the prayer. I have learned that Jesus died for me because He loves me.
Brooke Peterson, age 4, is a member of the Springfield Third Ward, Springfield Missouri South Stake.
