Not long ago, a young missionary stopped by my wife’s office at the Missionary Training Center in Provo, Utah, to make a special personal request. Since he knew that we were personally acquainted with his parents, he wondered if Sister Christensen would call his father and find out when his mother was going to have her surgery. He explained, “When my youngest sister was born, my mother almost died. All of us, including my five-year-old sister, fasted for her and she got well. Since that time, I worry when I think of operations. They make me nervous. I need to know when the surgery is going to be scheduled so that I can begin my fast.”

My wife willingly dialed his father’s telephone number and asked the elder if he would like to speak personally to him. He felt he should not because he knew it was against the policies and he thought it would make him homesick. When his father answered and learned that the call was from the Missionary Training Center, his first question was, “Is anything wrong?”

“No,” he was told, “not at all, but your son needs to know when the surgery on his mother is going to be so he can begin his fast.”

“Oh,” he said, “he’s going to be disappointed, because he can’t fast before the surgery; she already had it yesterday. It lasted for five hours and she is doing very, very well. We are so thrilled.”

The elder’s face brightened as he realized what was being communicated on the telephone.

“Tell my father I love him and send him a hug and a kiss. Tell him to give my mother a hug and a kiss from me and to all the family.”

After the telephone call ended and the details about the surgery were explained, this great young elder said, “Oh, I’m so thankful; I will fast anyway for gratitude!”

My wife, Barbara, wrote in her journal, “We shook hands and he left my office, and I sat down and cried!”

It would be very helpful to know what series of teachings, events, and circumstances have combined over the past nineteen years to produce a son with that kind of sweet spirit, dedication, humility, and appreciation.

In the process of growing up, he has come to know for himself that there is more to fasting than merely getting hungry. I feel confident that these spiritual qualities, combined with his other talents, will help him to be a very successful missionary. He has already cultivated spirituality to the point that he is at home with daily personal revelation.

In our present Church calling at the Missionary Training Center in Provo, Utah, my wife and I meet thousands of the finest people in the world. The missionaries come from a wide variety of circumstances, including the most spiritual and stable as well as the most challenging. A good share of the missionaries have already cultivated a high degree of testimony and spirituality, while others are struggling to obtain it.

With spirituality, we are successful, and without it we are not. It is that simple! It is not only the thoroughly genuine desire to live in harmony with the will of God at all times, as guided by the Spirit, but also the ability to surrender totally and willingly to this guidance and thus to do that which the Spirit whispers. To be truly spiritual is to walk with God. It is the key to true happiness and success in our lives in all kinds of circumstances.

Some time ago I had the difficult responsibility of informing a young missionary that his father had been killed in a tragic accident that morning. He was shocked, his chin quivered, and tears welled up in his eyes. Then I observed some of the miracle that comes from personal testimony and the cultivation of spirituality. He slowly lifted his head and an expression of quiet resolve came over him. He agreed to call his mother, but there was never even a hint that he would leave his mission. He said he knew that he was where his father and his Father in Heaven wanted him to be and he was going to stay. He exhibited an attitude of peace and courage I’ve seldom seen. He is an example of a strong, committed, well-prepared young man that any father would be proud to have as a son.

Fortunately, into his life along the way had come personal revelation that the gospel is true, that Jesus is the Christ, that there literally is a resurrection. All of these truths helped strengthen him in this time of crisis.

When spirituality and testimony have become part of an individual’s experience, that person becomes more independent, self-disciplined, confident, and happy, and at peace with whatever circumstances he may face.

Certainly the miraculous missionary effort of the Church would not operate with the success it does were it not for the abundance of spirituality and personal revelation our missionaries enjoy. Without the promptings of the Spirit, few would ever choose, at their own expense, to leave the comfort and security of their homes, families, and often sweethearts, for the months a mission requires. This testimony and personal assurance of the truthfulness of the gospel is the “rock” upon which The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints stands so firmly.

What a blessing it would be if all of us would receive more spiritual strength and personal revelation than we do. President Brigham Young said, “There is no doubt, if a person lives according to the revelations given to God’s people, he may have the Spirit of the Lord to signify to him his will, and to guide and to direct him in the discharge of his duties, in his temporal as well as his spiritual exercises. I am satisfied, however, that in respect, we live far beneath our privileges.” (Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. and arr. by John A. Widtsoe, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co. 1973, p. 32; emphasis added.)

Years ago I struggled to determine the kinds of very practical things I could do to increase in spirituality and thus not live beneath the privileges that come with the Gift of the Holy Ghost. I even produced a personal homemade checklist of ten questions and then tried to measure from one month to another how well I was doing on each one.

Of course, I still have much progress to make, but I know that I enjoy the influence of the Spirit more fully now than I did before I applied these practical suggestions. I hope that you also will find it helpful to ask yourself these questions:

1. Do I read the scriptures daily? We are commanded to “feast upon the words of Christ” and not just to nibble occasionally. (2 Ne. 32:3; italics added.) President Kimball has said, “I find that when I get casual in my relationship with divinity and when it seems that no divine ear is listening and no divine voice is speaking, that I am far, far away. If I immerse myself in the scriptures the distance narrows and the spirituality returns.” (“What I Hope You Will Teach My Grandchildren and All Others of the Youth of Zion,” address to Seminary and Institute Personnel, Brigham Young University, 11 July 1966, p. 6.)

Some of the most remarkable personal revelations have been directly related to individual study of the scriptures. For example, the vision of the degrees of glory recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 76 came to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon after the Prophet had been studying the translation of the fifth chapter of the Gospel of John. (D&C 76:15–24, headnote) Joseph Smith’s First Vision came after he had reflected on James 1:5 “again and again.” (JS—H 1:11–17.) And President Joseph F. Smith’s vision of the redemption of the dead came as he pondered over questions related to 1 Peter 3:18–20 and 4:6 [1 Pet. 3:18—20; 1 Pet. 4:6]. (D&C 138:1–11.)

2. Do I really pray and not just say prayers? If I’m not careful, sometimes I discover that I merely say prayers and don’t really pray. I can say a prayer filled with trite repetitions almost without thinking, but I can’t express the deep feelings of my heart to my Heavenly Father without thinking. Really praying draws me closer to the Spirit.

3. Is my fasting meaningful? Do I do more than just get hungry? I know that every fast day that I prepare myself and fast with purpose and the right attitude, I am spiritually strengthened. It is a principle of real power.

4. Do I go to bed early and get up early? If we want to receive the assistance of inspiration more regularly in our lives, we will follow the counsel to “cease to sleep longer than is needful; retire to thy bed early, that ye may not be weary; arise early, that your bodies and your minds may be invigorated.” (D&C 88:124.)

This scriptural counsel is similar to that which President Marion G. Romney received as a newly called Assistant to the Quorum of the Twelve from Elder Harold B. Lee, who was then a member of the Quorum of the Twelve: “Go to bed early and get up early. If you do that, your body and mind will become rested and then in the quiet of those early morning hours, you will receive more flashes of insight and inspiration than at any other time of the day.”

5. Am I essentially a happy person? Over and over again, the Lord has indicated in scripture that we should be happy, “be of good cheer” (see Matt. 9:2; Matt. 14:27; John 16:33; Acts 23:11; 3 Ne. 1:13; D&C 61:36) and “lift up our [hearts] and rejoice” (D&C 25:13). If we by nature are not happy, something is wrong with us. We ought to find out what it is and correct it as soon as possible, because until we do, we will not enjoy the Spirit with us as much as if we were of good cheer. Developing an attitude of gratitude for our many blessings can be a giant step forward in fostering happiness.

6. Do I work hard? Laziness and spirituality do not go together. If you want to have the Spirit with you more regularly, you will follow the counsel to “thrust in your sickle with all your soul” (D&C 31:5) and work with “all your heart, might, mind, and strength” (D&C 4:2).

Whenever I think of one who is close to the Spirit, President Spencer W. Kimball comes to mind. His immense capacity to work is legendary. It is true that feeling follows action more often than it precedes it.

7. Am I more concerned about how rather than where I serve? If we are not careful, the “universal sin” of human pride can rob us of spirituality when we become more concerned about position and status (in or out of the Church) than about serving humbly. Our Savior Jesus Christ taught us a profound example of willingness to serve humbly without concern for position when he chose to rise from that table and as Lord and Master kneel in front of his disciples and wash their feet.

We should never let envy, jealousy, or aspiring for position rob us of spirituality. There is no calling in the Church of Jesus Christ that does not require more of us than the talents we bring to the assignment if we magnify our callings. Thoughtful, humble service is the hallmark of Christianity.

8. Do I love everyone, even my enemies? Jesus said, “A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another.” (John 13:34–35.) These two verses contain only a few words, most of them very short. They are as easy to read and as hard to follow as any in scripture.

The Lord commanded us to love everyone, even those we may not like (“Love your enemies” Matt. 5:44); and if we do, we will not only prove that we are “Christian” but the Spirit will be with us more abundantly. Spirituality cannot be cultivated in an atmosphere of contention, dissention, and disharmony.

9. Am I striving to “become one” with what I know I ideally should be? As long as what we do in our actual lives is beneath the level where we know we should be, we rob ourselves of spirituality.

Jesus prayed over and over again that we who believe in him should become one as he and his Father are one. (John 17:11, 21–22.) Not only do the Father and the Son get along extremely well together, they know exactly what the ideal person ought to be and that is exactly what they are. Our ultimate goal is to become like them. (Matt. 5:48; 3 Ne. 27:27.) To get there we must apply the Atonement (“at-one-ment”) and by faith in Christ unto repentance change our lives to be more “at one” with what we ought to be. In the process, we must be willing to give up all our sins.

If we are moving in the direction of achieving this oneness, peace of mind and increased spirituality will be among our blessings. This process is at the heart of the reason we have come to this earth. It is at the center of the message we have to share with the world.

10. Do I share my testimony with others? One of the surest aids to cultivating spirituality is to share our testimony especially with nonmembers. As we bear testimony of the Savior and of the restoration of the gospel, the Holy Ghost confirms the truth of the message. Not only is the hearer blessed by the Spirit, but also we who share the testimony. Our testimonies are not static; they increase or decrease in intensity, and sharing them with others gives us a spiritual boost. The Lord is pleased with us when we “open our mouths” and not hide from others the conviction we have. (D&C 60:2.)

I find it helpful to ask myself these ten questions regularly. They remind me of some very practical steps I can take to increase my level of spirituality and thus come a little nearer to living up to my privileges as one who has received the Gift of the Holy Ghost. I encourage you to do the same and thus to enrich your life. Spirituality is indeed the key to successful, happy living.
