Mark L. McConkie, Father of the Prophet: Stories and Insights from the Life of Joseph Smith, Sr. ( 1993)

Preface

Joseph Smith, Sr., fathered one of the greatest lineages of prophetic souls ever to minister among men. In this he is like Adam, Abraham, and Alma the Elder, penetrating the generations by the power of his teachings and example. He was foreordained to greatness, and like his prophetic sons he lived great and died great in the eyes of God and his people.

ixThe greatness that is Father Smith is found only by placing him in his context, which is both prophetic and patriarchal. The historical, cultural, economic, political, and social conditions that surrounded him are important and will, I trust, one day be explored by others more competent in those fields than I. My intent, however, has been quite different. I have sought to understand Joseph Smith, Sr., as the father of the Prophet, as the first Patriarch to the Church in this dispensation, and as an example whose life is, in so many ways, worthy of emulation. We remember Father Smith because his very life is a sermon on humility, on overcoming affliction, on being true to the truth, on bearing testimony of the Restoration without fear of man, on living worthy of inspiration, and on the office and conduct of the Patriarch. If ever a man personified honesty, it was Father Smith; if ever a Patriarch pronounced inspired blessings, it was Father Smith; if ever a man was loved and trusted of heaven, it was Father Smith; and if ever a man consecrated his all to the upbuilding of Zion, it was the saintly Father Smith. His heart was pure, and his ministry, approved of God. He did all that the Lord required of him, and therein lay the essence of the man: he was true and faithful in all things.

ixWe see him not as the world sees him, for the world has always focused on his poverty, on the simplicity of his life-style, on the fact that he was surrounded by a world of prejudice and superstition, or on some other irrelevancy-irrelevant because the issue at stake is so much greater than mortal eye can see; it is something the spirit of man must discern and feel. The archaeologist speaks of what the spade uncovers, the historian of what the diaries of the dead reveal, and the political scientist of what legislative assemblies intended. Our task is larger than any of these, for we cannot understand this man without understanding the gospel that he embraced, loving the men and the ideas that he loved, and feeling the power of that God to whom he prayed. There is an eternal law which stipulates that like embraces like, that it takes a prophet to understand a prophet, and that just as the ungodly cannot understand the things of God, neither can they comprehend the works and motives of those whom God chooses as his own.

xTo study the life of Joseph Smith, Sr., is to learn the lessons that his life teaches. And, somehow, to know Father Smith is to know more about the Prophet Joseph Smith, more about the restoration of the gospel, and more about the workings of the Great Almighty, who chose both the Prophet and his father in the premortal councils of eternity. Father Smith was, in many ways, the mold in which the Prophet Joseph Smith was formed. On this count alone his life is worthy of our consideration.

xOn a technical note, in the pages that follow I have often standardized spelling and punctuation in quotations from sources such as diaries, journals, and letters; this has been done to facilitate readability.

xIn the course of gathering the many pieces of information that fold together to paint a picture of the father of the Prophet, I incurred a debt of gratitude to Frederick (Rick) M. Huchel, who spent many hours in books and in libraries hunting down and sifting through the big and little of early Church history. His valuable cranium was an invaluable sounding board, and I am grateful for and bettered by both the spirit and content of his assistance. Finally, I express my appreciation to Garry Garff of Bookcraft for his careful attention to detail in the editing process.
