Mark L. McConkie, Father of the Prophet: Stories and Insights from the Life of Joseph Smith, Sr. ( 1993)

Chapter 1

"After the Name of His Father"

In the person of Joseph Smith we have the greatest prophet since Jesus. [^1] He was foreordained to the great mission he performed. All of the ancient prophets looked forward with gladness to the restoration of the gospel in these latter days [^2] and to the role that Joseph Smith would play in that restoration. Indeed, except for the prophecies dealing with Christ and his mission, there is no subject that receives more prophetic attention by the ancient prophets than does the restoration of the gospel in the latter days.

1 In many instances these prophecies are remarkably specific, though much of what is contained in them is seen and heard, as is ever the case, only by those who have eyes to see and ears to hear. Nevertheless, we are told in holy writ of the First Vision and the climate surrounding it, as well as some of the very language Christ would utter to the young prophet. [^3] The ancient Saints also knew that Joseph Smith was the Elias who was to come and "restore all things, as it is written by the prophets," [^4] and that this was to be done as a preparation for the coming of the Lord. [^5] The Lord told Moses that Joseph Smith would be "like unto thee," [^6] and Isaiah referred to him as a "root of Jesse," whose mission would include gathering Israel "from the four corners of the earth." [^7] Isaiah also wrote that Joseph Smith would give to the world sacred scriptures that would pull people out of apostasy, and even that portions of these writings would be delivered to and rejected by "one that is learned." [^8] These writings would be contained on sacred metal plates, and so anxious were the ancient Saints that these writings come forth, that they exercised faith and prayed in behalf of Joseph Smith and the work he would do. [^9] Ancients knew not only of the Lord's promise that he would bless Joseph Smith in his ministry [^10] but also that he would be allowed to show the plates to three witnesses "as a testimony against the world at the last day." [^11] The Savior himself announced that the Book of Mormon would come forth, in spite of the fact that wicked men would seek to "hurt" and "mar" Joseph Smith. All this was said with the dire warning that those who rejected the Lord's words, brought to light through the ministry of Joseph Smith, would be, in the Savior's words, "cut off from among my people who are of the covenant." [^12] Clearly, it is the prophetic testimony of the ancient prophets that the measure of one's spiritual integrity in our day is determined by how he or she receives the message that Jesus is the Christ, as announced in the Book of Mormon and in the testimony of Joseph Smith. [^13]

Portrait of Joseph Smith, Jr., by an unknown artist

3 It becomes a self-evident truth that the testimony of the Book of Mormon's truthfulness and the testimony of Joseph Smith's prophetic calling are one and the same. When Joseph in ancient Egypt prophesied that one of his descendants-Joseph Smith would be the means of restoring the lost sheep of Israel to the fold of Christ, he said he would do so through the words in the Book of Mormon. [^14] So specific was Joseph's language that he not only called the Prophet Joseph Smith by name but also announced that his father would have the same name. "His [i.e., the Prophet Joseph Smith's] name shall be called after me," said the ancient Joseph; "and it shall be after the name of his father." [^15]

3 Both Joseph Smith and his father were foreordained to be named Joseph. But was the foreordination limited to the names they bore? We have already observed that the ancient prophets knew Joseph Smith was foreordained to be the Elias through whom all things would be restored. But what can we say of his father?

3 The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that "every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was." [^16] Could we expect anything less in the case of the man appointed to preside in the home in which the great prophet of the Restoration was to learn to pray, to love the Lord, to read the scriptures, to obey the commandments, and to love and serve his fellowmen? Could we even begin to imagine that the great God of heaven, who knows all things, and before whom all things are ever present, and before whom even a sparrow cannot fall without his notice-could we even begin to imagine that such a God would leave to chance the mortal homelife and training of the foreordained prophet of the Restoration?

3 Over the generations we seem to hear the Apostle Paul remind us that the same God who "is not the author of confusion" [^17] no more rules his dominions by happenstance or accident than he does by chance, and that just as he appointed unto all Israel a time to be born, he also stretched forth his hand and foreordained Joseph Smith, Sr., to that great prophetic work which was his. And-let it be stated clearly!-Joseph Smith, Sr., was a majestic prophet in his own right. He dreamed inspired dreams and beheld inspired visions; he entertained angels, spoke prophetically of future events, healed the sick, taught and baptized many, constantly gave inspired insight and counsel to the Saints and others, and both blessed and cursed in the name of the Lord.

4 We are, then, led to ask: What better place to raise a prophet than in the home of a prophet? What better way to prepare Joseph Smith to confide in visions than to give him a father who first had visions? What better way to prepare Joseph Smith to think about the religious state of affairs in which he lived than to give him a father who would boldly subpoena the creeds of men before the court of his reason and reject all that was false? What better way to prepare the young prophet to confront sectarian piety than to give him a father who would first reject man-made dogma? And what better way to inspire the young and future prophet with a love of scripture than to give him a father who read and loved the scriptures? And, finally, what better way to reinforce and reteach every principle and truth that the father would teach the young prophet than to give him a mother who was the spiritual equal of the father?

4 We remind ourselves that the father of the Prophet won the trust and confidence of angels. Moroni, for example, instructed the Prophet to tell his father of the angel's visit, for Moroni knew that this particular father was prepared in the worlds afore to believe and accept the young prophet's testimony. Thus Moroni urged the Prophet Joseph forward, saying: "He will believe every word you say to him." [^18] Moroni's promise proved correct, for the Prophet's father, upon hearing young Joseph's account, said: "My son, be not disobedient to this heavenly vision!" [^19]

4 Just as Moroni trusted Joseph Smith, Sr., so also did the Prophet Joseph Smith, who throughout his entire life felt no reluctance either in seeking his counsel or in referring others to him for comfort, counsel, or blessings. The great issue, however, is that God trusted him, as is evidenced by the kinds of experiences that God gave him. These experiences shaped and molded the Prophet's father, who in turn played a central role in shaping and molding the Prophet himself.

5But the mission of Father Smith-for so he was called by the Saints of his day-included more than teaching, preparing, and sustaining the Prophet Joseph Smith in his prophetic role. In addition, Father Smith is a role model for all Israel-a pattern all might emulate. When Robert B. Thompson spoke at the funeral services of Father Smith, he prophetically announced that "the whole Church will copy his examples, walk in his footsteps, and emulate his faith and virtuous actions." [^20]

5And so it should be. Salvation is a matter of doing what saved people before us have done. Jesus, of course, is the perfect exemplar, and we are commanded to follow his example. [^21] Because Apostles and prophets are, to borrow a phrase, "imitators of God," [^22] we emulate their righteous examples as well-and therein lies much of the reason why we examine here the life of Father Smith: he is a study in gospel devotion and compliance, and as we watch his triumph over life's struggles, and as we see his unbending commitment to the cause of Christ, we not only see an example of what can be done but also feel an assurance that we can overcome the world and become pure, even as Christ is pure. [^23] Moreover, because one life of faith is worth a thousand commentaries, the life of Father Smith should not be read but studied. In it there is an echo of the eternities, and, somehow, by coming to know him more fully we see eternity more clearly.

5But great men speak to us only insofar as we have ears and souls to hear them. Inasmuch as the things of the Spirit are understood only by the power of the Spirit, the life of Father Smith is seen correctly only with the eye of faith. The carnal mind cannot comprehend communication with angels, seeing visions, predicting future events, healing the sick and enfeebled by the power of faith, enduring persecution and privation and thanking God for the very experience, or preferring to help the homeless rather than seek wealth or comfort. The carnal mind, then, cannot comprehend Father Smith, for it cannot comprehend that struggle is the law of growth, that persecution and opposition sanctify, and that obedience exalts.

5The standard against which we judge Father Smith is the gospel standard. Let us, then, try to understand and judge him as God would judge him, for he is one of God's own. To watch him exercise faith, overcome oppression, preside in the family, speak prophetic patriarchal blessings, and counsel prophetic sons is to feast on a Christlike example; it is to taste of the good fruits of the gospel.

6Come, then, let us dine.
