Hyrum L. Andrus, Mormonism and the Rise of Western Civilization ( 1966)

Introduction

Within Latter-day Saint thought is a philosophy of history based upon the assumption that spiritual forces sometimes play a primary role in the formation of historical events and are vitally important in the establishment of societies founded upon the ideals of freedom and social union. Some historians conclude that the influence great men exert causes history to develop in a given direction. Others hold that forces within society are more important causative factors. Karl Marx, who, with Friedrich Engels, proposed the theory of dialectical materialism, wrote in defense of this view, "The mode of production in material life determines the general character of the social, political, and spiritual processes of life." [^1] Though Mormonism accepts both the influence of great men and of socio-economic factors in shaping human destiny, [^2] it holds that, aside from these considerations, deeper and more significant spiritual elements sometimes give primary impetus to the movements of history. This was particularly true in the rise of Western civilization. The Book of Mormon pictures the resurrected Christ as stating to a group in ancient America that "the pouring out of the Holy Ghost through me upon the Gentiles [the Western nations] ... shall make them mighty above all." (3 Nephi 20:27.) Here, according to that volume, was the most influential causative factor involved in the rise of the West.

This view is founded in the Latter-day Saint concept of Christ as a divine being in whom is centered the principles and powers of life, light, Spirit and truth that sustain and govern the universe. These divine powers, variously called the Spirit of the Lord, the Spirit of God, the light of Christ, the light of truth, and the Holy Spirit, emanate from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space. They constitute "the light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God. ..." (D&C 88:6-13.) [^3]

The basic characteristic of God's power is intelligence, associated in LDS thought with "light and truth." (D&C 93:28, 36.) Intelligence by nature forsakes evil and error. The "pure attributes" thereof, Brigham Young explained, "stand upon their own basis." They need no support. In a system filled with light and truth "the fabric sustains itself." [^4] Upon this basis only can organized life exist. A revelation said: "All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence." (D&C 93:30.) It follows that when truth and light predominate, error is eradicated and life becomes independent in its sphere—free and mature, having achieved obedience to the laws that govern it. "Here is the agency of man, and here is the condemnation of man," concluded the revelation. (D&C 93:31.) Here, too, is the foundation for union and cohesion in organized life. Another revelation observed that intelligence has a natural affinity with intelligence, truth embraces truth, virtue loves virtue, and light cleaves unto light. (See D&C 88:40.)

Mormon thought holds that man, with all organized creatures, is dependent upon the spiritual powers that center in Christ for life. These powers must interact with and illuminate the intelligence within man, giving him the power to think and move and have a being. Since these quickening powers center in Christ, he is the light and the life of the world. Though the light of Christ in its elementary manifestations is given to all men, the influence of spiritual powers in the lives of men may be increased by the exercise of proper desires and by man's obedience to the principles upon which they operate. In their influence lies the key to enlightened freedom and social union. As expressed by John Taylor, "Where the Spirit of God is, there is union, harmony and liberty, and where it is not there is strife, confusion, and bondage." [^5]

The Latter-day Saint view of man's dependence upon the Spirit is not deterministic. The right to the blessings of the Spirit is the natural heritage of all men. (See D&C 84:45-48; 88:6-13.) Furthermore, man, not God, determines the degree to which the Holy Spirit may influence his life. God "gives wisdom, increase, and power" to those who seek to save, Brigham Young explained, but when the desire, attitude and conduct of men are in rebellion to light and truth, the influence of the Spirit is withheld. [^6] God does the giving and the withholding, but He acts without partiality, according to divine justice and equity, and in the final analysis man determines that which he receives.

By its very nature a philosophy of history based upon the influence of spiritual powers is subject to limitations. Mormons would be first to question the degree to which historians have the data available and the criteria necessary to conclude specifically where and to what extent spiritual powers have shaped human events, except in some instances where they may have been prominently manifested. Since the divine element is said to operate with each individual on a personal basis, each one's desires, qualities of character, and talents are important in determining how and to what extent the Spirit may manifest its blessings. Though the Holy Spirit is pictured as striving with man, each individual is free, and only by his personal dedication and responsiveness can it significantly motivate and enlighten him. Even then one may lack the capacity to discern clearly and apply the light and truth that is available. Material factors of a wide variety must also be considered. Many times the divine element may not be the basic causative factor in a given action; and in other cases it may be totally lacking in influence. Thus, instead of there being a purely spiritual source of causation, more often a combination of elements may influence each historical situation. Where one factor may initially stimulate or give sanction to a given act, another may divert or even deter the individual from his original intent. George Fox and James Naylor, for example, may both have partaken of a measure of the Holy spirit in the early Quaker movement, but while Fox is remembered for his spiritual sensitivity and his stability of character, Naylor's radical tendencies are rightly deplored. Again, Socinianism espoused the quest for freedom that accompanied the Protestant Reformation, as did the atheists of the French Revolution; but precisely where and to what extent either group may have been enlightened by spiritual powers coming from God is open to question. [^7] But even though it recognizes certain limitations and qualifying factors, the Mormon position holds that spiritual powers, particularly among certain influential groups, played an important role in stimulating the development of Western institutions.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Marx's Preface to his Critique of Political Economy (1859).
[^2] 2. For a statement on the role of great men, see Doctrine and Covenants 101:77-80. For a statement on the important of economic factors, see ibid., 78:5-6.
[^3] 3. See also D&C 29:30-31; 33:16.
[^4] 4. Journal of Discourses, vol. 1, p. 81.
[^5] 5. Journal of Discourses, vol. 22, p. 41. See also ibid., vol. 20, p. 123.
[^6] 6. Journal of Discourses, vol. 7, pp. 10-11. In Mosiah 2:36, King Benjamin refers to man as withdrawing himself from the Spirit of the Lord.
[^7] 7. Certainly human prejudice, religiously or otherwise oriented, is not a valid basis for judging if and to what extent men may have been influenced by spiritual powers. Joseph Smith pointed to the fact that while the Mussulman condemns others as infidels who reject his Koran, the Jew believes those not of his faith by circumcision to be Gentile dogs, and the Christian consigns all to perdition who cannot bow to his creed. "But," observed the Mormon Prophet, "while one portion of the human race is judging and condemning the other without mercy, the Great Parent of the universe looks upon the whole of the human family with a fatherly care and paternal regard; He views them as his offspring, and without any of those contracted feelings that influence the children of men, causes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.' "-Documentary History of the Church, vol. 4, p. 595. This work is essentially Joseph Smith's journal and contains many important documents associated with the Mormon movement during his lifetime.
