Hyrum L. Andrus, Mormonism and the Rise of Western Civilization ( 1966)

General Developments in the Rise of the West

Though Western civilization has been in process of formation for generations, those developments that produced our modern culture are of more recent date. They commenced largely with the Renaissance and were greatly stimulated during the Protestant Reformation. The elements of power and greatness that then came to light originated from awakening forces that, says Troeltsch, changed "the whole general situation" of society, destroying the medieval world and giving birth to the modern age. This change came not as "the logical outcome of thought" but as "the result of conditions which had awakened the impulse to transform and recreate social life." [^1] In expressing the Mormon view, Parley P. Pratt earlier observed that "a new impulse was given to the minds of men, which has resulted in mighty changes in the scientific, commercial, and political departments, and which has mainly contributed in forming all the great outlines of modern character." [^2]

The new enlightening impulses that were then manifested infused greater life into men, resulting in a general increase in the average European intellect. [^3] A keener sense of discernment and moral discrimination was manifested, by which men perceived the degradation within the church. Though reforms were commenced, Preserved Smith concludes, they "never would or could have satisfied the spirit of the age." [^4] Men's aspirations were out of joint with the existing social structure and its values. Many saw for the first time the good that could be realized in this life—the value of marriage, of children, of physical labor, of success and prosperity. Within one generation such changes occurred in the lives of men as the world has seldom seen.

The creative energy that awakened Europe manifested itself in several specific ways. Intellectually, men began to read and to think for themselves, aided by the new art of printing. By the seventeenth century they were looking about with a new self-confidence, a new inquisitiveness, a new audacity. Natural philosophers throughout Europe rejected accepted beliefs and turned to probe nature for her mysteries with keener insight; and a flood of discoveries burst upon the world. The seventeenth century has been well named the "Century of Genius." Among other things, the earth's geography was studied, and as superstition lost its hold upon the human mind, seamen ventured out farther and farther upon the dreaded waters. And while Vasco da Gama, Columbus, and Magellan were opening waterways to new lands, Copernicus, Galileo, Kepler, Newton, and others revealed a new and more meaningful universe to man. It is not without significance that the new age of scientific analysis was called the "Enlightenment."

Brigham Young expressed the LDS view of the Enlightenment when he declared that "every discovery in science and art that is really true and useful to mankind has been given by direct revelation from God, though but few acknowledge it." [^5] George Q. Cannon elaborated upon this position by explaining that

the remarkable discoveries that have been made from time to time are produced by the operations of an unseen influence upon the mind of the children of men. For instance, it has frequently happened in astronomy and other branches of science that when an important discovery has been made two or three men about the same time widely separated from each other have received the communication; and disputes have arisen as to which of them was entitled to the credit. This was the case as to the application of steam and the principles of telegraphy and also many discoveries in astronomy and other sciences. Disputes have arisen in various nations upon these points; whereas the truth is that God is the Author; it is God that moved upon the minds of those individuals. It was God that inspired them to do as they did; it was He who led them on from step to step until they achieved the results which made them famous, and sometimes quite unexpectedly to themselves. [^6]

To the view that such discoveries came as the result of "the spirit of revelation," President Cannon added: "Some men possess it to a greater extent than others." Again, he observed: "Some have the gift in one direction and they are capable of receiving communication from God in a direction that others are not." [^7] The dawn of Enlightenment was consequently much like the effects of sunlight upon a seedbed that had been properly prepared: plants of many varieties burst forth spontaneously everywhere.

The Book of Mormon regards economic prosperity as a direct by-product of spiritual regeneration. God is pictured as cursing the land for the sake of the wicked, but the righteous are prospered and led "into precious lands." (1 Nephi 17:36-38.) The people called "Anti-Nephi-Lehies" were a case in point. When they responded to spiritual truth and power, "they began to be a very industrious people." (Alma 23:17-18.) The same was true in the rise of Western civilization. Parley P. Pratt observed that "a spirit of enterprise seized the people." [^8] Particularly in northern Europe after the sixteenth century, men developed an obsessional craving for work, a desire that had been lacking in free men before that period. These developments produced a shift from the medieval guild to the system of production by capital and wages. The revolution in the ethics of work laid the foundation upon which England rose to power, and it carried in its loins the Industrial Revolution. Scholarly studies have shown a direct correlation between the spiritual forces that motivated men in the sixteenth, seventeenth, eighteenth, and early nineteenth centuries and the rise of capitalism as an economic power in Western civilization. Though differing as to which gave the initial impetus, the spiritual powers identified with Protestantism or their correlated economic practices, R. H. Tawny's Religion and the Rise of Capitalism and Max Weber's The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism agree that once things got started spiritual forces and economic factors combined and interacted with each other to develop capitalism as the dominant economic system on earth.

With the accumulation of wealth, the individual and the nation achieved a power not before known. The monarchy of the Roman Church was broken as men freed themselves from its international control and from its cramping economic ethic; and the accompanying trends toward nationalism and self-determinism ushered in a new era of political relationships. Von Ranke, esteemed by some as the world's bestequipped historian, concluded that in breaking down the political power of the Holy Roman Empire, the Reformation aided in establishing a completely autonomous state sovereignty bounded by no extraneous considerations and existing for itself alone. These developments he held to be the most important factors in raising Western civilization to a place of power in world affairs. [^9]

Religiously, a new type of Christianity was developing whose underlying sentiment was essentially individualistic, in contrast to the former tone that had been collectivistic. "All it cared for was freedom for interchange of ideas, and a pure fellowship of thought." [^10] Men "suddenly" manifested an insatiable desire to read the scriptures for themselves. [^11] It was not long before the vernacular Bible became the most popular Protestant tract. Here may be found an insight into the inner forces that were then influencing the minds of men. Latter-day Saint thought holds with biblical authority that scripture originates as holy men of God speak or write under the power of the Holy Ghost; and all who in faith give consideration thereto are blessed with a measure of the same Spirit. (See 2 Peter 1:21; D&C 68:3-4; 2 Nephi 33:1.) Similarly, Roger Williams made "God's Spirit" synonymous with "the word of God"; [^12] and when Sir Thomas More inquired how the individual knew that the Bible was authoritative, he was told by William Tyndale that "it was by a feeling faith." [^13] John Calvin reasoned on the matter as follows:

Read Demosthenes or Cicero, read Plato, Aristotle, or any other of that class: You will, I admit, feel wonderfully allured, pleased, moved, enchanted; but turn from them to the reading of the Sacred Volume, and whether you will or not, it will so affect you, so pierce your heart, so work its way into your marrow, that, in comparison of the impression so produced, that of orators and philosophers will almost disappear; making it manifest that in the Sacred Volume there is a truth divine, a something which makes it immeasurably superior to all the gifts and graces attainable by man ... whether you read David, Isaiah, and others of the same class, whose discourse flows sweet and pleasant; or Amos the herdsman, Jeremiah, and Zechariah, whose rougher idiom savours of rusticity; that majesty of the Spirit to which I adverted appears conspicuous in all. [^14]

It was awakening creative forces compatible with, and in many ways germane to, the Spirit Calvin described that transformed Western civilization. This Spirit, more than the Reformers, was responsible for the downfall of the old and the rise of the new. Calvin established a policy in Geneva that subordinated the state to the church, but when his followers could not duplicate his example, they gave expression to the enlightening impulses they felt by asserting their right to individual judgment and freedom of conscience. Republican passions were thus aroused that fostered rebellion against the existing powers, so that Calvinists working in France, the Netherlands, Scotland, England and America were largely responsible for the establishment of freedom and self-government. [^15] Luther, who expressed the feelings of the masses as few men in history have ever done, likewise placed major emphasis upon "the wonder of faith occurring in the inmost center of personal life." [^16] But in emphasizing elements of the Spirit, the Reformers were dealing with powers they but vaguely understood—forces that pressed toward a freedom they would reject. At times they stood appalled at the results and recoiled. [^17] For this reason Gooch concludes that democracy "is the child of the Reformation, not of the Reformers." [^18]

Transformations wrought by the Spirit were particularly important in England. "The growth, triumph and transformation of the Puritan spirit," says Tawny, "was the most fundamental movement of the seventeenth century." He likened the Puritan to "a steel spring compressed by an inner force, which shatters every obstacle by its rebound." By the "mere energy of his expanding spirit," the Puritan remade his own character the way of life, influencing his "family and church, industry and city, political institutions and social order." [^19]

The transformations that took place in England were in varying degrees duplicated in other areas of Europe, largely as the result of men's responsiveness to the dynamic, lifegiving influences that then manifested themselves in Western civilization. Spiritual forces—not influential men, not socioeconomic, political or religious conditions—lie at the root of the great developments that brought freedom, prosperity, and enlightenment to the Western world.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Marx's Preface to his Critique of Political Economy (1859).
[^2] 2. For a statement on the role of great men, see Doctrine and Covenants 101:77-80. For a statement on the important of economic factors, see ibid., 78:5-6.
[^3] 3. See also D&C 29:30-31; 33:16.
[^4] 4. Journal of Discourses, vol. 1, p. 81.
[^5] 5. Journal of Discourses, vol. 22, p. 41. See also ibid., vol. 20, p. 123.
[^6] 6. Journal of Discourses, vol. 7, pp. 10-11. In Mosiah 2:36, King Benjamin refers to man as withdrawing himself from the Spirit of the Lord.
[^7] 7. Certainly human prejudice, religiously or otherwise oriented, is not a valid basis for judging if and to what extent men may have been influenced by spiritual powers. Joseph Smith pointed to the fact that while the Mussulman condemns others as infidels who reject his Koran, the Jew believes those not of his faith by circumcision to be Gentile dogs, and the Christian consigns all to perdition who cannot bow to his creed. "But," observed the Mormon Prophet, "while one portion of the human race is judging and condemning the other without mercy, the Great Parent of the universe looks upon the whole of the human family with a fatherly care and paternal regard; He views them as his offspring, and without any of those contracted feelings that influence the children of men, causes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.' "-Documentary History of the Church, vol. 4, p. 595. This work is essentially Joseph Smith's journal and contains many important documents associated with the Mormon movement during his lifetime.
