Hyrum L. Andrus, Mormonism and the Rise of Western Civilization ( 1966)

The Idea of Society by Covenant or Contract

The urge to establish society upon the basis of covenant, contract, or agreement for the mutual advantage of all developed contemporaneously with the rise of Western civilization. Inspired with these ideals, men sought to build a stable system with contractualism as the most conspicuous characteristic of Western society. Religiously, it was promimently expressed in the Puritan idea of covenant or federal theology. Politically, the social contract provided the foundation for constitutional government and represented the secularized version of the earlier religious concept. Democratic government is but another term for contractual government—a government of the people, by the people, and for the people. Economically, capitalism was founded upon contractual relationships between the parties involved in production, distribution, and consumption. Eventually every conceivable association, from the home to the international scene, was founded upon principles of covenant or contract.

Latter-day Saint thought sees a direct relationship between the influence of enlightening spiritual powers and the desire among men to develop free covenant institutions. Such forces are said to stimulate the development of mature freedom under law while strengthening the basis of true fraternal ties among men. Consequently, conscientious men responsive to enlightening spiritual powers will desire freedom and union in their social relationships. The logical way to achieve these ideals without doing violence to either is to establish covenant societies in which enlightening spiritual forces are strong enough to promote union and mature individualism to such an extent that each person will freely and maturely fulfill his covenant obligations to others. Spiritual powers thus stimulate the desire for covenant relationships and constitute the key by which they may be achieved. Here, in the Mormon view, is the pathway to liberty and life. Those who heed not the spiritual monitor, through disbelief, ignorance, or rebellion, are in bondage and cannot be free. [^1] The issues of freedom and social union are thus held to hinge largely upon man's perception and utilization of enlightening spiritual powers. John Taylor explained:

Men have had their varied social communities, religious and other theories; but they do not know the secret springs of the human heart. They do not know the operations of the Spirit of the living God. They cannot bind a conglomerate mass of men sufficiently together, they will not where they cannot amalgamate them. Nothing less than the inspiration of the Almighty will do it. [^2]

A study of the development of covenant society in Western civilization indicates that its proponents were among those most responsive to the spiritual forces underlying the Reformation. Calvinism developed an elaborate system of covenant relationships. Its Covenant of Grace, in particular, was correlated with the "inward renovation of the heart" and the "illumination of the mind as to the knowledge of God." [^3] The Magdeburg Bekenntnis, which set forth the doctrines of the social compact and the right to resist oppressive rulers, was in print as early as 1550. Before that decade was over John Ponet was advocating similar ideas in England. Ponet is also credited with writing a major part of the Humble and Unfained Confession of the Belefe of Certain Poore Banished men (1554), which aided in developing later views on covenant theology. [^4]

The incipient trends toward covenant society were challenged but nevertheless stimulated when Queen Mary endeavored to return England to the Roman faith. Many English reformers joined with sympathizers "in covenant, by volunterie profession, to obey the truth of Christ, and to witness against the abominations of Antichrist." [^5] Others fled to continental Europe where they continued to develop covenant principles. The colony established at Frankfurt, Germany, is best known. Though troubled by strife and contention, their society was established upon a covenant foundation, and the publication of their history aided in the spread of those principles.

It was out of this background that John Knox went to launch the reformation in Scotland. His celebrated First Blast of the Trumpet Against the Monstruous Regiment of Women, directed at Mary, Queen of Scotland, and Queen Mary of England, promised to elaborate more particularly upon the social contract in a "second blast" to follow. But the need for further immediate explanation was filled in 1558 when Christopher Goodman, another pastor trained in Geneva, published his How Superior Powers Ought to be Obeyed of Their Subjects, in which he developed the idea of society by covenant or contract as it pertained to the elective nature of the monarchy. Two other works of importance appeared in 1561, one of which pointedly declared, "We beleve that none ought of his own authoritie to thrust himselfe into the governement of the church, but that it ought to be done by election." [^6] Robert Browne, the Father of Congregationalism, also expressed similar views. "For ministers to assume their calling," he contended, "there must first be an agreement of the church; so 'for ciuil Magistrates; there must be an agreement of the people or Common welth." [^7] The record of the organization of Browne's congregation shows in detail the covenant nature of their system and the spiritual atmosphere in which it was developed:

... So a covenant was made & ther mutual consent was geun to hould to gether.

There vver certaine chief points proved vnto them by the scriptures, all vvich being particularlie rehersed vnto them with exhortion, thei agreed vpon them, & pronounced their agreement to ech thing particularlie, saiing, to this we geue our consent. First therefore thei gave their consent, to ioine them selues to the Lord, in one couenant & fellovveship together, & to keep & seek agreement vnder his lavves & gouerment; and therefore did vtterlie flee & auoide such like disorders & wickedness, as was mencioned before. Further thei agreed of thos vvich should teach them, and vvatch for the saluation of their soules, vvhom thei allovved & did chose as able & meets ffor that charge. For thei had sufficient triall and testimonie thereof by that vvich thei hard & savve by them, & had receaued of others. So thei praied for their vvatchfulness & diligence, & promised their obedience. [^8]

The ideal of establishing social institutions upon mutual covenant was a fundamental part of the Puritan movement in England. To implement its urge to transform society, Puritanism utilized every available tool. The legalistic ideas of English political philosophy—principles within the Common Law, Magna Charta, etc.—were taken over and used to good advantage. [^9] The idea of covenant as found in the Bible was made another tool. The Massacre of St. Bartholomew, where many French Protestants were killed in 1572, had brought forth the Vindiciae Contra Tyrannos, or the Grounds of Rights Against Tyrants, "the first work in modern history that constructs a political philosophy on the basis of certain inalienable rights of man." This and other similar political works published on the Continent were also utilized in England to break the power of the monarchy and establish representative, constitutional government. [^10]

Within the ranks of the English Puritans a group arose who styled themselves Independents. Religiously they contended for a return to primitive Christianity, asserting that each congregation should be founded upon covenant and consent, maintaining that Christ's "spiritual influence alone was sufficient to secure harmony and concord among the congregations of the 'saints' " and render superfluous the need of organized church discipline. [^11] In this they showed themselves to be true advocates of covenant society in its highest ideal. The Independents formed themselves into a political party and carried their views into politics. Within their ranks were thinkers whose names "stand high in the list of influential contributors" to the democratic philosophy of government. Freedom of religion and of speech were particularly emphasized by the Independents many years before Milton, Taylor, Baxter, and Locke gained recognition by their partial condemnation of intolerance. [^12]

Others besides the Independents looked back to the shadowy outlines of early Christian societies and sought by relying upon spiritual powers to duplicate their covenant structure. [^13] The Quakers established "thoroughly democratic" churches patterned after certain "cardinal features" of early Christian communities. [^14] They particularly associated covenant society with inner spiritual enlightenment. Their concept of the "inner light" held that "there was direct illumination from God within every man's inner being; that there was consequently no need for a priest or minister." [^15] The Church was a body of believers actuated by the Holy Spirit and united by covenant into a society where all were enlightened and none was to be preferred above another. But such "inner illumination" was possible only by a "concentration of the thoughts on God." [^16] Here was a key to the composition of a true society. Isaac Penington, a Quaker leader in the seventeenth century, held that true freedom under authority could properly be achieved in a social relationship only by the individual's responsiveness to the Spirit of Christ, and concluded: "The unity, thus kept, all will come into one outwardly also at length, as the light grows in everyone and as everyone grows into the light; but this must be patiently waited for from the hand of God, who hath the right way of effecting it and who alone can do it." [^17]

Penington's position is in full harmony with the LDS view. Mormonism, on the other hand, reaffirms that in varying degrees God "bestowed his Holy Spirit upon ... millions of people," including Luther, Calvin, Melanchthon, Wesley and others. [^18] But though men within the major religious bodies spawned by the Reformation were actuated in some degree by the Holy Spirit, they were not free from deficiencies and disorders. The Book of Mormon portrays them as stumbling, in an "awful state of blindness," by their failure to understand more fully the true nature and power of the Christian gospel. (1 Nephi 13:29.) Although they had "a spirit upon them," Brigham Young commented, they did not "profess to know enough to take the truth and leave the error." [^19] Furthermore, in the Latter-day Saint view, they lacked legitimate priesthood channels through which the Holy Spirit in its fuller and more intelligent manifestations could be obtained. But, in the words of George Q. Cannon, "Though they had not the authority to build up the Church of God in its ancient purity, they still had a work to do and they have come in their days and generations and have labored zealously, indefatigably and fearlessly, regardless of death, inspired of God to do the work which they performed in the various lands in which they labored." [^20]

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Marx's Preface to his Critique of Political Economy (1859).
[^2] 2. For a statement on the role of great men, see Doctrine and Covenants 101:77-80. For a statement on the important of economic factors, see ibid., 78:5-6.
[^3] 3. See also D&C 29:30-31; 33:16.
[^4] 4. Journal of Discourses, vol. 1, p. 81.
[^5] 5. Journal of Discourses, vol. 22, p. 41. See also ibid., vol. 20, p. 123.
[^6] 6. Journal of Discourses, vol. 7, pp. 10-11. In Mosiah 2:36, King Benjamin refers to man as withdrawing himself from the Spirit of the Lord.
[^7] 7. Certainly human prejudice, religiously or otherwise oriented, is not a valid basis for judging if and to what extent men may have been influenced by spiritual powers. Joseph Smith pointed to the fact that while the Mussulman condemns others as infidels who reject his Koran, the Jew believes those not of his faith by circumcision to be Gentile dogs, and the Christian consigns all to perdition who cannot bow to his creed. "But," observed the Mormon Prophet, "while one portion of the human race is judging and condemning the other without mercy, the Great Parent of the universe looks upon the whole of the human family with a fatherly care and paternal regard; He views them as his offspring, and without any of those contracted feelings that influence the children of men, causes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.' "-Documentary History of the Church, vol. 4, p. 595. This work is essentially Joseph Smith's journal and contains many important documents associated with the Mormon movement during his lifetime.
