Hyrum L. Andrus, Mormonism and the Rise of Western Civilization ( 1966)

America and the Triumph of the Secularized Covenant

The Book of Mormon emphatically declares that by the agency of his Holy Spirit, God brought about the discovery of the Western Hemisphere and promoted its later colonization. Nephi, an ancient American seer, gazed in vision at these events and said, "I looked and beheld a man [Columbus] among the Gentiles [European peoples], who was separated from the seed of my brethren [American Indians] by the many waters; and I beheld the Spirit of God, that it came down and wrought upon the man; and he went forth upon the many waters, even unto the seed of my brethren." (1 Nephi 13:12.) Here the Book of Mormon struck a sympathetic note to the sentiments expressed by Columbus himself. "When Columbus represents himself as inspired by the Holy Ghost, he is convinced to the bottom of his heart that he is speaking the truth," Wassermann observes. "This is no rhetorical flourish, no hypocrisy, no attempt to ingratiate himself with the dignitaries of the Church; it is bitter, deep, earnest." [^1]

The ancient seer next turned to view another scene and reported:

... I beheld the Spirit of God, that it wrought upon other Gentiles; and they went forth out of captivity, upon the many waters.

And it came to pass that I beheld many multitudes of the Gentiles upon the land of promise. ...

And I beheld the Spirit of the Lord, that it was upon the Gentiles, and they did prosper and obtain the land for their inheritance. ...

And ... I, Nephi, beheld that the Gentiles who had gone forth out of captivity did humble themselves before the Lord; and the power of the Lord was with them. (1 Nephi 13:13-16.)

In stating that early colonists "went forth out of captivity," environmental factors are recognized as expulsive forces that aided the colonization of America. It is a historic fact that at no time in English history had the claims of the monarchy been more exorbitant and oppressive than between 1603 and 1642 when the tide of emigration began to flow toward America. But though such factors were important, the presence of one motive for coming to the New World did not assume the absence of another. "We go," said the early Puritans, "to practice the positive part of church reformation, and propagate the gospel in America." [^2] In this declaration, they expressed the spiritual motivation they felt. By viewing things from that vantage point, a Puritan historian could later conclude that "God sifted a whole nation that he might send choice Grain over into this Wilderness." [^3]

Perry Miller tackled the problem of determining possible causes for the Puritan migration to America. Aside from political and economic factors, he found that the early clergy who went to the New World had previously formed mutual friendships and given common allegiance to the views of certain great theologians. But, above all, they were united almost to a man in asserting that the form of church organization given in the scriptures was congregational. The heart of this church theory was the covenant, where men, regenerated by the Spirit, covenanted together and from this compact organized a church.

The fact that the Puritan leaders were united in these views caused Miller to conclude that the colonization of America was undertaken as a "positive crusade" for their covenant ideal. To support this conclusion, he cited Jonathan Mitchell who sat at the feet of the first Puritan ministers and wrote in 1662, "The Latter Erecting of Christ's Kingdom in whole Societies ... was our Design, and our Interest in this Country: tho' with Respect to the Inward and Invisible Kingdom, as the Scope thereof." Finally, Miller observed that the Puritan desire to develop covenant societies resulted from "the tremendous thrust of the Reformation and the living force of the theology." [^4] Thus, he agreed that the covenant idea and the spiritual forces that brought it into being were among the basic factors promoting the early colonization of New England.

While the early American colonists were busy planting the covenant ideal in the New World, their spiritual cousins in Europe were secularizing covenant concepts and applying them to political problems at hand. Later these ideas also came to America in the popular political thought of the eighteenth century. One major landmark in the application of covenant concepts to the political scene occurred during the Cromwellian Commonwealth from 1642 to 1660. The Agreement of the People, a draft constitution of the commonwealth, was founded upon the idea of covenant and provided among other things for bills of attainder, security of private property, freedom of religion (except for Papists), freedom from impressment, and the equality of all before the law. Had this constitution been put into effect, Dunning observes, "It would have stood as the express will, not of Parliament, but of the people considered as individuals." [^5]

The ideas expressed during the whole period of Puritan activity in England were of great importance to later political developments in Europe and America. John Locke, whose political philosophy laid some of the main foundations for the American Revolution, obtained much of his thought from this background. The "key elements" in Locke's philosophy—natural rights, social contract or covenant, government by consent, and the right of revolution—had all been clarified in the debates during the revolutionary period which commenced with the Puritan resistance to Charles I. [^6] When the Agreement of the People was formulated and presented, it touched off a great debate. There is little in Locke's writings not found in the arguments set forth at this time. His views on political philosophy "embrace arguments from both sides of the debate." [^7] Locke's philosophy, in turn, found permanent lodging in the minds of the Founding Fathers of the United States. His Two Treatises on Government became the official political text of America's eighteenth-century colleges. Jefferson thoroughly digested the great Englishman's philosophy, and he drew so heavily upon it in writing the Declaration of Independence that he actually employed the language of the Second Treatise in many places without consulting the written word of his exemplar at the time of writing. [^8]

But even before Locke wrote, the idea of society by covenant and its political offspring, the social contract, had been working their way into American thoughts. Similar ideas to those set forth by Locke had developed independently on the Western Hemisphere to such extent that it is generally conceded that the Reverend Thomas Hooker could easily have written parts of Locke's Second Treatise. The principles entertained by the two men were much the same, though the American minister's A Survey of the Summe of Church Discipline [^9] was published in 1648, forty years before Locke wrote.

There can be little doubt that, theologically, covenant principles generated and later gave impetus to the dominant ideal of eighteenth-century popularism, the social contract, which in turn formed the basis of later constitutional government. The prevailing idea of Federal Theology included a national covenant as well as individual covenants. Though more specifically emphasized in New England, such doctrines were commonly taught in all the colonies. The colonists considered themselves to be modern Israel, bound in national and individual covenant with God; and here was a significant source of their strength and union. Rulers who violated the national covenant were considered as usurpers to be legitimately resisted. On this basis the colonist set aside the rule of George III and formulated a new national covenant—the Constitution of the United States. [^10]

This explains why New England ministers gave enthusiastic reception to the writings of Locke and other English [traditional] liberals and preached the principles of government by contract and consent. As early as 1633, in Massachusetts, and 1674, in Connecticut, the practice arose of inviting the clergy to preach a sermon at each election period. Year after year these sermons were delivered before the Governor and the Assembly. Frequently they were printed and discussed throughout the country, often from the pulpit by the local minister. It is significant that the whole political philosophy of the American Revolution was set forth in these election sermons, including the doctrine of civil liberty as enunciated by Sidney, Locke, and Milton. [^11]

Covenant ideas, both religious and secular, combined with the prevailing desire for freedom and developed to triumph in the work of the American Revolution and the founding of the United States Constitution. The urge for freedom was of particular importance. A "spirit of levelism" was strongly manifest in America, warring against older forms of European society that had gained a foothold in the New World. [^12] This "rising spirit," says Parrington, "found expression in individualism, ... exalted liberty and hated tyranny—a spirit that had for its ultimate purpose the reduction of the powers of the political state." [^13]

Writers have sought to explain this prevailing zeal for freedom and enterprise and determine its source. Alexis de Tocqueville referred to it as a "democratic revolution" that glowed with heat and displayed a "strong spirit of independence." [^14] To John Stuart Mill the existing revolution consisted of "that go-ahead spirit; that restless, impatient eagerness for improvement in circumstances; that mobility; that shifting and fluctuating,—now up, now down, now here, now there; that absence of classes and class-spirit; that jealousy of superior attainments; that want of deference for authority and leadership; that habit of bringing things to the rule and square of each man's understanding." [^15] More recently Frederick Jackson Turner characterized the revolution by "that coarseness and strength combined with acuteness and inquisitiveness; that practical inventive turn of mind, quick to find expedients; that masterful grasp of material things, lacking in the artistic but powerful to effect great ends; that restless, nervous energy; that dominant individualism working for good and evil, and withal that buoyancy and exuberance which comes from freedom." [^16]

De Tocqueville concluded that equality and the desire for equality had much to do with the "moral and social phenomena," so much so that in his eyes the ultimate ascendancy of the democratic principle assumed the character of a law of nature. [^17] Mill discredited these conclusions, insisting that the impetus derived from an equality of conditions could not be "the exclusive, or even the principal cause." He pointed out that the French Catholics of Lower Canada enjoyed a relative degree of equality, yet no such revolutionary effects were manifest among them. [^18]

Turner held that the "striking characteristics" of the age were "traits of the frontier." [^19] There can be little doubt that the frontier helped release men from the limitations of aristocratic society and thereby facilitated the free expression of those inner impulses that began to be manifest in Western civilization years before men moved into the frontier. The frontier also developed coarseness and ruggedness of character, combined with an increased facility to deal with material things. But to assign America's tremendous contributions to the modern world to no higher source than the frontier disregards her spiritual heritage and confuses primary causes with secondary factors. While Turner's formula for America's genius and greatness was based paradoxically in a return to the primitive, Latter-day Saint thought holds that European colonists were "established in this land, and ... set up as a free people by the power of the Father." (3 Nephi 21:4.) Man's general responsiveness to that intelligent power—not essentially the impact of an ideal or the influence of the frontier—was the primary reason why early Americans "prospered" in the land. (1 Nephi 13:15-18.)

The Book of Mormon declares that during the American Revolution and in subsequent developments on the international scene, "the power of God" was with the early Americans and "the wrath of God was upon all those that were gathered together against them to battle," and the colonists "were delivered by the power of God out of the hands of all other nations." (1 Nephi 13:19.) That volume further stated prophetically that this nation would be "lifted up by the power of God above all other nations." (1 Nephi 13:30.) Other details on the Latter-day Saint view were added in a revelation that spoke of the establishment of "the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom I [God] raised up unto this very purpose." (D&C 101:80.) Here the influence of great men is recognized as a factor in the historical picture. But as with Luther, Calvin, and others, the Founding Fathers were also inspired by the light of heaven. Thus Joseph Smith explained that the Constitution of the United States was given by the inspiration of God. [^20] This position has a fundamental place in Mormon thought. [^21]

In his "First Inaugural Address," Washington expressed a similar sentiment, as he testified that the United States was born with divine assistance:

It would be peculiarly improper to omit, in this first official act, my fervent supplications to that Almighty Being, who rules the universe. ... No people can be bound to acknowledge and adore the invisible hand, which conducts the affairs of men, more than the people of the United States. Every step, by which they have advanced in the character of an independent nation, seems to have been distinguished by some token of providential agency. And in the important revolution just accomplished in the system of their United Government, the tranquil deliberations and voluntary consent of so many distinct communities, from which the event has resulted, cannot be compared with the means by which most Governments have been established, without some return to pious gratitude along with an humble anticipation of the future blessings which the past seems to presage. These reflections, arising out of the present crisis, have forced themselves too strongly on my mind to be suppressed. [^22]

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Marx's Preface to his Critique of Political Economy (1859).
[^2] 2. For a statement on the role of great men, see Doctrine and Covenants 101:77-80. For a statement on the important of economic factors, see ibid., 78:5-6.
[^3] 3. See also D&C 29:30-31; 33:16.
[^4] 4. Journal of Discourses, vol. 1, p. 81.
[^5] 5. Journal of Discourses, vol. 22, p. 41. See also ibid., vol. 20, p. 123.
[^6] 6. Journal of Discourses, vol. 7, pp. 10-11. In Mosiah 2:36, King Benjamin refers to man as withdrawing himself from the Spirit of the Lord.
[^7] 7. Certainly human prejudice, religiously or otherwise oriented, is not a valid basis for judging if and to what extent men may have been influenced by spiritual powers. Joseph Smith pointed to the fact that while the Mussulman condemns others as infidels who reject his Koran, the Jew believes those not of his faith by circumcision to be Gentile dogs, and the Christian consigns all to perdition who cannot bow to his creed. "But," observed the Mormon Prophet, "while one portion of the human race is judging and condemning the other without mercy, the Great Parent of the universe looks upon the whole of the human family with a fatherly care and paternal regard; He views them as his offspring, and without any of those contracted feelings that influence the children of men, causes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.' "-Documentary History of the Church, vol. 4, p. 595. This work is essentially Joseph Smith's journal and contains many important documents associated with the Mormon movement during his lifetime.
