Hyrum L. Andrus, Mormonism and the Rise of Western Civilization ( 1966)

The Latter-day Saint View of the Constitution

Latter-day Saints believe that, as a divinely inspired document, the Constitution of the United States is designed to establish that system of government which the Lord proposes for men. Of the Constitution, a revelation to Joseph Smith states: "As pertaining to law of man, whatsoever is more or less than this, cometh of evil. (D&C 98:7. Italics added.) The old Articles of Confederation (which the Constitution replaced) established a system of government that was "less" than that which the Constitution provided, in that the earlier system did not have the power or the political machinery required to uphold the rights of men and regulate adequately the affairs of society. The welfare state, on the other hand, is a governmental system that in concept is "more" than that originally provided for by the Constitution. It regulates the affairs of men in ways that the Constitution was not expected to regulate, and it must infringe upon those freedoms which the Constitution was expected to uphold.

As God's proposed system of government, the Constitution of the United States is designed to extend freedom and justice to all men. These are the central reasons for which it was established. Government under the Constitution was not intended to be an instrument through which social and economic justice could be achieved, only so far as the Constitution provides a framework of freedom in which Christian men may freely and maturely work in the interest of these ideals. In speaking of the central purpose to be achieved through the Constitution of the United States, God said in a revelation to Joseph Smith that this great document had been established "that every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity, according to the moral agency which I have given unto him." (D&C 101:77-78. Italics added.) In other words, the central purpose of the Constitution is to establish a climate of freedom in which each individual may act, according to the doctrine and principles he espouses, in determining his future. Any policy of government that militates against this central purpose is unconstitutional. According to this ideal of political economy wherein individual freedom is made the foundation of society, government is instituted primarily to safeguard human rights and provide the necessary machinery to reconcile conflicts that arise between elements within society in such a way that justice will be administered to the contending parties.

Although the Constitution was brought forth under the inspiration of God, it was not in every respect a perfect document. Nor have the qualifying amendments, with the varying interpretations given to them, necessarily been born of the same inspiration. On the subject of revelation, Brigham Young said: "The Almighty has never yet found a man in mortality that was capable, at the first intimation, at the first impulse, to receive anything in a state of entire perfection." [^1] Joseph Smith found fault with the Constitution because, although it stated that all men should enjoy religious freedom, it did not provide sufficient guarantees to insure that this right would be upheld for all people. He explained: "Under its provision, a man or a people who are able to protect themselves can get along well enough; but those who have the misfortune to be weak or unpopular are left to the merciless rage of popular fury." This observation grew out of the experiences of the Latter-day Saints in Missouri and the treatment their case for redress was given by state and federal officials. To insure that freedom and justice would be maintained in all instances, Joseph Smith proposed:

The Constitution should contain a provision that every officer of the Government who should neglect or refuse to extend the protection guaranteed in the Constitution should be subject to capital punishment; and then the president of the United States would not say, "Your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you," a governor issue exterminating orders, or judges say, "The men ought to have the protection of law, but it won't please the mob." [^2]

According to the Mormon view, the Constitution should be perfected in its guarantees of freedom and justice and extended to all people throughout the world, for in the mind of God it is a universal document belonging to all mankind. Of this great system for the guarantee of human freedom and justice, God said in a revelation to Joseph Smith: "That law of the land which is constitutional, supporting that principle of freedom in maintaining rights and privileges, belongs to all mankind, and is justifiable before me." (D&C 98:5. Italics added.) Again: "The laws and constitution of the people, which I have suffered to be established, ... should be maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh, according to just and holy principles." (D&C 101:77. Italics added.) Speaking of it in this light, George Q. Cannon declared of the Constitution: "It is broad enough, if interpreted in its true spirit, to cover the individual, the continent, and the entire globe and furnish freedom for all." [^3] Because he accepted this view of the Constitution, Joseph Smith sought in the presidential campaign of 1844 to extend the Constitution of the United States throughout the world. He stated: "When a neighboring realm petitioned to join the union of liberty's sons, my voice would be, Come—yea, come, Texas; come Mexico, come Canada; and come, all the world: let us be brethren, let us be one great family, and let there be a universal peace. [^4]

Latter-day Saint thought is positive and optimistic in viewing the benefits Western civilization has bequeathed to the world, particularly those benefits that have been given to mankind through the inspired efforts of the Founding Fathers of the United States of America. They gave to the world a political system that should be extended to govern all men, that all people might be able to enjoy the blessings of freedom and justice. But if this goal is to be achieved and a just and a universal peace established, men must understand that freedom is born of the Holy Spirit and can only be sustained and spread abroad by the assistance of that intelligent power. This requires, first, that men obtain a clear understanding of the nature, laws, and operations of true spiritual powers. Second, it requires that, by dedication to righteousness, obedience to divine laws, and responsiveness to intelligent spiritual powers, men assist to bring about the conditions by which God can pour out his Holy Spirit upon all flesh. In the Mormon view, this goal will one day be achieved; and freedom and peace in their true and full concepts will then come to all men on earth. In the great panorama of events leading to that future time, the Constitution of the United States is looked upon as "one of those stepping stones to a future development in the progress of man to the intelligence and light, the power and union that God alone can impart to the human family." [^5]

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Marx's Preface to his Critique of Political Economy (1859).
[^2] 2. For a statement on the role of great men, see Doctrine and Covenants 101:77-80. For a statement on the important of economic factors, see ibid., 78:5-6.
[^3] 3. See also D&C 29:30-31; 33:16.
[^4] 4. Journal of Discourses, vol. 1, p. 81.
[^5] 5. Journal of Discourses, vol. 22, p. 41. See also ibid., vol. 20, p. 123.
