Hyrum L. Andrus, Mormonism and the Rise of Western Civilization ( 1966)

Zion's Covenant Society

During the first half of the nineteenth century, the foundations of a unique society were laid in America. The new church, sometimes called the society of Zion, but popularly referred to as the Mormon movement, was established completely upon the principles of free and open covenant. Joseph Smith, the first prophet, seer, and revelator of the Church, said: "It was my endeavor to so organize the Church, that the brethren might eventually be independent of every incumbrance beneath the celestial kingdom, by bonds and covenants of mutual friendship and mutual love." [^1] This covenant ideal puts Mormonism in the full stream of Western history. It makes the Renaissance and the Protestant Reformation relevant and important, and in the Mormon view preparatory to the society of Zion. In a real sense, Mormonism sought to fulfil many basic aspirations of Western civilization.

As a new revelation from God, Mormonism claimed to be the official launching of the dispensation of the fulness of times foretold by ancient prophets, [^2] in which all things would eventually be gathered together in Christ. [^3] Thereby, the restitution of all things referred to by all the holy prophets since the world began would be effected, in preparation for the day of righteous peace. [^4] As a harbinger of the Restoration, the angel Moroni made such an announcement to Joseph Smith in 1823. The latter wrote: "This messenger proclaimed himself to be an angel of God, sent to bring the joyful tidings that the covenant which God made with ancient Israel was at hand to be fulfilled, that the preparatory work for the second coming of the Messiah was speedily to commence; that the time was at hand for the gospel in all its fulness to be preached in power, unto all nations that a people might be prepared for the millenial reign." [^5]

Though born in obscurity, Mormonism announced itself to the world as a new covenant organization "fitted to the times and with the principles and laws adapted to the reorganization, order and government of a renovated world." [^6] Therein was contained the germ that would one day be expanded into a millennial society. Through baptism one initially"complied with the requirements of the new covenant." [^7] Priesthood authority within the system was centered in such obligations. Those ordained to the lesser or Aaronic Priesthood were to observe "the duties of their office, as given in the covenants." (D&C 107:85-88.) Bearers of the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood were obligated by a special covenant of faithfulness which contained the promise of future heirship in celestial society, where the obedient are promised that they will inherit all that the Father possesses. (See D&C 84:35-40; 107:89.) To fully realize these blessings the faithful were expected to enter Zion's new economic order, by "a covenant and a deed" that was not to be broken. (D&C 42:30.) An educational program was also commenced upon covenant principles. (D&C 88:127-137.) Finally, the family had its basis in the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, which, among other things, insured its eternal perpetuity. (See D&C 131, 132.) Significantly, the record containing the major recorded revelations and inspired writings of Joseph Smith was entitled the Doctrine and Covenants. It is understandable that the Prophet should occupy his time giving instructions "on points of duty, such as observing covenants." [^8]

Like the Independents and other early covenant-conscious bodies, the Latter-day Saints looked back in history to scriptural precedents for their system, one of which was the New Testament Church in the apostolic era. A revelation to Joseph Smith gave information on another body under the leadership of the antediluvian patriarch Enoch, stating: "And the Lord called his people ZION, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them." (Moses 7:18.) The Book of Mormon also reports the existence of similar groups in pre-Columbus America. (Mosiah 18; Alma 1; 4 Nephi.) Such covenant societies were said to have been founded upon mature individualism and mutual love, with the members imparting of their substance "of their own free will and good desires," to assist those in need. Each person managed his own economic interests, but consecrated himself and his possessions to God, to the end that every other person might have equal opportunities to acquire a livelihood. Personal spontaneity combined with emphasis upon freedom and Christian brotherhood promoted the kind of social union that prevents the individual from becoming a pawn in a communal organization. (See Mosiah 18; Alma 1; 4 Nephi.)

Contemporaries of Joseph Smith also aspired to the ideal of social union. As a result, communitarian schemes mushroomed into existence throughout Europe and America. But Mormonism's covenant concept made the society of Zion significantly different from other systems in that day, most of which were based upon common-stock or communal-ownership principles. Such principles Joseph Smith repudiated. When asked if the Saints believed in "having all things in common," as in the above systems, he answered emphatically, "No." [^9] In reporting that an English socialist had lectured at Nauvoo, he said: "After he got through, I made a few remarks, alluding to Sidney Rigdon and Alexander Campbell getting up a community at Kirtland, and of the big fish there eating up all the little fish. I said I did not believe the doctrine., [^10] Later the Prophet preached "about one hour on the 2nd chapter of Acts, designed to show the folly of common stock." [^11] In these and other statements he and his associates made their position clear. [^12] The Saints sought for a society in which the individual expressed a high degree of mature and intelligent spontaneity, so that freedom and social union were united within the system.

Ordinarily these two ingredients are antithetical when combined in a social relationship. They stand at opposite poles of society and make war against each other. James Madison discussed the tendency of free men to develop divergent opinions and interests, and concluded that by nature the fruits of freedom militate against social union. [^13] Here was a major problem that confronted the communitarians of Joseph Smith's day. When the Transcendentalists sought to reconcile individualism and mutualism, the more ardent personalities among them took fright and prudently kept without the gates of Brook Farm. Among the latter was Ralph Waldo Emerson, who studied the problem and concluded. "Spoons and skimmers you can lay indiscriminately together but vases and statues require each a pedestal for itself." [^14] Because he saw no possible reconciliation, Emerson wrote, "Dear heart, take it sadly home to thee, that there will and can be no cooperation." [^15]

In the above work, Madison considered the problem of reconciling freedom and social union without destroying the first. Give every citizen "the same opinion, the same passions, and the same interest," he pointed out, and the problem would be solved. But as he saw no way to achieve such union he discarded the idea and set forth the philosophy espoused in the United States Constitution. Therein, government is designed in its first duty to protect man in his right to different opinions and interest; but the machinery of government is so organized—by its vertical and horizontal separation of powers and its system of representation—to make it exceedingly difficult for a group or a collection of self-interested groups to control the several branches of government in their interest. Thus, though freedom by nature spawns selfinterested groups that oppose each other and seek to control government in their own interest, the machinery of government under the Constitution is designed to "break and control the violence of faction," while establishing justice and equal rights for all. [^16]

Madison could propose no better plan of union than to establish the basis of an open society where men would be free and justice would hold the balance between them. Consequently, social union to a degree was sacrificed to freedom, except as justice and equity under law provide the only real basis upon which union among free men can be achieved. To this extent the Constitution in some measure fulfilled the covenant ideals that brought it into being. But it also served to demonstrate that when men secularize covenant principles the ideal of free and spontaneous social union to a degree ceases to be possible.

The genius of Mormonism consisted of its ability to combine the highest sentiments of individualism with a dynamic element of social union. Both ideals were deeply rooted within the system. There is no more dominant individualism than that which was characterized in the lives of the Latter-day Saints. It was bluntly declared that "man should not counsel his fellow man, neither trust in the arm of flesh," but that each individual should stand independent under God. To this end had Mormonism been established. (See D&C 1:17-20.) A biblical passage concerning man's relationship to an ideal society was corrected by the Prophet to express the same dominant individualism, concluding: "Therefore, let every man stand or fall, by himself, and not for another; or not trusting another." [^17]

In equally unequivocal terms Mormon thought asserts its ideal of social union. "If ye are not one," said a revelation, "ye are not mine." (D&C 38:27.) Again, from another revelation: "Let every man deal honestly, and be alike among this people, and receive alike, that ye may be one, even as I have commanded you." (D&C 51:9.) Joseph Smith considered that such union was obviously necessary to promote the best interests of men. Said he, "The greatest temporal and spiritual blessings which always flow from faithfulness and concerted effort never attend individual exertion or enterprise." [^18] It was to be expected that the message of Mormonism would appeal to those with true fraternal instincts. Brigham Young explained, "The Gospel is designed to gather a people that will be of one heart and of one mind." [^19] And having gathered them, the system commenced to mold them to its standard of social union. Said Orson Pratt: "There is no law, statute, ordinance, covenant, nor blessing, but what was instituted to make the Saints one." [^20]

To achieve its goal of social union without impinging upon its ideal of freedom, Mormonism accepted the challenge that Madison considered but discarded as impracticable: to give men the same general opinions, passions and interest. Significantly, one Book of Mormon character after another quotes the following passages from Isaiah and applies it to Zion's covenant system: "Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the voice together shall they sing: for they shall see eye to eye, when the Lord shall bring again Zion." [^21] Abinadi added prophetically: "The time shall come when all shall see the salvation of the Lord; when every nation, kindred, tongue, and people shall see eye to eye and shall confess before God that his judgments are just." (Mosiah 16:1.)

To establish a true covenant society, in the Mormon view, men must come to the spiritual standard proposed in the society of Zion. In addition to the unifying devices built into the machinery of the new covenant society, spiritual powers more dynamic, enlightening and unifying than those that promoted the rise of Western civilization were considered necessary. Thereby a basis for new social relationships, otherwise unattainable, could be established. But to receive these additional spiritual powers a commission of divine authority was considered necessary. This Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery testified they received in 1829, when such heavenly messengers as John the Baptist and the Apostles Peter, James, and John committed to them the keys of the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods, including the holy apostleship. Of the bestowal of the Aaronic Priesthood, Joseph Smith wrote:

While we were ... employed, praying and calling upon the Lord, a messenger from heaven descended in a cloud of light, and having laid his hands upon us, he ordained us, saying:

"Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the Gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness."

He said this Aaronic Priesthood had not the power of laying on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, but that this should be conferred on us hereafter.

... The messenger who visited us on this occasion ... said that ... he acted under the direction of Peter, James and John who held the keys of the Priesthood of Melchizedek, which Priesthood he said would in due time be conferred on us. [^22]

The bestowal of the Melchizedek Priesthood occurred a short time thereafter. Although the date is not now a matter of record, evidence points toward June, 1829. [^23] On several occasions during his lifetime, Oliver Cowdery confirmed Joseph Smith's testimony of these two ordinations in the most positive terms—in oral discourse, in private conversations, and by letter to his associates. [^24]

Through the channels of these priesthoods, spiritual powers necessary to develop a true covenant society were attainable. (See D&C 84:18-28; 107:13-20.) Thereby, the gift of the Holy Ghost, with all its accompanying spiritual endowments, could be enjoyed by members of the new society. These spiritual powers were held by Joseph Smith to be the center of the Mormon system. When President Martin Van Buren inquired how Mormonism differed from other religious bodies, the Prophet replied, "In the mode of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost." "All other considerations," he added, "are contained in the gift of the Holy Ghost." [^25]

The spiritual forces centered in Mormonism were said to have no equivalent in modern times. This the Prophet pointed out in discussing the subject editorially. [^26] Other prominent figures in the Mormon movement agreed. Brigham Young explained that but few understood the nature of these spiritual powers. [^27] "All the kings, potentates, and powers," said John Taylor, were "entirely ignorant" of them. [^28] Lorenzo Snow states: "This gift of the Holy Ghost is a different principle from anything that we see manifested in the sectarian world." [^29] So obvious were the differences, George Q. Cannon concluded, that if men would honestly inquire into the matter and judge these new spiritual powers by their tangible operations and effects, they would be constrained to acknowledge the presence of something wholesomely different from anything known to the world. [^30]

"There is nothing unnatural in the Spirit of God," as given to men through Zion's priesthood channels, Joseph Smith explained. [^31] He referred to it as a "pure spirit of intelligence," that revealed the things of God to man. [^32] So potent is its power that "it swallows up the organization which pertains to this world," said Brigham Young, opening the vision of one's mind so that "all things are made new." [^33] John Taylor further explained: "When the Spirit that dwells in the bosom of the Almighty dwells in ours, and an intercourse is open between heaven and us, we are then placed in a position to understand that which it would be impossible to comprehend upon any natural principle known to us." [^34]

There can be little doubt that the spiritual powers the Saints claimed to receive greatly influenced their lives. "The gift of the Holy Ghost was given to me," Orson Pratt recalled, "and when it was shed forth upon me, it gave me a testimony concerning the truth of this work that no man can ever take from me." [^35] Brigham Young also declared that his testimony was "positive." "The eye, the ear, the hand, all the senses may be deceived, but the Spirit of God cannot be deceived," he argued, "and when inspired with that Spirit, the whole man is filled with knowledge, he can see with a spiritual eye, and he knows that which is beyond the power of man to controvert." [^36]

The message of Mormonism was accompanied by the unequivocal promise that all who conscientiously complied with the new covenant would receive the gift of the Holy Ghost with its enlightening spiritual manifestations. The Angel Moroni referred to this promise in 1823. [^37] It was reaffirmed in the Book of Mormon and made a fundamental proposition upon which Mormonism was founded. [^38] For this reason John Taylor held that the claims of Mormonism were "susceptible of proof." Just as a farmer might know if a certain seed was good by planting it, so could a person know if the new covenant's law of spiritual birth was true by complying with its requirements. It would admit to "as strong evidence as anything in nature." [^39]

Taylor himself questioned Parley P. Pratt on this claim when the latter presented the message of Mormonism to him in 1836. Would the Holy Ghost manifest its gifts and powers and give one "a certain knowledge of the principles that you believe in?" he inquired. "Yes," said Pratt, and "if it will not then I am an impostor." [^40] Said Lorenzo Snow: "I noticed that Joseph Smith assumed a position which no false prophet would dare, viz: that he had received the visitation of three angels: Peter, James and John, who ... authorized him to preach the gospel, administer its ordinances, and promise the Holy Ghost which would impart a knowledge of his authority, and divine mission, and his right to organize the church of God on the earth." [^41] For this reason Charles W. Penrose declared that his own testimony concerning Mormonism did not depend upon Joseph Smith, Brigham Young or any other man. Said he:

I pin my faith to no man's sleeve. ... I obeyed this gospel because I believed it was true ... and having bowed in obedience to its ordinances, I received a testimony for myself of its truthfulness, and that testimony has never departed from me. [^42]

"Here," said John Taylor, "is a secret that the world does not comprehend." [^43] George Q. Cannon agreed that upon this "peculiarity" the new system had been built. "Legions of witnesses" could "unanimously" testify "that God himself, ... by the outpouring of the Holy Ghost upon them, has borne testimony to them, so that they are thoroughly convinced and have a knowledge as strong as the knowledge that they themselves live, that he has established it, and that he will roll it forth and cause it to accomplish all that he has said it would." [^44]

To achieve union without society, concord must first be developed within the fiber of men's souls. As expressed by a Mormon writer, "No system that has not within it the elements of power, or unity, or greatness, in its embryonic state, or when passing through a process of development, can possess them when it attains to its full strength and stature. [^45] At this level spiritual powers are necessary to develop a correct basis of social union. In this light Parley P. Pratt wrote of the influence of the Holy Spirit upon the individual:

The gift of the Holy Ghost adapts itself to all these organs or attributes (of the human system). It quickens all the intellectual faculties, increases, enlarges, expands and purifies all the natural passions and affections, and adapts them, by the gift of wisdom, to their lawful use. It inspires, develops, cultivates, and matures all the fine toned sympathies, joys, tastes, kindred feelings and affections of our nature. It inspires virtue, kindness, goodness, tenderness, gentleness, and charity. It develops beauty of person, form and features. It tends to health, vigor, animation and social feelings. It invigorates all the faculties of the physical and intellectual man. It strengthens and gives tone to the nerves. In short, it is, as it were, marrow to the bones, joy to the heart, light to the eyes, music to the ears, and life to the whole being. [^46]

Among individuals so regenerated and endowed, Mormonism proposed to establish its program of social union. Enlightened social feelings, intelligent consideration, and mutual love were to be the solidifying clements. These were the fruits of the Spirit that fill its recipients "with hope and perfect love." (Moroni 7:48; 8:26.) In this light Brigham Young spoke of the experience of the Latter-day Saints:

Each and every Latter-day Saint, who has experienced the love of God in his heart, after having received the remission of sins, through baptism, and the laying on of hands (by those holding the Melchizedek Priesthood, for the gift of the Holy Ghost), realizes that he is filled with joy, and happiness, and consolation. He may be in pain, ... in poverty, or in prison, if necessity demands; still he is joyful. This is our experience, and each and every Latter-day Saint can bear witness to it. [^47]

A multitude of voices in the Mormon movement bore a consistent testimony that social union among free men was possible when the powers associated with the Holy Priesthood were properly utilized. "Union," declared an epistle to the saints in 1841, "flows from the Spirit, through the Priesthood; which Spirit, and power, and Priesthood, can only exist with the humble and meek of the earth." [^48] "If we possess the Spirit that flows from God," John Taylor explained, "we shall possess the spirit of kindness and love and affection, that will eventually bind us in the bonds of eternal union." [^49] George Q. Cannon concurred that it was "one of the peculiarities of the Holy Ghost to unite the hearts of those who receive it and to make them one." [^50] By this means it is possible, Wilford Woodruff affirmed, for the saints to "see alike, feel alike, and be alike and become one." [^51]

Here was a principle of social union that other systems lacked. Although Madison discarded as impracticable the idea of reconciling freedom and social union, Joseph Smith made their reconciliation the basis of a whole new system of social relationships. For this reason President Joseph F. Smith, the Prophet's nephew, reasoned that if the saints were "in possession of the Spirit," the harmony among them would "be superior to the harmony" that could be hoped for "in any other organization whatever." [^52] It was because of "the incorrect organization of society" and the "lack of cohesive power" that other social systems fail to solve the problems of peace and union, George Q. Cannon concluded. It requires the "wisdom, power and Spirit of the Almighty" to achieve these goals. In Cannon's opinion, God had "chosen his people, the Latter-day Saints, to solve these knotty problems that have troubled the brains and afflicted the children of men for so many centuries." In the real sense of the word, they claimed to possess the key to world peace. [^53]

In referring to the lack of true fraternal relations among men, even when various schemes to unite the human family had been tried, John Taylor observed that "they never had accomplished it and they never will." Without the key to added spiritual powers and the intelligence to utilize properly the blessings of the Spirit, such union is hopeless. Thus, Elder Taylor concluded, "We are brought back to where we started, the necessity of sending forth the gospel." [^54] On another occasion, he cited several examples of disunion in other systems of society and concluded:

There is no adhesive principle sufficiently powerful to unite the people of any portion of the earth, similar to the one that has sprung forth in our day and right among this people; if there is anything of that sort abroad in the world. I am not acquainted with it. Then it follows, as a natural consequence, that if there is nothing to unite the people together they are deficient in some principle, doctrine, faith or practice. Philosophy has not united the people together; politics has never done it; no social principles have ever accomplished it. [^55]

By introducing new spiritual powers into society, relationships among men were to be greatly changed and the task of governing and directing the affairs of society simplified. In the opinion of Brigham Young, it was "one of the simplest things in the world" to control and direct a people. if they were properly organized and actuated by the Holy Spirit." Said he:

Is there any particular art in making this people obedient? There is just one. If you Elders of Israel can get the art of preaching the Holy Ghost into the hearts of the people, you will have an obedient people. This is the only art required. Teach the people truth, teach them correct principles; show them what is for their best good and don't you think they will follow in that path? They will. [^56]

Again Brigham Young explained the nature of this "very mysterious principle":

To Saint and sinner, believer and unbeliever, I wish to offer one word of advice and counsel, by revealing the mystery that abides with this people called Latter-day Saints; it is the Spirit of the living God that leads them; it is the Spirit of the Almighty that binds them together; it is the influence of the Holy Ghost that makes them love each other like little children. ... This mystery, the great mystery of "Mormonism," is that the Spirit of the Lord binds the hearts of the people together. Let the world look at it. ... Who gives me power, that "at the pointing of my finger," the hosts of Israel move, and at my request the inhabitants of this great territory are displaced; at my command they are here? Who gives me that power? Let the world inquire. It is the God of heaven; it is the Spirit of the Holy Gospel; it is not of myself; it is the Lord Jesus Christ, trying to save the inhabitants of the earth. [^57]

Social union in Zion's covenant society was not achieved by any compromise of individual freedom, talent, or initiative. In fact, the system was established as much upon dominant individualism as upon social union. John Taylor explained that the "intelligence communicated by the Holy Ghost" made it possible for men to "know for themselves, and stand as the rock of ages, invulnerable, immovable and unchangeable." [^58] No sacrifice of individuality was here implied. If the saints were "really of one mind," Brigham Young maintained they would "be as independent as ever the children of Zion could be." [^59] George Q. Cannon concurred, stating: "There is no more independent people lives upon the face of the earth than the Latter-day Saints." Yet with reference to the union that existed among them he said, "This entire people can be moved by a hair when it is in the right direction." [^60] John Taylor spoke in like manner of the wedding of individualism and union, and challenged the assertion that coercion in any form was applied to gain the desired union:

We know of no such principle as coercion; it is a matter of choice. The principle that I spoke of before—that is, men receive the Holy Ghost within themselves—is the cementing, binding, uniting power that exists among the Latter-day Saints. [^61]

Union among the saints was to be ideal in actual individualism. So long as the spiritual powers within their covenant society were properly utilized to promote union, Brigham Young explained that individual members could be encouraged to "develop the variety" of gifts and talents that characterize the creations of God. [^62] Individuals would then support and complement each other, the personalities would flower into a myriad of gifts and talents. In short, the system would cultivate man "to perfection as a social and individual being." [^63] Or, as Parley P. Pratt observed, the saints could "unite in their efforts, both temporally and spiritually, to build up themselves as a people, and each other as individuals." [^64]

By building up the society of Zion on its spiritual foundation, it is possible for the saints to establish social and economic justice among themselves, and point the way for all men to realize these ideals, without relinquishing their freedoms to the stifling program of a welfare state. Only when intelligent and mature men willingly unite in true covenant relationships can man be both free and united; and only by such relationships can man also be both free and equal in enjoying the blessings of life and of the earth. On this foundation only can true social and economic justice be achieved. Here is the way for man to realize the hope that was placed in the hearts of men by the Holy Spirit and that was given expression during the rise of Western civilization to power and prominence.

Freedom and true social union are goals worthy to be sought for and cherished; and Joseph Smith and his associates were in the front ranks of that quest in Western civilization. To the latter-day prophet, God also revealed the true source of human freedom and union; and the Lord gave to him and others the rights, keys, and powers of the Holy Priesthood by which the spirit of freedom and brotherly union may be enhanced in the lives of men. To Joseph Smith, God also gave the plan of social, economic, and political principles necessary to bring to fruition a more perfect society capable of extending freedom and justice to all men, and showing all men how to solve their individual and community problems without sacrificing their freedoms. Mormonism therefore stands in a real sense as a major landmark in man's quest for freedom and social union. It is simultaneously the true heir of Western civilization's spiritual heritage and the harbinger of a new era in which the ideals of freedom and social union may be developed to a fuller fruition. In a world threatened by the onslaught of scientific materialism, where the individual is sacrificed to a godless, coercive, and frustrating philosophy of social union, lovers of freedom should look again to the spiritual source of their heritage and seriously consider the Latter-day Saint proposal for strengthening the basis of freedom and social union. Herein lies the hope of struggling humanity.

This article is from a pamphlet entitled Mormonism and the Rise of Western Civilization and Second American Revolution: Era of Preparation. (A Brigham Young University Extension publication, 1966.)

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Marx's Preface to his Critique of Political Economy (1859).
[^2] 2. For a statement on the role of great men, see Doctrine and Covenants 101:77-80. For a statement on the important of economic factors, see ibid., 78:5-6.
[^3] 3. See also D&C 29:30-31; 33:16.
[^4] 4. Journal of Discourses, vol. 1, p. 81.
[^5] 5. Journal of Discourses, vol. 22, p. 41. See also ibid., vol. 20, p. 123.
[^6] 6. Journal of Discourses, vol. 7, pp. 10-11. In Mosiah 2:36, King Benjamin refers to man as withdrawing himself from the Spirit of the Lord.
[^7] 7. Certainly human prejudice, religiously or otherwise oriented, is not a valid basis for judging if and to what extent men may have been influenced by spiritual powers. Joseph Smith pointed to the fact that while the Mussulman condemns others as infidels who reject his Koran, the Jew believes those not of his faith by circumcision to be Gentile dogs, and the Christian consigns all to perdition who cannot bow to his creed. "But," observed the Mormon Prophet, "while one portion of the human race is judging and condemning the other without mercy, the Great Parent of the universe looks upon the whole of the human family with a fatherly care and paternal regard; He views them as his offspring, and without any of those contracted feelings that influence the children of men, causes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.' "-Documentary History of the Church, vol. 4, p. 595. This work is essentially Joseph Smith's journal and contains many important documents associated with the Mormon movement during his lifetime.
[^23] 96. See D&C 18:9, where a revelation in June, 1829, states that Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer had been called with "the same calling" as the Apostle Paul had anciently received. Brigham Young once stated that Cowdery and Whitmer had been ordained to the apostleship. See Journal of Discourses, vol. 6, p. 320. For other early references implying conferment of the Melchizedek Priesthood, see Book of Commandments 22:13-14; 24:1-5. For statements by the associates of Joseph Smith, see Parley P. Pratt, Key to Theology, chapter 9; Documentary History of the Church, vol. 4, p. 373; Journal of Discourses, vol. 4, p. 299; vol. 8, p. 136; vol. 12, p. 252; vol. 13, pp. 67-68; vol. 16, p. 267; vol. 22, p. 30; vol. 25, pp. 177-178; vol. 26, pp 106-107.
[^24] 97. See Messenger and Advocate, October, 1834, for a detailed account of the bestowal of the Aaronic Priesthood. See also Deseret News, April 13, 1859; Millennial Star, vol. 11 (January 1, 1849), p. 14; vol. 11 (February 1, 1849), p. 43.
[^25] 98. Documentary History of the Church, vol. 4, p. 42.
[^26] 99. Ibid., pp. 571-581.
[^27] 100. Journal of Discourses, vol 7, pp. 54ff. See also vol. 12, p. 35.
[^28] 101. Ibid., vol. 5, pp. 189-190; vol. 19, p. 150.
[^29] 102. Ibid., vol. 20, p. 330.
[^30] 103. Ibid., vol. 11, p. 333. See also vol. 14, p. 52.
[^31] 104. Documentary History of the Church, vol. 4, p. 42.
[^32] 105. Ibid., vol. 3, pp. 379-381. For a similar statement by John Taylor, see Journal of Discourses, vol. 20, p. 330.
[^33] 106. Journal of Discourses, vol. 1, pp. 90-91.
[^34] 107. Ibid., vol. 11, pp. 22-23. For a statement by Charles W. Penrose, see Ibid., vol. 25, pp. 40-41.
[^35] 108. Ibid., vol. 7, p. 178. Said Pratt: "The gift and power of the Holy Ghost ... is the greatest evidence any man or woman can have concerning the kingdom of God."-Ibid., p. 179.
[^36] 109. Ibid., vol. 16, p. 46. See also Ibid., vol. 13, p. 336.
[^37] 110. See Messenger and Advocate, Kirtland, Ohio, October, 1835.
[^38] 111. The Book of Mormon and the revelations of Joseph Smith assert that this is a standard promise associated with the true gospel of Jesus Christ. See 2 Nephi 31:4-18; 3 Nephi 11:32-40; 27:20-21; D&C 33:10-13; 39:5-6; 76:50-53. For supporting promises found in the New Testament, see Acts 2:38-39; 5:32; 8:12-20; 19:1-6; Hebrews 6:1-6.
[^39] 112. Journal of Discourses, vol. 23, pp. 51-52.
[^40] 113. Ibid.
[^41] 114. Juvenile Instructor, vol. 22, pp. 22-23. Wilford Woodruff made a similar statement while referring to the ministration of Peter, James and John: "These angels told Joseph Smith to ... preach the gospel as taught by Jesus Christ and the Apostles, and the Lord would back up their testimony; that when they laid hands upon those who had been baptized for the remission of sins, and who had received their testimony, they should receive the Holy Ghost."-Journal of Discourses, vol. 24, pp. 241-242. On another occasion Lorenzo Snow said:
[^42] 115. Ibid., vol. 20, p. 295.
[^43] 116. Ibid., vol. 23, pp. 51-52.
[^44] 117. Ibid., vol. 25, p. 25. For another statement by Cannon, see Ibid., vol. 22, p. 215. See also page 201. John Taylor called for a show of hands by those in a large congregation who could to testify and "a perfect forest of hands was held up." See Ibid., vol. 25, p. 183. Wilford Woodruff asserted that it was upon this basis that the barren desert of the West was colonized by Saints coming from many lands. Said he: "If the Lord Almighty had not backed up the testimony of the Elders of Israel as he has done, Utah to-day would have been as when we found it 36 years ago."-Ibid., vol. 24, pp. 241-242.
[^45] 118. Millennial Star, Vol. 27, p. 538.
[^46] 119. Pratt, Key to Theology, p. 100. See also Documentary History of the Church, vol. 3, p. 380; Journal of Discourses, vol. 7, pp. 318-319.
[^47] 120. Journal of Discourses, vol. 18, pp. 213-214.
[^48] 121. Documentary History of the Church, vol. 4, p. 345. Joseph Smith wrote: "All must act in concert, or nothing can be done, and should move according to the ancient Priesthood; hence the Saints should be a select people, separate from all the evils of the world-choice, virtuous, and holy."-Ibid., p. 570.
[^49] 122. Journal of Discourses, vol. 19, p. 121. On another occasion Elder Taylor referred to the priesthood as the channel through which the gift of the Holy Ghost is made available, concluding: "We are told how man can get into possession of the Holy Spirit of God, and how we can be placed in communication with God, just the same as you would place one town in communication with another by means of the electric wire. ... What for? For the building up of something that is called Zion or the pure in heart."-Ibid., vol. 20, p. 133.
[^50] 123. Ibid., vol. 12, p. 363.
[^51] 124. Ibid., vol. 14, p. 191.
[^52] 125. Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City, 1919), p. 163.
[^53] 126. Journal of Discourses, vol. 13, pp. 97-99.
[^54] 127. Ibid., vol. 18, pp. 209-210.
[^55] 128. Ibid., vol. 10, pp. 124-125.
[^56] 129. Ibid., vol. 12, p. 257.
[^57] 130. Ibid., vol. 1, p. 145. See Ibid., vol. 7, p. 54, for another statement by Brigham Young. All this was implied in a revelation, January 3, 1831, that stated: "I have a great work laid up in store, for Israel shall be saved, and I will lead them whithersoever I will, and no power shall stay my hand."-D&C 38:33.
[^58] 131. Journal of Discourses, vol. 23, p. 52.
[^59] 132. Ibid., vol. 12, p. 29. (Misnumbered as p. 204). See also Ibid., vol. 6, p. 204; vol. 15, p. 220, for other statements by Brigham Young.
[^60] 133. Ibid., vol. 22, p. 366.
[^61] 134. Ibid., vol. 23, p. 63-64.
[^62] 135. Ibid., vol. 11, p. 305.
[^63] 136. Ibid., vol. 22, p. 26.
[^64] 137. Ibid., vol. 1, p. 303.
