Hyrum L. Andrus, Mormonism and the Rise of Western Civilization ( 1966)

Footnotes

"The time has at last arrived when the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, has set his hand again the second time to recover the remnants of his people, which have been left from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea, and with them to bring in the fulness of the Gentiles, and establish that covenant with them, which was promised when their sins should be taken away. See Isaiah 11, Romans 11:25, 26 and 27, and also Jeremiah 23:31, 32 and 33. This covenant has never been established with the house of Israel, nor with the house of Judah, for it requires two parties to make a covenant, and those two parties must be agreed, or no covenant can be made.

"Christ, in the days of His flesh, proposed to make a covenant with them, but they rejected Him and His proposals, and in consequence thereof, they were broken off, and no covenant was made with them at that time. But their unbelief has not rendered the promise of God of none effect: no, for there was another day limited in David, which was the day of His power; and then His people Israel, should be a willing people;-and He would write His law in their hearts, and print it in their thoughts; their sins and their iniquities He would remember no more."-Ibid., vol. 1, p. 313

Some writers have lacked discernment in their treatment of the Mormon position, as in the case of Kimball Young, who erroneously referred to the "communistic order, which the Mormons attempted but gave up."-Article on Sidney Rigdon in Dictionary of American Biography, vol. 15, p. 601.

Pomeroy Tucker, a resident of Palmyra and an antagonist of the new movement, revealed by the tone of the following statement how Joseph Smith's assertion that he had received such authority was regarded by many in that day. Said Tucker:

"He (Joseph Smith) now arrogated to himself, by authority of 'the spirit of revelation,' and in accordance with the previous 'promises' made to him (by John the Baptist), a far higher sphere in the scale of human existence, assuming to possess the gift and power of 'prophet, seer, and revelator (the presiding office in the Melchizedek Priesthood).' ... This was substantially, if not literally, the pretension of Smith, as related by himself, and repeatedly quoted by his credulous friends at the time."-Tucker, Origin, Rise and Progress of Mormonism (New York, 1867), p. 29.

Due to difficulties largely arising out of the Missouri persecutions, Cowdery was severed from the Church and remained estranged until 1848. While unaffiliated with the movement he wrote to Phineas Young, from Tiffin, Seneca County, Ohio, March 23, 1846, stating:

I have cherished a hope, and that one of my fondest, that I might leave such a character, as those who might believe in my testimony, after I should be called hence, might do so, not only for the sake of the truth, but might not blush for the private character of the man who bore that testimony. I have been sensitive on this subject, I admit, but I ought to be so-you would be, under the circumstances, had you stood in the presence of John, with your departed brother Joseph, to receive the lesser Priesthood-and in the presence of Peter to receive the greater, and looked down through time, and witnessed the effects these two must produce, you would feel what you have never felt."-Original letter in Church Historian's office. Salt Lake City, Utah.

"Where in all the world can you find a class of ministers that dare take the position our elders do? Where is the man or the set of men that can be found that dare to present themselves before the world and say that they have been authorized by God to administer certain ordinances from God? Any one announcing a doctrine of this kind would soon be found out if he were an impostor-he would place himself in a very dangerous position, and would soon be discovered if he held no such authority. Our elders, however, dare take this position. We have taken this position for nearly fifty years."-Ibid., vol. 20, p. 331.
