Marvin J. Ashton, Be of Good Cheer ( 1987)

Acknowledgments

About this Book

Shortly before his crucifixion, the Savior told his disciples: "In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world." (John 16:33.)

In Be of Good Cheer, Elder Marvin J. Ashton, a member of the Council of the Twelve of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, shares his insights about how to be happy. He discusses pure religion, enduring tribulations, choosing the good part, carrying our cross, quiet giving, commitment, doing what is right "straightway," shaking off the chains of bad habits, achieving spiritual and social maturity, holding the priesthood, finding peace, and living with courage. He offers hope and encouragement to replace doubt and despair.

Elder Ashton writes: "Being of good cheer makes it possible for us to turn all of our sunsets into sunrises. With good cheer, carrying our cross can be our ladder to happiness. When Jesus comes into our lives, cheer lights the way."

Be of Good Cheer, adapted from talks by Elder Ashton, is a gift of happiness that will be treasured by Latter-day Saints and their friends the world over.

About the Author

The life of Marvin J. Ashton has been one of service to business, community, and church.

He graduated from the University of Utah in business administration and was founder and president of a wholesale lumber company. He has also served on the boards of a number of businesses.

As a community and civic leader, he served a term in the Utah State Senate and has been a member of the Utah State Alcohol and Drug Control Board.

He served a mission for the Church in the British Mission, where, in addition to his regular proselyting and other missionary work, he was associate editor of the Millennial Star. He served more than twenty-one years as a member of the general board and in the general presidency of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association. He was called to be an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve in October 1969 and has been a member of the Council of the Twelve since December 2, 1971.

Elder Ashton married Norma Berntson in the Salt Lake Temple in 1940, and they are the parents of four children: M. John, Stephen, Jonne A. Wheadon, and Janice A. Sorensen.

In addition to Be of Good Cheer, Elder Ashton is the author of What Is Your Destination? and Ye Are My Friends.

Appreciation is expressed to the following:

Ronald A. Millett, Eleanor Knowles, Jack Lyon, Richard Erickson, and other members of the Deseret Book staff who helped to edit, design, and prepare this book for publication, and

Valoy Eaton, a personal friend whose fine work I admire and who has given permission for the use of one of his paintings on the dust jacket.
