Marvin J. Ashton, Be of Good Cheer ( 1987)

6

Quiet Giving

"Take heed that ye do not your alms before men to be seen of them; . . . that thine alms may be in secret; and thy Father who seeth in secret, himself shall reward thee openly." (3 Nephi 13:1, 4.)

Some weeks ago a university president shared with me his pleasure in receiving a substantial monetary contribution from an unexpected donor. The giver said she wanted the money to go to her state institution of higher learning but insisted no one be told of her gift. When asked why, she said, "I have come to know the personal benefits of quiet giving."

To me it is heartwarming to hear of such people. Incidentally, while she is still unknown to me because the president maintains his pledge, I salute her and others who find satisfaction in realizing giving is its own reward.

Is this quiet giving a new way of life? A new source of satisfaction? Let me answer these questions by sharing the following.

"When he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed him. And, behold, there came a leper and worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. And Jesus put forth his hand, and touched him, saying, I will; be thou clean. And immediately his leprosy was cleansed. And Jesus saith unto him, See thou tell no man; but go thy way, shew thyself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them." (Matthew 8:1-4; italics added.)

"And when Jesus departed thence, two blind men followed him, crying, and saying, Thou Son of David, have mercy on us. And when he was come into the house, the blind men came to him: and Jesus saith unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this? They said unto him, Yea, Lord. Then touched he their eyes, saying, According to your faith be it unto you. And their eyes were opened; and Jesus straitly charged them, saying, See that no man know it. But they, when they were departed, spread abroad his fame in all that country." (Matthew 9:27-31; italics added.)

Jesus Christ, the mortal Messiah, pointed the way. His life encompassed quiet giving.

Much has been written and spoken over the years about the virtues of the cheerful giver. I would like to pay special tribute to quiet givers and recommend to others the joy and satisfaction that can come from quiet sharing. The Savior in His powerful and loving sermon to the Nephites in 3 Nephi, chapter 13, points the way for daily and eternal rewards as we conform.

"Verily, verily, I say that I would that ye should do alms unto the poor; but take heed that ye do not your alms before men to be seen of them; otherwise you have no reward of your Father who is in heaven. Therefore, when ye shall do your alms do not sound a trumpet before you, as will hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. But when thou doest alms let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth; that thine alms may be in secret; and thy Father who seeth in secret, himself shall reward thee openly." (3 Nephi 13:1-4.)

Alms by definition is a gift or gifts to the poor or needy. A gift is something that is given, goods, money, or time. The Savior lived the quiet giving life. We should do good quietly, privately, and let our deeds be discovered accidentally. God knows. You know. The recipient knows. What else matters? Proper giving and sharing in God's sight will be rewarded openly. Quiet giving puts into action the admonition that we be doers of the word.

I am thinking of an elderly widow who is housebound and lives alone. Every morning she uses her telephone and calls four of her widow associates who are alone. She greets them with, "Are you all right, dear?" She doesn't tell people that this is one of her quiet forms of giving and sharing. She just does it. Those who are the recipients of her call and generosity are the ones who share her Christlike service, and tell people like you and me about it. Should one of her daily calls ever result in no answer, someone would be alerted immediately to find out why. Her quiet giving of time and self in this way could make the difference between life and death, between illness or pain and needed attention. Her friends expect her daily calls and look forward to the caring contact.

I am also thinking of another friend who is a quiet giver. He provides money to be given to needy missionaries somewhere in the world. His only requirement is that it be given to a missionary who is in need. He insists that the receiver not know from whom the money comes. His instructions are: "When these dollars have been given away, let me know and I will replace them so that this deed may be done on a perpetual basis." His joy is found in the giving, not in the recognition.

Sometimes we have a tendency to give with an anticipation of being vocally rewarded by the recipient or other family members. I am thinking of someone who recently sent a missionary a gift in the form of cash, and almost before the recipient would have time to receive it the giver was asking the parents of the missionary if their son had received it.

Quiet giving brings its own lasting reward.

In Luke 11:41 we are instructed, "But rather give alms of such things as ye have."

The Savior teaches us the value of quiet or silent prayers: "When thou prayest thou shalt not do as the hypocrites, for they love to pray, standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father who is in secret; and thy Father, who seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly. But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen, for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking. Be not ye therefore like unto them, for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of before ye ask him." (3 Nephi 13:5-8.)

Perhaps we would do well to involve ourselves in more and more quiet saying of prayers. There are strength, power, and discipline rewards in communicating with God on a continuing personal and private basis. Quietly we can pray for the patience to have our secret prayers answered. Sometimes we fail to recognize answered prayers because we are expecting more than quiet answers.

"After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, forever. Amen." (3 Nephi 13:9-13.)

In Alma 34:28 we read, "Impart of your substance [prayer], if ye have, to those who stand in need." The Lord's prayer sets the proper pattern for prayers for those who would share and be concerned with not only God but all others. I love its quiet composition and selfless approach.

"But this is not all; ye must pour out your souls in your closets, and your secret places, and in your wilderness. Yea, and when you do not cry unto the Lord, let your hearts be full, drawn out in prayer unto him continually for your welfare, and also for the welfare of those who are around you." (Alma 34:26-28.) What a joy the quiet giving of ourselves in prayer brings when our primary concern is "those who are around you."

Fasting can also be appropriately accomplished in an attitude and setting of quiet giving. Fasting quietly for the benefit of another is an inner evidence of true love. It brings rewarding peace.

"Moreover, when ye fast be not as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance, for they disfigure their faces that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. That thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father, who is in secret; and thy Father, who seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly." (3 Nephi 13:16, 18.)

Fasting is best participated in without eternal evidence of suffering, pain, or unnecessary announcements. Not only is fasting a private privilege, but it makes possible unpretentious giving to the needy. Self-discipline and self- denial are also worthy personal fruits of the fast. In quiet humility if food is offered to us during our fast, perhaps "No thank you" is preferable to the announcement, "I am fasting today." Let your fasting come as a blessing to others and yourself rather than as an announced sacrifice.

Quiet giving is more rewarding than personal getting. True growth comes from sharing, not accumulating. Attainment of wealth without sharing is empty.

"Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and dust doth corrupt, and thieves break through and steal; but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also." (3 Nephi 13:19-21.)

Finally there is no greater earthly reward than the quiet giving of self. Giving of self without desire for recognition is Christ-centered living. Albert Schweitzer said the following: "I do not know where all of you are going or what you will do, but let me tell you simply this: unless you set aside some portion of your lives to help and serve those less fortunate than yourselves, you will really not be happy."

"For I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me.

"Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee? And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." (Matthew 25:35-40.)

Peter's gift to the lame man in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth at the gates of the temple was quiet giving in its highest form.

"Now Peter and John went up together into the temple at the hour of prayer, being the ninth hour. And a certain man lame from his mother's womb was carried, whom they laid daily at the gate of the temple which is called Beautiful, to ask alms of them that entered into the temple: who seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple asked an alms.

"And Peter, fastening his eyes upon him with John, said, Look on us. And he gave heed unto them, expecting to receive something of them. Then Peter said, Silver and gold have I none; but such as I have give I thee: In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth rise up and walk." (Acts 3:1-6.)

The quiet giver looks, listens, hears, and finds ways to help. He needs no recognition.

May we learn from the New Testament, the Book of Mormon, and life's journeys the personal and rewarding benefits of the quiet giving of alms, prayer, fasting, and self.
