Marvin J. Ashton, Be of Good Cheer ( 1987)

11

Holding the Priesthood, A Sacred Trust

"No man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron." (Hebrews 5:4.)

It was sixty long days after my twelfth birthday before I was ordained a deacon. I say "long" because most of my boyfriends in other wards were being ordained on or very near their twelfth birthdays. I hadn't asked but wondered why my bishop was so slow in getting to something as important as this.

When the day finally came, the bishop said, "I want you to know being ordained a deacon doesn't come at a certain time, day, or month. It comes when those in authority think you're ready. Time is not the determining factor." I think I could have said rightfully and respectfully to the bishop, "I was just as ready sixty days ago as I am now," but I didn't. My life was in order. I couldn't understand the delay. This good bishop was teaching me a great lesson, and I have always tried to remember it. Priesthood possession and power do not come at a certain date or time. They should be extended when the one having authority feels it is the right time.

This important learning experience taught so many years ago has helped me in counseling members of the Church worldwide. When they ask, "How long before I can hold the Aaronic Priesthood?" or "When can I be ordained an elder?" or "How many years do I have to wait before I can have my priesthood blessings restored?" I am better prepared to respond.

Holding the priesthood is a sacred trust. Sharing the priesthood with family and friends is a God-given right and responsibility. Holding the priesthood is as permanent as we are worthy. How proud I was to be a deacon and pass the sacrament in a similar manner to the way Jesus Christ broke the bread and blessed it and passed it to His apostles. When the Council of the Twelve and the First Presidency meet in the temple on special occasions and partake of the sacrament, I am honored, humbled, and thrilled when I am assigned to pass the sacrament. Even though I have been ordained an apostle, I am proud I am still a deacon and can exercise that power that is mine. I am pleased also to be a teacher, a priest, and an elder. If I live worthily, these offices will always be my priceless possessions.

When I became a deacons quorum president, I learned I had a serious responsibility to assist others in their attendance and in carrying out their assignments. I and others in my quorum now had the power and authority to act. I soon realized that when you take someone else to the quorum meeting, you get there too. Hands had been laid upon our heads. We had memorized the Articles of Faith, but now the fifth article, "We believe that a man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof," had new meaning. Also having additional significance was the scripture "And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron." (Hebrews 5:4.)

President Joseph F. Smith described with clarity and beauty the important features of the priesthood in the Church when he said: "[The priesthood] is nothing more nor less than the power of God delegated to man by which man can act in the earth for the salvation of the human family, in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, and act legitimately; not assuming that authority, nor borrowing it from generations that are dead and gone, but authority that has been given in this day in which we live by ministering angels and spirits from above, direct from the presence of Almighty God." (Gospel Doctrine, 5th ed. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1939], pp. 139-40.)

The mighty priesthood of God was delegated to Adam and passed on down to Abraham, who received it from the great high priest, Melchizedek, "which priesthood continueth in the church of God in all generations and is without beginning of days or end of years. And the Lord confirmed a priesthood also upon Aaron and his seed, throughout all their generations, which priesthood also continueth and abideth forever with the priesthood which is after the holiest order of God.

"And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God. Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest. And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh." (D&C 84:17-21.)

The priesthood can bring glorious gifts, powers, and responsibilities that are beyond measure. Those who would honor the sacred trust of holding the priesthood will need to be firm in the right to represent the Most High here upon the earth. Upon this trust and power is God's earthly kingdom dependent.

"Hearken, O ye people of my church, saith the voice of him who dwells on high, and whose eyes are upon all men; yea, verily I say: Hearken ye people from afar; and ye that are upon the islands of the sea, listen together. For verily the voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape; and there is no eye that shall not see, neither ear that shall not hear, neither heart that shall not be penetrated." (D&C 1:1-2.)

We holders of the priesthood, as Joseph Smith, are given keys and powers to build the kingdom of God through a delegation of authority that is most rewarding.

Some years ago President Marion G. Romney had an eye operation. The day following his surgery I was visiting with his secretary and asked if she thought it would be appropriate and timely for me to visit him in the hospital. When she indicated it would not only be possible but, she thought, welcomed by President Romney, I made my way to his room. When I looked at him, I noticed that most of his head and both eyes were covered with bandages. As he lay quietly, it was difficult to tell whether he was asleep or resting. I decided to sit quietly at the side of his bed for a few minutes. Before too long a nurse came into the room and, recognizing me, said, "Hello, Elder Ashton, how are you?" When I responded to her greeting with "I am fine. How is President Romney?" she said, "Let me tell him you are here." She touched his arm gently and said, "Elder Ashton is here. Would you like him to give you a blessing?" Even though President Romney was weak and under heavy sedation, I will never forget his reply when in a frail but firm voice he said, "No, I don't want Elder Ashton to give me a blessing. My home teachers gave me a blessing last night."

Here this member of the First Presidency who could have called upon any of his associates to give him a blessing realized that according to pattern and recommendation his own home teachers not only had the right but the power to bless him at his invitation. To say that I was impressed with this is an understatement. The power of the priesthood is greater than an individual or his calling.

What a blessing it is for us to have the power to place our hands upon the sick and the afflicted and extend to them appropriate, comforting, and rewarding promises as directed by the Spirit. This is possible only through people who have the authority and live to honor it. A father who bears the priesthood of God is never released from his responsibilities. He may release himself through sin, but his is an eternal calling. We need to not only honor our priesthood but be worthy to carry it with dignity, pride, and effectiveness. In the ninth chapter of Acts, verse 6, the Savior was asked, "Lord, what wilt thou have me do?" And an appropriate answer comes from the Book of Mormon, 3 Nephi, chapter 27, verse 27: "Therefore, what manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am."

Hopefully the priesthood of God will help us to be better individuals as we remember that Jesus Christ is the way, the light, and the truth. We become even as He is as we love Him, keep His commandments, and walk in His paths. Studying scriptures and knowing Him, His life, and His example are stepping stones to becoming more like He is. We need to walk in His steps. Our priesthood can be an anchor. No one can come back into the presence of our Father except through Him.

We should not only honor the priesthood but respect those who are worthy bearers of the priesthood and who live close to their Heavenly Father. I had the occasion to have minor surgery during the past six months. What a joy, a strength, and a comfort it was to have our two sons come into our home with their wives and with my wife Norma at their side giving me a blessing before I under- went the operation. To have this priesthood power in our family and to have those close to us exercising it in a proper way is a reward in and of itself. When my sons were deacons, teachers, and priests, we had taught them of the restoration of the priesthood and its availability to them if they would live worthily. Now they were exercising their priesthood powers in extending a blessing to their father.

What a joy it has been over the years to have a sweetheart and wife who, when there has been a special need, would quietly say, "Marv, will you please give me a blessing? Then I know everything will be all right." These tender moments of exercising and sharing the priesthood cause me to thank God for His trust.

Besides being a sacred power, the priesthood gives one the right and the authority to act, which includes to lead, to heal, to bless, to bind, to set in order, to organize, to bear special witness, to home teach, to baptize, to confirm, and to perform other God-given obligations, duties, and spiritual pleasures. To carry out God's purposes and while so doing prove themselves, it is necessary for boys and men in the Church to work under the direction of His authorized servants. There is a great strength provided from associations with others who are seeking and fulfilling similar goals and service opportunities.

Priesthood makes a great brotherhood possible and most desirable. To illustrate this, I should like to share a story related by Elder Henry D. Taylor, a General Authority associate of mine who passed away recently. I heard him give a talk at General Conference that he titled "Man Does Not Stand Alone."

In that talk he said, "A boy was extended an invitation to visit his uncle who was a lumberjack up in the Northwest. . . . [As he arrived] his uncle met him at the depot, and as the two pursued their way to the lumber camp, the boy was impressed by the enormous size of the trees on every hand. There was a gigantic tree which he observed standing all alone on the top of a small hill. The boy, full of awe, called out excitedly, 'Uncle George, look at that big tree! It will make a lot of good lumber, won't it?'

"Uncle George slowly shook his head, then replied, 'No, son, that tree will not make a lot of good lumber. It might make a lot of lumber but not a lot of good lumber. When a tree grows off by itself, too many branches grow on it. Those branches produce knots when the tree is cut into lumber. The best lumber comes from trees that grow together in groves. The trees also grow taller and straighter when they grow together.' "

Then Brother Taylor made this observation: "It is so with people. We become better individuals, more useful timber, when we grow together rather than alone." (Conference Report, April 1965, pp. 54-55.)

I naturally related to this illustration because I spent all my life prior to becoming a General Authority in businesses related to the products of the tree. I love trees. Over the years I have learned what makes good trees and good boys.

A tree that never had to fight for sun and sky and air and light, but stood out in the open plain and always had its share of rain, never became a forest king but lived and died a scrubby thing.

The man who never had to fight, who never had to win his share of sun and sky and air and light, never became a manly man but lived and died as he began.

Good timber does not grow in ease, the stronger the wind, the tougher the trees.

(Author unknown)

In this same trend of thought President David O. McKay said on another occasion, while addressing the general priesthood of the Church, "Fellow presiding officers in missions, stakes, wards, and quorums, make your quorums more effective in regard to brotherhood and service. The quorums are units which should effectively hold the priesthood in sacred bonds and in helpfulness.

"I refer particularly to the senior members of the Aaronic Priesthood—you businessmen, successful in the business world; you professional men who have devoted your time to the success of your vocations and are successful and are leading men in civic and political affairs— get together more closely in your quorum . . . and help one another. If one of your number be sick, two or three of you get together and call on him. . . .

"You elders perhaps have one of your number sick, and his crop needs harvesting. Get together and harvest it. One of your members has a son on a mission, and his funds are getting low. Just ask if you can be of help to him. Your thoughtfulness he will never forget. Such acts as these are what the Savior had in mind when He said, 'Inasmuch as ye do it unto the least of these my brethren, ye do it unto me.' (See Matthew 25:40.)" (Conference Report, October 1955, p. 129.)

In this important day our beloved President Ezra Taft Benson and his noble counselors Gordon B. Hinckley and Thomas S. Monson have extended a warm and caring invitation to come back and share the joys of Church activity and priesthood involvement.

The power, strength, and importance of the priesthood is reinforced by a statement made by President Stephen L Richards, former counselor in the First Presidency. He said: "I have reached the conclusion in my own mind that no man, however great his intellectual attainments, however vast and far-reaching his service may be, arrives at the full measure of his sonship and the manhood the Lord intended him to have, without the investiture of the Holy Priesthood, and with that appreciation, my brethren, I have given thanks to the Lord all my life for this marvelous blessing which has come to me—a blessing that some of my progenitors had, and a blessing which more than any other heritage I want my sons and my grandsons and my great-grandsons to enjoy." (Conference Report, October 1955, p. 88.)

I humbly thank my eternal father for the special priesthood calling and responsibility that is now mine. When President Joseph Fielding Smith and his counselors called me to be a special witness, an apostle, and a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, it was the most humbling experience of my life. How rewarding and comforting it was when Harold B. Lee, who ordained and set me apart at the request of President Smith, promised greater powers and greater measures of the spirit to help me to function as a priesthood leader.

The power and authority to act for and in behalf of God is upon the earth. I bear witness to the deacons, as well as to those called to other offices within the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthood, that you have a power that is real and priceless. We should humbly thank God daily for the restoration of the priesthood. Our priesthood responsibilities can help us in our personal lives, homes, families, and leadership positions. We do not boast. We know we are weak, but with God's help and the priesthood many mighty works can be accomplished, as pointed out in Alma 26:10-12: "When Ammon had said these words, his brother Aaron rebuked him, saying: Ammon, I fear that thy joy doth carry thee away unto boasting.

"But Ammon said unto him: I do not boast in my own strength, nor in my own wisdom; but behold my joy is full, yea, my heart is brim with joy, and I will rejoice in my God. Yea, I know that I am nothing; as to my strength I am weak; therefore I will not boast of myself, but I will boast of my God, for in his strength I can do all things; yea, behold, many mighty miracles we have wrought in this land, for which we will praise his name forever."

God help us to be worthy. God help us to be appreciative of the restored priesthood we bear and share. God help us as Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthood holders to be true to ourselves and our Eternal Father.
