Marvin J. Ashton, Be of Good Cheer ( 1987)

13

Courage for Christmas

"Be strong and of a good courage, fear not, nor be afraid . . . for the Lord thy God, he it is that doth go with thee; he will not fail thee, nor forsake thee." (Deuteronomy 31:6.)

A lovely woman who had lost her companion through death once told me, "I wish I could say I am looking forward to the holidays, but without Richard, Christmas is going to be very difficult this year."

With this heartfelt comment, and knowing the anguish and loneliness resulting from separation from one so close, I can understand how some wish the holidays were not so difficult. The loss of a loved one is oftentimes cruelly related to the holiday season.

Such situations prompt me to extend the gift of courage for Christmas to all. Courage makes it possible for memories and present pleasantries to overshadow past losses and loneliness. The spirit of giving, sharing, and praising can prevail over anxiety and loss when courage fills our lives. With courage, we can take from Christmas the true gifts available and make them part of a season intended to be uplifting and glorious.

Christmas is intended to be a joyous time, a time for all to reflect upon the fact that the Lord has come. We have the opportunity to repeat and share the joyous news of the birth of the child Jesus, our Savior, Friend, and Redeemer. We are beneficiaries of His priceless gift: His life, His example, His love, and His redeeming grace.

I could wish for nothing more for my friends, associates, and family members alike than that they would accept the gift of courage for Christmas—the courage to be Christlike; the courage to be childlike in faith, in belief, and in joy, anticipated and real; the courage to be honest with God, with self, and with all humanity; and the courage to place others ahead of themselves. How wonderful it is when we have the courage to declare, without hesitation and with real conviction, "Him only shall I serve." (See Luke 4:8.) How rewarding it is when we solemnly declare that the birth of Jesus is real, significant, and an eternal blessing for all mankind. In this spirit we learn to share rather than to "wish well" in our daily pursuits.

Courage is the capacity and the ability to decide before anything else is really decided, to predetermine to move forward joyously in our worthy pursuits. Courage conquers all things. Courage is the desire, the strength, the composure, the determination, the drive, the sustaining power, and the love to properly relate and respond. Courage is the power to meet all that life has to offer. Courage enables us to see ourselves and our own situation in a proper light and to share with others in a meaningful way.

We cannot walk through life on mountain peaks. There are rivers and valleys along the way, and some are deep and treacherous. Some are cruel and challenging to human endurance. Some rivers and valleys would have us lose our way, and some mountain peaks would have us bask in self-sufficiency. All of these ultimately result in heartache, distress, and frustration.

Illness, death, disappointment, and discouragement, as well as honor, wealth, and public acclaim, often require great courage to ensure proper survival. Courage is that ingredient in life which makes it possible for us to anticipate and prepare ahead for whatever comes. How great, how wise, how strong are those who realize that with God's help we can accomplish all things!

I would like to share five gifts of courage for Christmas, with the hope that one or more can be helpful for each of our Christmases, present and future.

1.The courage to choose.

"Choose you this day whom ye will serve, . . . but as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord." (Joshua 24:15.) We need to make honest decisions. We need the courage to stand up and be counted. We need the courage to choose the right and let the consequences follow.

What a powerful example for strength and enduring faith we have in the life of our Savior:

Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil. And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward an hungred. And when the tempter came to him, he said, If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread. But he answered and said, It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. . . . Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God. . . . Then saith Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve. (Matthew 4:1-4, 7, 10.)

Jesus chose appropriately. He chose to remain firm. He chose to carry out His earthly mission and maintain a proper relationship with His Heavenly Father. How important it is for us to have the courage to choose wisely when choices are placed before us! To choose right over the convenient, the popular, or the socially accepted way is a sign of strength. We need courage to choose change over conflict and inner anguish. We need courage to choose to repent rather than rebel. Such decisions give each of us the opportunity to grow, to rededicate, to recommit, and to restructure our life.

In the mission field I once met a young woman who had been a member of the Church for three years and who had been serving as a full-time missionary for three months. "How is your missionary life going?" I asked. "Quite well," she said. I could tell by her tone that perhaps she wanted to say more, so I said, "Share with me. Why do you report 'quite well' instead of 'very well'?" She replied, "Sometimes my heart aches when I look back and realize what a decisive choice I had to make." When I probed further, she told me this story:

"I had to make a choice between membership in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and my mother's continuing love. My testimony and the conviction of my heart and mind told me the Church was true and that I must accept it. When I went to my mother and shared with her my desires and feelings, she told me, 'If you join the Mormon Church, just remember you don't have a mother anymore.' Elder Ashton, it wasn't easy for me to say to my mother, 'I must join the Church. It is true, and I cannot deny it. I hope, Mother, that this will not be your decision, but if I must choose, I must choose the Church.' " Then she concluded, "It is not a pleasant and happy situation to be without a mother, but I know that with God's help I will win her back."

Not many of us must choose between church and parents. We have to admire a person who not only has joined the Church, accepted it fully, and is now sharing with others, but who also has the courage, after having made this important choice, to say, "I know that with God's help I will win my mother back."

The courage to choose and to make decisions based upon fact, feelings, and promptings, regardless of the reaction or responses of others, is a God-given virtue that makes life meaningful and worthwhile.

In today's society it often takes extreme courage to choose Jesus Christ to be our best friend and Savior when others would try to convince us that He doesn't even exist, that He doesn't know us, that He doesn't care. It takes courage to share His life, His ways, and His peace when others about us would cause confusion.

Yes, I would give courage for Christmas, even the courage to choose properly, with strength, fortitude, and conviction, when a choice is placed before us. We need to think, to ponder, and to pray when we make a decision, and then have the courage to choose the right and accept the consequences without hesitation or fear.

2.The courage to continue.

We need the courage to remain true and faithful, to show by our life-style day after day that we are not ashamed of the gospel of Jesus Christ. We need courage so that regardless of environmental pressures or situations, we will continue worthily in the pursuit of lofty goals in His paths. We need to follow the admonition of the scriptures: "Be ye doers of the word." (James 1:22.)

President Spencer W. Kimball's life will always be an example for all to follow when we think of the courage to continue. He met all of life's challenges physically, socially, financially, and spiritually with a firm determination to continue. He is an outstanding example of continuing when others of lesser stature and commitment would be inclined to fall by the wayside. Certainly it is accurate to say that his courage was greater than his strength. He was strong because he was courageous. He knew no other way to live.

It is important to have the courage to continue when some enemies along the sidelines of life would threaten, belittle, misrepresent, and cause us to miss a step with their slander, falsehoods, and misinterpretations. We should never allow our enemies to cause us to lose ground or direction by their comments, accusations, contention, or innuendoes. There is no time for contention. Proper courage will keep us moving onward and upward regardless of situations along life's path. We need the courage to continually bear our own witness of the Savior of mankind. He lives. Though He suffered for our salvation and for our redemption, He continued courageously because He moved forward without hesitation in His Father's business.

3.The courage to carry our cross.

No matter what size, shape, or weight, we should each carry with dignity our cross of burden, tragedy, or success. God will help us bear it. We all have crosses to bear. Some crosses are unseen. Some cause us to become weary with the weight and the responsibility. Sometimes the heaviest cross to shoulder is to share in the load of another's burdens. When this is properly understood, no cross can be considered light.

Our responsibility is to do more than bear our cross. We need to bear our cross and move ahead without hesitation. Proper courage makes this possible. What strength and direction we should receive when we read that Jesus "bearing his cross went forth." (John 19:17.) He not only bore His cross, but He "went forth." We have the same responsibility. We have the same opportunity not only to bear our cross, but to keep moving without becoming weary. Jesus told His disciples, "If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me." (Matthew 16:24.) In this powerful scripture we learn that carrying the cross is not sufficient. We have the responsibility not only to carry the cross, but to follow Him as we make our way. Each of us, in our struggle to carry our cross, will need constant encouragement to follow as we go forth.

Our Savior, Jesus Christ, left no reason for doubt as to His feelings regarding those who are unwilling to bear the cross and follow Him. He said, "He that taketh not his cross, and followeth after me, is not worthy of me. He that findeth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it." (Matthew 10:38-39.) A cross can be a strength in helping us to find the real purpose of life and its meaning. Particularly is this true as we not only carry our cross but also share the burdens of others, as we lose our lives in serving and lifting others. If we want to be His disciples, we must bear His cross and be near Him, for He has said, "Whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot be my disciple." (Luke 14:27.) Bearing the cross and coming after Him makes it possible for us to be one with Him.

Crosses have many configurations; they have different weights, edges, and lengths. All require strength if the load is to be carried appropriately. We cannot always unburden ourselves of the cross we have been given, but we can rid ourselves of the weight we need not carry.

Some crosses are self-inflicted; some we unknowingly place upon ourselves. Oftentimes a cross, even though it is heavy, is allowed to become comfortable. With proper attitude and commitment, such crosses can be lifted.

We should not allow our own stupidity to cause us to stagger or trip with the loads we carry. We should rid ourselves of prejudices and weaknesses that make staggering or lost direction acceptable in our path. We can carry our crosses well if we but seek His help and His strength to supplement our own. I recall a blind man's reaction to a dedicatory service in the Jordan River Temple in Salt Lake City. He described the temple as being "beautiful, totally and completely." His cross made it possible for him to see the temple through spiritual eyes and feelings that were significant and pleasing not only to him but also to those of us with whom he shared his impressions.

Sometimes our cross, as we carry it, gives us a new outlook and a new eternal dimension. As Joseph Smith was imprisoned in jail at Liberty, Missouri, the Lord told him, "Know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?" (D&C 122:7-8.) Jesus Christ carried the cross for all of us in making salvation and eternal life real. A cross carried courageously will make it possible for us to be stronger than had we been free of the burden.

4.The courage to be clean.

All of our thoughts, remarks, dress, grooming, and daily activities should be pursued in the realm of the clean life. We should be selective in the books, magazines, movies, television shows, and personal conversations available to us, and we should avoid those associations that are not uplifting. We plant seeds before we harvest. Unclean thoughts result in unclean deeds, and unclean deeds bring unclean lives. We have been admonished: "Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord." (D&C 38:42.)

The courage to be clean in our attitudes and in our thought processes is so important because thoughts beget behavior. Much of the music that people listen to today can degrade and cause improper actions and reactions. When we allow the words, the beat, and the environment to result in low thoughts and poor performance, we are unfair with ourselves. No greater sermon in fewer words has ever been shared on this subject than "Be ye clean." God help us to be clean in thought, clean in act, and clean in appearance.

5.The courage to communicate properly.

Courage is needed if we are to properly counsel, confide, comfort, and console. To ponder, to meditate, to show sincere concern, to pray, and to teach prayer are such important aspects of communication. The courage to communicate good cheer, to communicate peace, and to communicate the great joys of the gospel of Jesus Christ, as well as to communicate love, affection, warmth, and happiness, are so greatly needed today. The courage to bring tidings of great joy, the courage to share a warm handshake, a smile, a nod of the head, a wink of the eye, a good word, and sincere pleasantries—all are powerful methods of communication.

We need to continually take the time to communicate with our Heavenly Father and those about us. As we share, we can make the difference in the life and light of others. We lift as we love and as we convey our love through communication. In the scriptures we read, "But to do good and to communicate forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well pleased." (Hebrews 13:16.)

In all of our relationships, communication should be open, comforting, and sincere. God has invited us to communicate with Him through prayer continually, no matter where we are or what the circumstances. He wants to hear from us. He loves us. He knows us. He wants to be part of our lives and to help us solve our problems. How important it is to improve our communication with Him and with others every day!

The Lord's Prayer is still a worthy model of communication in content, approach, and attitude:

After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen. (Matthew 6:9-13.)

Family members often cry for the strength that accompanies good communication. Some are awkward and hesitant in developing the channels that make two-way dialogue possible. Wise mothers and fathers will communicate more effectively with each other and will, in turn, teach their children and others in the process. What a blessing is a warm personality, properly communicated, as we go down life's paths with others!

May God help us to give and to share courage for Christmas by having the courage to choose, the courage to continue, the courage to carry our cross, the courage to be clean, and the courage to communicate.

At this Christmas season I extend to you the gift of courage. I pray that our Heavenly Father will help you and me in receiving this priceless gift. May He help us to share it as we seek to make it a permanent possession, and may He help us to have the courage to know, to believe, and to declare that Jesus is the Christ, the Lord of lords, the King of kings, our Savior born in Bethlehem in humble surroundings and circumstances.

We need the continuing courage to declare to the world that Jesus lives today, that He is our Savior, our Friend, the Son of God, and that His church and kingdom are available to all today. God does live. Jesus is one with the Father. It takes courage not only to know but also to declare these truths. With courage as a permanent possession, all of these things are possible, and they will bring peace and joy to each of us as we know and understand the real meaning of Christmas. Courage makes it possible for cherished memories and mountains to overshadow losses and valleys in our quest for the joyous.
