Lord, show me personally what you mean by living water. I want the peace and contentment that comes from knowing that I’m provided for. Amen.

Day 12

John 4: 15-26

husband. Why?

interaction that He did before revealing His identity to

her in verse 26?

woman knew each other’s religious beliefs. How did

Jesus solve this problem? (verse 23)

what God is in verse 24. Explain.

Prayer

prayers of worship and praise, Yahweh, the great “I am”, the One True God. Amen

Day 13

John 4: 27-38

Questions

spoken to this Samaritan woman, yet they didn’t

question Him. Why?

revealing that she has spoken with a Jew. Why would

she have done that?

disciples to think on a spiritual plain rather than a

physical one. What is He saying about “sowing and

reaping”?

Lord, please teach me spiritual truth. Lead me to trust You as the only way that I can “reap” peace, wisdom, love and true joy; even though I have “sown” selfishness, doubt, skepticism and turmoil. Amen

Day 14

John 4 : 39-42

Questions

these Samaritans for two days?

time with Jesus and learned more, their belief was no

longer based on a simple magic trick of knowing

something about someone in advance. Why do you

think they came to believe, going against everything

in their own culture and religion?

Prayer

God, everything you taught us is in question today in our culture; our religion has become success, achievement, and a free for all of religions and humanism; whatever beliefs you create for yourself are o.k. if they work for you. That is where we are, but I don’t want to be there. I want to follow the One True Leader, the Creator, the Ultimate Authority, the Alpha and Omega. Show me the way Lord, show me the Way. Amen

John 4 : 43-54

Questions

1.When Jesus was frustrated by the lack of belief among His own people, why do you think He healed the Roman official’s son (verse 50) after initially rebuffing him in verse 48?

simultaneously; both actually and symbolically. How

many different observations can you make about this

miracle of Jesus and His healing of the centurion’s

son.

Prayer

Lord, You created me, this entire world I live in. You gave me my mind, my drive, my family; You have blessed me in every way. I ask you now, in the name of your son Jesus Christ, to call me to your purposes…to make me an Ambassador for you everywhere I go and in Day 16

John 5 : 1-15

Questions

into the pool while the waters were stirring. It was

perform first, then be healed. How was the sequence

different when Jesus healed the man in verse 8?

Prayer

Lord, you are telling me through this scripture that you don’t connect up my performance with your blessings, price you paid for my salvation and eternal life. I want your righteousness. I want to be good. Amen.

Day 17

John 5:16-23

on the Sabbath, Jesus began to reveal more about

who he was. What claim does Jesus make in verse 18

and why was that such a “sensational” claim in the

Jewish culture?

that Jesus is truly devine and a part of the

“Godhead”. What was that revelation?

information Jesus gives us in verses 19 and 20,

explain how the dialog likely went between Jesus and

the Father as to the healing of the invalid we just

studied?
