Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

Hearts Knit Together

SANDRA ROGERS

One afternoon in the San Francisco library, while leafing through a thick volume of journals, I came upon an article on Mormonism. The author, a sociologist, was interested in how an American-born church became a worldwide religion. How, he questioned, would Mormonism shift from being a religion for the homogeneous to being a religion for the diverse? [^1]

Managing worldwide diversity is a challenge for the Church. But, in truth, no matter where they live, be it the Wasatch Front or West Africa, today's Saints already come in many varieties. We differ in size, education, ethnicity, political preference, and accent. We differ in the clothes we choose, how much money we have, how much money we want, how well we cook, what we like to eat, the kind of work we do in or out of the home, our marital and family situations. The length of time we have been in the Church may be different. So are our sufferings—whether we are mothers or just wishing we could be—the things that are hard for us to do, the things that hurt us, the things that give us joy, the mistakes we have made, the successes we have enjoyed.

Yet with all this variation, "all are alike unto God" (2 Ne. 26:33). Becoming sensitive to each other—allowing for and respecting differences—helps us all feel welcome, wanted, and needed in the Church. But that is not the only reason our hearts must be knit together. The most compelling and urgent reason is that without unity we simply cannot be Christ's. If we cannot attain unity, we are disobedient to him, for the Lord has said, "Be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine" (D&C 38:27).

In the Book of Mormon, Alma taught new Church members that "there should be no contention one with another, but . . . they should look forward with one eye, having one faith and one baptism, having their hearts knit together in unity and in love one towards another" (Mosiah 18:21). Without this unifying love, we are as sounding brass and tinkling cymbals—nice for a small round-the-block parade but unsuitable for a resounding heavenly choir. "Hearts knit together in unity and love" means much more than sharing warm feelings on Sunday, caring about your neighbors, or even being loyal friends. Alma is describing how to be covenant keepers, for all the law and the prophets depend on loving God with all our heart, might, mind, and strength and our neighbors as ourselves (see Matt. 22:37-40). To be without contention, we must also knit our hearts to Christ, the author of the "everlasting covenant, even the fulness of [his] gospel" (D&C 66:2). In this way, our hearts are knit together not merely with our own unity and love but with his.

Our love must be grounded in his because, as Paul taught, "And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing" (1 Cor. 13:3). Why would Paul say bestowing all our goods to feed the poor isn't the same as charity? I see faithful members of my ward canning peaches at the welfare cannery, or rising at 4 a.m. to work in the temple laundry, or taking a neighbor's children for an afternoon. I see meals prepared for the sick, the grieving, or those bowed down—meals that if lined up dish to dish would circle the globe twice over and keep Deseret Industries supplied for years with orphaned pans and bowls. How can Paul tell me that might not be "never-failing charity"?

Is there some holier form of compassion than service? What sanctifies our service?

I have come to believe that to knit our hearts in Christ's perfect unity and love we must first "break" our hearts. We must be humble. The scriptures and our leaders repeatedly affirm that humility is the prerequisite for faith, hope, and charity. Mormon, for instance, tells us that we "cannot have faith and hope, save [we] shall be meek, and lowly of heart. . . . For none is acceptable before God, save the meek and lowly in heart" (Moro. 7:43-44). President Ezra Taft Benson taught that the test of the twentieth-century Church is pride. [^2] Pride is for us as the frozen snow of Wyoming was for the Willie and Martin handcart companies. Pride keeps us from humility, and without humility we cannot have charity and unity.

Paul makes more sense considered in that light: the prideful bestowal of all our goods to feed the poor can never be charity. Humility perfects our unity and purifies our love. Without humility, our fondness for and loyalty to each other can, in some circumstances, lead us away from the light of Christ, not closer to it. Without humility, our unity can become self-serving, restrictive, and haughty, directing us straight up the steps of a latter-day rameumptom instead of into the sandaled, dusty footprints of the Master. Satan's counterfeit for hearts being knit together in unity and love is not contentious or apathetic hearts; it is proud hearts seeking other proud hearts in self- congratulation.

King Benjamin taught that humility begins when we acknowledge our dependence upon God our Father and the Savior, Jesus Christ, for life and breath here and for eternal joy in the hereafter. Humility is knowing that because of the Atonement, we can, if we "yield to the enticings of the Holy Spirit" and follow Christ, be saved from sin, as well as from carelessness, inadequacy, bitterness, anger, revenge, poor esteem, selfishness, fear, and all the other tendencies of the natural woman (see Mosiah 3:19). Whatever brings us to the well, the vessel into which his healing, comforting Spirit is poured is the broken heart.

The Savior has often begged us to come unto him. He pleads, "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls" (Matt. 11:28-29). To Joseph Smith he said, "Learn of me, and listen to my words; walk in the meekness of my Spirit, and you shall have peace in me" (D&C 19:23). Humility, walking in meekness, is the prerequisite condition of the heart.

I would like to share one woman's humility with you. My grandmother Malinda Porter Rogers was born in a little town in northern Arizona. Her father farmed and was the mail carrier. Grandma struggled in school and completed only the eighth grade. Seven years after she married, her father was tragically killed in an accident with a mail train. Then in 1936, her oldest sons, ages twelve and nine, drowned in a whirlpool created by the railroad siphoning water from the river. Four years later, her husband—my grandfather—died of a kidney ailment. Many of his friends said he died of grief over the loss of his boys. Grandma faced life with five children and no savings, no previous work experience, no food stamps, no government relief, and no lawsuit against the railroad.

The elders quorum repaired a small, one-bedroom home for the family. Her widowed mother came to live with her, and Grandma eventually buried her mother in the dress Grandma had worn for her eighth-grade graduation and again for her wedding. She came close to losing her home several years later when her brother convinced her to mortgage it to lend him money and then "forgot" to make the payments.

She washed the bishop's milking equipment at his dairy in exchange for milk for the family. She cleaned the church, kneeling to scrub the crayon marks off the linoleum of the nursery, in return for Church assistance. She turned collars on shirts. She could mend a corner tear in the sheerest of fabric with stitches invisible to the eye. If she ever went out for dinner, she invariably picked the least expensive item on the menu.

When her last child married, she gave her own little house to the newlyweds and never owned her own home again. She was a faithful visiting teacher and contributed her widow's mite to build the Relief Society Building in Salt Lake City. And never once did anyone hear her express doubt, self-pity, bitterness, depression, or anger. Never.

I don't think she was ever treated as Job was treated, being asked what terrible sins she had committed to deserve what had happened to her, but she was asked on several occasions how she kept going. Her answer, in perfect patience and meekness, not murmuring about her pressing, lifelong poverty, was, "I rely on the Lord, and he has blessed me."

Grandma was humble before she lost her sons and her husband. But her humility and faith refined her until she was the epitome of charity. For Grandma suffered long, was kind, envied not, was not puffed up, sought not her own, was not easily provoked, thought no evil, rejoiced in truth, bore all things, believed all things, hoped all things, and endured all things, and I know it shall be well with her at the last day (see Moro. 7:45, 47; 1 Cor. 13:4-7).

This granddaughter needs to learn much to be equal to her grandmother. As I begin in tentative ways to understand humility—backing away from judgment, opening my heart, peeling off a bit of pride—my weaknesses loom before me with heightened clarity. That's not always comfortable; in fact, sometimes it's quite painful. But the Lord has promised to help turn those weaknesses into strengths if we come unto him, and I find myself holding on to that promise with great hope (see Ether 12:27). As I have tried to be more patient, more teachable, more forgiving, and more understanding of another's circumstances, I have felt more peace.

I grew up in a small town where everyone knew everyone else. After my mission, every time I went home to visit it seemed someone would ask, "Sandra, haven't you been able to catch a husband yet?" Not understanding much about the doctrine of humble hearts knit together in unity and love, I dreaded the questions, sometimes feeling that people were picking at a weakness, a void in my character. One day, speeding across the reservation between Page and Flagstaff, Arizona, I dreaded coming face to face with many at home who would remind me of my singleness—again.

Then a beam of pure light entered my heart through a tiny crack. I remembered my feelings for the men and women who always asked me those infernal questions. I remembered how they had taught me in Primary or Mutual or Sunday School. I remembered their goodness as neighbors. The Spirit whispered through the tiny crack in my heart, "My land, Sandra, get a grip." (The Spirit always speaks in language you understand.) "These people care about you. They are interested in you. They have no idea what kind of job you have so they can't ask about it. Their questions come out of their neighborliness and their interest—not because they want to hurt you. Be grateful." The questions came when I arrived home, but I felt no resentment, no sense of inadequacy. I stopped judging their intent as hurtful and started viewing it, instead, as love and concern.

Lessons of humility are often learned in a rigorous school. And I find that I must keep paying my tuition. Sometimes we are compelled to be humble because our God-given resources are inadequate to the challenges we face. Sometimes social or economic conditions compel us to humility, as with the poor Zoramites cast out of their synagogues because of their exceeding poverty. And sometimes we cultivate humility. As Alma taught, "Blessed are they who humble themselves without being compelled to be humble" (Alma 32:16).

Perhaps genuine humility is recognizing the source of true strength. The poor in spirit who come unto Christ and rely on his strength display a special brand of courage. They are willing to give up self-seeking and selfish concerns to know God. To be humble, we must be willing, as Alma says, to experience "a change of heart . . . [to be] stripped of pride . . . [and] of envy" (Alma 5:26, 28-29). Not only must we stop["tak[ing] advantage" of each other "because of [our] words" and["dig[ging] a pit for [our][neighbor[s]" (2 Ne. 28:8) but we must seek to bless the lives of others. Humility will help us magnify our callings; it will also teach us how to uphold "by [our] confidence, faith, and prayer" others who are fulfilling callings that are not ours (D&C 107:22).

Humility and charity help us serve without making unrigh-teous judgments. We do not need to know how or why the person we are serving got into that situation in the first place. We may trust that "what God hath cleansed, that call thou not common" (Acts 10:15). The greatest form of charity may be to withhold judgment.

Lisa Flindt, a senior graduating in nursing from Brigham Young University, wrote in her nursing journal of an experience that first broke and then opened her heart to feelings of unity and love: "Taking care of AIDS patients has made me take a hard look at my values. Though I have always felt the individual to be of infinite worth to our Father in Heaven, I have never before associated with people who were experiencing trials so different from mine and who needed Heavenly Father's infinite love so much. I learned the deeper meaning of charity when I cared for a wheelchair-bound HIV patient. He had lesions on his hands and buttocks, was pale as a ghost with a splotchy red rash consuming his body, and wore dark sunglasses which made him seem even ghastlier. His partner sat at his bedside. Initially, looking at the men made me feel physically ill. I wanted to hold my breath, toss the patient his gown, and spend as little time in the room as possible for I feared that inevitably he would sneeze, somehow I would catch his disease and then bring it home to my husband and ten-month-old baby.

"However, one day his mother entered the room. When she went to him, kissed him on the forehead, and whispered, 'Sweetheart, I will never leave you,' the words charity never faileth came to mind and my soul melted. I put on my gloves, picked up a bottle of lotion at his bedside and asked him if he wanted a back rub. That day I felt I understood the words of the Savior as never before, 'If ye have done it unto the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.'

"Christ is the ultimate healer, and as nurses we are learning many aspects of the healer's art. Sometimes in the process of healing another's wounds, we must cross the barriers defining our own value system and dig deep into the heart of a suffering individual who may have values different from our own.

"I have been raised with the belief that homosexuality and IV-drug abuse are immoral, unethical, and simply wrong. Though I do not sacrifice my moral and ethical standards for the sake of tolerance, a turning point came in my life when I had to decide whether I would love others for who they are, surrendering judgment and criticism, or allow prejudgments and the social barriers of the world to stifle another's spiritual growth, as well as my own." [^3]

Not long ago I had a short conversation with my bishop. I expressed sorrow and regret for something I had said, and my good bishop's response was, "That's all right, Sister Rogers. I know your heart is in the right place." Imagine how well we could serve, teach, encourage, uplift, and comfort one another, and how less frequently we would judge, feel judged, hurt, or left out and strike back at others if we stopped ascribing sinister or unkind motives to others and remembered their hearts are probably in the right place.

Hearts knit together rarely trouble each other with the "should" list but rather reason together about priorities. Hearts knit together in unity and love stop thinking that the measure of our homemaking efforts is the number of bodies in the seats and notice instead if and when the hearts that are there are being uplifted and strengthened. Hearts knit together in unity and love are offended less often, recover more quickly from hurt, and serve with less fanfare and more courage.

Some of my greatest challenges in humble charity have come in my reactions to people who should "know better" or from whom I have "expected better." My youngest brother made choices that took him away from the Church. He hurt my parents deeply, and I was angry—especially because he "knew better." I found tension in every interaction with this charming, personable, hard-working brother of mine. Several years after his abrupt departure from the Church, I had one of those all-too-brief moments of enlightenment when my hard heart broke just a little. (Humble hearts are teachable hearts—and I confess the Spirit has had to work to reach me sometimes.) The Spirit communicated, "Sandra, you spent hours on your mission teaching people who had been involved in almost every kind of sin and bad choice imaginable. Yet you loved them, and you testified to them that Christ loved them and that through the Atonement they could be reconciled to God. You accepted them with patience, and you treated them with kindness. Can't you do the same for your younger brother?" I have since felt peace in loving my brother and others who were taught to share my faith but who have made choices different from my own.

Hearts knit together in oneness and charity celebrate all that is good in each other. Humble hearts surround their expectations of another with a cocoon of gentleness and charity. Hearts knit in unity and love are not envious or demeaning of another's gifts. They are not jealous of another's material blessings. They know that God's promised blessings are rarely listed as assets on the world's balance sheet.

I had been involved in graduate research work in Nigeria for several months when my Relief Society president, Faustina Otoo, invited me to her home for dinner. She seemed a bit apprehensive and apologized for the circumstances in which she lived as if she were inviting some royal personage who had never eaten a meal anywhere but the Waldorf-Astoria. I learned later that she had attended a Relief Society lesson on being "no more strangers or foreigners" that had helped her see that I was a stranger in her part of the world, and the Lord wanted her to help me feel welcome, even though she feared I would be uncomfortable in her home or look down on her. Determined to do what the Lord wanted, she humbled herself and exposed her extreme poverty to me.

To make me as comfortable as possible, she arranged with her landlady for me to use the landlord's private bathroom so I wouldn't be faced with the community facility, which was somewhat austerely appointed. I would be staying overnight, and she felt panicky because I would have to sleep on the floor. American television had taught her that I would be expecting to sleep in my own, private, king-sized bed.

That evening she proudly showed me her growing collection of Church literature, reaffirming her testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ. I did everything I could to show her I was comfortable in her home—because I was—and Faustina and I became dear friends. The entire friendship began because of her humility.

Now, listen to the same story from her perspective.

"Sandra . . . was living in Lagos to do her doctorate work. She took an interest in me. . . . I was down and very sad. She said she wanted to comfort me, but I wouldn't give her the chance. I never wanted to invite her to my house, because I have always had the impression that whites live in a unique environment, and where I live is not good enough to invite a missionary or white person to. So I never invited anybody.

"We were having a lesson in Relief Society that said that we in the gospel are 'no more strangers . . . but fellowcitizens' (Eph. 2:19). I told Sandra that I had always really wanted to invite her to my place. She said she didn't mind how I lived, so I invited her.

"She humbled herself to the extent that she slept on the floor with me. . . . We read the scriptures together, and that was the first time I had had that type of experience. . . . I told Sandra that she has showed me the life I think Christ wanted his children to have. . . . I will send her my birth certificate and other papers, so that should I happen to die, she can go to the temple and do my temple work for me.

"She lowered herself to befriend me—somebody who doesn't have any background. I am nothing that she should become my friend." [^4]

Dear Faustina is poor in the things of the world and rich in the things of God. If humility could knit the heart of Faustina (a short, poor, married-and-then-divorced mother, former Pentecostal, uneducated but self-taught black woman who works as a seamstress) with the heart of Sandi (a tall, not-so-economically-challenged, born-in-the-Church, educationally privileged, single, white woman who teaches at a university), then I believe humble, broken hearts can bring any and all of us together in unity and love.

Do you find on occasion, as I do, a discouraging gap between righteous desires so deeply felt on Sunday and the realities of living on Monday? Humility is hardest to have when we need it the most. But we can cultivate humility even when we struggle with pride, when we feel attacked, when we feel misunderstood, when we are afraid, when we doubt, when we feel perfectly justified, when we feel belittled, when we feel alone, or when evil has been done to us and we have little desire to return good in its place.

With hearts humbly knit together with unity and love, we can be a mighty force for good in our homes, in the Church, in our work, and in the world. When the tempests are nearly swamping our boat, our humbled hearts can find peace, comfort, and joy in being one with Christ and with our sisters in the gospel.

The Joseph City ward choir of my childhood sang it this way: "Perverse and foolish, oft I strayed, but yet in love He sought me, and on His shoulder gently laid and home rejoicing brought me. . . . I nothing lack [for] I am His, and He is mine forever." [^5] I take comfort in God's promises to us, that his grace is sufficient, his burden is light, and he can give us rest.

Notes

Sandra Rogers is dean of the College of Nursing at Brigham Young University. She was a Welfare Services missionary in the Philippines and now serves in her ward Relief Society.

---
Notas:
[^1] Lauren B. Alloy, "Depressive Realism: Sadder but Wiser?" Harvard Mental Health Letter, Apr. 1995, 4-5.
[^2] Ezra Taft Benson, "Beware of Pride," Ensign, May 1989, 4-7.
[^3] Lisa Flindt, untitled journal assignment from class, Brigham Young University, N442 Journal, Fall 1994; used with permission; slightly edited.
[^4] Dale LeBaron, ed., All Are Alike unto God (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990), 70-71.
[^5] Harry Rowe Shelley, "The King of Love My Shepherd Is," in Sing unto God: Anthems and Sacred Choruses, ed. and arr. by Ruth Heller (Minneapolis: Schmitt, Hall, & McCreary, 1952), 58-63; capitals at line breaks omitted.
