Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

Tracking Down the Principles

MARY HALES

Trials are part of mortality. Some are no-fault trials, like no-fault insurance: through no fault of our own, we will suffer, things will go wrong. Our mortal bodies begin to break down from the day we are born, little by little, part by part. And the bodies of those we care about do, too. As quickly as we learn how to do one thing, conditions change. Our memory goes, our sight goes, our hearing goes. Once we are past seventy, we find our foyer visiting at church includes an organ recital: pancreas doesn't work, kidneys don't function, heart is clogged. That is just life.

How do we deal with what faces us? There is no way the Lord can give us enough laws to fit every possibility. The Israelites tried that. It doesn't work. Instead, he gives us principles, which he wants us to apply to our particular situation. That may take some figuring out because our problems and even our pleasures differ. Sometimes we struggle to see the principle and bog down in the details. For instance, at a recent women's conference, a speaker mentioned that she had taken a loaf of freshly baked bread to her new neighbor. She told how much good it did. A lot of people in that audience heard the word bread (I was one of them), and we said to ourselves, But I don't bake bread. The principle here, though, is not take bread to your neighbor. The principle is show caring to your neighbor.

When I lived in the East, I decided to make a Boston cream pie for a new neighbor. Boston cream pie is a misnomer; it's really a cake split into layers with pudding in between. To keep the top and bottom from slipping, you quickly insert toothpicks through the layers, slide the whole thing into the refrigerator, and hope it sets up straight. Once it's set, you frost it fast and hurry it back to the fridge before it starts to move. It's difficult to make, time consuming, and terribly messy. But it was a family favorite, and I thought, A new neighbor—I'll take her something special.

So I knocked on her door and said as I extended the Boston cream pie, "I'm your new neighbor. I brought you this to welcome you to our neighborhood." She looked at it and said, "Our family doesn't eat dessert." I said, "Oh." At home later, after I recovered from the shock of rejection, I said to myself, You know, she's right. I didn't think this out very well. What could I have taken this new neighbor I had never met? Not what does my family like, but what does she need? She needs my name and phone number so she can call and ask me when the trash is picked up or the name of a dentist for when her child wakes in the night with a toothache. There are things she needs that I could provide.

This same principle of caring by thinking of another's particular needs shows up in a ward. When did you last hear a baby cry in church? Probably last Sunday, because we expect babies and mothers to attend church. When a mother has small children, to survive she develops a tolerance for noise. She learns to distinguish the different cries of her child. Answering the cry that says I'm tired, she says, "Okay, I'll put you to bed"; to the cry that says I'm hungry, "Okay, I'll feed you"; to the I'm just restless cry, "I'll let you exercise your lungs a minute." When the child in sacrament meeting cries, he's probably tired. The alarm in her head doesn't ring Emergency! Emergency! She registers, Ahh, it's a tolerable level, and goes about her business of listening to the speaker. The other members of the congregation, however, are alarmed. Those with hearing aids may be in pain.

How do we sort this out? First, a young mother deserves a gold star for even getting to church with a baby and diaper bag and everything else she needs. There has to be compromise on all sides. The mother has to listen with the ears of the congregation and say, "I know that I can tolerate a certain level of noise, but many in this congregation have forgotten or never experienced what it is like to have a child around. I have to consider their feelings." Others seated near her fussy baby have to say, "I will consider her needs. I will be supportive." Caring is the principle here; peace and quiet are secondary.

Our church is a lay church. That means we learn how to live the gospel by practicing it on each other. The choir learns to sing by singing. Will it be the best music you have ever heard? Probably not, but restrain yourself from screaming "Blend! Blend!" Choir volunteers come together to worship the Lord through music. It's not meant to be perfect music. When children give talks or offer fledgling testimonies, we rarely hear something we haven't heard before, but do we complain? Of course not. Bishops learn how to be bishops by practicing on us. Relief Society presidents learn how to be Relief Society presidents by practicing on us. We all take a turn. That's okay, because the Lord has told us to forgive and be patient with each other.

The world expects teachers to be specialists. The math teacher presumably knows far more than the vast majority of her students. The science teacher specializes in her course material. But in the Church, our fellow members teach classes. Fellow members give talks. Fellow members prepare to teach Gospel Doctrine or priesthood or Relief Society, often worrying themselves sick because they don't know any more than anyone else. In the Church, we are not specialists.

Where do we get the idea that other people are specialists? If we're assigned a topic, we do the best we can and try to teach with some enthusiasm so people will be interested and motivated. But that doesn't mean we've perfected the topic. We all feel depressed when we make comparisons. We all feel discouraged at times because we don't measure up to so-and-so. Everyone is struggling; everyone is learning.

If you don't think someone has trials, you just don't know the person well enough. The fact that some individuals can look on the bright side of life doesn't mean everything that happens to them is good or that they have life all figured out. They don't. No one does. The April 1995 Harvard Mental Health Letter reported some studies on perception, comparing optimists with pessimists. According to the study, optimists overestimate their own social skills and the amount of control they have over the outcome of events, but they accurately estimate other people. Pessimists' perceptions were reversed. They did not underestimate their own skills, as you might expect, but rather overestimated everyone else's. Both groups would benefit from the truth: the ability to see themselves and others accurately. [^1] Our goal is to have realistic expectations.

Expect to have trials. The good news is you can cope with these trials with the help of the Lord and the help of your family and friends. But don't get the idea that tomorrow your trials will be gone. I once had the illusion that I would some day get my entire house cleaned. There would come a day when all at the same time, every room, every floor, every closet, every drawer would be clean all at once. But it's never going to happen, never, not in this world, not with me. If I get one thing in order or fixed, something else goes down. That's just how it is. But once I realized that and quit getting all upset about it, I learned to function. It's the same with life. I know the trials will come. Absolutely guaranteed, there will be trials. So when they arise, I don't say, "Oh dear me, a trial!" I say, "Oh, another trial. Well, I coped with the last one. I'll cope with this one." That's how I go through life and keep my sanity.

Trials can be made worse if we burden ourselves with unrealistic expectations. For instance, when we think we didn't get anything out of a meeting, we need to reflect on why we go to church. The reality is we don't go to church to get. The Lord commanded us to go to sacrament meeting so that we could give our worship, renew our covenant to keep his commandments, and support and love each other. Every person who walks through that chapel door should feel the caring of other ward members. A sister can teach a lesson, and if we come up and talk to her afterward, she feels encouraged. I can sit in class and if I say, "How are you? How's it going? How is this problem, that problem?" she knows someone cares about her. We go to church to support each other, to show caring. If we have the realistic idea that we go to church to give and then we give, we will never be disappointed.

We need to carry that realism into our expectations of ourselves. There's a principle involved here, stated by King Benjamin in Mosiah 4:27: "See that all these things are done in wisdom and order." We are not required to run faster than we have strength. The quantity of good things we can do in a day is unlimited, but energy and resources are limited. A General Authority I know stayed with a family while on an out-of-town Church assignment. The family got up early to have family prayer together and scripture study before breakfast. That night he joined them as they studied scriptures and prayed together again before they went to bed. As their little boy rose from his knees to head off to bed, he blurted out, "Dad, what's going on?" Now that's life; that's the reality.

Because our time and energy are limited, we have to decide what is right for us and our family at a particular time of our life. We can look around and get ideas and suggestions about how others spend their time, but only we can decide what's right for us at this moment, and in what proportion. We need to commit ourselves—keep all the commandments—but allot our time according to our phase of life.

Not long ago I heard a woman speak in sacrament meeting about family history. It was a wonderful talk. She said, "I spend four hours a day on family history, and I love it." Is that wrong? Not for her. Her children are grown. She has the time. She loves it. It's doing good for other people. Are four hours right for everybody? For some, yes; for some, no. Who decides? You decide. If you go to a meeting and hear, "I spend four hours on family history," do you say, "Oh, woe is me. I'm depressed." No, you say, "I'm glad I heard that talk. She talked about what was really important in family history. I learned which things I need to throw in a drawer so that when I do have time, I won't have lost irreplaceable items. I'm glad I heard that talk. I'll let it help me, not depress me because I can't devote the hours to it this woman can." If someone makes the mistake of challenging you to work on family history four hours a day, just forgive that person. It's all right.

What if you want to try something new but have no way to fit it into your life? You say, "One more straw, and this camel is down." Don't keep piling on more and more responsibilities until you break. Instead consider, "What straw am I willing to remove for now so I can add this new straw?" or "What half of a straw here and another half straw there can I drop because I want to try this new straw for a while?" Exchange and keep exchanging as your life changes and as you change. Keep adjusting your time and commitments to fit your personal needs.

In all this juggling and adjusting of expectations, in accepting our own and others' limitations, things happen to us that are positively unfair as well as painful. Some people say, "Well, what principles will work here? Prayer! I'll pray it away. I'll fast and I'll pray and I know the Lord will take this away." But that's not a true principle. Look at the example of the Savior when he went to Gethsemane. What was fair about his atonement? He understood what atonement was, how painful it would be. He even asked his Father in Heaven, "Can this cup pass from me?" In other words, can this trial be removed? But he added, "Thy will, Lord, not mine." Did the Lord remove the trial? No, he did not. What did he do? He strengthened his Son.

Some of us will have trials that will be more than we feel we can bear. We'll say, "I want it removed. It's too much." The Lord will respond, "I'll strengthen you."

My husband and I are good friends with an energetic, bright, enthusiastic young couple who have three young children. Their future was full of promise. Then the husband began to notice a strange numbness in his hand. He consulted a doctor, who conducted some tests, did some surgery, and then some more tests. Soon afterward the doctor told them the tests indicated Lou Gehrig's disease. This is a very young family; Lou Gehrig's disease doesn't usually hit someone so young. Now this man can no longer walk or talk. Only his wife can understand him, and sometimes even she can't. The children climb up on his lap to hug him. I look at this young family and wonder how they can stand what's happening to them.

The illness isn't something that runs its course quickly; it takes several years. The ward has been very helpful. They built a ramp to his home so that he can come out in his wheelchair. His extended family members help and support him in every way possible. But it's extremely painful to watch. I asked the young mother one day how she was coping because I couldn't imagine how she could. She said, "Well, the day before we returned to the doctor we went to the temple to prepare ourselves for the diagnosis, which we suspected was going to be very serious. There in the temple, a peace and a strengthening came over us, and it has stayed with us ever since." She added, "That doesn't mean we don't get bone tired and we don't cry from the sorrow of what's happening, but we are strengthened and that has stayed with us since we found out what was wrong." Pain in this life is not a sign that the Lord is angry or that we have done wrong. It's just mortality.

The gospel teaches principles based on eternal truths. As we identify the principle involved in our choices, we develop the ability to cope successfully with the trials of mortality. Gospel principles teach us to value caring about others over personal irritation as we weed out unrealistic expectations of ourselves and others. We need to develop realistic expectations softened with compassion. If we learn to yield our will to the Father's and pray the way the Savior showed us—"Thy will be done"—then he will bless us with the understanding that even those trying to do right will experience trials. We will know the Lord loves us and allow him to strengthen us as we strengthen and care for each other.

Note

Mary Hales, who received her bachelor's degree from Brigham Young University in home and family development, is a homemaker. She and her husband, Robert D. Hales, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, are the parents of two children and the grandparents of eight. Mary teaches the Spiritual Living lessons in her ward Relief Society.

---
Notas:
[^1] I am indebted to my friend and colleague Duane Boyce for suggesting this analogy in his article "The Brethren and the Lord: A Letter to My Children," This People, Fall 1995, 34-46. Both his article and his friendship significantly influenced this essay.
