Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

The Art of Compassion, The Compassion of Art

ELIZABETH HANSEN

The more I learn about compassion, the more I am inclined to believe that it is an art, something to be experienced, examined, and yearned for. But what is compassion exactly? How does it differ from sympathy, concern, or pity? Compassion is a deep awareness of the suffering of another coupled with the wish to relieve that suffering. Compassion must be more active than mere sympathy. But how do we come to that deeper awareness? I believe that empathy leads the heart toward compassion.

Empathy is the capacity to experience, as your own, the feelings of another. But how can we as humans, with our temporal limitations, climb into another's soul to feel that person's life firsthand? Can we become Jews in a concentration camp? Can we become an AIDS victim and realize the terror of facing death? Can we rejoice at the finding of true love, only then to lose it? I believe we can. We can transcend our own realm into another's and fly alongside their soul through art. We can be a name on Schindler's List, can visit Philadelphia, or stand in the Shadowlands. Perhaps the flight is short, perhaps it will provide only a momentary glance, but without that glance, we may miss the opportunity to taste the abundance of compassion.

Christ admonished us, "Love your enemies, do good to them which hate you, bless them that curse you, and pray for them which despitefully use you" (Luke 6:27-28). Could he have asked this of us if he had not tasted mortality?

How easy it is to condemn and judge when one is without the experience of living. "There is nothing heavier than compassion. Not even one's own pain weighs so heavy as the pain one feels with someone, for someone, a pain intensified by the imagination and prolonged by a hundred echoes," says Czech writer Milan Kundera in The Unbearable Lightness of Being. [^1] God knew and understood that truth firsthand, and he sent his Son to experience it for himself. Christ in the garden took upon himself the full weight of human misery and error in the ultimate act of compassion. But unlike Christ, our experience as humans is limited to our own time and space. How do we push the boundaries of what we know? How do we learn compassion?

I recently came across the diary entry of a fourteen-year-old girl:

"April 12, 1969

"Today, I went to see Ben Hur. Well, that was the best show that I have ever seen. It was very gory, and yet it was so beautiful. It taught you to be thankful that you live in this time and place.

"It was about Judah Ben Hur (Charleton Heston) and how he was taken to the galleys and his mother and sister were imprisoned. On his way to the galleys he met Jesus. Jesus gave him water when he was not to have any. Ben Hur never forgot him or his face. When Ben Hur got back to Judea, Esther told him that his mother and sister were dead, but they weren't. They were leopards [sic]. They had gone to the valley of the leopards.

"So he went there and found Esther bringing some food to his mother and sister. After that Esther went to the sermon on the mount and saw Jesus. She told Ben Hur and they both went to the valley of the leopards to get his mother and sister to take them to see Jesus, but Jesus was going to be crucified. And when Jesus died the place went dark and it rained hard and Esther went and had to take Miriam and his sister into a cave for protection and they got well.

"They were so happy, it was sad. He told Esther about when Jesus had said, 'Father forgive them for they know not what they do.' And said that Christ's words had pulled the sword out of his hand. When you saw all of Jesus' blood in the rain and in the stream it was so sad, everybody was just crying their eyes out. It was such a good movie. I felt so good inside to know that Jesus died so that we might live.

"I make a vow. That I will try to keep. I will never make fun of my religion again. Or about Jews. Bye."

I'm afraid that I haven't always kept that vow. But I remember writing those words. I remember where I was, and how I felt. I was only fourteen. I didn't know a leper from a leopard. But that movie had a powerful effect on my heart and mind, which is still readily available. How can we instill compassion into another's heart? By first finding our own. And the arts can help.

As I teach students in my screenwriting and playwrighting classes, I explain that a story is an account or a recital of an event or series of events, incidents, or experiences, either true or fictitious, intended to interest or amuse the hearer or reader. More succinctly, a story is a series of events in which one person acts upon someone else and we find out why. That's the important part, the part that hooks us in. It is the story, then, that engages us, interests us, involves us—just as it is the plight of an individual or group that moves us to compassion.

Story may, then, be the gateway to compassion. Because when we become swept up in a story, we care if E.T. phones home, or if Dorothy gets back to Kansas, or if the Phantom of the Opera finds his soul amid his own emotional desolation and releases the virtuous Christine from his maniacal grasp. If in theater, film, poetry, or literature, story is indeed the gateway to compassion, then what happens when we venture outside the fictitious into the real world? Perhaps through considering fictitious circumstances, we can better understand those real stories and relationships of people we know, so that we care that our best friend has lost a homosexual brother, or we feel for a loved one who is an alcoholic, or we even recognize that we can be kinder to ourselves when we are not as good a parent as we wish we were. Through the channel of storytelling, we can learn to exercise compassion.

In the film It's a Wonderful Life, we care that a man, pushed to the limit, with nowhere to turn, looks to suicide to solve his problems. We care what happens to him, and because we do, we have compassion for him. In the final scenes of the movie Schindler's List, Oscar Schindler has saved more than fifteen hundred Jews from the gas chambers. Yet ridden with guilt and remorse, Schindler agonizes that he didn't save more people. He wasted so much money. If he had only sold his Nazi pin, he could have saved one more. If he had sold his car, he could have saved maybe two. In anguish, Schindler collapses into the arms of a Jewish friend and weeps. We can feel Oscar Schindler's deep, inconsolable grief at not having saved more people. We can empathize with his circumstances, even though we have not actually experienced them ourselves: his anguish reaches our own feelings of sorrow, and we care deeply about him. Having exercised these feelings of compassion and caring through film and theater, we will be more likely to experience those emotions when someone around us is hurting or in despair.

To show compassion you do not have to—indeed, you cannot—experience every situation firsthand. You don't have to have been in a concentration camp or near suicide; you don't have to be a direct participant in your neighbor's grief to feel compassion. You just have to be willing to see the suffering, empathize with it, and want to do something about it.

Reflect on Christ in the garden, taking upon himself the sins of the world. Perhaps afterward he understood as never before our unique plight as humans. Empathy is essential for compassion, because it leads us not only to pity but to understand why people are as they are. And, in the words of Alexander Chase, "To understand is to forgive, even oneself." [^2]

In my life, art and compassion are intertwined. Art, in all its forms, is the only temporal element that can lift me from the drudgery of mortal existence to catch a glimpse of God. "I can't tell you what art does and how it does it," says John Berger, British author and critic, "but I know that often art has judged the judges, pleaded revenge to the innocent, and shown to the future what the past suffered, so that it has never been forgotten." [^3]

On the other hand, just as film has the power to teach tolerance and compassion, so can it also teach hatred and cruelty. The Nazis understood well the power of the media during World War II and used it to influence and poison the minds of German citizens against Jews, Poles, Czechs, Gypsies, homosexuals, the mentally disabled, and any person, religion, ethic, or ideal that those in power found contrary to Nazi doctrine. The Nazis came to believe their own propaganda and in so doing slaughtered innocent millions, both temporally and spiritually. Art gone awry can be deadly in more than just the literal sense. It can deaden our senses and our souls to human suffering. It can persuade and influence us to accept and even delight in that cruelty.

Unfortunately, much contemporary art reflects the worst of modern society. What I see is a group of artists out of touch with human virtues trying to justify their self-indulgences. Too much of art has become, in the words of cartoonist Al Capp, "a product of the untalented sold by the unprincipled to the utterly bewildered." [^4]

How and why does an artist choose to persuade hearts toward compassion rather than toward immorality, hatred, or self-indulgence? I'm not sure I can answer that question, but I do know that if we want to live in a more gentle, compassionate world, our goal should not be to eliminate art but to retrench it, to support it in its most compassionate and purest form. Truthful art has the power to bless us, inspire us, and impel us to do good works. Says Austrian poet and critic Ernst Fischer, "In a decaying society, art, if it is truthful, must also reflect decay. And unless it wants to break faith with its social function, art must show the world as changeable. And help to change it." [^5]

That is what art must do—not simply reflect a "decaying society" but help change society. Art must help move people to compassion, tolerance, and love, not to intolerance and hate. It must foster goodwill, not ungodliness. Art—theater, film, music, painting, poetry—can and should impel us towards hope and school us in compassion.

Notes

Elizabeth Hansen teaches play writing and screenwriting at BYU. She received her master of fine arts degree in screenwriting from the American Film Institute and has won a Writers Guild of America Award and an Emmy nomination for her television writing. Also a performer, she has been seen on Broadway, toured nationally, and appeared with such performers as Carol Channing, Milton Berle, James Mason, and Rudolf Nureyev.

---
Notas:
[^1] Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985), no. 237.
[^2] William J. Bennett, Book of Virtues (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1993), 742.
[^3] John Berger, Keeping a Rendezvous (1992), quoted in Columbia Dictionary of Quotations.
[^4] Al Capp, National Observer (Silver Spring, Md., 1 July 1963), quoted in Columbia Dictionary of Quotations.
[^5] Ernst Fischer, "The Necessity of Art" (1959; trans. 1963), quoted in Columbia Dictionary of Quotations.
