Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

Why I Believe

BONNIE D. PARKIN

The month of March was crazy. I was still getting over the shock of my new calling and stressing over my talk for the General Young Women meeting when, a week before the broadcast, I walked into my office and found a letter from the First Presidency. Could it be a pink slip?

I ripped open the envelope to discover my worst nightmare realized: I was to speak in the closing session of general conference in three weeks. I wept, phoned my husband, and was sure I'd have diarrhea for the rest of the month!

During an early morning walk, I discussed with some close friends the daunting subject of why we believe. Their responses were like mine: It's too scary not to! After all, facing life with its paradoxes, complexities, and unanswerable questions is difficult enough with God in the equation. None of us could, or was willing to, imagine living without God and, by extension, his church.

I think about my father's mother, Agnes Ruth Kunz Dansie, who had an incredibly hard life. The oldest of six children, she was nine years old when, as her mother was giving birth to a seventh child, both mother and child died. Agnes had to quit school, care for her younger brothers and sisters, and help run the family dairy. It's a common story, familiar from the past of many of us.

When Agnes was eighteen, she married a man fourteen years her senior in an arranged marriage and moved to a small Utah town. Life was not easy. She raised children while she raised chickens. She ran her own dairy and supplemented that meager income by writing articles for the local Midvale Sentinel. She served as a Relief Society president, sent a son on a mission in Depression years, and, while he was gone, had another baby.

I remember her standing with me at a mirror helping me practice my Primary talks, gently correcting my mistakes and calming my anxious nerves. (I had stage fright even then.) I remember the way people spoke about her with admiration and love. Of course she wasn't perfect, but she gave her all to whatever she did; she brought a measure of culture, generosity, and love to a little town called Herriman.

Why would she do such things?

I never asked her. I do know, though, that she was a living example of belief; example initiates belief.

One morning my mother, at age eleven, sat talking to her mother as she brushed her hair. Suddenly her mother slumped to the floor. Soon afterward she died of a brain aneurism, leaving behind nine children. Devastated, my mother had plenty of excuses not to believe: What kind of God would take a young child's mother? But she pushed onward, living by her motto: "Do what is right; let the consequence follow." [^1] I was born of goodly parents. I had ties to the Church; I was brought up with the gospel.

Women in our little town of Herriman gave a lot to make Primary meaningful. Back then, Primary was held in the middle of the week, and getting together was something I looked forward to. I remember we gave pennies to Primary Children's Hospital, had parades around the church parking lot, and sang songs. There in the old Herriman Ward, paintings of the prophets surrounded us, looking down on us, smiling, approving, reminding. There in that brick building, even at a very young age, I sang the words to Primary songs and felt a profound tenderness. It was as though I knew the Church was true.

Many times during my childhood, my mother was near death. Once she was hospitalized with heart disease for three months, and we were unable to go inside to visit her. We would go to the hospital and position ourselves on the lawn outside her window. Three months is a long time without a mother.

My mother and I received our patriarchal blessings together. We drove miles to another town to the home of an elderly patriarch who did not know either one of us. I was twenty-one, ready to graduate from college. Mother was forty-nine, but that wasn't too old to receive such a gift. Going for these blessings was one of the most powerful experiences of my life. I will never forget that day—how the patriarch placed his hands on Mother's head and told her how often her life had been spared—the rheumatic fever, the heart disease, the many illnesses. He recounted her life, enumerating the times she had blessed others' lives. He told her of other things the Lord had in store for her and told her of things she needed to do. It was as though we weren't sitting on chairs—we were raised up, lifted up, together. I knew her life, and this patriarch who didn't know her described her life.

This blessing was a witness to me that God lived, that he knew us individually, that he was there for us. It was a witness to me that the Church is true. I felt the existence of God and the power of the priesthood.

Why did my mother go to receive a patriarchal blessing so late in her life? Why did she spend so much of her life doing good, but not easy, things?

I'm only beginning to understand.

At my age, I realize that faith is a process, not an event. It's a warm sweater we're constantly growing into. Somehow I know that. While I am often impatient for my growth, I watch my tulips, planted in the fall, push their heads through thawing soil, and I know I too will continue to grow and bloom.

I think of John Thelwall, the nineteenth-century English radical, who thought it "unfair to influence a child's mind by inculcating any opinions before it should have come to years of discretion, and be able to choose for itself." There is an enlightening anecdote in Samuel Taylor Coleridge's Table Talk: "I showed [John Thelwall] my garden, and told him it was my botanical garden. 'How so?' said he, 'it is covered with weeds.'—'Oh,' I replied, 'that is only because it has not yet come to its age of discretion and choice. The weeds, you see, have taken the liberty to grow, and I thought it unfair in me to prejudice the soil towards roses and strawberries.'" [^2] My parents helped me pull the weeds so that somewhere I might have roses and strawberries and tulips.

I have friends who find believing difficult. It does not seem part of their nature. I am lucky. I was born with a believing heart. To say I haven't questioned would be untrue, but to be born with a believing heart is a blessing. And a part of that comes from my ancestry, members or not.

A convert friend of mine said to me: "You lifelong members were born with the gospel tree in your backyard. You enjoyed the shade of the tree, but some time or another, you have to know for yourself—like all converts. You have to climb that tree and experiment upon the word." To those who struggle to have a believing heart, remember Alma 32. You can experiment upon the word, you can feel it grow within you, you can taste its fruit and know that it is good, for "the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance . . . " (Gal. 5:22-23).

I also believe because of you. Paul yearned for a time to join the Christian believers in Rome: "I long to see you . . . that I may be comforted together with you by the mutual faith both of you and me" (Rom. 1:11-12). As I travel throughout the Church in my calling, I can scarcely contain my awe at your dedication, your struggles, your faith and charity, your testimonies.

Finally, there are moments when I don't have to ask myself why I believe. Spiritual whisperings come quietly, sometimes with years between them. But I remember those moments, like patriarchal blessings and Primary songs.

When I had to stand in the Tabernacle and give that general conference talk, I was very, very frightened. The Saturday night before I was to speak, my husband and sons gave me a blessing. It was comforting and assuring, but I did not sleep well. During the morning session of conference, my heart began its slow crescendo to my ascent of those steep stairs. I did not know how I would do it. Sister Pinegar said, "I looked at your husband on the front row, and he looked more nervous than you." I'm not sure that was possible.

Then just before my address, while Elder L. Tom Perry was speaking, I had a witness that I could give my talk—the Spirit enfolded my entire body like a celestial sweater. I thought of my grandmother standing with me beside a mirror, practicing a talk to make it perfect. And then I knew I could speak with the Spirit, and things would be okay—no matter how my husband looked. A peace fell over me; that stairway was shortened, and my troubled heart was calmed.

Why do I believe? I believe because of spiritual whisperings, because of a believing heart, because of you, because of goodly parents and grandparents. Because words cannot capture the soarings of my spirit.

I believe because amidst all these good and powerful things, I know that "eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. But God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit" (1 Cor. 2:9-10).

Notes

Bonnie Dansie Parkin serves as second counselor in the Young Women General Presidency. She and her husband, James L. Parkin, are the parents of four strapping sons and four terrific daughters-in-law and the grandparents of four grandchildren.

---
Notas:
[^1] Corrie ten Boom, The Hiding Place (New York: Bantam Books, 1971), 195.
[^2] As quoted in Bless Your Heart (calendar), Series II (Edina, Minn.: Heartland Samples, 1990).
