Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

The Inner Life

JOANN SHIELDS

From the moment of quickening, you have had an inner life. Although your soul is complex and mysterious, the concept of the inner life is not. It's simply what goes on inside rather than outside your body. It's thoughts and feelings, the motives and emotions that govern action. The quality of inner life varies from person to person in much the same way the outer life does, except the two can be opposites. You can have an empty outer life and a full inner life, or vice versa. Corrie ten Boom defined the inner life as the life "we live . . . with God." [^1] By praying and reading her smuggled hand-sized Bible, Corrie sustained a magnificent inner life with God even though her outer life in World War II death camps was hideous beyond imagining.

On this earth, most of us will never see the Lord with our outer eyes. In D&C 38:7, he said his eyes are on us and he is among us but we cannot see him. We may all, however, see him with our inner eyes—which sight is just as real and just as soul changing. The inner life we live with God is filled with powerful thoughts and feelings he communicates to us through the Holy Ghost.

Let me explain what I mean by power in the inner life. Power means different things to different people. For some it means money: If I have enough money, I can do what I want when I want to. For others, it means fame: Everyone knows my name and loves my face. For far too many, it means control: I have power over others. I can boss people around and manipulate their choices and perceptions.

These definitions of power are made up by people who don't have any. They lack the only true power: godliness, or goodness. In Matt. 28:18 we read that all power in the heaven and earth is given to the Lord Jesus Christ, so we must look to him for the true source and definition of power.

God's power has nothing to do with money, fame, or control. In fact, Jesus repeatedly warned pleasers of men that they would never find him, his kingdom, or his power. To the moneymongers, Jesus said, "He that hath eternal life is rich" (D&C 6:7). To the fame seekers: "All honor comes from God. Before honor comes humility" (see John 5:44; Prov. 15:33). To the control brokers: "Share power or lose it" (see D&C 121:37).

God's power in the inner life can be illustrated by a simple law of physics. Two soda pop cans, an empty one and an unopened full one, look exactly alike on the outside. But no matter how hard I try, I can't dent the full can, whereas with one squeeze I can crumple the empty can. The reason I can't dent the full can is that it has as much pressure inside as outside. The empty can has no internal pressure, so the external pressure crushes it. Although mortal beings cannot really be compared to pop cans, the analogy holds. We will collapse under relentless life stresses unless we have more power coming from within than pressure bearing down on us from without. We may, in fact, thrive under the constant pressures we all face, but we cannot do it alone. We were never meant to. Our burdens may become light, because Christ will carry them. He will give us the power—that is, the thoughts and feelings—to do everything we can, and then he will use his power to do everything we cannot. That's grace. God's power heals and nourishes the soul. It sustains the inner life. It gives humans the will to repent and overcome their natural, fallen state.

Last January I traveled to California with one of my friends, a savvy, brilliant, thirty-year-old lawyer who had been away from the Church several years. For nearly the entire trip, she vented examples of the soul-searing reason she left: spiritual aloneness. She was the only member in her family and never felt accepted in the Church family. Outside the Church she had found community and communion—some of it beyond the mark. My friend said she would never, never come back to the Church and subject herself again to such loneliness and nonstop rejection. I understood but after several painful hours couldn't sustain the grace to respond to her cry for compassion and connection. The venting ended in anger.

A few weeks later, my friend called cheery-voiced to say she had decided to start praying and reading the Book of Mormon again. She had never noticed the first fourteen chapters were all about the "goodness of God" until she started feeling it again. In February she and I launched a scripture expedition, searching for understanding of Christ's atonement. I wish I had space to write everything we found about God's grace and the changing power of his relentless love—his mercy. Paul captured our quest in one question: "Despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance and longsuffering; knowing not that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance?" (Rom. 2:4; emphasis added).

That year spring forgot to come in the outer world, but it arrived right on time in my friend's inner world. One March night, I was sitting alone in a meetinghouse—waiting. On my right was an open classroom door; on my left, a closed bishop's door. Beyond the open door, I heard a man explaining that we should be reluctant to talk about God's unconditional love for us. He feared that some people would think they can do anything they want to and God will still love them. In a clear inner voice, the Holy Ghost told me, "The man is wrong. See what only God's unconditional love can do." I looked to the left and then from behind the closed door, I heard my friend and the members of the disciplinary council laughing.

She had decided to go before a disciplinary council only after she read Christ's promise to be her advocate. My friend, the lawyer, needed a defender. Her remorse and humility brought her the most powerful advocate in the universe: she would not appear alone; if she would be honest, he and she would "plead together" (Isa. 43:26) he would put his "strength" in her to "order [her] cause" and "fill [her] mouth" (Job 23:4, 6) he would ask the Father to remember the death of his sinless Son and reward her with everlasting life because she believes in the Son (D&C 45:3-5) and the Father would direct the disciplinary council's decision (D&C 58:20). The decision was simple and kind. All three council members said that scriptures—recurring messages of God's unconditional love and advocacy—were coursing through their minds the entire day before they met.

Now my friend is in the temple, in her ward, and in God's grace. If all-powerful God's redeeming and gracious love should be his sole means of holding onto his children, why should we weak mortals think control will ever do anything but force them away?

Human control wounds and starves the soul. It damages the human will to repent. Prolonged external control saps the soul of its power and fills it with helplessness—the sense of not really knowing or liking what one is doing but feeling compelled to do it anyway. Controlling and shaming are not God's way to salvation. People cannot be shamed into spirituality; they can be shamed only into shame.

Some people dominate their spouses or children by demanding obedience to them in all things—even though, unlike God, they can't see the future or alter it. But the domineering, however well-meaning, don't stand for God—they try to stand in front of him. They stunt the growth of a strong inner life in those who either submit to, or feel forced to rebel against, their control. Overcontrolled people seldom learn to feel God's power, guidance, approval, and pleasure inside themselves. Their battered conscience and inner life can die from disuse or distortion.

Lucifer is Satan because he wants to stand between God and us, because he wants to destroy moral agency, our power, by having all decisions made by forces outside us (see Moses 4:3). Jesus is Christ because he wants to stand with God and us, because he seeks to perfect moral agency by having all decisions made by choices inside us (see 2 Ne. 2:27). Moral agency is the soul of the Atonement, which promises God's life and mind to all those who choose them freely. Fortunately, we need not fear others' choices. Human attempts to grab power don't thwart God. If he can't work through people, he will work around them—even parents.

One of the most defining examples of the Lord's working around a parent he couldn't work through is that of Isaac being forced to pass on to Jacob the Abrahamic oath and covenant. During two face-to-face visits, the Lord had explained to Isaac that fulfillment of the oath and covenant meant continuation of a righteous, endless posterity (see Gen. 26:2-4, 24). The Lord even revealed to Rebekah that the younger twin would be the next patriarch (see Gen. 25:23-24), which she probably told Isaac. Yet, although Esau's hedonistic ways and pagan wives caused his parents "grief of mind" (Gen. 26:34, 35), Isaac was intent on giving Esau the Abrahamic oath and blessing. Esau, however, was in no condition to rear a righteous posterity, much less pass on God's power and priesthood. He had already violated the oath. The covenant would have died with him.

I used to wonder how the Lord could have approved of Rebekah's plan to trick her husband into blessing Jacob or of Jacob's outright lies to his blind, dying father. The past few years, however, I've wondered how Isaac could have so obdurately resisted foresight, common sense, personal revelation, and baseline tribal loyalty. He knew. He had had years of powerful enlightenment. He understood the import of the blessing. Yet he clung to a decision that would have altered Jacob's foreordained course of events, destroyed the house of Israel, and made prophecy a lie. Of course, that was not to be. Jacob's destiny was the world's destiny. The Lord had to work around Isaac until he could finally work through him—until Isaac's will matched the Lord's will.

I've known parents like Isaac, fundamentally good people who nonetheless insist on decisions that are contrary to the Lord's will for their children. Should the children be open to the Lord, their divinely mandated course of events moves forward anyway—often through other people the Lord sends their way. The parents merely suffer the pain of exclusion and miss the pleasure of participating in their children's growth.

The best way to stop blocking others' growth is to keep growing yourself. Growth means positive change.

More important than the inner power to resist external pressure is the inner power to change external circumstances. Father Lehi explained that we may act on the events of the insecure outer world rather than react to them (see 2 Ne. 2:11). Last year I started thinking about how the fallen, unchanged, natural mind is a natural enemy to just about everyone. So I decided to invite change in my mental habits by controlling the predatory little thoughts, comments, and actions that just seem to roll out—naturally, of course. But self-control was frustrating; I was just blocking expression. I needed new thoughts and feelings.

One day a prayer came into my mind and has stayed. When someone insults or irritates me, I find myself saying: "I do that, too. Heavenly Father, please forgive me as I forgive him or her." The result was amazing. I started experiencing on-the-spot healing and forgetting. Only after a few weeks of this prayer did I realize I was following the Lord's model (see Matt. 6:12).

I wish I could say I've become gracious. I have become less petty, and I'm now trying proactive grace. The other day I received some toxic E-mail from a woman who seems to enjoy sniping. Usually I sort through her spleen for her substance and then push delete. This time I replied immediately, thanking her for the information. After several hours, I received a reply: "You're welcome." Since then her E-mail has been at least civil if not kind. Maybe that's next. We all may nurture our soul by returning grace for spite.

Tender care of our inner lives causes us to be strong, mature, and active; injury or neglect of our inner lives causes us to be weak, immature, and passive. We constantly nurture our inner life through every truth told, prayer prayed, thought devoted, covenant kept, promise honored, tithe paid, sacrifice offered, scripture read, praise given, hand held, abuse withheld, service rendered, sin cleansed.

In the parable of the ten virgins, the five wise virgins could not give their oil—symbolic of the inner life—to the five foolish virgins, nor could the five foolish virgins receive it. Think of this parable in terms of family relations. Each family member can and ultimately must have her or his own inner relationship with the Father—separate from parents', spouse's, or anyone else's relationship. Spiritual power must be developed gradually and personally through a long-term, free-flowing relationship with the Father.

Sometimes parents may wonder if immature, controlling behavior has permanently ruined their important relation- ships and skewed their children's inner vision of God. The Atonement says no. The Atonement says, Give place for the Spirit and start to heal where you are now by letting Christ take you where he is. "No one can go back and make a brand-new start, my Friend. But anyone can start from here and make a brand-new end." [^2]

Grace, power, mercy, and justice are not rewards God will hand out on Judgment Day to those who are strong enough to choose right until they become perfect. They are undeserved gifts for this moment without which we have little power of choice and no chance of perfection. It is useless to think, "I'll get myself straightened out and then God will bless me." Without God we have no power to straighten anything out. Holiness is not the way to Christ. Christ is the way to holiness.

Listen to God's promise of inner life to those who ask, yield, and trust: he will give "exceedingly abundantly above all that we ask or think, accordingly to the power that worketh in us" (Eph. 3:20; emphasis added). "Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need" (Heb. 4:16).

As Elder Merrill J. Bateman reminded us, the Atonement is not only infinite but intimate. [^3] In Tennyson's words: "Closer is he than breathing and nearer than hands and feet." [^4] And in the Lord's own words: "When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; . . . when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned. . . . For I am the Lord thy God . . . thy Saviour. . . . Thou [art] precious in my sight. . . . Fear not: for I am with thee" (Isa. 43:2-5).

Notes

Joann Shields is a Salt Lake City attorney specializing in business litigation. She served a mission in Quebec, Canada, and is a member of the Young Women General Board.

---
Notas:
[^1] Mikhail Lermontov, "The Mermaid," Selected Works (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1978), 29.
[^2] The team had different responsibilities: Dale Cressman was documentary producer; Roger Gunn, production manager; Jennifer Lloyd, Russian culture consultant and translator; Sam Prigg, head videographer; Steve Kingsolver, assistant videographer; Deirdre Paulsen, folklore consultant. Our expedition was funded by the BYU film committee, the College of Fine Arts and Communications, and KBYU. The resulting documentary, "Hidden Memory," first aired on KBYU December 1995.
[^3] The bread-and-salt ceremony is the traditional Russian way to welcome foreigners. In our case, ten to fifteen villagers in peasant costumes met our bus as we entered every village. They sang and offered us flowers. One of the villagers prominently carried an elaborately decorated round loaf of bread on a long, embroidered "towel." I was expected to break off a chunk of this thick-crusted bread and dip it into a small glass containing salt, which perched on top of the bread. The other members of our team then did the same. This ceremony symbolizes hospitality. By offering bread (the staple of life) and salt (long a luxury item), the Russians offered us their finest, assuring us that we would never go hungry while we stayed with them.
[^4] Novosti Press Agency, Yearbook USSR '87 (Moscow, 1987), 163, 167, quoted in Barbara Evans Clements "Later Development," Russia's Women: Accommodations, Resistance, Transformation, ed. Clements et al. (Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1991), 274.
