Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

Russian Women: Gaining Roots, Growing Strong

DEIRDRE M. PAULSEN

So the mermaid she sang, filled with sadness and pain,

With a sorrow she could not explain,

And the stream leapt and danced and rushed noisily on,

And the clouds in its depths whirled and spun.1

These words of Russian poet Mikhail Lermontov express how I felt—the sorrow, the whirling confusion—saying good-bye at the end of my first trip to Russia in 1993. Galina Sysoeva, a Russian folklorist, my guide and friend, was one of a kaleidoscope of Russian women who touched me deeply.

Life is not now, nor has it ever been, easy for these extraordinary women, especially the grandmothers, or babushkas, as they are fondly called. Faced with the Bolshevik Revolution, World War I, Stalin's purges, husbands killed in the Great Patriotic War (World War II), forced starvation in the Ukraine, and meager, if any, pensions, these women have eked out an existence in a third-world country that we had assumed to be our equal. I found myself searching deeply within myself to match their wellsprings of humanity and love. Often I found myself lacking.

As we parted, Galina gave me the beaded necklace she was wearing. Of her own making, the necklace could not be replaced because Russian glass beads are now unavailable in Russia. Deeply moved, I told my translator, Ilya, that I couldn't accept it. Ilya said to me, "When a Russian gives you something, it's from the heart and you must accept." I did, but what could I give in return? I wanted to give my heart, but the closest I could manage were the heart-shaped earrings I was wearing.

On that first visit, Galina invited me to return to Russia to lead a research expedition with her into the villages of southern Russia. If I could go back to see Galina's life work, perhaps the gift I could give her would be the technology to record Russian roots. I knew that Galina, with only pencil and paper, had already recorded more than five hundred songs. With the support of many people at Brigham Young University, I returned with a documentary crew in August 1994.

I had some apprehensions. Galina and I were unified by our common interest in Russian folklore, but how would Russian villagers treat our crew? We were their cold-war rivals, bringing American high technology into the villages. Would Russians resent us? Would they perform for us? Food was scarce. Would we starve? Where would we sleep?

Granola bars in hand, our group ventured into the remote villages in the Southern Black Earth region of Russia, where, we were told, no foreigners had ever set foot. [^1] The Russians' generosity took us by surprise. In every village we were greeted with the same bread-and-salt ceremonies that Alexander Solzhenitsyn received on his return to Russia [^2] and with banquets of food (even though the Russian farmers in this area had not been paid for seven months). Many greeted us with tears and memories of fighting side-by-side with Americans in World War II and joining with us in the victory celebrations after the Battle of the Elbe in Germany. They welcomed us with singing and dancing and with gifts from their walls and their tables. They gave up their beds for us.

Welcoming the visitor is a strong tradition throughout Russia. As Galina explained, "We have a saying—first, you bring a person into your home, feed him, give him something to drink, give him a bath, then you ask why he has come to see you." The villagers' welcome moved us deeply. "Thank you for coming to see us," one elderly babushka said. "We were preparing to die and you have revived us. Finally, something to celebrate!" Another woman volunteered, "We love you. You are such good people. Very good. Just like we are. Our entire world waited for you. We wondered what Americans would be like. And it turns out you are just like us."

Even though these women have suffered much more deprivation than we have, their hopes and dreams for a good family, for religious values, for good friends are the same as ours. And there is hope for these women. I found that already resilient Russian women are finding their lost roots under perestroika and growing stronger emotionally and spiritually, even as conditions in their country deteriorate further.

Mythic Roots: Russia As Mother

I had previously thought of Russia in terms of male figures: the Vikings who conquered in a.d. 860; Vladimir I who brought Christianity in a.d. 988; the Mongol khans, who ruled for 250 years; the Czars, especially Ivan the Terrible and Peter the Great; the Communist leaders—Lenin, Stalin, Brezhnev, Gorbachev, Yeltsin; soldiers marching in Red Square—a very masculine country. Oh, yes, there was Catherine the Great, but I considered her an anomaly.

Yet my experience with Russia was largely feminine. The mayors of the villages were female, the farmers in the countryside were female; in fact, the inhabitants of the villages were predominately female. I have since read that 80 percent of the doctors, 75 percent of teachers, and 82 percent of health care and other social service workers are women. [^3] Women manage the money and the homes. But more than that, as I traveled with Galina, I learned that women are the repositories of tradition and morals. It's the babushkas who are teaching their grandchildren to pray, to sing, and to dance the traditional rituals.

Kubaneva Nina Konstantinova, one of our Russian translators, explained the role of women in Russia: "A large number of men died in the war. . . . Therefore our women value men, spoil them. . . . The second generation of men after the war stopped considering themselves masculine, it seems to me. So women carry a lot of responsibility on their shoulders. They are the leaders here. They fulfill the largest role in the family. . . . Real men that take responsibility for women and their families are very hard to find in Russia." [^4]

Even so, the strength of the Russian women surprised and puzzled me. How did they emerge from a Russia so long controlled by a strong male autocracy? I have since discovered that a Russian tradition of strong women predates the male autocracy. Written records and artifacts indicate that a female divinity was prominent until the twelfth century. [^5]

The Matrioshka doll seems to be a carryover of this great divine female power, a symbol of Mother Russia. Joanna Hubbs, author of Mother Russia, asks, "Who is not familiar with the round and brightly colored Matrioshka doll? She is the most common of all Russian toys. . . . Broken apart at the stomach, she spills out many identical dolls, one inside the other in descending order, until the tiny center doll appears as though it were her youngest. One containing many, she seems ever- fertile." [^6]

Hubbs feels that "more than a doll and a relic from a forgotten past, Matrioshka remains a symbolic embodiment of 'Mother Russia'. Just as the doll is to be found everywhere, . . . the habit of mind which sees the mother as the 'nest' where her children can find refuge and identity remains strong." During my visit, I noted this attachment of the Russians to the country as mother. The land and physical features, even cities, are given "maternal epithets." Huge rivers, for example, are called Matushka Volga or "Little Mother Volga." Mother Kiev is "the city which is popularly called the birth giver," and Mother Moscow "nourished Russia's growth and is identified with her heart." [^7]

Russians give the earth strong motherly attributes. "In the peasant tradition," says Hubbs, "the soil is sacred: The peasants implore 'Mother Moist Earth' for aid in their lives." [^8] Galina told me that her folk group, Lada, performed at Chernobyl eight weeks after the meltdown of the nuclear reactor. Horrified, I asked if they'd worn protective clothing, and of course they hadn't. But Galina reassured me. She'd known they weren't in danger, she said, because she smelled the earth and it smelled fine, and she tasted it and it tasted fine. Needless to say, I was not much reassured, but this incident illustrates the Russian trust in "Mother Moist Earth"—trust that she will sustain them and won't be defiled. In fact, until the early 1900s, peasants would "swallow a mouthful of earth" to seal their oaths, much as we would place our hand on the Bible. [^9] Couples during the same period ate earth to "confirm their union." [^10]

In Russia, respect for Mother Earth extends to respect for all motherhood. The Russians I met accorded me, as a mother of five children, incredible reverence. They would touch me with awe and say, "You are the mother of five children. You are so blessed." These women who had a strong sense of motherhood and a centuries-rooted desire for many children, had few children and repeated abortions so they could meet their heavy, state-mandated work quotas. [^11] When they found out that the Communist state couldn't fulfill its promises, they were far past their childbearing years. They had been duped and felt tremendously cheated.

Yet despite their losses, there was something subconscious, almost mystical, giving these women strength. I now believe the centuries-old Russian myths and folklore, suppressed but not obliterated under Communism, strengthen the Russian woman's view of herself as mother and provider.

Genealogical Roots

A second change to enter the women's lives under perestroika has been the ability to obtain their genealogy. It is one of the great ironies of Russia that the country with one of the longest unbroken chains of traditions allowed Communism to erase that memory. For at least a thousand years, cultural history remained almost unchanged in Russia. The wedding ceremonies, games, songs, musical accompaniment, foods, family organization, and religious beliefs go back to a.d. 1000 and beyond. But the Bolshevik Revolution in 1917 changed all that. Communists not only disrupted the customs and beliefs but forbade memory. That devastated a culture with deep roots in its past and a strong, central family organization that revered its ancestry.

Igor V. Sakharov, president of the recently founded Russian Genealogical Society in Saint Petersburg, told us that "the Communist regime wanted to eliminate memory because memory was dangerous for the regime. If you had a rich grandmother or grandfather, or priests, or officers of the Czar's army, or just an educated person in your family tree, that was a reason for discrimination and repression. So everybody tried to hide their own past." Old personal documents and letters were burned, portraits and photographs destroyed, family relics hidden, and surnames even changed to obliterate family connections. "That is why most Russians now do not know anything about their family roots and do not even understand that there could have been anything interesting to know."

Sakharov remembers: "Sometimes, [the government] would eliminate an entire mass of documents." Many people destroyed their personal archives: "In this manner there was a massive elimination of documented memories. . . . Never have so many people disappeared, because you can kill people by forgetting them. To forget a person is to destroy a person. . . . The result is that people are left without roots. A person without roots isn't complete. He's somewhat ill and maybe even very ill." Sakharov worries that Russia is now "facing a profound cultural, intellectual, moral, and spiritual rupture, a gap between modern generations and the generations of our fathers. The people were cut off from their roots. We now observe in Russia a loss of historical memory, a disease which can be called historical amnesia." [^12]

As Sakharov noted, most people in Russia think they are descended from peasants, because under Communism that was the only safe group to be related to. Since perestroika, however, many have found out that they are really descended from nobility, the intellectual class, or from clerics. A case in point is Nina Bazarskaya, a professor at the Institute of Forestry in Voronezh. Nina's grandfather on her father's side joined the Russian Orthodox clergy when he was in his thirties to protest atrocities against the church. In the 1930s, under Stalin's regime, he and his uncles and his great-grandfather, who was in his nineties, were exiled to northern Siberia, where they all died.

Nina's father was seventeen when his father was imprisoned, and the experience affected the rest of his life. He became a forester so he didn't have to fill out a lot of official forms and for half the year could be in the forest where no one cared about his origins. He never, ever talked about his father, and Nina wondered why. Only recently her father showed her the last letter her grandfather had written from the camps before he died. It was a "great psychological shock to read a letter from a man who was doomed to death just because he was a priest in the Russian Orthodox faith," says Nina. Yet learning of her progenitors filled her with pride and with a great feeling of completeness. [^13]

Valentin Rasputin, one of Russia's finest writers of the post-Stalinist period, wrote: "Truth is in memory. The person without memory is without life." [^14] Russians are slowly having their memories and their lives restored. This memory is giving them tremendous strength—strength they very much need to deal with the political and economic hardships in Russia. Finally they are gaining a sense of connectedness.

Folk Roots

The revival of folk and religious customs is also bringing new meaning to Russian women's lives. Many women in their seventies, eighties, and nineties are finally free to share their historical past and collective memory now that the Iron Curtain has fallen. In fourteen small villages throughout rural Russia, we recorded these babushkas as they struggled to recall exactly how a ritual used to be performed and how a song was sung. This was their way of resurrecting the Russian soul.

From Galina I knew that folk traditions still existed but that the Communist regime had forbidden their practice. Communist leaders despised traditions and rituals, which they felt linked people to a past of prejudice and superstition—a burden to a new society. So I was amazed to see how many traditional songs had been preserved; how many dances were still being danced; how many hundred-year-old costumes had been carefully tucked away; and how many festive rituals had been continually performed in secret.

Villager Natalia Chertova says, "These songs purify the Russian soul. There are happy songs, sad songs, spiritual songs. . . . When you sing an old song your soul is resurrected." To explain this resurgence of traditional folklore, Galina uses the metaphor of a tree, which was cut down, its roots covered by asphalt. The Russian soul was never killed, she insists. The roots were simply covered by the asphalt of Communism: "Where traditions are strong, they give new sprout."

Accustomed to the pseudofolklore promoted under the Soviets, even Galina hadn't known much about what she now identifies as "authentic folklore." In 1987 she visited the rural villages to learn songs to teach her choir in Voronezh, one of the larger cities in Russia, but "what they sang in the villages and what they sang on the [city] stage were completely different art forms."

Since then, Galina has devoted her life and her family's sparse finances to the preservation of "authentic culture," including buying old costumes and establishing a private museum, perhaps the only one in Russia, so that her fellow Russians can rediscover their roots. She and her husband had been saving for five years to buy a television, when she came upon some very old regional costumes. When she told her husband, he urged her, "Take the money and buy the costumes. . . . A TV we'll buy in five years. . . . A TV doesn't have any value. It's a diversion." Galina feels the urgency of her mission: "These carriers of folklore—they are dying. In another five years or so, these people will be gone."

On our visits I was especially impressed by the villagers' houses. Inside and out, they were painted bright colors with fanciful designs, such as snowmen or flowers. Their ancestors had embroidered nature symbols on the sleeves of their costumes to protect the wearers from evil. These same symbols were on the linen towels they draped around their icons and family pictures. Their beds were high off the ground, often curtained, and always had two huge, heavily embroidered pillows. (We never did figure out how to sleep on the pillows.)

We were humbled to learn that the villagers had anticipated the visit of "rich Americans" with embarrassment, thinking we would look down on their homes and their villages and their lives. Far from it. We agreed with Galina: "They [the villagers] are an amazing example of how to live beautifully. Even under difficult conditions, they don't wait for someone to make their world beautiful. They do it themselves."

Religious Roots

For older Russians, reestablishing roots means a return to Russian Orthodoxy—rebuilding the Russian Orthodox churches, finding the icons or painting new ones, teaching the grandchildren the tenets of the faith. In the area we visited, old maps attest to the density of churches whose onion domes used to sparkle along the Don River. Galina explains, "To conquer faith . . . [the Communists] destroyed churches, which were at the center of our culture." So for Galina Sysoeva and most Russians, a search for spiritual as well as cultural roots includes returning to the Orthodox faith.

Knowing her concerns, I asked Galina if she resented other religions coming which threatened traditional ways. "I have thought a lot about that question," she answered. "At first it did bother me. And I still think that for the older people, you can't separate their souls, the Russian soul, from the Orthodox church. But for the younger people, who have had spiritual and moral values torn away from them by the state, any religion is a blessing, and so, for them, I welcome new religions."

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is one of the "new" religions that has recently begun proselyting in Russia. Latter-day Saint missionaries entered Russia from Finland in 1989. Today there are six missions, a dramatic growth of the Church. What kind of people are joining the LDS Church in Russia? They are strong and dedicated, and many have struggled because Russian Orthodoxy and Russia are so closely linked. For every Russian, "to change religion is a great process, a very difficult process, the process of moral torture," said Professor Nina Bazarskaya, the first Latter-day Saint convert in Voronezh. "You need to think it over, again and again, to think if you're doing right."

Nina first learned of the Church through Trevor McKee, a BYU professor whom she met at a conference near Moscow and invited to lecture in Voronezh. She took him to the Easter ceremony, the greatest festival in the Russian Orthodox Church. "Even though the lights, the music, the golden robes were wonderful," she says, "I couldn't feel the Spirit." The BYU professor encouraged her to attend an LDS church meeting held by students he had brought with him to teach English to Russian preschoolers. Nina records: "When I came to this meeting, the moment I entered the room, I felt the Spirit. This to me was my personal revelation."

Feeling, however, as if she were betraying her grandfather who had died in exile in Siberia for his Russian Orthodox beliefs, Nina went to the country for three days and prayed. Finally, she received assurance that her relatives were loyal to the only truth they had at the time, but that she needn't feel guilty for leaving the Russian Orthodox faith in searching for greater truth. It was a confirmation she desperately needed before she could join the LDS Church. [^15]

Larissa Kolotneva, a young LDS Russian student who translated for us, recently sent me her testimony. "Now I am a seminary teacher and I am so very happy! I read the scriptures every day and I thank my Heavenly Father for talking to me. The Gospel is very simple: Seek pure things and you will be happy. Things we cannot do, the Lord will do for us if we stay worthy. I know that." [^16] Larissa closes our last correspondence with, "I love you very much and all my brothers and sisters in the gospel all over the world."

I love these wonderfully warm and strong Russian women who are relishing discovering their roots. Erasing "historical amnesia" is not easy—it has been a painful yet jubilant process of Russians merging recollections to achieve a collective memory.

Notes

Nina Bzarskaya will be a plenary speaker at the 1996 Women's Conference at BYU.

Galina Sysoeva and fifteen of her students from the Voronezh Institute of Art have formed a group called "Volya" or "Freedom." They have been invited by the Springville Folkfest (Springville, Utah) and the Red Butte Gardens (Salt Lake City, Utah) to perform July 1997.

Deirdre Murray Paulsen teaches folklore classes at Brigham Young University in Salt Lake Center and serves as a writing consultant and the Writing Fellows Director at BYU. She and her husband, David Finn Paulsen, are the parents of five children. Deirdre and David teach the Young Single Adult Sunday School class in their stake.

---
Notas:
[^1] Mikhail Lermontov, "The Mermaid," Selected Works (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1978), 29.
[^2] The team had different responsibilities: Dale Cressman was documentary producer; Roger Gunn, production manager; Jennifer Lloyd, Russian culture consultant and translator; Sam Prigg, head videographer; Steve Kingsolver, assistant videographer; Deirdre Paulsen, folklore consultant. Our expedition was funded by the BYU film committee, the College of Fine Arts and Communications, and KBYU. The resulting documentary, "Hidden Memory," first aired on KBYU December 1995.
[^3] The bread-and-salt ceremony is the traditional Russian way to welcome foreigners. In our case, ten to fifteen villagers in peasant costumes met our bus as we entered every village. They sang and offered us flowers. One of the villagers prominently carried an elaborately decorated round loaf of bread on a long, embroidered "towel." I was expected to break off a chunk of this thick-crusted bread and dip it into a small glass containing salt, which perched on top of the bread. The other members of our team then did the same. This ceremony symbolizes hospitality. By offering bread (the staple of life) and salt (long a luxury item), the Russians offered us their finest, assuring us that we would never go hungry while we stayed with them.
[^4] Novosti Press Agency, Yearbook USSR '87 (Moscow, 1987), 163, 167, quoted in Barbara Evans Clements "Later Development," Russia's Women: Accommodations, Resistance, Transformation, ed. Clements et al. (Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1991), 274.
[^5] Kubaneva Nina Konstantinova, interview with the author, Voronezh, Russia, August 1994.
[^6] Joanna Hubbs, Mother Russia: Feminine Myth in Russian Culture (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1988), 11-12.
[^7] Hubbs, xi.
[^8] Hubbs, xii-xiii.
[^9] Hubbs, xiii-xiv.
[^10] Linda J. Ivanits, Russian Folk Belief (New York: M. E. Sharpe, Inc., 1989), 15.
[^11] Olga Semyonova Tian Shanskaia, Village Life in Late Tsarist Russia, trans. and ed. David L. Ransel (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1993), 167.
[^12] Neither the Communist state nor the Russian government has ever restricted family size as has, for example, China. On the contrary, the government has tried to ban abortion in an effort to increase family size. There is a continuing concern in Russia about declining population. So why did the peasant women I interviewed have few children? Susan Bridger in her 1983 article "Soviet Rural Women: Employment and Family Life," reprinted in Russian Peasant Women, ed. Beatrice Farnsworth and Lynne Viola (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992), 289, explains this seeming contradiction: "In its anxiety to raise the birthrate, the state is putting pressure on women with heavy commitments at work and in the home to have more children. At the same time, little effort is being made to challenge the apathy and inertia of men within the family. Inevitably, many women clearly resent the burdens placed upon them and see the restriction of their family size as the only way to obtain a manageable workload."
[^13] Igor V. Sakharov, interview with Jennifer Lloyd, Saint Petersburg, Russia, August 1994.
[^14] Nina Bazarskaya, interview with author, Voronezh, Russia, August 1994.
[^15] Valentin Rasputin, Farewell to Matyora (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1991), 181.
[^16] Nina Bazarskaya, interview with author, Salt Lake City, Utah, July 1994.
