Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

ELAINE W. CHRISTENSEN

She was learning German that year, a war bride, living in Darmstadt, trying to say ich in the back of her throat, the guttural r of Herr and Frau, to introduce herself and her lieutenant husband, pursing her lips to form the strange vowel sounds of umlaut u and o, the difficult blends of pf in Apfel and zw in zwei. Years later, when I studied German, these sounds surprised me, shaping themselves on my tongue as easily as a baby finds its fist and sucks. That spring she sat long hours at the piano, exercising her fingers with Hanon first, then Mozart. When each finger knew its strength, she played Chopin. When her hands reached the octave with ease, Beethoven followed. Closing her music and her eyes, she'd finish with Rachmaninoff, each finger an emotion, each key its release. The fortes, the pianissimos, each rallentando pulsed in me and I knew before I was born I would hunger, I would hate, I would fear, I would seek sorrow. That summer as August approached and she grew awkward, swelling with the heat, my mother stood evenings at the window wishing some breath of the river might move in the heavy draperies, might ease her longing for blue mountains, for arched skies of home. Here the sky spread like a flat sheet from one corner of the horizon to the other. She wished for blue, anything blue. She said my eyes were her wish granted. When I saw her mountains, the sky, chips of blue glass in every window, I cried. I knew this was home, like an infant knows, still slick and bloody, to turn its head toward the sound of its mother's voice.

Elaine W. Christensen, recipient of the Utah Poet of the Year award in 1990 for her book At the Edges, received her bachelor's degree from Utah State University in German and English. She and her husband, Roger P. Christensen, have five children. Elaine teaches Gospel Doctrine in her ward and is an institute instructor at Salt Lake Community College.
