Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

Seeking the Will of God: Bit by Bit by Bit

PAM KAZMAIER

When I was asked to discuss seeking God's will in decision making, I was sure I should say no. I had just been watching the news on CNN, and interest rates and the stock market were falling. My husband and I had prayerfully invested five thousand dollars in the stock that was plummeting. Obviously, I'm not a good decision maker, I thought. I was waiting for an opening in the conversation so I could say no. Then my knees started shaking just as they do before I bear my testimony on fast Sunday at church. I felt I was supposed to say yes—that I was supposed to tell of my recent experience in making the hardest decision of my life: I quit my career as a nurse to stay at home with my two small children.

Please understand, I'm not advocating that all women should quit their jobs to stay home with their children— especially after having done it for two years. I thought I worked hard as a nurse—but being a mother is the hardest thing I've ever done.

Let me explain why this decision was so difficult. I grew up in Illinois. I was completely ignorant about Latter-day Saints. I thought they all wore black and lived in the Rocky Mountains. I was reared by a mother who was a feminist back in the fifties before that term was coined. She reared my two sisters and me not to marry or have children but to get an education and have a career. My father did not disagree.

At the age of eighteen, I entered a convent, largely because I didn't want to worry about being married and having children. I valued my mother's teachings and was afraid that if I went to college, I'd fall in love, get married, and have children. A convent seemed a good place to avoid all that.

The scriptures are another strong reason I entered the convent; they are also the reason I left. The longer I was in the convent, the more I read the scriptures and prayed, the more I felt the Holy Spirit tell me that I was in the wrong place. I didn't understand that then. I do now. I was in the wrong place there; I was supposed to be here.

So even though being a nun was a wonderful part of my life, after four years, I left the convent. Making that decision was very tough. I had never taken my commitment lightly. While I was a nun, I began nurse's training in earnest. I loved nursing—and I am not talking about breast-feeding. To tell the truth, I do not do nursing babies well, but I was a great nurse. I loved the nursing profession and thought I would never leave it. I started at fourteen as a candy striper and completed my training in 1977 after I had left the convent.

I was not like young Latter-day Saint women who are taught eternal values early and are groomed to marry in the temple and be wives and mothers. Those were all foreign ideas to me. But at twenty-eight I did marry. Like me, my husband Kevin supported the idea of women working and believed they should be independent. At the time of our marriage, Kevin and I decided not to have children because they'd get in the way of our work. His career came first; my career came first. It was a great match. To you, career first, family second sounds very foreign, but to us in the world, that attitude was very common.

I loved everything about the hospital—the smell, the excitement. It was just a great place; it felt like home. I joined the Church because of people I met there. I found myself taking care of patients who were different from anybody I had ever met. They were amazing; I wanted to be like them. These patients had something I didn't have—peace. I was attracted to their strength in crisis, their family unity. They were mannerly and polite, well-groomed and refined. To me, my conversion experience was a miracle. I joined the Church in Mesa, Arizona, and my life changed.

My patriarchal blessing said, "There are spirits reserved in the heavens so that you and your husband can have children." I thought, Yeah, right. These Mormons have all these children. Not me. Then, a year and a half later, my husband joined the Church, and his patriarchal blessing said, "There are still spirits reserved in heaven so that you and your wife can have children." "Oh, Kevin," I said, "I think we've got to have these children. Oh no." And so we did. We sold our Corvette and bought a family car. And here we are. At thirty-five I had my first little boy, and then at thirty-seven I had another.

I still never considered quitting work, though. I thought having the children was going to be enough. Then I had a run-in with a little pink pamphlet—Mothers of Zion. I hear it made quite a stir in the Church when it came out, but it didn't faze me because I didn't have any children then. When I first saw it, I thought, Oh yeah, right, uh-huh, very good, and I shelved it. It wasn't about me. But then one day my husband said, seeing me wrestle with motherhood and work, "Maybe you ought to think about quitting work." Ha! Quit work? He could just as well have said, "Maybe you ought to cut off your legs." I loved my job—and I was very good at it. I couldn't cook. I couldn't sew. I can't sing. I can't do anything. But give me a chest pain, and I know what to do.

I told my husband I would pray about quitting work, fully thinking the Lord would say, "Of course you can't quit your job. It's a vocation; it's a calling. You and I have done this for twenty years. You can't quit. People are waiting for you in the hospital." So I just prayed, "Okay, Lord, this is what Kevin thinks, but you and I both know . . ." and then on like that. I got up from my knees and never thought another thing about it. Here's the lesson: When you wrestle with questions like, Should I marry him/Should I not marry him? Should I move? Should I go back to school? remember this. When I have been about to go down the wrong path and take others with me, the Lord has intervened if I have stayed close to him.

The next day, this pink pamphlet that had been shelved for four years was hanging out of my bookshelves. My husband doesn't get up in my bookshelves. My kids were too little. And I hadn't been in that section—that was the dusty section. But the pink pamphlet was hanging out. That's the miracle. How did that happen? I had ten minutes before I left for work—I was never late for work—so I thought, Okay, I've got ten minutes to read this thing. There is something in here about mothers working. (That's how much attention I had paid to it when I first got it.) I thought, I'm going to read something in here that will prove to Kevin that I should keep on working. So I started reading the pamphlet, and before I knew it I was crying. I read, "No more sacred word exists in secular or holy writ than that of mother. There is no more noble work than that of a good and God-fearing mother." [^1] It went on and on—"a mother's role is God-ordained." Oh, brother! I thought. I'm sunk. I cried all the way to work.

I had great babysitters. My kids were in better hands with them than they were with me. The sitters had play dough and children's tapes and other kids running around, and everybody was happy. I left our children with the babysitter on the way to work and said, "Yes! I'm out of here. I'm going someplace where I know what I'm doing." But this day I drove to work sobbing.

I'm not like Abraham, who could immediately sacrifice Isaac the very next morning. I couldn't tell my head nurse, "I read this article and . . ." It took weeks and weeks, months and months. It was a very gradual change for me. I got home that night and thought, Sure, women are supposed to leave working at McDonald's and the dry cleaners, but I have this important calling of the Lord to be a nurse. So I checked in with the pamphlet again, only to read, "Finally President Kimball counsels, 'I beg of you, you who could and should be bearing and rearing a family: wives come home from the typewriter, the laundry, the nursing [emphasis added].'" I was devastated, shattered.

I began to pray with real intent this time. For months I prayed about it. I was on my knees to the Lord saying, "Lord, how can you expect me to give up something I am so good at to do something I am so bad at?" It didn't make any sense to me. And I heard the voice of the Lord: "I am just asking you to do something else now." I was speechless. I knew it was the voice of the Lord. It was that still, small voice I had read about in the scriptures. I thought, Oh, he wants me to do something else now. It isn't like he didn't appreciate all those years of service. He's asking me to do something else now.

I pondered that. That month I taught a Relief Society lesson in my ward and found a quotation from Harold B. Lee in the lesson materials that really helped. It began, "You may not like what comes from the authority of the Church." [^2] Well, thank you for giving me at least that permission, I thought. Yes, I don't like what has come from the authority of the Church. "It may contradict your political views." I'm a member of NOW, the National Organization of Women, and yes, this contradicts my political views. "It may contradict your social views. It may interfere with some of your social life." No kidding. Stuck home with two little kids, my husband's gone half the time, all my friends are at work. The hospital is my social life. Then President Lee goes on to say, "But if you listen to these things, as if from the mouth of the Lord himself, with patience and faith . . . " In other words, I didn't have to do it right away. I was so glad he let me wean myself from full time, to part time, to on call. That is how my testimony has grown—bit by bit by bit.

The final step came for me one night when I came home after only four hours at the hospital. I drove into my driveway and saw my husband, my dear husband whom I love, outside speaking to our next-door neighbor. It was dark and cold. It gets that way in Arizona in the evenings even though it's hot during the days. There were my two little boys, barefoot and dirty. In wet T-shirts with their hair all caked, they looked like orphans. I just left four hours ago, I thought. How can they look this bad already? When I'm home I line those kids up just like my IV fluids. I organize them, and they are in bed and asleep by eight o'clock. They would have had their little jammies on and their baths and their prayers and their stories and their teethies brushed and everything.

It was not the moment to discuss with Kevin the differences in our parenting styles. So I went into the house, put down my stethoscope, rolled up my sleeves, and tore into the disaster area that used to be the kitchen. And I once again heard the calm voice, not my own, say in my mind, "There are others who can take your place at work, but there is no one who can take your place here." And I said, "No kidding!" Just like that. Out loud. I wasn't feeling at all spiritual at the time, so when I heard the voice of the Lord, I just said, "No kidding! No kidding."

As I said, I am no Abraham. Months had gone by since I had begun praying about work. It wasn't until the next week that I woke up one morning with the thought, I'm going to quit my job today. I need to tell Kevin. One day each week Kevin takes the kids to the sitter, and we spend the whole day together—we have lunch, go to a movie, even have an uninterrupted conversation. "Kevin," I said on this particular morning, "when you come back from taking the kids, I've got something to tell you." He didn't know that I'd been brooding about work for months and months.

Kevin was my last hurdle. He really liked my salary, really liked the fact that I was working. If there was some way I could convince him . . . I was on my knees in prayer right there by the bathtub after he left, praying, "Heavenly Father, I've got to quit today, and I don't know how to do it. I don't know how I'm going to tell Kevin, and you've got to help me."

When Kevin came home, I was sobbing. I felt like somebody had died. Kevin came in and said, "The Holy Spirit told me on the way home in the truck. You're going to quit your job today." I was so grateful to Heavenly Father for hearing my prayer so I didn't have to tell Kevin. I nodded and cried some more, and Kevin said, "It's okay. Let 'em go pound sand." I don't know what that means, but those were his words.

"How do I do this?" I asked. "I've never quit a job. I've been there at this hospital for eleven years. I love nursing. Over twenty years I've been a nurse. I don't know how to do this."

"Well, you need to go tell your head nurse."

"Yeah. Go tell the head nurse. Okay." So we got in the car and drove to the hospital. I sobbed all the way up the stairs to the sixth floor. I didn't even care who saw me. I couldn't stop crying. Doctors and patients wondered what in the world was wrong. Thank goodness my head nurse was in her office. I blurted out, "Sally, I've got to quit my job." And then she was crying and I was crying, and it was awful, just awful. But I did it. That was two years ago this week, and I am still alive.

I wish I could stand before you and say, "I just love the little ones—they're five and three now. I just love their laundry and the peanut butter and the spilled popsicles. I'm just having so much fun with my children." I really am not having fun.

What I miss most are the angels singing for me at the end of my shift. Many times when something critical happened during my shift, like a patient hemorrhaging or a difficult delivery, when I walked out to the car after work about one o'clock in the morning, I could hear the angels sing for me. I felt they were grateful. They applauded for how I had helped. These past two years I haven't heard them sing for me one time. But I know that twenty years from now they're going to sing for me again. I know they will.

And I know I am doing the right thing now, too. At times, even with very little children, you can actually get a conversation of some sort going or experience some kind of spiritual feeling with them. When that happens, I'll look at my watch and realize, I would have been counting narcotics. I would have missed this. It's not just my body that's at home now; my mind is there, too. Even when I was working part time or on call, my mind was at the hospital. I'd call the hospital, "You want me to come in? How's it going?" Because I am home day in and day out now, answering questions and being there for them, I know my children have a peace in their lives that wasn't there before.

In Matt. 6:33, the Savior instructs: "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you." If he had not said "first," wouldn't that be easier? Wouldn't it be great if he'd said, "Seek ye third the kingdom of God"? Wouldn't that be a lot more convenient? But he says, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God." Seeking the kingdom of God first is hard. Usually I find I have to sacrifice something of the world to do it. Right now, that means putting my ambitions aside for my children.

Notes

Pam Kazmaier enjoyed hospital nursing for twenty years. Now she and her husband, Kevin Craig Kazmaier, are the parents of two active boys. Pam teaches an even more active Sunbeam class in her ward.

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph F. Smith, Improvement Era 7 (December 1904): 135.
[^2] Rex D. Pinegar, "Truth Is the Best Treatment," AMCAP Journal 9 (October 1983): 8.
