Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

"Be a Specialist Yourself in the Truth"

NANCY ROLLINS AHLANDER

As a young mother, I spent considerable effort and energy seeking out good books about parenting and family relations. In fact, one day one of my children, himself a great reader of Little House books, commented, "Mother, why don't you read something you enjoy?" I answered, "But I do enjoy this." I'm that kind of seeker; I enjoy learning—even without suspense, a good plot, exotic settings, or dashing characters. When my children were older, I worked my way, a few college credit hours at a time, toward a master's degree. I entered the halls of academia thinking, Now I'm going to find truth. I'm going to sort through theories with the pros.

My initial excitement soon waned. Each theory I encountered in my first two classes seemed to have some truth, much obvious untruth, and some ideas I could not sort into either camp. In learning about the authors of various theories, I was disheartened to discover that many of them led lives counter not only to gospel teaching but seemingly to their own theories as well. How could I give credence to their theories?

I asked a Latter-day Saint faculty member, counselor, and friend to help me sort things out from an LDS perspective. Although my friend was warm and empathetic, his response did not give me peace. I was searching for the true theory, the one that fit LDS beliefs; he insisted there was no such thing. In fact, LDS counselors could and did practice from any and all the various theories.

Compounding my frustration that semester, my skills lab teacher strongly advocated a theory I didn't like. Although the intent of the lab class was to experience a variety of counseling methods, she imposed her preferences, perhaps innocently, on the class. She believed a counselor should never self-disclose. But doesn't self-disclosure—sharing part of myself—help people open up to me? I wondered. She also denounced touching, hugging, and a nurturing stance as "infantilizing" and never appropriate in a counseling situation. But weren't there appropriate occasions when warmth and a hug might help others feel valued and trusted?

That semester was excruciating. Not only did I not find an indisputably true theory in theory class, but the one I had formed for myself was being crucified in skills lab. I felt as if I were sitting on a three-legged stool, with first one leg and then another being systematically kicked out from under me. My continuing studies eventually helped me replace the legs on my tottering stool.

First, I learned that experts disagree with each other. For nearly every person with scholarly credentials who takes a strong position on a certain subject, another with equally impressive scholarly credentials takes the opposite position on the very same issue. In fact, Neal Postman, a scholar in the field of education, has confessed that he and his coauthor and friend are often tempted, on finishing a book, to add as the last line "And vice versa!" They know that they could make a strong scholarly case for the opposing view as well.

Consider the current debates on family change as an example. With more teenage pregnancies, unwed mothers, divorce, single-parent families, stepfamilies, cohabitation, and same-sex partners, nobody questions that the family is changing. The disagreement centers on whether the changes signal family decline or simply family change, perhaps even an improvement allowing for more diversity and tolerance. Scholars studying families occupy every position on the continuum from those who predict disaster unless trends are reversed to those who celebrate the family's demise, bidding good riddance to an institution that was always oppressive to women and children anyway. More moderate positions range everywhere in between. Learning that even experts disagree and that a scholarly, well-reasoned case can be made for just about any position was a valuable lesson for me.

Second, in the course of my studies, I also discovered that scholars and experts change their minds. In fact, over the course of their careers, they may change their minds several times and in radical ways. For example, Jay Belsky, a brilliant child development scholar, early in his career championed the mainstream view that day care not only does not harm, but in some cases helps a child. Later in his career, after reviewing all the available research and conducting some of his own, Dr. Belsky published his new, politically unpopular opinion. In essence, his analysis showed that children under the age of one year who are in day care for more than twenty hours a week are at risk for a variety of negative effects. Scholars, especially intellectually honest scholars, change their minds.

This brings me to my third discovery. Research scholars ask questions based on fundamental assumptions. For example, a researcher would never ask, "How long does it take to teach a cow to talk?" or "How much fertilizer is needed to promote rock growth?" A fundamental assumption that cows don't talk and rocks don't grow eliminates those questions. But not all assumptions are as universally held or based on apparent realities like those are. For instance, if you assume that humans evolved from lower species, you ask different research questions from those you ask if you believe that humans had a premortal existence and are children of God. A scholar's assumptions shape both the questions asked and the interpretation of research findings. For instance, teenage pregnancies are increasing. So are sex education programs in schools. The assumptions some scholars bring to their research may lead them to believe that inadequate sex education in the schools has contributed to the problem of teenage pregnancy. Another set of assumptions could draw an alternate inference, however, that earlier and earlier exposure to sexual information without a moral context gives rise to the problem.

For me, these few examples of conflicting opinions illustrate not the uselessness of parenting books and resources or the foolishness of social science, my chosen field, but rather how knowing a little about the process of scholarship can help us in the search for truth and in our desire to be the best possible parent or grandparent.

Joseph F. Smith has advised: "Let love and peace, and the spirit of the Lord, kindness, charity, sacrifice for others, abound in your families. Banish harsh words, envyings, hatreds, evil speaking, obscene language and innuendo, blasphemy, and let the Spirit of God take possession of your hearts. Teach to your children these things, in spirit and power, sustained and strengthened by personal practice. Let them see that you are earnest, and practice what you preach. Do not let your children out to specialists in these things, but teach them by your own precept and example, by your own fireside. Be a specialist yourself in the truth." [^1] In that spirit, let me share with you some of the questions I have learned to ask as I read expert parenting advice to keep me from being "tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine" (Eph. 4:14).

First and foremost, I consciously impose my LDS assumptions as I evaluate expert advice. I ask, Is this in harmony with gospel principles? For example, most marriage and family college textbooks advise young people to experiment with several different lifestyle options, including cohabitation and same-sex unions, as preparation for marriage. When expert advice so blatantly opposes gospel principles, I take comfort in the words of Elder Rex D. Pinegar spoken to a group of LDS counselors: "Everything that came to me I had to measure against the gospel of Jesus Christ, and if it didn't fit, then I had two choices—I could put it into one of two categories, the discarded category or the set-it-over-here category, because I may not quite have been able to understand yet. But I did not adopt it until after I found out where it fit, and if it didn't fit, I found myself absolutely free to discard it." [^2] So I ask myself, Does this advice invite me to do good, to deal justly, to walk uprightly? (see D&C 11:12).

Answering that question is fairly easy. A little tougher question is, What assumptions is this author making about human growth and development, or the nature of human relations, that allow him or her to make these recommendations or draw these conclusions? Some authors outline their underlying, fundamental assumptions in a preface; they want you to know up front where they're coming from. Others don't tell you. You may have to note patterns in their ideas or read between the lines. To help me do that, I ask myself, How else can I interpret this? and What does someone else say about this? I read other scholars. I ask other people's opinions. And I cultivate a healthy skepticism about statistics: As a friend once warned me, "Torture numbers long enough, and they'll confess to anything you want to hear."

Many years ago, I was part of a neighborhood book club. At one meeting, the younger mothers were almost in tears over a parenting book we had chosen to read together. The author's assumption was that a child's personality is set by the age of five. That leads to the conclusion that if you mess up as a parent during those first crucial years, it's over for your child. The prevailing emotion of several of our group was, "I've ruined my child." Fortunately, that month I had dipped into my stockpile of garage sale and used-book purchases to sample a few other books on the same subject. "Now wait," I said. "Let's see what someone else thinks about this." So I shared with them ideas from some other books. We found other ways to look at things. You can do that too, with or without a book club.

Another question I ask myself is, How does this advice or research compare with my experience? We live in a world of scientific advances and advantages, experts and specialists; to some extent we have been socialized to look to science for more and better answers. I had for many years felt that if my experience differed from what I read in a book, I should trust the expert. Now, however, I don't substitute expertise for my own experience; instead, I measure expertise by my experience. [^3]

I am always careful, though, to separate description from prescription. Let me explain what I mean. Sometimes when I read over-the-counter advice books, the first few chapters will describe my own situation perfectly. I'll find myself saying, "That's me! That's just like me! Did they read my journal?" Because they describe my situation so accurately, I can get into dangerous territory if I accept the implications they draw as true or the prescriptions for changing the situation as good. For example, after describing my situation, the expert may tell me: "Now, take a foam baseball bat and beat the chair while imagining the person you are mad at sitting there." This expert advice, I guarantee you, is not in harmony with gospel teachings.

Having said that, I should reemphasize that I'm not against research, social science, and scholarly expertise. We know from scripture that we are to become acquainted with all good books (see D&C 90:15). And not all good books are written by LDS General Authorities. President Howard W. Hunter, citing Elder Orson F. Whitney, has taught us that many good people outside the Church, "possessing profundity of thought, great wisdom, and a desire to uplift their fellows, have been sent by the Almighty into many nations to give them . . . [a] portion of the truth." [^4] Elder Neal A. Maxwell cautions that "the LDS scholar has his citizenship in the kingdom, but carries his passport into the professional world, not the other way around." [^5] Your passport into the world of experts is your righteousness, your goodness, and the doctrines of the kingdom. Take that with you in your study of worldly philosophies and you can be inspired and have questions answered by some of these books. I have learned a great deal from insightful, moral family scholars such as Robert Bellah or Jean Elshtain or Parker Palmer and numerous others. [^6]

As you ponder, study, sift, and pray to find insights, be prepared for spiritual answers that seem to contradict the experts. For example, one summer my daughter, who had been babysitting a lot, began missing money out of her drawer. I didn't suspect the older children—they had their own money—but two younger ones were candidates. I talked to both of them, gave them an opportunity to confess. They both determinedly professed their innocence. The money, however, kept disappearing. It was really creating a problem in our family, and I was at my wit's end. I knew that experts say never to accuse a child unless you are sure (good, sound advice!). So I prayerfully said, "Heavenly Father, I need to solve this problem, and you know who's taking the money." When I asked to know who it was, the name of one of my children came into my mind. I went to that child, in full confidence, and said, "I know you've been taking the money." He said, "How do you know that?" And I said, "I just know." He admitted, "You're right," opening the way for us to talk out the problem. My behavior went totally against expert advice, yet it worked because my insight came from a higher source.

The last discovery I've made, and the most important piece of advice I can pass on, is to enjoy your children. Researchers, after studying children before the age of five and then twenty years later, have found that "the most important influence in their lives—dwarfing all others—was how much their parents, especially their mothers, had loved them, had enjoyed them, and had shown affection for them." [^7] Sometimes we feel so anxious about how they are turning out, or what kind of a job we're doing, that we can't stop the teeth gritting long enough to actually enjoy the dailiness (and sometimes mayhem) of family life. They will grow up. So in the meantime be patient with yourself, laugh and relax and enjoy your children. All the best "specialists" do.

Notes

Robert N. Bellah, Richard Madsen, William M. Sullivan, Ann Swidler, and Steven M. Tipton, Habits of the Heart: Individualism and Commitment in American Life (New York: Harper & Row, 1985).

Parker J. Palmer, To Know As We Are Known: A Spirituality of Education (San Francisco: Harper Collins, 1983).

David Blankenhorn, Steven Bayme, and Jean Bethke Elshtain, eds., Rebuilding the Nest: A New Commitment to the American Family (Milwaukee, Wis.: Family Service America, 1990). This is a wonderful collection of essays, including one by Bruce Hafen, all having in common an acknowledgment of the moral dimension of family life.

Nancy Rollins Ahlander has a Ph.D. in family studies from Brigham Young University and is on the family science faculty at Ricks College. The mother of seven children, she teaches Home and Family Education in her ward Relief Society.

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph F. Smith, Improvement Era 7 (December 1904): 135.
[^2] Rex D. Pinegar, "Truth Is the Best Treatment," AMCAP Journal 9 (October 1983): 8.
[^3] I owe this insight to my friend and associate Dr. Terence D. Olson of the BYU Family Science Department.
[^4] Howard W. Hunter, "The Gospel—a Global Faith," Ensign, Nov. 1991, 19, citing Orson F. Whitney, in Conference Report, Apr. 1921, 32-33.
[^5] Neal A. Maxwell, "Some Thoughts on the Gospel and the Behavioral Sciences," Ensign, July 1976, 70.
[^6] I would recommend the following books by some of these authors:
[^7] Diane E. Papailla and Sally Wendkos Olds, A Child's World: Infancy through Adolescence, 6th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993), 356.
