Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

My Last Visit

ELISA PULIDO

The last time my grandparents came to visit we found Grandma in Mother's closet searching through skirts and dresses for the front door. And afterwards, when we visited their ranch, we found that Grandma's raisin cakes refused to rise for want of baking powder and that she put her best red glasses into the hutch still greasy and crusted with last night's meal. And she now insisted that her dislocated shoulder was an arm completely severed and reattached with black thread by Dr. Lindsey in his one-room office. I remember one afternoon there when my sister and I and five or six cousins, dodged cow pies and mosquitos through Grandpa's back pasture trying to catch his horse and a few sassy others, that, given the chance, would rub young riders' legs into barbed-wire fencing. These we trotted through sagebrush until the white ranch house was but a small point under an exclamation of low hills, white clouds. I remember we laughed beneath that big sky, when three cousins recited in unison, the limb-restoring feat of the great Dr. Lindsey after the manner of Grandma herself. And, I remember the next morning, how Grandma, her long white hair pulled back, stood at her stoves—one coal, one electric— cooking a breakfast of fried trout and eggs. I sat trying to drink warm, raw milk from a cloudy red glass, when she scooped one egg from a pot of boiling water and laid it on my grandfather's empty plate. His large, rough, rein-pulled hands took a knife and cracked the shell— clear whites, raw yolk spilled onto his plate. He slowly took a spoon and drank that egg never once raising his pale hatless forehead or bronzed jaw, shaven but never quite smooth. His brown eyes bleached blue from seventy winters on the glaring snow-covered Wyoming range, refused to meet my round-eyed stare, would not see my sister's half-smile. But when he had swallowed the last, he rose, laid his large hand on my grandmother's shoulder, thanked her softly and went to the barn.

Elisa Pulido graduated from Brigham Young University with a bachelor of arts degree in German and received a teaching credential from California State-San Bernardino. She also served a mission in the Switzerland Zurich mission. Elisa has three children and resides with her husband in Madrid, Spain, where she teaches seminary and serves on the stake public affairs committee.
