Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

The Challenge of Aging Adults: Their Care, Your Care

BONNIE MUIRBROOK BLAIR

I need to begin with a disclaimer of sorts. In what I am about to share, please understand that the messenger still is struggling to understand the message. My other concern regards the private, personal nature of this experience—not only for myself but also for other family members, friends, and, especially, the person who received the care, whose story this is, too: my mother-in-law.

I met my mother-in-law for the first time while my husband, Frank, and I were dating, at her eightieth birthday party. I married Frank, who is several years my senior, when I was twenty-nine. I had been teaching high school and college for eight years. So when my mother-in-law came to live with us, we had been married only three years and had two sons, nineteen months and six weeks old. During the eight years she lived in our home, we added two daughters to our family, and my husband served as bishop, retired from his lifelong career, and started a new business. My father died, my mother served a mission and moved from her home of forty-five years into an apartment, and I served three years as stake Relief Society president. In short, it was a very demanding time in our lives.

The first time I remember considering the idea of Grand-mother, as we all called her, coming to live with us was when Frank and I were drawing up our house plans. Frank asked how I would feel about designing the downstairs to be used as an apartment for his mother if she ever needed it. I don't recall having any objections at that time. I got along well with my mother-in-law, who had graciously and lovingly welcomed me into her family. I was very much in love with my husband and wanted to please him and be the perfect wife.

When the house plans were finished, we showed them to Grandmother. With the plans spread on her living room floor in front of her rocking chair, Frank explained the various rooms and details. She thanked us for thinking of her but said emotionally, "I would never live with my children. I have money set aside, and if the time comes that I can't live here in my own home, I will go to a rest home." She told us about a favorite aunt who had checked herself into a nursing home when she decided it was time and assured us she intended to do the same. I believed her. And, more important, I'm sure she believed herself.

We proceeded with our building plans, and soon we excitedly moved into our home. We landscaped the yard, shopped for furniture, and found we were expecting our first child. We usually spent Saturdays at Grandmother's, taking care of her house, yard, and the family land for which my husband was responsible. Caught up as I was with my new roles of wife and mother, I was probably not very sensitive to Grandmother's growing unrest. For the first time in her life, she was alone in her home most of the time. Businesses had sprung up across her once-rural street, yet the remaining farmland left her without close neighbors. I have vague memories of occasional calls at night when she was fearful that someone was in her yard. Caring friends told Frank that his mother was not doing well alone. Initially unwilling to consider selling her home of sixty years, Grandmother now agreed to have it put on the market.

I have a difficult time explaining my thinking processes at this point. I was aware that her home was for sale, and we must have talked about her coming to live with us. At the same time, no one seemed interested in buying her home, and I still remembered her earlier statements about not living with her children. I just didn't feel that change was imminent.

Perhaps my inability to focus on this event was partially due to my being pregnant again. When our second child was a few weeks old, my husband announced suddenly that Grandmother's home had a buyer who wanted to take possession in one month. In somewhat of a stupor (after all, I spent my nights up with a newborn and my days chasing a highly energetic toddler), I began to clean the downstairs, which had been vacant since we moved in. Frank's sister came from out of state to help Grandmother move and to clean the old house. She arranged furniture, bought needed items, got rid of some unneeded ones, and insisted on finding a weekly cleaning woman for her mother. For all of this I was very grateful.

At the time she came to live with us, Grandmother was eighty-three years old. She did her own cooking and laundry, drove her car, visited out-of-state family members about once a year, knit beautiful sweaters, read voraciously, keenly followed current events, and, most important, was a loving and concerned matriarch to her family. She maintained close contact with her children, grandchildren, nieces, and nephews through frequent phone calls and never let a birthday or anniversary pass without a card and check. She had reared four children and had contributed in time and energy to building the family businesses. A widow for seven years, she had given of herself freely in community and church service. Her husband, who had suffered from diabetes and its complications, had spent the last four years of his life in a nursing home; she was with him each day. She was a proud grandmother who loved her grandchildren and wanted to hear about and attend, whenever possible, their activities.

She walked with a cane, the result of a hip fracture a few years before Frank and I were married. She also had arthritis in her hip and back. Naturally, these slowed her down, and standing for very long was difficult. She was also beginning to have some problems with incontinence.

After the initial adjustment of having someone else living in our home, things went well. Our almost-two-year-old loved his visits downstairs. He and Grandmother read books, baked cookies, and took daily walks to the mailbox, weather permitting, to post her many cards and letters. I remember watching them out the window one morning, noticing that my son, using a stick for his cane, was walking with a limp like his grandmother's.

Grandmother enjoyed cooking and prepared herself a full meal every night, along with a good breakfast and lunch. She looked forward to grocery shopping and enjoyed watching cooking shows on television and trying new recipes. She baked delicious pies. She still canned some of her favorites—peaches, pickles, and her famous chili sauce. We joined her downstairs each week for Sunday dinner.

Change came gradually. First she became increasingly reluctant to drive. From our home, she had to enter a major highway to get anywhere, and our community was unfamiliar to her, about a twenty-minute drive by freeway from her former home. Not many months after moving in with us, she quit driving entirely.

Incontinence problems increased. Her arthritis bothered her more, and she began to spend more time in bed with her heating pad. Then, about eighteen months after her move, Grandmother fell and cracked her hip. Six months later, she fell again, hurting her wrist and hand. The next fall, just three months later, was the worst and resulted in a broken kneecap. Sitting was very painful; she had to wear an immobilizer and lie or stand most of the time. Our third child was due in about a month, and I felt overwhelmed and inadequate. A dear sister from our ward helped by coming to bathe Grandmother three times a week, a deeply appreciated service.

This was the spring of the floods in Utah. One morning the sister who bathed Grandmother noted as she walked in, "You know, Bonnie, you can see that mud slide on the mountain really well from your front porch." I followed her pointing finger to a mud slide, across a major highway and much higher than our home, but unnerving nevertheless. My baby was about a month old. I was still in my nightgown, and the boys weren't dressed either. I had about three clean diapers in the house. I've already described Grandmother's condition. I waited until my friend went downstairs and then burst into tears. As I tried to change and feed the baby, I decided that we would just have to drown, because there was no way I could get organized and get everybody out! Fortunately, evacuation wasn't necessary. I can laugh about it now, but I remember how I felt. I was totally unable at the time to deal with what was happening to me.

Gradually, with physical therapy and lots of determination, Grandmother learned to get around with a walker. Her cleaning woman was doing her laundry and preparing food to supplement the meals I was taking downstairs. Eventually, Grandmother was able to go grocery shopping with me again, something she really enjoyed because she could buy exactly what she wanted. When we returned home, I unloaded and put away her groceries and then my own. Her daughter and a granddaughter bought nearly all of her nongrocery items for her. This same granddaughter also brought her a dozen or more library books every three weeks.

This period of time was also my introduction to the world of bureaucratic medicine. Suddenly, part of our life was ruled by the unseen power that declared how many days of each kind of care Grandmother was eligible for and who could provide it. A thick folder of insurance and Medicare forms dominated my desk, along with the phone number of the office that was supposed to be able to explain them to me. It was a world that continually surprised and baffled me. Just when I thought I understood the rules, they changed. I resigned myself to trying to provide the information required and asking only the most pressing questions.

Things settled once more into a routine. As Grandmother regained some of her mobility, she was able to do more for herself. She enjoyed having the children sit on her bed for stories or games. Because she could no longer manage the stairs, she came upstairs only on rare special occasions, when my husband helped her walk outside and around to the front door. She attended church with us on Sunday and special family events but became more and more reluctant to go other places.

Grandmother had now been with us about three and one-half years. On the last day of Christmas vacation, we were all sleeping in. In that fog between sleep and waking, I could hear someone calling. My mother-reflexes kicked in automatically, and I jumped out of bed and ran to the children's rooms. All were sleeping peacefully; I was now wide awake and still heard someone calling. I finally realized the voice was coming from downstairs. "It's your mom! Come quick!" I called to Frank and hurried downstairs. I should probably qualify how quickly I hurried. I was six months pregnant. My timing—or Grandmother's—was amazing.

We found Grandmother on the floor in her living room, near her Christmas tree. She was in extreme pain and unable to move. The pain was centered in her upper leg. Frank called the doctor and then the ambulance. I got a blanket and pillow to make her more comfortable. I felt so helpless. Frank went to the hospital, and I stayed with the children. He called about an hour later to report that Grandmother had broken a hip that would require surgery and the placement of, in laymen's terms, nuts and bolts to hold the bones in place. The surgery was successful, and she was in the hospital about ten days.

We were told that she would require intensive physical therapy to learn to walk again. She was unable to get in and out of bed on her own and needed full-time professional care. Frank chose a nursing home recommended for its excellent physical therapy program. Grandmother was adamantly against going. We promised that she could come home again as soon as she could walk. She went only because she had no other choice.

She was very unhappy in the nursing home. The blessing in disguise was that her unhappiness served as strong motivation. She was now eighty-seven years old and weak from her surgery and hospital stay, but she worked very hard at all the exercises and activities assigned by the therapist. I look back with admiration on her determination and strength.

I also look back with amazement at my own naivetÃ© and lack of foresight. The signs clearly pointed toward problems in the future, but I failed to recognize or understand them. Grandmother wanted no part of the nursing home beyond what it took for her to learn to walk again. She paid an additional fee to have all her meals in her room instead of with other residents. She refused to attend any social or entertainment activities offered. She insisted on having a phone in her room, something that was frowned upon by the nursing home. Grandmother was always frugal, but again she paid the additional cost of a private room and a private phone line. One day she even phoned the front desk when the buzzer at her bedside didn't bring the desired response.

My husband, with rare exception, visited her daily. We took the children often in the evenings. Her visiting teachers usually visited weekly. Other family members stopped by when they could. Even so, those four months were difficult for her. She made many phone calls and asked almost daily when she could come home. Finally her doctor gave her a tentative discharge date, and the countdown began. Of course, two days before D-day, our youngest daughter was born. So, the new baby and I went home from the hospital the same day Grandmother went home from the nursing home.

Grandmother's daughter visited from out of the state for the first week. Grandmother was still having difficulty getting in and out of bed and dressing herself; she could not be alone. The days her daughter could stay elapsed, and Grandmother was still physically unable to take care of herself. The doctor and the therapist strongly urged her to return to the nursing home. With great reluctance she went back for about three more weeks.

Once Grandmother was home again, new challenges presented themselves. She still needed a lot of physical help. A physical therapist visited two or three times weekly. A home health care aide assisted with bathing. Getting in and out of a car was difficult and painful, so Grandmother's only trips out were to the doctor's office. Unsure on her feet, Grandmother was now frightened to attempt anything that didn't allow her to keep both hands on her walker. In addition to her physical limitations, the fall and ensuing events had taken an emotional toll as well. Always nervous about being alone, especially at night, she was now unwilling to be alone at all. She was depressed, lonely, and afraid, though I'm not sure I recognized those things at the time. I just knew that I couldn't provide for her all that she needed and wanted.

A simple call from Grandmother for me to come downstairs to help her frustrated and upset me. Should I go down alone, hoping to be there only a few minutes, and leave the children upstairs? Or should I haul all the kids with me, hoping they wouldn't get in the way if I need to help her into the bathroom? My children were now ages five, four, two, and two months. I felt torn and stretched beyond my capacities.

Grandmother's fears of being alone meant that even if we took all of the children with us, we still needed a sitter when we left our home. Sometimes family members and neighbors were available, but mostly we hired teen-aged girls for the company and to make sure she got to the bathroom or had her dinner. If my husband and I went somewhere alone, we were not sure a sitter could take care of four children and a grandmother. It was not unusual to come home and find the children still up, downstairs on Grandmother's bed playing games and watching TV with the sitter and Grandmother. If the children were in their beds, often the sitter was downstairs with Grandmother, out of earshot of the children's rooms. Grandmother strongly encouraged anything that would mean she wasn't alone.

Physical therapists, home health care workers, and hired people all helped Grandmother. The last year we also discovered Council on Aging volunteers. Some neighbors and ward members also helped. A local Girl Scout troop visited Grandmother and helped her organize and mount a box of loose photographs. One of the Young Women helped with Grandmother as her Laurel project. In our fast-growing area, our ward boundaries and leaders changed several times during the eight years. Because my husband was the bishop part of the time, and I was the stake Relief Society president the remainder, asking for help was somewhat awkward. I will always be grateful to the Relief Society presidents who called and organized ward sisters to visit Grandmother regularly. I'm not sure that someone who hasn't been in a similar situation can fully understand how much we appreciated any and all help.

Having expressed those sentiments, I must say in all honesty that having volunteers and paid help also added another dimension to my work. I became the master scheduler, responsible for keeping track of who was coming when, who would not be available, who canceled, who rescheduled—and arranging our family life around that. When I thought I had arranged for someone to be with Grandmother, then I would plan for errands, family outings, and appointments. When someone canceled or forgot, the dominoes began to fall, and the scheduler began rescheduling.

The most difficult aspect of this for me was being the employer, or personnel director. Frank or I would hire the personnel and explain their jobs, but Grandmother told them what she wanted done, and she paid them. As a result, often what we wanted was not what they actually did. I also discovered that I was not very good at maintaining employer-employee relationships. It was difficult for me to say "you must or must not" to helpers who were or soon became friends.

Having help also meant that people were in and out of our home a great deal. It was hard for me to adjust to the feeling that my home was not my own and that at any moment someone might be standing in my downstairs hall calling for me or coming up the stairs.

The demands of four small children, a busy husband, church callings, a fledgling family business, and Grandmother left me exhausted. I longed to wake up feeling rested. I was afraid that I wouldn't hear the baby at night because I was so tired. There just didn't seem to be enough of me to go around, but the only solution seemed to be to do more. I cried a lot and unloaded frustrations on a few close friends.

But my biggest challenge was my growing resentment and anger. Recognizing these feelings produced great guilt. I was sure I was not a good person because I resented the demands of caring for Grandmother. I was not serving with Christlike love. I knew I should repent and try to change. I prayed to have better feelings about my situation, but when I got up off my knees to a ringing phone or someone calling for me, the anger and resentment welled up inside me. I sat one Sunday in Relief Society, staring at the framed needlepoint sampler that declared, "Charity never faileth." Charity may never fail, I thought, but I'm failing. I felt ashamed, hopeless, and alone.

These were not easy times for Grandmother either. In addition to her leg and back pain, she was losing her hearing, becoming more incontinent, and having trouble breathing. She had been a strong, self-sufficient, private woman. Now, each day she was at the mercy of others for even her most basic needs. Much of the time when I felt Grandmother was being difficult, she was probably only trying to maintain some sense of dignity, self-respect, and control.

Grandmother's physical problems continued to mount. The breathing difficulties intensified until she was struggling for air, especially when lying down. She became extremely frightened about dying. She frequently phoned to beg me to come downstairs. "Sit here by me," she would say. "I don't want to die alone."

Still, she refused to see a doctor. Her distrust of medicine, doctors, and hospitals intensified. Finally, under coercion, she went for an exam and was diagnosed with congestive heart failure. Her heart could no longer pump efficiently; her lungs were filling with fluid. The doctor wanted to hospitalize her to reduce the fluid level with intravenous medication. "I am not going to the hospital," she said quietly but firmly. The doctor explained again. I reasoned with her. "I am not going to the hospital," she repeated. Finally, in desperation, I called my husband at work. Frank talked to the doctor, then to Grandmother, then to me. He came to take his mother to the hospital. After helping him get her into his car, I left. As I walked away, I could hear her say, "I'm not going to the hospital."

She stayed about a week. At home, she now needed oxygen and medication to keep the fluid down. She was weaker physically and emotionally. Her knitting needles lay idle, her library books unopened. Her hearty appetite and interest in food declined. Her fear of being alone became an obsession. Her only concern was who would be with her or how long she might have to be alone. She felt alone any time the chair next to her bed was empty.

One spring afternoon, I joined my children on the front lawn in a kickball game. We hadn't played for ten minutes when my neighbor hurried over. Grandmother had called him, believing we had left her home alone. She often told friends on the phone that she had been alone all day, when I had left her bedside just minutes before and was still in the adjoining room where I had told her I would be.

Visits from friends and family dwindled. Grandmother wasn't enjoyable company most of the time now. She mostly wanted us to sit next to her bed and reassure her that we weren't leaving. At this point we hired full-time help. Mary came four days a week, from eight to three. The fifth day a volunteer from the Council on Aging came. We were on our own for evenings and weekends.

She now needed help every time she went to the bathroom. Hallucinations were next. At night, alone in her room, she saw people coming out of the walls and ceilings. She called us on the telephone, begging us to come downstairs. Once there, we tried to reassure her that no one was in her room. We had just gotten back into bed upstairs when the phone rang again—and again and again throughout the night. After she called the neighbors at 2 a.m. one night, we started unplugging her phone at bedtime. Then she woke us yelling my husband's name, over and over, till we reached her bedside. I began to stay up and read, thinking getting up wouldn't be as hard if I weren't asleep when she called. Most often, I fell asleep in the chair.

Finally one Saturday, I was upstairs after giving Grandmother her lunch when the phone rang. I expected it to be her. Instead, the voice on the other end asked if we had an elderly relative somewhere who might need help. The caller had received several phone calls that day and many on previous days from an elderly woman trying to locate her son. Their phone number was similar to ours. In her confusion, Grandmother had misdialed not once but many times. The fear of being alone that had brought her to our home was now the reason she would leave. We had given all we could, and it was not enough. She needed twenty-four-hour, nonstop care.

We contacted a woman who cared for elderly people in her home, but after a visit there we realized that she would be unable to meet Grandmother's needs. We visited nursing homes and talked with friends who had family members in nursing homes. The morning came when my husband had to tell his mother that she was going to a nursing home. She was angry, hurt, and defiant. She refused to go, even as we packed her things. Once she was settled in her room there, however, she became almost complaisant, talking about what pictures she wanted where and what things she needed from home.

I came home filled with sadness and relief—and my constant companion, guilt. Now the guilt was even greater because of my relief and sense of final failure. The relative calmness in my home and the still rooms downstairs were constant reminders of what I had done and failed to do.

Grandmother seemed to do quite well the first couple of weeks in the nursing home. She complained about the food and what seemed like long waits for nurses. Frank visited her daily, and we took the children a couple of times a week. Relief Society sisters visited regularly. But then the confusion and hallucinations intensified. She had a difficult time remembering people and became more and more listless. She only picked at her food. She didn't want to get out of bed. Then one night the nursing home called, saying she hadn't eaten all day. I hurriedly prepared some of her favorite foods, and Frank took a plate to her. He returned just before midnight, having failed to get Grandmother to eat. She hadn't even opened her eyes while he was there. About noon the next day, the rest home notified us that Grandmother had died. It had been seven weeks since she had left our home.

The blessed numbness that often accompanies death arrived. I made phone calls, helped plan the funeral, ordered flowers. Family members arrived; neighbors called. I went through all the motions, doing for the most part all I was supposed to do. I didn't allow myself to think or feel too deeply. My feelings were jumbled, and trying to sort them out hurt too much. When everybody had gone home, I returned to a daily routine and worked hard not to think about all that had happened. In effect, I closed the door on that part of my life. Reopening it has been difficult and sometimes painful but has allowed the healing process to begin.

What have I learned? Caring for a family member is a family affair. All immediate family members should contribute in some way and be involved in decision making, even those living away from where the care will be given. I recommend consulting books that outline the process a family should go through when making major caregiving decisions. [^1] We also should have planned for and talked about the circumstances under which we would no longer be able to care for Grandmother.

Studies show that "the degree of satisfaction experienced by caregivers did not relate to the number of hours they put in or the number of people they cared for, but rather to the caregiver's ability to care for themselves." [^2] Caregivers who care for themselves as well as they care for another person are likely to be the most successful. For many of us, distinguishing between self-care and selfishness is difficult. At some point during my caregiving experience, I crossed the line into self-neglect, and both Grandmother and I suffered. I wish I had been more willing to accept and able to express my need for self-care earlier. What I saw as failure at the time was, in many cases, simply burnout. I was totally spent, both emotionally and spiritually. It has been an arduous, private journey back to spiritual and emotional well-being.

Admitting my resentment, anger, and guilt publicly is still not easy. Part of the learning process for me has been to understand that I do have weaknesses; they do not go away simply because I want them to. I now know that developing charity, empathy, self-respect, and personal strength will be a lifelong work for me—as it is for everyone. I have also learned that charity, the pure love of Christ, is a gift that comes after["pray[ing] unto the Father with all the energy of heart" (Moro. 7:48). I thought I had to develop it all by myself.

In the Church we often hear that caring for the elderly develops Christlike love. I'm not sure that happened to me during the caregiving experience. As a caregiver my feelings were often very negative. I have tried to be honest about how difficult the experience was, about how troubled I have been that I was not able to serve all of the time with Christlike love.

In Matt. 5:48 we are told, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." A footnote explains that the word perfect was translated from a Greek word meaning complete, finished, fully developed. My caregiving experience is part of my mortal effort to become like our Heavenly Father. But I was not complete, finished, or fully developed when I did it. I was learning, and like most students, I lacked understanding of some of the concepts and struggled with some of the assignments. Some days I didn't even want to go to school. But I now understand that I didn't fail the final exam. I have learned much about empathy, compassion, and acceptance of my own and other's weaknesses and struggles. I believe I am better prepared for future learning experiences. And I am comforted that my care allowed my mother-in-law to live a more fulfilling life.

Friends have asked, "Would you do it again?" I have thought long and hard about that question. I hope I wouldn't ever have to, at least under the same circumstances. But I took on the care of my mother-in-law because I love my husband, and it was very important to him that we care for his mother. That love continues, stronger than before. Yes, I would do it again.

If you know someone who is a caregiver, take time to find out how they are doing. Look for ways, even small ones, to help. And please, reserve judgment. What they are doing is probably more difficult than it appears. And if you are the caregiver, please take care of yourself, seek help from others, accept that you will be angry and resentful at times, and remember that, imperfect as you feel it may be, your service is invaluable.

Notes

Bonnie Muirbrook Blair received her master's degree in home economics education from Brigham Young University. A homemaker, she and her husband, Frank S. Blair, are the parents of four children. She is a school volunteer and a counselor in her ward Relief Society presidency.

---
Notas:
[^1] Demographics and statistical information were taken from A Profile of Older Americans, 1994, published by AARP and the Administration on Aging, based on information from the 1993 census.
[^2] Carter and Golant, 47.
