Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

A Quilt of Care: Assisting Older People in Need

COSETTE MILLS

Older people come in diverse shapes, textures, and colors. For some, time has worn the fabric of their lives, necessitating outside reinforcement. Caring for these frail individuals can be as challenging as stitching together a Triple Irish Chain or Double Wedding Ring.

We can be better prepared to help the aged if we first understand demographic trends for older people in the United States. [^1] What do statistics tell us? More people are living longer. In 1900, life expectancy was about forty-seven years; today people can generally expect to reach age seventy-six—an increase of twenty-nine years. The longer people live, the more likely they are to need assistance. We should be particularly aware of older women—who are more likely to live alone because they live longer than men. By age eighty-five and above, there are 256 women to every 100 men. We should also note that both older women and minority individuals are at greater risk, because they are more likely to have lower incomes.

Consider other characteristics of United States society today that affect frail, older citizens. Families are changing. They are more mobile than ever, have fewer children, and more women are working. Caregivers of the past lived at home. Frequently now, they are either not available or they must sandwich the care they give between jobs and their own families.

Communities are changing as well. Neighbors do not know each other as they once did. Socializing or visiting is less common as a form of leisure. Homes are often empty during the day. Life is fast-paced, full of stress. All around us we see more focus on self and less focus on serving others.

Individual wellness and changes in health care must also be considered. Most men and women over sixty-five have one or more chronic conditions, although most adapt to these conditions without help. Twenty-three percent need help with personal care, such as bathing, dressing, eating, moving from bed or chair, walking, or toileting. Twenty-eight percent need help with meal preparation, shopping, managing money, and housework. Of those over the age of eighty-five, 58 percent need assistance with some of these activities. And for those that need health care, hospital stays are shorter and patients are often sent home needing extensive and highly technical in-home care. Health care costs have also risen dramatically, hitting the older population especially hard. In 1987, persons sixty-five and older represented 12 percent of the U.S. population but accounted for 36 percent of personal health care expenditures.

Considering all these factors, how do we better address the needs of the elderly in our society, in our church, in our families? I suggest that we liken care for a frail, older person to a patchwork quilt. For a quilt to be warm and beautiful, the fabric blocks need to be carefully prepared, pieced together, and lovingly stitched. Similarly, when an older person needs care, specific needs must be conscientiously considered, arranged, and coordinated in a compassionate and loving way. Spiritual, social, physical, emotional, and mental needs should be carefully assessed. For some, the pattern is simple, requiring just a few blocks. Others have more intricate needs, requiring many precisely placed pieces.

Caring comes in varying proportions from three important sources: the older individuals themselves; an informal support network of family, church, neighbors, and friends; and formal programs available in the community. All too often, care for older persons seems to have been thrown together, leaving gaps and holes. And sometimes, the love to tie it all together is missing.

The first and most essential block for our quilt of care is the older person. The Church encourages principles of self-reliance, and we must allow individuals to do all they safely can for themselves or we will destroy their self-esteem. But how do we know how much help to give? Take cues from the individual and in some cases from the family. In most instances, if older people know and trust you, they will tell you what they need help with when your questions to them are specific. For example, instead of asking: "Do you need help with anything?" say, "Is it difficult for you to carry your laundry up and down the stairs?"

Frail, older persons may work slowly, and their work may not be up to their previous standards. That is not important as long as they are in no danger and are able to work. We should make every effort to encourage their independence, allowing them to live in their own homes and do as many of their own tasks as possible for as long as possible.

The second essential block is an informal support network. Most of the help older people receive (60 to 80 percent) comes from an informal support source such as the family or church. In my experience, successful caregiving families do many things in common. Many family members share in the caregiving duties, instead of the load falling on one person. The families meet and plan in councils that include the older persons. The families consider the resources and strengths of each member and figure out ways for those living away from home to contribute. Last, when they need outside help, they get it.

Sometimes, however, families run into problems. Often as the older person's functioning becomes more limited, families have difficulty acknowledging that they can't do everything. If they don't get help, they often burn out or become ill, stressing the family even more. At other times, care cannot be provided safely in the home, and an institution becomes appropriate.

In families that have never gotten along well, involving family members in care may create increased pain and frustration. Abuse or neglect is also a potential problem in such a situation. In addition, some older people don't want their families to know their problems and concerns, and some families don't want to hear about them.

Neighbors, friends, and wards can do a lot to help care for the elderly. I have been surprised on numerous occasions to find that the ward wasn't providing help or the older person didn't perceive the ward as wanting to provide help. I believe the Church can support older persons in many ways, supplementing what the individuals themselves and their families can do. Ward councils may carefully consider the spiritual, social, physical, mental, and emotional needs of each older person within its boundaries, realizing the wealth of Christlike service opportunities available and recognizing the great resource older persons can be to a ward. Here are a few suggestions about how we as Church members might help in each area of need.

Spiritual Needs

Spiritual growth can continue at all ages. Many find in their later years deeper levels of refinement and commitment to spiritual convictions. Spiritual activity without the support of others, however, can be lonely and discouraging. What can Church members do to enhance the spiritual needs of the elderly? We can ensure that older members have access to the Church News and Church magazines. A member could read aloud to those who are visually impaired. Visiting and home teachers could more actively look for ways to add spirituality to the older person's life, such as visiting with better prepared messages, praying with the individuals at the end of a visit, or offering priesthood blessings. Family home evening groups could be established or families in the ward could invite older persons to join with them. Ward auxiliary groups could take lessons into the homes of older ward members.

When I was a Beehive adviser, once a month our class held our lesson, activity, and refreshments at the home of two older sisters in our ward. Each session was inspiring as these sisters shared their wisdom, testimonies, humor, and gratitude. The young women benefited as much as the older sisters did!

Priesthood members could administer the sacrament at the home of older ward members unable to attend sacrament meeting. In addition, bishops could try to find meaningful ward assignments that use older persons' talents and enhance their spiritual growth.

Social Needs

Loneliness is one of the greatest problems frail, older people face. Imagine what it's like to be home nearly twenty-four hours a day. One call or visit per day may still leave a person alone for more than twenty-three hours. No wonder feelings of loneliness or discouragement are so prevalent. What can members of the Church do to help? Visiting and home teachers can plan longer or more frequent visits and avoid appearing rushed. Consistent visits early in the month show visiting isn't a burden. Unassigned visits are important also. Older ward members are particularly good visitors. If visiting isn't possible, daily calls can be made by and to older members. Because they don't want to worry their family members, some elderly people will talk more freely to people outside their families.

In conversations with the elderly, let them lead out, expressing needs or sharing wisdom. Allow them—encourage them—to reminisce or grieve. Offer to visit weekly to help record their life history. Take them on outings whenever possible. Pick them up and accompany them to church and other activities or take them for a ride. Invite them to Sunday dinner. Or, if you take a meal, offer to eat with them. Better still, arrange to take in the meal ingredients and then prepare the food and eat together. Meal times without others can be particularly lonely.

Physical Needs

Physical needs include individual care as well as care for the home, finances, and essential transportation. These kinds of needs often require consistent, continuing support and help. For older people needing a little assistance to bathe and dress themselves, ward members could provide "stand-by" assistance to prevent falling or to assist with fastening clothing. Relief Society sisters could modify clothes for easier dressing using velcro rather than buttons or front zippers rather than back. For those who may need more extensive assistance from a trained aide, professional home health services could be arranged.

Another type of assistance frequently needed is care of the home and yard. It can be discouraging for older persons to look through dirty windows or see a carpet in need of vacuuming and not be able to do the work themselves. Regular assistance with heavier household tasks such as changing linens on beds, vacuuming, mopping, and laundry can be offered, remembering not to take away tasks the older persons can manage on their own. Also, an elderly person may need help with weekly lawn care, flowers, mail, home repairs, and weatherization. Ice and snow removal are especially important to prevent isolation, falls, and serious injury. In addition, some older persons on fixed incomes often have financial worries. Frequently they will pay bills before buying food or medications. They may require financial or food assistance to meet the most basic needs. They also may lack transportation to buy groceries, visit the doctor, shop, or attend other events. Invite them along when you are going out, or ask specifically about their transportation needs.

Emotional and Mental Needs

Depression and discouragement are common among the less mobile elderly. A listening ear, a visit, or a hug can do a lot to brighten a day. Be alert for signs of serious depression or emotional problems and also watch for confusion or disorientation. Professional treatment should be sought for such conditions. Observing if these conditions come on suddenly or gradually can help in getting appropriate treatment.

Emotional needs of caregivers also need to be considered. Caregivers are at great risk for burnout when providing constant care. They need a respite at least weekly to rest, run errands, or do something just for themselves. With consistent relief, caregivers can usually function much longer and much more effectively, without destroying their own health.

Opportunities for learning or teaching can also provide a great boost. Older sisters may have wonderful skills and insight to share with younger sisters during homemaking meetings. Again, specific questions may unlock treasures. Not "What skills do you have?" but "Do you have a favorite recipe for holiday fruit cake? Will you teach us how to make it?"

The third block of our quilt of care is community assistance. Resources from formal government or community programs are particularly important when skilled help is needed for safe care or when needs are longer term. Some available resources may include home health care, hospice (in-home support for the terminally ill), meals at a senior center or home delivered, adult day care, and institutionalization when twenty-four-hour care is needed. Availability of these services will vary from community to community and from state to state. It is also important to realize that many of these programs face major cuts in funding. Additionally, as the population of older persons increases, the ability of formal services to respond to the demand will likely decrease. In the future, older persons may need to depend on informal supports of family and church even more than today.

In James 1:27 we read: "Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To visit the fatherless and the widows in their affliction." Giving this help, even when we want to, is not easy. Our lives may be busy and the extent of care required may seem overwhelming. But if we will use all the quilt pieces—including the older persons themselves, family, church, and other informal supports, and, when necessary, formal government and community programs—and then tie our quilt of care with love, together we will bless the lives of older persons, doing as our Savior would do.

Note

Cosette W. Mills received her bachelor of science degree in family relations, gerontology emphasis, from Weber State College. She and her husband, Brent B. Mills, are the parents of four children. She has worked for several organizations serving older persons and serves as education counselor in her ward Relief Society.

---
Notas:
[^1] Hymns of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985), no. 85.
