Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

Enjoy to the End

GWEN SQUIRES

As we move into the middle years of our lives, we may find that our circumstances are not what we had anticipated. Some women may be alone and looking for ways to fill their empty days. Others may have days that are too full and feel oppressed by many demands. Whatever our circumstances, we have the option to choose our attitude toward them. We can choose to let them overwhelm and defeat us, or we can choose to find the beauty, humor, and good in each day. This was recently reaffirmed to me when my eldest daughter, a stake Primary president, shared with me the theme they had selected for stake leadership meeting—"enjoy to the end." When I find myself in an endurance frame of mind, I try to switch to an "enjoy the moment" attitude. I believe that Heavenly Father meant for us to find joy in this life.

In my fifties I returned to school after a thirty-year absence to complete a master's degree in social work. At age fifty-five, my husband, an air traffic controller, was approaching retirement. With eight of our ten children still at home, and five adult retarded women (we refer to them as our foster girls) also living with us, I was not looking for ways to fill my days. This seemed, however, to be the right time to return to school.

Three of our ten children were born after I was forty. I was having such a good time with the children that I missed my cue to stop. In fact, Sara came into the world already an aunt a month before my forty-seventh birthday. One day when she was still very tiny, I was tending my two grandchildren when the phone rang. My grandson Andy ran to answer it and to my dismay I heard him say, "Grandma can't come to the phone right now. She's nursing the baby." I am thankful I never learned who the caller was.

I had done a year's work toward a master's degree in social work and had planned to go back to school. The time had come. I'll never forget the day I went to the registrar's office at the University of Utah to get a copy of my transcript of credits. The room was crowded, and my husband, of course, was standing next to me. The woman behind the counter said to me in a very loud voice, "What year did you say you were here?" I repeated the year I had last been in school. She sighed, "We'll have to go to the archives to get those records." My husband laughed. I didn't. I suddenly felt quite ancient and wondered if I was up to this new venture.

I decided to pursue my graduate studies at Brigham Young University. I was quite frustrated when they disregarded my previous year of study and required that I start the program over. My irritation dissipated, however, when I discovered that after thirty years I had no idea what the instructors were talking about. I crammed unfamiliar terms into the margins of my notes, hoping nobody would notice, and then hurried home to look them up. I felt overwhelmed and discouraged.

I hit my low point the day my first major paper was due. My professor, dean of the college, had emphasized on the first day of class: "Don't any of you think that your difficult circumstances will earn you any special consideration. We expect everyone to turn all work in on time." I immediately assumed he was speaking just to me. I remember thinking, He thinks I can't do this. And I seriously wondered if I could. I worked hard on researching my topic and felt reasonably well prepared to write the paper. That week was homecoming at American Fork High School, and my daughter Stacey, a sophomore, had been chosen as the second attendant to the homecoming queen. Wednesday morning, just as I was dashing out the door to class, she informed me, "Mom, I'm supposed to wear a white formal in the parade today." Two older sisters had previously been attendants, but their formals had been red—we had no white formals. I went to school frustrated and shared the problem with some classmates. "Gwen," they said, "we'll just call a few rental places and find one." Everyone got on a phone, and we located a white, size-four formal. After class I picked up the dress, rushed home, and found Stacey patiently waiting in her slip in the family room, never doubting I would come through for her. We zipped her into the dress, and she made it to the parade.

The next hurdle was the dance on Friday. My paper was due Friday. I suggested hopefully to Stacey, "Maybe you could wear Sabrina's dress, dear?" She didn't look convinced. No, I thought, she needs her own dress. I can handle this and my paper. So we went shopping on Thursday night. We shopped and shopped. I was very patient, but Stacey couldn't find anything she liked and finally said, "Maybe I could wear Sabrina's dress." At 9:30 we went home empty-handed. I thought, I can still handle this. I have my information, and I will stay up all night to type it. Then my three-year-old got sick. I sat with that three-year-old trying to type my paper. The first pages were really quite strong, but by four o'clock in the morning, as the baby would throw up and I would clean her up once again, my paper got weaker and weaker. Sometimes my fingers slipped to the wrong typewriter keys, and the words became a bit garbled.

I was sure I had no option but to turn the paper in. Hadn't my professor said there would be no exceptions? I got to class on time with the paper. A few students turned in papers; I was one of them. When I got the paper back, my professor's comments on the first few pages were complimentary, then came the red marks, and finally no marks at all. There was a note at the end: "You must have been very tired, my dear." I went home and wept. I wept like a first grader. From there I had nowhere to go but up.

Things did get better. The cobwebs cleared in my mind, and I moved forward. I learned how to manage my time. I took notes with me everywhere I went. In January we had to memorize the entire DSM-III, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. At Stacey's New Beginnings program at church I pretended to pay attention while studying my note cards. Someone said my name. I thought they were calling on me to say the closing prayer, so I stood up and said it. They weren't.

I learned to do all my studying in the early mornings. If I tried to stay up at night, the children stayed up to visit with me; nobody wanted to talk to me at 3:00 a.m. Our foster girls don't have a good sense of time, though. I was always very careful to be quiet so they wouldn't hear me and think it was time to get up. One morning I was up particularly early to study for a very important test. Unfortunately, the girls had been roused too, so I fixed their breakfast and then started studying. But eating breakfast didn't keep them occupied. "What are we going to do for Valentine's Day, Gwen?" I patiently told them. They then cycled through every birthday and holiday. I was getting less patient and more frustrated. Finally I said, "Girls, I have an important test to study for. Please don't bother me any more. We'll talk about this later." In a minute one of the girls came in and asked, "Gwen, what are we going to do for Christmas?" It was the last straw. I looked at her and said, "If one more person says one more word to me, I'm canceling Christmas." They didn't, and I didn't.

Despite all the distractions, graduate school worked out all right. In fact, I now look back on it as a period with its own particular joys and satisfactions. I finished my classes quite respectably. I don't say that with pride; I say that to illustrate that women in midlife do have skills. We can compete.

I thought, Now I've got it made. Then I started a new job. I am a social worker at the American Fork Hospital. I assist families dealing with grief over the death of loved ones; I help abused women find courage to change their situations; I encourage suicidal patients to find new hope and resources to overcome their depression. It is a wonderful job. Each day brings its own challenges and rewards. In the beginning, however, I found once again that I didn't know what I was doing. Again I resorted to writing down unknown terms, this time medical terms, on the paper I kept secretly tucked away in my pocket. At home I looked up meanings. The medical staff hadn't had a full-time medical social worker before and didn't know what I was to do. Worst of all, I didn't know either. That, too, worked out. I couldn't ask for a better job. I have respect for and give respect to the excellent staff members I work with, and I find joy in my daily associations. Again I thought, now I've got it made.

Not for long. The new stake president of our recently divided stake asked me to be the stake Young Women's president. Was he aware, I mumbled, that I had a large family, worked full-time, and cared for five handicapped women? He smiled at me in his confident, capable manner and said, "Yes, we know that, Sister Squires," and went on to outline my responsibilities. I felt dismayed. That word kept running through my mind, Dismayed. I am so dismayed.

My first task was to select counselors, but I couldn't even remember who was in my stake. We had new boundaries. Finally I asked my husband to go to the temple with me. I was sure neon lights were going to go on, all the answers would flash before me, and I'd know just who to call to be my counselors. It didn't happen. Instead, as we waited in the chapel for our session to begin, a sister sat down at the piano. She played "How Firm a Foundation," and the words just jumped at me. "Fear not, I am with thee; oh, be not dismayed, / For I am thy God and will still give thee aid." [^1] I thought, How could I have forgotten that? This isn't my church. This isn't my program. This is Heavenly Father's program. He'll take care of me. . . . And he has. I have found another dimension of joy as I work with my counselors in this exciting, sometimes demanding, calling.

Being a grandmother also brings its own measure of joy. Because we don't have to be on the front lines of parenting these children, we are in a unique position to offer unconditional love and complete acceptance. I was acquainted with a gracious woman whose grandchildren's lives were tumultuous. She could do little to change their situations, but she could give them unconditional love, and she did. One day her sixteen-year-old granddaughter came to her house as a first step in running away from home. They talked into the wee hours of the morning and worked out the problem. Then this wise grandmother packed a suitcase, set it on the top shelf of her closet, and said, "Lisa, if you ever think you need to leave home again, come and get me and I will go with you."

Last week when I drove home, a three-year-old grandchild ran out to meet me with his hand tightly clenched. He thrust his closed fist at me and said, "Surprise! Guess!" I ventured, "A rock? A bug?" Chase laughed, opened his grubby little fist, and said, "It's for you." It was a crumpled-up dandelion. Joy comes in simple things.

I've had some wonderful experiences in my later life, returning to school, entering the professional work force, tackling an intimidating church calling, and loving and learning from my grandchildren. Some of these experiences were not what I had anticipated at this stage in life. Each of them has, however, brought me joy.

Note

Gwen Forsyth Squires is a licensed clinical social worker at the American Fork Hospital. She and her husband, Ray Squires, are the parents of ten children. She serves as stake Young Women president.

---
Notas:
[^1] Hymns of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985), no. 85.
