Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

When I Was Fifty-One

IONE J. SIMPSON

When I was fifty, my husband Del and I lived in Idaho Falls. We had five children: one married, one on a mission, two at Brigham Young University, and one a senior in high school. We owned our own business and worked hard making it successful. We were a happy family. Del and I were nearing the time in our lives when the heavy responsibility of raising a family was easing. When we talked about what the future held for us, Del often said he wished he could serve the Lord full time. We looked forward to going on a mission together.

When I was fifty-one, Del and I, four other stake presidents and their wives, and a Church visitor from Salt Lake, went on an outing to Island Park in Idaho. We were boating down the Snake River when our canoe overturned in the swift current, and Del was drowned. In a matter of minutes, I was a widow. It is impossible to express my pain. Only one who has had the experience can know the anguish and sorrow of that time.

Wise friends counseled me to make no important decisions for at least a year, and I followed their counsel. It was a time of grieving, of adjustment, and of planning. The years ahead had seemed so safe and sure. This would be like starting over again. I knew I needed to do something where I could be with and help people. Counseling appealed to me, but that would mean going back to school. Before I married, I had completed two years of college and then had gone on a mission. The very thought of going back to school terrified me. Could I study? Could I take tests? Could I compete with younger students? It had been almost thirty years since I had been in the classroom.

When I was fifty-two, I went back to school. First, I took just one class at Ricks College. Then I enrolled at Idaho State University and commuted three days a week with other "older" women students, still wondering if I could make it. I studied constantly. I'll never forget my first test. I had stayed up most of the night studying. When I got to class the sociology teacher announced that it would be a computer test, and I panicked. I had studied for a sociology test. What was a computer test? I was too embarrassed to ask questions because it was obvious the other students knew what she was talking about. When I finally got the test and read the directions, I realized the teacher was talking about a computer-graded test. I recovered my bearings, took the test, and passed.

At the end of a successful semester, I decided to finish my degree at Brigham Young University. I closed my home and found an apartment in Provo. Every credit I had earned thirty years before was still good, and I was a junior. One of the greatest blessings of school was that I didn't have time to feel sorry for myself. My days and nights were filled with studying. Learning was immensely satisfying.

By now we had had two more weddings in our family, and all of us were at a university. At one time, three of my children and I were enrolled at BYU at the same time. The two married daughters seemed pleased to have me there, but the youngest, who was unmarried, was not at all sure she liked going to the university with Mother.

By Christmas of the second year at BYU, I needed only three credits to graduate. I arranged to take the three hours by correspondence and joined thirty-four young people and one other woman my age on a semester abroad in Israel for six exciting months. Upon my return to school, my three correspondence credits were accepted, and I marched with the other graduates to get my degree. Goal number one had been accomplished.

In the meantime, our home in Idaho Falls had stood empty for two years except for summers and holidays, when we gathered to be a family again. It looked as though I would not return to live in Idaho Falls, so I sold my home to my oldest son and bought a condominium in Salt Lake City.

When I was fifty-five, I began graduate school at the University of Utah. I had all kinds of experiences there: difficult ones, humorous ones, and challenging ones. But in two years, the day finally came that I could put on my cap and gown and graduate with a master's degree in social work. My first job after graduation was with LDS Social Services. I worked first with unwed mothers and then with adoptive parents. Helping deserving couples prepare for their families and then placing newborn infants in their arms was pure joy. I felt I had found my niche and spent nine fulfilling years there.

When I was sixty-six, I was invited to go to Washington, D.C., to act as director of policy for the National Committee for Adoption. It sounded like an exciting adventure, and even though I knew no one in Washington, I packed my clothes in my car and drove east with my son. We found an apartment for me close to my work, and he flew home.

At times my stay in Washington turned out to be more exciting than I had bargained for. That huge, beautiful city is without question the easiest place in the United States to get lost in. For someone directionally disabled, as I am, it was a challenge. On weekends, however, my sister who lived in Connecticut often came to Washington; together we visited the Smithsonian Institution, strolled down the Washington Mall (not a shopping center), boarded a bus and toured D.C., and traveled to fascinating historical spots in Washington, Virginia, and Maryland. My supervisor commented that I saw more of this part of the country in one year than he had seen in his nineteen years there.

When I was sixty-seven, while still in Washington, D.C., I was called to be a member of the Relief Society General Board. Upon my return to Salt Lake from Washington, I worked for a year part-time for LDS Social Services while also serving on the board. As I served, primarily with welfare services, I learned of the great strength and devotion of my sisters throughout the Church.

Not until I was seventy-two did I face retirement. How do you slow down after so many years of constant activity? For a short time it was hard, but I have found many exciting things to do. When you don't have to do anything, the opportunities are limitless. I've spent several years on family genealogy, I have written my husband's life story, and I have traveled to fascinating countries. Most rewarding has been my greater involvement with my children and grandchildren. My five children live in four different states—none of them Utah. My thirty-two grandchildren range from eight years old to married with small children.

Sometimes we feel that as grandmothers we are past the time when we can influence children and grandchildren. I'm finding that's not so. If being together in eternity is our goal, we need to practice now. We need to love each other and enjoy being together. I figure I have more time to make this happen than anyone else.

Every two years we have family reunions with a different family in charge each time. One year we rented a large bus with video screens, a table for games, and a microwave in the back. Thirty of us traveled from Utah to the Palmyra pageant in New York, visiting Church and historical sites. We would have Captain Crunch and orange juice for breakfast in a park; sandwiches and soda pop for lunch in a parking lot; and often we stopped at Denny's or McDonalds for dinner. Parents occupied the front seats of the bus and laughed and reminisced about their growing up years; teenagers were in the middle with their delightful and sometimes noisy entertainment; youngsters played games in the back. A time of rejoicing: I'm sure the only reunion that will top this one will be when we all meet again in the eternities.

Seven of the grandchildren are presently at Ricks College. Five married grandchildren attend BYU or the University of Utah. We hold family home evenings in my home once a month. Sometimes, such as at general conference, they all end up at my home. I make it as inviting as possible by keeping food on hand that they like but can't always afford, games they like to play, a bed or floor to sleep on, and a comfortable place to bring their friends. At every opportunity I let them know that I love them and remind them that our family goal is to share eternity together.

Now at age seventy-eight, let me tell you what I feel has made my life rich after fifty.

First, I am firmly convinced that we came to this earth to succeed. Heavenly Father knows us better than we know ourselves. He knows our strengths and our weaknesses. He will help us build on our strengths and overcome our weaknesses, if we ask him. Every one of us will have challenges. We can let those challenges control us, or we can take charge. My greatest strength has come from my faith that this is true. I find direction and confirmation in the scriptures.

Second, don't be content to do the easy thing. Look for opportunities to stretch farther than you think you can. Going back to school was a frightening experience at first, but succeeding brought tremendous satisfaction. Also, I found that my practical experience as a wife, mother, and church worker gave me an edge over younger, less experienced students.

Third, several years before my husband died, he and I sat down together and talked about our finances. I knew what insurance policies we had and what they could do for me. I knew about Social Security, savings, and indebtedness; I had even gone to the safety deposit box in the bank and knew what it contained. Very few couples do that. Often a widow is left with no idea about her financial circumstances. Wise planning can make all the difference in whether or not you will have a good life after fifty.

Fourth, develop a good attitude. It is so easy to feel sorry for yourself. Don't. All you have to do to become unpleasant company is to talk about your ailments or about how you couldn't sleep last night. I learned through experience that no matter what your problem, someone else will top your story. Forget about yourself. One good way to do that is to do something for someone else. Volunteer regularly for a worthwhile cause, make a telephone call, visit someone who needs you.

Last and most important, many times you will feel alone, but you never are. Your Heavenly Father will always be there. He knows your potential better than you do and will help you through your trials and your joys.

Perhaps it sounds as though my life has been easy. It has not. Like everyone else, I have been depressed. I have felt, Why me? and have had times when I was so lonely I didn't want to get out of bed, times when I could have stayed home and cried—and sometimes I did. It got me nowhere.

One very important thing I know—I am responsible for my own happiness. Every once in a while I have to learn that over again, but I work at it. Life is good! These later years are the very best years of life when we have the time to really concentrate on what is most important—loving and caring about those around us.

Ione J. Simpson received her master's degree in social work after the death of her husband and worked for LDS Social Services for ten years. She is the mother of six, grandmother of thirty-two, and the great-grandmother of six. She has served on the Relief Society General Board and teaches Gospel Doctrine in her ward.
