Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

Rejoicing in One Another's Achievements

NEILL MARRIOTT

I want to talk about feeling resentment or envy when a friend loses twenty pounds and you don't. I want to share my feelings with those not able to have a child who feel guilty about your bitterness when your sister announces her fourth pregnancy. I want to reach your hearts if you are wondering why you have to struggle with a less-active spouse or rebellious child while your neighbor doesn't.

What do we do with these feelings? I sometimes have had moments of jealousy, self-doubt, and inferiority when I have seen the achievements of others. I have looked away, hardening my heart, when a friend's daughter walked by wearing a beautifully sewn Easter dress. What an achievement for a busy mother of six! But I can't sew, and I refused to rejoice in her talent. (My husband wanted to buy me a sewing machine early in our marriage, but I convinced him that a glue gun would do. If his pants cuff droops when he leaves for work, I run for the stapler.) To rejoice honestly in one another's achievements, our hearts must become unselfish and Christlike. Why is this such a struggle? Is a Christlike attitude of joy and rejoicing for others possible for us?

Patricia Holland outlined the problem: "Because of the increasing diversity of life styles for women of today, we seem even more uncertain and less secure with each other. We are not getting closer, but further away from that sense of community and sisterhood that has sustained and given us unique strength for generations. There seems to be an increase in our competitiveness and a decrease in our generosity with one another." [^1]

We are mortal, and often our natural desire is to be selfish, to think of our wants and needs first. Though we want to become like the Savior, much of the time we are far from it. We worry, compare, compete, feel doubtful, and insecure as we fight a spiritual battle in a worldly arena. We are fearful when we don't "measure up" to others.

We should not take counsel from our fears. To resist their counsel, we must first identify those fears and self-doubts. Admit (even out loud, perhaps), "I am feeling afraid of Martha's opinion of me," or "I don't think I am as well-liked as Mary," or "I am afraid of failing in my new calling." Be honest with yourself, and you can begin to free yourself.

Once you have identified your fears, what then? You still haven't lost the twenty pounds, your husband heads for work with several staples glinting near his ankle, and your heart may still ache at comparisons. Willpower just isn't enough. You can't white-knuckle your anxious feelings into calm, confident thoughts. D&C 6:36 tells us where to turn: "Look unto me in every thought; doubt not, fear not." We look to the Savior. We seek divine help. If we bring a broken heart and a contrite spirit to him, the Lord will make the changes in us that we cannot make in ourselves. We can't force our hearts to rejoice when we don't feel joyful—but Jesus Christ can take our feelings, if we offer them to him, and give us understanding, light, and a rejoicing love.

Consider this tender, encouraging invitation: "Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me. I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing" (John 15:4-5).

A few years ago I felt envy and ill-will toward a family member who is a very successful attorney and a good wife and mother. I did not rejoice in her law school honors and courtroom success; I burned with resentment when she gained well deserved recognition. My discontent intensified after we had a disagreement about the legislation of women's rights. With her verbal skills, sharp intellect, and legal training, she took apart all my emotional reasoning and handily won the argument. Not only did I feel silly and uninformed but I probably was.

After our confrontation, I went in tears to Heavenly Father and poured out my feelings: "I don't like her, she doesn't respect my opinions—what am I going to do?" On and on I prayed, justifying my hurt feelings; finally I admitted to my loving Father in Heaven: "I think you probably want me to love her, but I don't think I even like her." As soon as I said those words, a certain ease came to my heart. Yes, that was the answer. He wanted me to love her and be glad for her successes—but how? I just plain didn't feel like it.

Then a clear, sweet understanding came. I might not love her, but Heavenly Father loves her. Could I come to feel about her the way he did? I felt a desire to love her, and with guidance from the Holy Ghost, my heart began to soften. I began to see who she really was. With spiritual eyes, I discovered an earnest, intelligent woman who wanted to give of herself and be a contributing part of our family, one who believed deeply in the rights of others, one who wanted to be accepted by me, one who cared about me.

As that light of understanding grew in me, love for her settled in my heart, and I began to rejoice in who she was and valued her as a human being and a daughter of God. This change of heart was and is a gift. Unclouded understanding and an attitude of rejoicing for others comes from our spiritual Father and our Savior through the Holy Ghost, for they can lift us out of our selfishness to rejoice in others as they do. At those times, I find I can lift and love others with more generous support, and when this happens, I feel connected and bonded to the one with whom I am sharing my acceptance and joy.

All this may sound improbable—to rid our hearts of envy and fill them with rejoicing in one another's achievements—but ultimately it is a matter of desire. Do we want to have such a heart? We can, but we must yearn for it and ask, as in Carol Lynn Pearson's simple but eloquent poem "The Uses of Prayer."

Heaven Holds out the blessing Like a bright Ripe fruit, Only waiting For us to ask it: Our words Weave the basket. [^2]

Our own secret prayers will open our hearts, enabling us to receive this gift: to understand and love as God loves. Let me share with you what works for me in praying.

First, I go into a quiet room and lock the door behind me. In my home are several little people who like to come into the room and watch me pray. While I do believe in being an example to my children, this young, solemn audience can be comical and distracting, so I lock the door and then don't worry about being interrupted. Next, I kneel down. For me, kneeling is important. Choosing to act in meekness opens the way for the Holy Ghost to influence my attitude.

I then pray out loud. I find that when I pray silently, I communicate clearly for a while and then I lapse into telling Heavenly Father such things as the price of lettuce. When I pray out loud, I stay focused. My prayers begin with what I suppose you could call a private testimony meeting, in which I share with my Heavenly Father all I know and love about him. As I do so, my weaknesses become very clear. I am acutely aware of my need for a Redeemer. I thank him for listening and simply pour out the feelings of my heart, fears, doubts, hopes, needs, failings, and gratitude.

My faith is stronger after these special prayers. I am sometimes instructed just by the thoughts I hear myself praying out loud, and I often feel as though a thick, soft, warm shawl has been gently placed around me. The feeling around me is tender, comforting, soft, reassuring, and warm. Sometimes my spirit feels filled with light, and then I see more clearly what Heavenly Father wants me to do or I understand another's feelings and needs correctly. Little by little, through prayer, I am gaining light and feeling nearer to my Father in Heaven.

D&C 50:24 says, "That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light." Prayer is surely the first step to receiving more light; and for me the next essential step is scripture study. The scriptures can powerfully illuminate our daily lives. They throw light on our individual circumstances. Through them, the Lord can help us fulfill our duties and give strength, hope, and direction. When we read hungering for help, we get help.

Twelve years ago I was called as Young Women president in my ward. The circumstances were not ideal. My husband was bishop of a University of Utah singles ward, I was expecting our seventh child, and our oldest was ten years old. At that time, the Young Women president was both the teacher and the adviser for the Laurel class. I had thirteen Laurels who were not particularly pleased with me or each other.

David was a wonderful bishop, and I was glad, but I compared my success rate with his and felt like a failure. Every Sunday I herded my children home after a trying Laurel lesson and then bawled. I used up a whole bottle of Visine that year trying to make my eyes look okay. My well of confidence and spirituality was dry, and I didn't see any fresh springs nearby.

One day I read in 1 Ne. 4:1: "Let us be faithful in keeping the commandments of the Lord; for behold he is mightier than all the earth, then why not mightier than Laban and his fifty, yea, or even than his tens of thousands?" I felt light and truth sink into my heart as I applied this blessed scripture to myself, "Neill, if the Lord is mightier than all the earth, then why not mightier than your discouragement and ineffectiveness?"

On my knees I presented the whole heavy burden, asking for some of his strength and wisdom. I trusted the scriptures. James 1:5-6 spoke to me: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God . . . and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith." I felt reassured, and small moments of insight started coming. I could picture Christ reaching out to Jill, to Pam, to each of them—even to Lisa, who refused to attend. I knew that were Christ here, he would testify of Heavenly Father's love for each girl and his plan of salvation. Here was something I could do—in a personal visit bear my testimony to each individual Laurel. This simple idea found in prayer and scriptures resulted in a treasury of friendships, created by the power of the Holy Ghost that was present when we met one on one. Lisa never did come to a meeting or activity, nor did she ever indicate that she believed me when I bore my testimony in my monthly visits. Finally she moved, and we lost touch. Then, six years later, an invitation arrived to her temple wedding. I was thrilled for her and grateful she remembered me. After the ceremony she whispered to me, "You are one of the reasons I'm here today." Deeply moved, I knew it was the Lord who had used a stumbling Laurel teacher to speak the truth of his love to this girl.

Heavenly Father has a plan and a purpose for each of us. We are all "under heaven," as we are told in Eccl. 3:1: "To everything there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven." Heavenly Father knows our hearts and our gifts. When we look about and see others achieving but feel that we are not, then we must remind ourselves that we each have a purpose—and find through prayer and scripture study a way to rejoice in our own worth and the worth of others.

Sometimes life gets heavy and difficult, and we struggle to keep going. One of my favorite scriptures is Rom. 8:28: "All things work together for good to them that love God." All things. This verse doesn't say, "All things, except disease, work together for good," or "All things, except being single," or "All things, except a less-active spouse," or "All things except financial ruin." It says all things. It doesn't say all things are good; it says they work together for good. For whom? For those who love God.

In our quest to see one another as God sees us, I suggest that we first love God. Then we will feel about one another more as he feels; we will grow in understanding one another, and our delight in each other's achievements will be a natural impulse. Our righteous desires to rejoice in others' achievements can bring greater goodness to this earth. In acknowledging the good we see in others, we become agents of a warmer, steadier, kinder sisterhood, the carriers of goodwill.

I know that I am powerless to create these rejoicings by myself. Mosiah 4:5 says a knowledge of God's goodness awakens us to a sense of our nothingness. Hel. 12:7 exclaims, "How great is the nothingness of men." We are at present in a fallen state, but a healing power is always available to empower us. The atonement of Jesus Christ is that power. Only his atonement can heal the wounds in our heart, the sins in our past, the fears for our future so that we may return home, rejoicing in one another's achievements to live God's life, eternally.

Notes

Neill Foote Marriott is a homemaker who received her bachelor of arts degree from Southern Methodist University. A convert of twenty-five years, she serves as stake Relief Society president. Neill and her husband, David C. Marriott, are the parents of eleven children.

---
Notas:
[^1] Patricia T. Holland, "With Your Face to the Son," BYU Today, June 1987, 35.
[^2] Carol Lynn Pearson, "The Uses of Prayer," The Search (Provo, Utah: Trilogy Arts Publication, 1970), 31.
