Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

Between Twelve and Twenty: A Time of Change

VIRGINIA H. PEARCE

Have you ever wondered at how long your fifteen-year-old talks on the telephone, or the amount of time per week she spends in front of the mirror, or the number of outfits she takes from the closet before she decides what to wear? Perhaps you have watched a mother shudder as her teenaged son slouches into church with a new and bizarre haircut. What is happening to these usually reasonable and predictable children? In a simple phrase: they are hard at work. Their behaviors are all part of the process of becoming an adult.

Think about times of accelerated change in your own life experience. Remember those first few weeks on a new job and your feelings of confusion and inadequacy? Or remember a mission or a move and how it felt to suddenly have no identity—the strange feeling that no one knew your history. Adolescence is also a time of accelerated change.

Relocation: A Time of Change

I always feel a sense of adventure and excitement when I arrive in a new home, neighborhood, and city. At the same time, I have feelings of insecurity—and dozens of questions: What will be my new routine? Where and how will I shop, bank, go walking, get to know my neighbors? Will I find new friends? Does this neighborhood have new rules—most likely unwritten and unspoken—that I may trespass upon before I figure them out? Why do I feel almost invisible much of the time? And what is this kind of sick feeling in the pit of my stomach that seems to come and go? Is there someone I can find to ask all of these stupid questions—someone who knows the territory and will help me read the clues about how to talk, act, and do what I need to do?

Over and over again I don't even recognize myself. I feel timid about things that used to seem easy. I doubt my abilities and even past successes. I don't know what to expect from one day to the next. Similarly, the new administrative assistant in our office, who is new to Utah, said to me one day after a week of fairly violent weather, "Is this a normal spring?" I didn't know. I've been here so long that I do little more than watch the weather report and alter my day-to-day plans accordingly. But the weather in Salt Lake is just one of the things that Susan is trying to arrange into a predictable pattern as she adapts to all sorts of change.

Besides the loss of predictable patterns in the world, a move seems to precipitate more emotional ups and downs. One day in a new neighborhood I think, This is the best place I've ever lived. The next day I may be seized with despondency and dread of the future. Any emotional evenness I may have had gives way while I adjust and grow.

A friend of mine recently began a very intimidating new job. At the same time, she was building a new home and moving into a new neighborhood. I asked one day, "How's it going?" and she replied, "I am so sick of thinking about myself!" That is what change does to you. Initially you have to think about yourself a lot. I believe that this kind of egocentricity may have been what drove Enos in the Book of Mormon to desperate and intense prayer. He was experiencing a jolting change as he began his ministry as a prophet. His first concerns were totally egocentric—his own sins and weaknesses. Only after he received personal reassurance and forgiveness did he move on to the concerns of others (see Jacob 7:27-Enos 1).

After we have moved to a new home, what helps us progress beyond discomfort and egocentricity to a place of enlarged perspective and permanent growth? Mostly time. Simply being patient. We have learned from previous experiences that in time things will right themselves. Meanwhile, people who are not critical, who make us feel safe, and who invite us to ask all those "dumb questions" make adjustment a little less painful. A calling to serve in a new ward or branch may restore self-confidence, just when we are doubting our abilities. And watching people who are successfully navigating can provide clues to appropriate local behavior. In time we will become a comfortable and unself-conscious "local."

Adolescence: A Time of Change

Adolescence is an even more prolonged time of dramatic and pervasive change. Remembering some of the feelings and tasks of moving to a new home will enlarge our understanding of young people's behavior. Adolescence is, by definition, a time of intense and profound change. Between the ages of twelve and twenty, a child becomes an adult. The physical changes alone are immense. Height and weight change dramatically. Hormonal changes set in motion processes that literally create a new person, both physically and emotionally.

The structure of life also changes for the adolescent. The elementary schoolteacher who assumed a presence much like a parent is replaced by seven junior high or high school teachers who no longer have the time or mandate to assume much personal responsibility for individual students. At a time of increasing choices, both academic and extracurricular, teens also have greater access to friends who live outside their immediate neighborhoods.

Parents often feel apprehensive when a child enters adolescence. In our industrialized society, adolescents are not viewed as assets to the family business as they were in more rural, agrarian times. More often, parents expect that the child will become a financial and emotional drain on the family. Community rhetoric echoes family anxiety. Young people are seen not as a resource to the community but as a potential threat, requiring extra resources.

Adult rhetoric concerning teens moves on a continuum from good-humored but negative jokes to actual fear. As that occurs, adults tend to distance themselves from and isolate the adolescent. Furthermore, because the individual stakes are high, adults unwittingly communicate fear, rather than faith, in the future of the emerging adult.

The Work of Adolescence

Now think again of what it's like to move. Recall those feelings of disorientation, loneliness, isolation, loss of identity, confusion about newly required behaviors, inadequacy, excitement and adventurousness, lack of predictability, need for reassurance and acceptance, accelerated ups and downs, egocentricity, and self-doubt. Could they accurately describe the feelings of a normal, healthy, growing adolescent?

Add to those feelings a partial list of the massive work that will be done within a few years—the questions that will have to be answered before the unique new adult individual emerges—and our respect increases. The work of adolescence can be seen as the formation of individual identity—answering the question, Who am I? Included in this question are many others. There are gender questions (What does it mean to be male/female?), issues of attachments and belonging (How do I fit in with peer group/family/church structure/neighborhood? How do I make new friends? Will I ever have a boyfriend/ girlfriend?), concerns about competence and skills (What do I know? What can I do? Can I contribute anything useful to anyone else? What am I capable of in the future?). In addition, the work of adolescence involves choices with lifelong consequences (Now that I know I don't have to be just like my mother/father, what are my choices? Who helps me figure out what options are available? What do I believe? What do I do about what I believe?) and difficult questions of validation (How do I know if I'm doing okay? What do siblings, friends, parents, teachers, and other adults think of me?).

What Can We Do To Be Helpful?

When we understand the feelings, it's easy to see that the very same things that are helpful during a geographic move can help an adolescent. First is time. Unlike adults, a fifteen-year-old has much less experience to help her or him know about time and the magic it can work. Therefore, it becomes even more important that adults communicate to the teen their own patience and faith in the process of time.

Strangely enough, helpful behavior, especially this faith in the process, is often very difficult for parents to provide for their own children. Often, we can be of the greatest help to other people's children. Wouldn't you be grateful to a wonderful adult who befriended your son or daughter, who made that child so new to adulthood feel safe enough to ask "dumb questions"? An adult can reassure with positive and respectful language, can model appropriate adult behavior with warmth and concern. Adults can help an adolescent explore new interests and opportunities, build new skills, and strengthen an emerging new identity. An adult can work alongside the young person, helping him or her to experience new feelings of competence.

I recently asked some young people to talk about the adults in their lives. I wanted to know some of the specific attitudes and actions that they perceived as helpful:

"I love it when adults in my ward call me by my first name—not 'Little Johnson'!"

"I love working with my stepdad. He's great at fixing things, and I've learned how to do a lot of that stuff."

"The guy I home teach with is really cool. He hired me to do his yardwork."

"There's this really old guy in our neighborhood. He always asks me about my dates."

"I like it when adults ask me for my opinion and then don't just try to shoot it down."

Your personal emotional comfort with yourself is of real help to an adolescent. Just knowing people who have successfully negotiated adolescence and have become healthy adults is of great value in the chaotic climate of change. Ask the young people you know and care about what would be helpful to them. You may be surprised that much of what you are already doing is significant in their lives. I have often heard Sister Janette Hales Beckham, Young Women General President, say, "When we talk about young people and their challenges, I feel anxious. When we listen to young people, I feel encouraged." I agree with her. Our Latter-day Saint youth, actively engaged in the process of change between twelve and twenty, both need and deserve our admiration and trust.

Virginia H. Pearce serves as first counselor in the Young Women General Presidency. She received a master's degree in social work from the University of Utah. She and her husband, Dr. James R. Pearce, are the parents of six and the grandparents of seven.
