Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

Of Different Faiths

PAMELA J. ATKINSON

I came to Salt Lake City eight years ago from the Northwest to work as an administrator of patient services at LDS Hospital. I had been recruited by Intermountain Health Care. My friends and family had tried to caution me: "You are going where?" "Well, Salt Lake City," I said. "But why? What an odd place. There are Mormons there." "There are?" I hadn't known. "Yeah, and they're really weird." The people I had seen during my interview trip seemed quite normal, but I promised my family I'd stay on the lookout.

When my daughter and I first arrived, I bought a house in Bountiful, mainly because daffodils were in bloom there and I was longing for flowers. I was recently divorced and found my new neighbors very friendly and warm—just great people. My youngest daughter was living with me; the older two were at college. Our neighbors invited us to meals. They invited us to church. But a lot of my newly met non-LDS friends warned, "Just watch out, Pamela. They only want you to convert you." After a while, because I didn't want to attend church or go to every ward social and fireside with them, I found some of my neighbors didn't really have much more to do with me. I was puzzled. I was still open to friendships; I just didn't want to attend church with them because I was going to my own. Then it dawned on me one day that perhaps my daughter and I weren't seen as Christians. I recalled my daughter's excitement over her first friend at her new elementary school. She happily talked about her every evening when I arrived home, but one day during the second week, I found her at home crying. It seems that the new friend's mother had found out we weren't Latter-day Saints and had told her daughter the two girls could no longer be friends. We felt stunned. Was there something wrong with us?

When some family members came to Utah for a visit, I took them to Bountiful's lovely Mueller Park for a picnic. We opened a bottle of wine and sipped a glass with our meal. Other picnickers all must have been LDS, because they began whispering, some turning to face away from us, and others pointing at us. Uncomfortable, we finally packed up and left. Later the little eight-year-old girl who lived next door to us naively expressed the mixed message we were sensing: "You know, you two aren't too bad considering you're not LDS." Aha, we thought. That's it.

By the time my daughter was thirteen, she had a number of close LDS friends and was attending some of their activities. At home one evening, when I was drinking a glass of wine, I noticed her watching me. "What are you looking at me like that for?" I asked. Her answer was full of piety: "You'll never get to the celestial kingdom if you act like that." At the time, I didn't know what the celestial kingdom was. I have since learned. I have even learned that the angel on the temple is not Gabriel but Moroni!

Over the years, I have also gratefully come to know Latter-day Saints who did not treat non-Latter-day Saints as morally inferior or less than Christian. Non-Latter-day Saints in Utah have a great need to be liked for who they are, not just as possible LDS converts. Both Latter-day Saints and non-Latter-day Saints need to remember that our lives may be the only scriptures that some people read. What I've learned from my LDS friends, I've learned from their lives, their caring, their reaching out, their love of me as a human being.

Just a few years ago, I was housebound and on crutches after knee surgery. A Relief Society president called to see how I was managing and in no time at all had organized the women in my neighborhood. Every day gracious neighbors brought in meals; it was terrific. Perhaps the greatest statement of personal generosity came from my kitty-corner neighbor Liz, who called to ask, "How are you doing?" I said, "Well, right now I'm struggling." When she asked why, I explained, "Oh, I'm trying to make a pot of tea. Have you ever tried to make a pot of tea on crutches?" To my surprise she said, "I've never made a pot of tea, but I'll come over and you can tell me how." I thought that was terrific. In Moro. 7:47 you can read, "But charity is the pure love of Christ." That's what I felt with these LDS friends—they were really reaching out to me in my need at that time. I will always be grateful for them.

I've searched diligently for what I call "safe people"—those with whom I can share a dialogue about their Latter-day Saint faith and beliefs, who aren't going to try to convert me but just help me to understand. I think of such people as my tremendous friends Colleen and Neal Maxwell. I can say to my non-LDS friends, "Hey, the Maxwells like me for who I am, not necessarily as a possible convert—although I'm sure they would love to have me join their church. But they like me for who I am." Such acceptance gives me a great feeling.

Perhaps our charity could extend to a genuine interest in what other people believe. Sometimes on Monday mornings, my coworkers chat about the priesthood, about Relief Society, about their wards and bishops. But nobody asks me what went on at my Presbyterian church. I find myself thinking, Gosh, I wish somebody would say, "Hey, what happened at your church, Pamela?" My non-LDS friends might, but my LDS colleagues and friends are so full of their own thoughts because they've had such great Sundays that they don't think to ask what other people might have done on the weekend.

One feeling we hold in common is our love of Jesus Christ and the Old and the New Testaments. We are all God's children. I believe that Christ lived on earth and died for my sins as well as yours. I believe we can be saved through accepting Christ as our personal Savior. I believe that I will be judged on my whole life—my relationship with other people, my faith, and my actions. I wonder which of my beliefs makes me less of a Christian than some of my LDS friends. A lot of my non-LDS friends believe that Latter-day Saints have a different God and a different Jesus Christ, but discussions with my LDS friends have convinced me otherwise. Many of our beliefs are the same, yet at times, I sense that some LDS people feel that what I believe is of no consequence. That hurts.

It says in Alma 1:30, "Therefore they were liberal to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, whether out of the church or in the church." I respect that verse. As one of twenty-four elected elders, male and female in the Presbyterian Church, I am responsible for mission services and community outreach. Elders are elected by the congregation for three years' service, and then they usually have some time off before being elected to serve again. My current assignment is to help our church members reach out to the community by working with homeless and low-income people. We arrange for the youth to do home repair and yardwork for older people and to make sandwiches, serve dinner, and assist in other ways at the Salvation Army and the homeless shelter. We also help needy people in our church neighborhood. I raise and budget funds for homeless people who come by for food, for gasoline vouchers, and other needs. Along with the other twenty-three elders, I'm also responsible for spiritual growth of the church.

We should never forget that reaching out and caring for someone can make a great deal of difference in that person's life. Reach out to your non-LDS friends and neighbors and discover how your life can be enriched as mine has been because of my LDS friends. A few months ago, I walked in a little late to a meeting at the hospital. The only woman in a group of LDS men, I listened to talk about the LDS Church this and the LDS Church that. Finally somebody said, "Oops, sorry, Pamela. We forgot." And I said, "Oh, that's quite all right. We're all elders here." I'm grateful we knew each other well enough to share that joke.

Jesus said to love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind. This is the first and greatest commandment. And the second is like unto it, love your neighbor as yourself (see Matt. 22:37-39). We are all neighbors, whether of the LDS faith or any other, and should be reaching out to each other in love.

Pamela J. Atkinson is vice president of Mission Services for Intermountain Health Care. She is actively involved in community work with homeless and low-income families and individuals. She has three children: Sally, Roger, and Heather. Pamela is an elder in the First Presbyterian Church in Salt Lake City.
