Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

New Ways to Teach and Learn: Caring and Connecting

BEVERLY B. ZIMMERMAN

One of my favorite comic strips is "Calvin and Hobbes." In one sequence, Calvin appears in nine different poses: driven with a herd of cattle, bottled like juice on a cannery assembly line, running circles in a squirrel cage, working on a chain gang, walking like a robot, squawking senseless phrases on a parrot perch, jumping with fright in a cemetery, being driven as a square peg into a round hole, and flapping around like a fish out of water. [^1] In the final frame, Calvin and Hobbes head down the hill in their wagon. Calvin says, "Boy, am I glad to see you, Hobbes!" And Hobbes replies, "Another typical school day?" In this cartoon, artist Bill Watterson provides a clever commentary on how Calvin—and many of us—would characterize our educational experiences.

South American philosopher Paulo Freire uses the metaphor of banking to characterize a view of education not unlike Calvin's. [^2] Freire criticizes teachers who see their role as depositing information into students' minds, and students who simply store those deposits. According to Freire, in this manner of learning, teachers first study a subject and prepare lectures and lesson plans in the privacy of their offices; second, they expound about the subject to their students; and third, students faithfully write down what the teachers say.

As passive recipients, students never experience the subject. Rather they memorize what the teacher tells them and then repeat the information back on examinations. Thus, students see the result of a teacher's thinking but never experience the teacher's learning process. Teachers talk, and students listen. Teachers deposit ideas into the students' notebooks, and students store those deposits.

Unfortunately, this approach is all too common in schools, church settings, and other learning situations. Teachers assume they can transmit or deliver ideas from their own minds or from a text to students without ever asking students to interpret those ideas or to interact with the teacher. As a result, students doubt their ability to discover or create knowledge for themselves. Moreover, emphasizing what students learn (the content of a course) over how students learn (the process by which they learn) can lead to teachers like one I know who said point-blank: "I have been certified by the General Authorities to teach at BYU. When students have been certified, then I will entertain their ideas." Or, it may produce such teachers as the one I observed responding to a student: "If you had read the text, you wouldn't ask such a question."

During my training to become an instructional designer, I became interested in the current heated educational debate over appropriate metaphors for teaching and learning. Some of the most interesting thinking comes from Mary Field Belenky and other women researchers. In Women's Ways of Knowing: The Development of Self, Voice, and Mind, Belenky and her colleagues point out that psychological studies of wealthy male college students form the basis for our current theories of learning. Thus, many of our assumptions about education, Belenky argues, are biased because (1) few women have participated in educational studies or conducted them and (2) when women have participated, the results have been analyzed using conclusions drawn from the study of men. [^3]

Belenky's group interviewed 135 women from all walks of life: working women, women in the home, educated women, and women on welfare. Whereas the earlier studies of men had shown learners preferred independence, autonomy, and competition, the women Belenky studied preferred interdependence, nurturance, and cooperation. Thus, Belenky and others would like to replace the metaphors of banking and hierarchy with the metaphor of a web or a net whereby teachers and students connect with each other on equal terms and where students cooperate rather than compete with each other.

This model allows information to flow not only from the teacher to the students but from the students to the teacher. Connected teachers and students become partners who both engage in the learning process and discuss their insights. Thus, as connected teachers and students think and talk together, their roles merge—students become teachers and teachers become students.

Furthermore, Belenky found learners develop their own knowledge when teachers "emphasize connection over separation, understanding and acceptance over assessment, and collaboration over debate; if [teachers] accord respect to and allow time for the knowledge that emerges from firsthand experience; [and] if instead of imposing their own expectations and arbitrary requirements, they encourage students to evolve their own patterns of work based on the problems they are pursuing." [^4]

As part of my dissertation research, I observed a male teacher who had implemented in his college writing classes Belenky's connected, supportive, collaborative classroom model. Later I attempted to adopt those same metaphors in my own classroom, in my church calling, and in my home.

I now teach technical writing at Brigham Young University. Establishing a caring and supportive classroom while still providing a rigorous course is not easy because most of my students are male upper-division science and engineering students, used to the lecture method of teaching.

The first essential step is to learn every student's name and to ask them to learn each other's names. That allows for more interactive class discussions. And I find that I genuinely respect my students' opinions; their many years of experience with textbooks has already prepared them to recognize good writing. They can usually describe what they like and dislike about the samples of resumes, letters, instruction manuals, and product specifications I give them. I also include collaborative assignments, small group discussions of each other's work, and after every writing assignment, I allot class time for students to comment on how they solved problems that arose and what they learned from the assignment.

I also discuss my own writing with students: I show them red marks by numerous editors and I describe some of the decisions (wise and otherwise) I've made in writing for a specific audience, purpose, or situation. At first, I worried that by seeing my mistakes, students would question my expertise in teaching the course. What I found was just the opposite. As one student told me: "I have to be honest and say that my first response to the other students' comments on my paper was anger. I kept thinking, He had no idea how hard I worked on this paper! Then I remembered the day you showed us all the changes you had to make on one of your computer manuals. You said it's hard to take criticism but it helped you see holes in your work. So I cooled down a bit and looked at his responses objectively."

Changing my teaching style has made me more flexible and more focused on teaching students and less on teaching subject matter. I've had a harder time using connected teaching in my Church calling as a stake Relief Society president. Our training from the Relief Society General Board to "Think, Pair, Share" certainly encourages connections, but unfortunately I most often see the banking metaphor in Relief Society meetings—teachers talk and students listen. The only one who really learns is the teacher.

Three years ago, we changed our stake women's conference from an "Education Week" format in which women sat in classes and listened to experts to one in which the women in the stake shared their own stories. Over the course of three years, we have heard from many fine women in our stake—women who have sacrificed and suffered, who have been challenged by death, divorce, or personal illness, who have turned to the Lord for strength. This shared sisterhood has enabled many sisters to face and accept their own struggles. Unfortunately, our attempts at learning through connection have not always been understood by some who fear a woman's need for sharing may lead to "gossip" or who consider a discussion of challenges to be negative.

I have had an even harder time applying the metaphor of caring and connection in my own home. Because I'm stubborn, it's taken me a while to learn that preaching isn't teaching. Connected teaching means I must let go of the need to control or manipulate my husband and our children. As a result, our family home evenings have become less formal. Some of the best teaching happens while we're playing games or just sharing the day's experiences. When I saw a need to encourage my children to get along better, for example, instead of preaching about being tolerant, we took a personality test and discovered that personality differences are fun. Being more tolerant and accepting of each other was a natural outcome.

Slowly, I'm discovering that sometimes the best way to teach in the home is just to listen. Recently, my daughter was called as president of her Mia Maid class and needed to choose her counselors. When she asked for my advice, my first impulse was to tell her which girls I thought would make good counselors. Instead, I asked her what she had done so far in trying to decide and how she felt about it. As she explained to me how she had prayed about each girl in her class and felt good about certain names, she realized she had already received her answer.

It's never easy to make changes, but my efforts to change my teaching style have brought some unexpected bonuses. As I've struggled to share my writing with my students, I've discovered areas where I can improve. Hearing other women share their struggles has given me courage to better accept and handle my own. By listening to my children, I have come to understand myself.

In the end, by caring, by sharing, by listening, both students and teachers are better taught. I have learned much more, and I have become a better teacher, leader, and parent as I've learned to value my own—and others'—experiences. Shouldn't a few frames of caring and connection be worked into the Calvin and Hobbes cartoon? Teaching and learning would be the better for it. Nel Noddings expressed it well when she stated: "It is time for the voice of the mother to be heard in education." [^5]

Notes

Beverly Burrup Zimmerman, assistant professor of English at Brigham Young University, holds a Ph.D. in instructional science. She and her husband, Scott Zimmerman, have seven children and one grandchild. She has served as a stake Relief Society president in her Orem, Utah, stake.

---
Notas:
[^1] Margaret Gay Judd Clawson, "Rambling Reminiscence of Margaret Gay Judd Clawson," holograph, Archives Division, Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City; hereafter cited as LDS Church Archives. Courtesy of Jean Greenwood and Kathlene Fife Jackson, who transcribed the text. See also Relief Society Magazine 6 (1919): 257-62, 317-27, 391-400, 474-79; and excerpts in Gordon Irving, ed., "Teenage Pioneer: The Adventures of Margaret Judd Clawson," New Era 4 (May 1974): 44-50. BYU's Religious Studies Center is publishing the entire Clawson manuscript as prepared by Kathlene Fife Jackson in a volume edited by Claudine Foudray Gallacher.
[^2] Mary Goble Pay, "Death Strikes the Handcart Company," in A Believing People: Literature of the Latter-day Saints, ed. Richard H. Cracroft and Neal E. Lambert (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1974), 107.
[^3] Patricia Cooper and Norma Bradley Buferd, The Quilters: Women and Domestic Art (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1978), 20.
[^4] Annie Clark Tanner, A Mormon Mother: An Autobiography by Annie Clark Tanner (Salt Lake City: Tanner Trust Fund, University of Utah Library, 1969).
[^5] "The Journal of Rhoda Ann Dykes Burgess," typescript in possession of the author, courtesy of Lois Shepherd Beck and Jill Mulvay Derr.
