Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

In Search of Spirit: Life Writings of Latter-day Saint Women

MAUREEN URSENBACH BEECHER

A journal entry is a piece saved from the fabric of a

woman's day. Ragged, incomplete, misshapen—only its

color and pattern are left to show how it fits with its mates.

And now that I have written this long, disconnected rambling remembrances of the past," wrote Mormon pioneer Margaret Judd Clawson in the late nineteenth century, "I Scarsly know what to do with it For who Can be interested in the little things of [the] Common, everyday life of another?" [^1]

I, for one, and my colleagues are interested. Since the birth some thirty years ago of the study of women's history, we have valued every such text for the richness of its details: its little things. From just such rambling remembrances as those of Margaret Clawson, we have been able to extract the details which, analyzed and synthesized, allow us to construct and illustrate a history of the Latter-day Saint past, female.

As I have worked in archive collections abstracting an overall picture, however, I have realized that my joy was not in the generalizations I could draw but in each life I was reading. Something in the handwritten, sometimes penciled, often naive, misspelled, uncluttered account each woman gave of herself drew me in and held me fast. I would find the single detail or particular description I needed for my historical analysis; then, guilt nudging at my elbow to move to other sources, I would read on, and on, and on. Each writer, whom I viewed first as informant, became by stages an individual, a woman, an acquaintance, my friend, my sister. The historical data became a by-product of what is now to me a much more satisfying search: the life writings of Latter-day Saint women, a literature of its own. Richard Cracroft and Neal Lambert, in their anthology A Believing People, introduced me to Mary Goble Pay's description of her family's arrival in Utah with the handcart companies: "We arrived in Salt Lake City nine o'clock at night the 11th of December 1856. Three out of four that were living were frozen. My mother was dead in the wagon.

"Bishop Hardy had us taken to a home in his ward and the brethren and the sisters brought us plenty of food. We had to be careful and not eat too much as it might kill us we were so hungry.

"Early next morning Bro. Brigham Young and a doctor came. The doctor's name was Williams. When Bro. Young came in he shook hands with us all. When he saw our condition—our feet frozen and our mother dead—tears rolled down his cheeks." [^2]

The passage defies analysis by any of the criteria by which I was taught to recognize good writing. Simple sentences, or run-on, or fragmentary. Interjections. Dangling modifiers. Little words—only two with more than two syllables in the whole passage. But a Hopkins sonnet or a John Donne sermon has not the power to move me as has this honest piece so simply written. The literary canon must expand to allow it a place.

Our manuscript collections are rich with the life writings of ordinary Latter-day Saint women from our recent past. Brigham Young University's Harold B. Lee Library, among other local repositories, has such gems packed away in Fiberdex boxes, often untouched from year to year. Not the written-for-publication works of famous women, these are either the daily jottings of mothers, wives, daughters, or the women's mature attempts to set their lives in order, to explain themselves not to the world but to their children and their children's children in the Puritan tradition of testimony bearing and lasting testament. In loose sheets or bound notebooks, they are as imperfect as the lives they represent, as incomplete as a peek through the keyhole, as unfinished as mortality.

As we broaden the literary canon to include these texts, we establish a corpus of the life writings of ordinary women. How do we then approach them critically? What principles can guide our reading? How do they reach us, these private pieces?

First there is the question of genre. Diaries—or journals—differ from autobiographies or memoirs or reminiscences. Let me use a homely metaphor to make some distinctions. Mary White was one of the West Texas quiltmakers interviewed by Patricia Cooper and Norma Bradley Buferd for their 1978 book, The Quilters. For Mary, quilting was a way to see the world: "You can't always change things. Sometimes you don't have no control over the way things go. Hail ruins the crops, or fire burns you out. And then you're given so much to work with in a life and you have to do the best you can with what you've got. That's what piecing is. The materials is passed on to you or is all you can afford to buy . . . that's what's given to you. Your fate. But the way you put them together is your business. You can put them in any order you like." [^3]

The image works as well to explain not only the living of a life but also the writing of one. Each recorded moment, each diary entry, is a piece saved from the fabric of a woman's day. Ragged, incomplete, misshapen—only its color and its pattern are left to show how it fits with its mates. Like fabric scraps, a diary is a jumble of unconnected pieces tossed together into a box and pushed under the bed.

Years later, having survived the more demanding necessities of her life, a woman might eventually pull out her box of swatches or blocks and arrange them into a full quilt top. "You can put them in any order you like," Mary White said. Wedding Ring, Log Cabin, Windmill, Flying Geese, or Crazy Quilt—she would now create a thing of beauty in which every piece connected artistically and permanently to its neighbor and every block had its partner. Each piece that the collector still liked, that is, or would acknowledge as hers. That is an autobiography. Its intricacy or simplicity tells more about the woman at the time of its quilting than of the blocks at the time of their origin. It uses the stuff of the past merely as the raw material out of which the present is recreated.

Take Annie Clark Tanner, for example. You may know her as A Mormon Mother from her fine autobiography published by her son Obert in 1969. [^4] From first to last, we have not the child Annie growing up, the girl Annie attending Brigham Young Academy, the young woman Annie marrying into polygamy, or the mother Annie rearing her children alone in Farmington. Instead each part is cut to shape and placed in the whole to reveal to the mature, reflecting Annie—and to the reader—the meaning of the contradictions in her life. In composing the autobiography, Annie drew on her collection of her diaries and letters, which, her son later told me, were destroyed. How sad. In the spaces between the diary and the autobiography, what might we learn of growth, of struggle, of developing self-awareness?

Then we might have of Annie what we do have of Rhoda Dykes Burgess, whose diary, as typed by her granddaughter, recently came to hand. Begin anywhere—it hardly matters. Try January 15, 1882, Pine Valley, Utah. "It is snowing very hard to day there has been no meeting nor Sunday school most of the men are away at work I am not well to day Eliza has been writing the young folks are having a sleigh ride oh how I miss my Dear Mother when I am sick." [^5]

Then begin to trace the pieces. "Today's" snow will last for months, even though this is Pine Valley, not thirty miles from St. George—Utah's usual hot spot. The Burgesses have come down from their farm in Grass Valley, farther up the mountains, where the winter is even harder, to live until summer. It helps to have neighbors, especially in winter. In spring, Rhoda and George will again move their household the twelve miles north.

It is Sunday as Rhoda writes. Even so, the men are away at work. The men are usually away at work. "I am not well today" is a rare complaint for Rhoda, and a foreshadowing: in three weeks, she will bear her tenth child and sixth daughter. On the eve of the birth, Rhoda will write: "I have been cleaning washed and Ironed a littel the Children are home from school Geo is back from Grassvalley supper is over and the littel ones are in bed the snow is quite deep and the weather very cold I am so lonely to night and selfish enough to wish my Dear old Mother here with me." [^6]

Anticipating the birth without "my Dear old Mother" is particularly trying; Dorcas Keeling Dykes (Grandma to the children, Ma to Rhoda) had been sick through most of December. The diary reads:

"Dec 12 the Children came from Grandmas this morning said she was sick so I hurried down found her in bed she said she was a littel better she had had a chill . . .

Dec 13 I have been sick all day . . . so I did not go down till evening found her much better she said she wanted her supper so we got it she ate hearty seemed to enjoy it

Dec 14 Ma is not so well to day has that old pain in her side

Dec 15 Ma is no better and yet she does not seem very sick her appetite is quite good and her mouth is all broke out with cold sores . . .

Dec 16 Ma sent word to me not to come down to day as she felt much better I am so glad . . .

Dec 17 I hurried down to Mas this morning found she had spit blood all night . . . I hope it is nothing serious I have seen her spit blood before this Brother Lloyd has just administered to her I do wish George was here—evening—Lord help us to say Thy will be done our Dear old Mother has passed away to a better world than this."

"The snow is falling on her grave today," Rhoda writes as she draws one day nearer her own passage through "the valley of the shadow of death" that was giving birth.

So, patch after patch, the quilt pieces jumble into Rhoda's box. Life. Raw life. Day by tedious day. "I have been piecing a flannel quilt and tearing carpet rags all day." The fabric of a woman's life.

But not always so heavy with responsibility. Take Lizzie Conrad, nearly nineteen and waiting for her true love to return, writing to her diary as though to a friend, and signaling with a squiggle each day a letter arrives from her Hyrum: "Little Journal I haven't written any in you for a long time I have neglected you and my mind is getting rusty. Sacred little book you will keep my secrets wont you."

The persona is innocence itself, springtime pregnant with promise but threatened by approaching summer: "21st of March [1894] This is my birthday. I am 19 years old. I ought to be a woman now. Oh what a responcibility. The oldest one of the family ought to be able to take the place of ma. [Lizzie's mother will give birth next month.] Hyrum is coming home, am I happy or sorry? I am glad he is coming home, but sorry I have not been a better girl and proven my self more worthy of him. . . . I was such a child when he went away and a very thoughtless girl and Hyrum the boy that he was, sent away to preache the Gospel, he will come home with a great deal of experience and a strong testamony of the truth. I wonder if I will ever be worthy of him."

Hyrum does return, and the diary, like the Velveteen Rabbit, is forgotten a while. A year passes.

"Well my little book it has been a long time since I've told you how I felt. I'd feel pretty well if I'd done right all the time but I have not. I thought at one time I had more trouble than any one, but the old saying is, that time is the great healer of all wounds, and he has partly healed mine. After having taken a fancy to the German lad his folks took it into their heads that it must not be so. They there fore decided to seperate us by the Atlantic Ocean, and thought that I would soon marry and their son would be saved but that scheme dident work. Hyrum and I felt the same as of old towards each other. His folks still treat me cool. He left for Scofield on the 15 of May to raise some money to pay[of[f] his mission debt and of corse I am left alone again." [^7]

The course of true love, et cetera, et cetera. But true true love it seldom is. For personal texts are the fictions we create to make our lives acceptable to ourselves. By omissions, by evasions, or by outright untruths, we reshape events to our liking. "I don't remember why I was lying here," observed a young friend on reading her own teenage diary, "but I know this is a lie." [^8] Our memories are flawed—distorted—as people discover when they share their version of an event with that of a sibling or a spouse. But within every text is imbedded a deeper truth, a transcendent reality trying to emerge.

Before he allowed the Church historian to look at his diary, my grandfather carefully razored out small sections. More frequently we totally omit details which belie the persona we are trying to present. Spaces. Silences. Perhaps the most interesting part of the autobiographical record is what is left out and why. In my grandfather's case, notes were deleted after inclusion. Perhaps they reflected ill on another person; perhaps they spoke a truth which, in the days of post-Manifesto plural marriage, could be damaging to the Church; perhaps they simply contradicted the self he wished to portray. That another of my ancestors noted the birth of one of his children in the margin, as an afterthought, need not suggest that the birth meant little to him; it could as easily reflect his sense of what a man's journal ought to concern itself with.

Women, too, have been known to suppress parts of their records or even to destroy the entire record. More often what happens in a woman's world seems to her simply too mundane, too routine, too insignificant to warrant mention. The "dailiness" of a woman's life, Laurel Ulrich calls it; the ongoing "woman's work" that creates the core around which the household members build their lives; the "little things" Margaret Clawson deemed of no interest.

Emma Lorena Barrows Brown, called in the 1880s as president of the Wasatch Stake Relief Society, kept a lean diary of her activities. The few events and activities she considered worthy of mention are framed by the omission of the ones she did not deign to note. "At home," she would write, "at home and washed," "at home all day," "quilted a quilet raining," "at home ironed," "at home," summarizing for herself the demanding tasks of keeping house in rural Charleston, Utah. In contrast, Relief Society activities are spelled out in her 1878 entries:

"Sun 28 [July 1878] went to R Society Meeting [.] Meeting comenced at 9 Oclock Sister E R Snow & Zina Young spoke and gave ous some good instruction went to Sunday School then went to Bro Murdock to Dinner went to afternoon Meeting come home and got Supper then went to the[Y[oung][L[adies'] Meeting Sis Snow Zina Young spoke had a good meeting." [^9]

Whether the task of diary keeping became too onerous, the weather too unremittingly hot, or Emma Lorena simply unable to find significance in her activities, in August 1880 the life of the thirty-seven-year-old wife, mother, sister, and president is reflected in an even more sparse series:

"Thu 19 went on the hills back of our place Lizza came over

"Fri 20 started home on a load of hay

"Sat 21 at home

"Sun 22 at home Geo went after the Cows

"Mon 23 at home

"Tus 24 at home

"Wed 25 at home

"Thu 26 at home

"Fri 27 at home

"Sat 28 at home

"Sun 29 went to Meeting

"Mon 30 wash"

The columnar appearance of August's entries and the apparent sameness of her days may well have discouraged Emma Lorena. After three similarly brief September entries, she inscribed the date and day of the week along the margin and left six weeks' worth of empty spaces from "Fri 3 at home" to October 22. Then she noted, after a space of a word's length, "& Ethan came home." A similar hiatus commenced again November 11 and continued to December 14, when even the dates no longer appear. Empty pages represent January and February 1881, designating presumably the diarist's intent to summarize those months later. Then the passage of March through November is simply noted by month. September is the exception: "On the 23 of this month William Leonard Brown was Born." Whether pregnancy had been more than usually difficult, the summer more than usually hot, the work more than usually dreary, or the baby more than normally difficult, only Emma Lorena can know. For us it is left to ponder the silences, the spaces, and their meaning in the framework of the whole diary. Reading on, we feel relief when in November "Geo went to Provo to meet Sister Horn and Howard," and the Relief Society work resumes for President Brown. It is easier to deal with the positive statements than the negative spaces.

Margaret Judd Clawson, with whom this essay began, wrote in full and delightful detail of her young womanhood, of crossing the plains, of performing in the Salt Lake Theater, of young motherhood, of the social life that whirled around her family. But of the backstage romance and her marriage as second wife to Hiram Clawson, she writes only: "In 1852 I was sealed to Hiram B. Clawson by President Brigham Young and I have no cause to regret ever having taken that step For he has been a Kind, Considerate husband and a most indulgent Father to all of his Children." Four years later, when Margaret was four months pregnant with their son Rudger, Hiram married a third time. Her pain and that of Hiram's first wife, Ellen Spencer Clawson, are reflected in that woman's letter to her friend Ellen McGary in San Bernardino telling of the new marriage: "I think perhaps Margaret feels worse than I do for she was the last, and I suppose thought he would never get another, the same as I did." [^10] In an autobiography written presumably for her children, Margaret did not share the anguish, the ache, the sorrow engendered by her marriage in polygamy. Nor perhaps could she acknowledge the seemingly illicit delight of being courted and won by a man already someone else's husband. In any case, in her reminiscence, as in so many LDS women's accounts, her soon-to-be husband is a shadow, a phantom, seldom named or seen.

Margaret's sister-wife Ellen, however, is freer in her letter—she knows, or thinks she knows, that her words will be kept private by one who will understand. After that third marriage, Ellen confides to her friend: "I feel as though it would do me good to write, for my heart is rather heavy. I never thought I could care again if Hiram got a dozen wives, but it seems as though my affections return with double force, now that I feel as if I had lost him but I expect he thinks as much of me as ever, only in a different way you know a new wife is a new thing, and I know it is impossible for him to feel any different towards her just at present, still it[make[s] my heart ache to think I have not the same love, but I console myself with thinking it will subside into affection, the same as it is with me, for you know the honey-moon cannot always last at least if you dont know it now you will sometime perhaps."

Words tumble pell-mell from Ellen's pen, her grief revealed to her friend. Such intimate disclosure is rare in an autobiography and in most diaries. In deigning to read such a letter, we who seek to understand the burdens of the past count ourselves among the writer's confidants and assume with reverence an obligation of compassion and love. We, too, become sisters and friends.

Quilts, embroideries, tapestries—fabrics of women's lives, these personal narratives. Loosely woven or still on the loom, bobbins dangling, colors yet to be interwoven; or tightly bound and neatly finished, ends tucked in, seams hidden. Unique as the mind that conceived them, the hands that made them, they warm us, please our eye, delight our sensibilities, evoke our love. Let us not participate longer in the silencing of the voices of our sisters of past and present. Let us find their texts, read them, share them, and learn from them. In them we find ourselves.

Notes

This essay is an excerpt from an article previously published in BYU Studies 34, no. 4 (1994-95), 14-45, and taken originally from the Alice Louise Reynolds Lecture, 17 Mar. 1994, Harold B. Lee Libraries, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.

Maureen Ursenbach Beecher is professor of English and an associate at the Joseph Fielding Smith Institute for Church History at Brigham Young University. A former missionary to Switzerland and a ward Relief Society president, she lives in Salt Lake City with her teenaged children.

---
Notas:
[^1] A Centenary of Relief Society [ed. Belle S. Spafford and Marianne C. Sharp] (Salt Lake City: General Board of Relief Society, 1942), 14.
[^2] Emma Smith, in Centenary, 14.
[^3] Sarah Cleveland, "A Record of the Organization, and Proceedings of the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo," 1842-1844, holograph, Archives of the Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, 17 Mar. 1842; hereafter cited as Nauvoo Minutes.
[^4] Nauvoo Minutes, 28 Apr. 1842; emphasis added.
[^5] George Albert Smith, "Address to the Members of the Relief Society," General Relief Society Conference, 4 Oct. 1945; in Relief Society Magazine, Dec. 1945, 717.
[^6] Reynolds Cahoon, Nauvoo Minutes, 13 Aug. 1843.
[^7] Seneca Falls is just at the other end of Seneca Lake from where the Church was organized at the Peter Whitmer farm eighteen years earlier.
[^8] Abigail Adams, Adams Family Correspondence, vol. 1, ed. L. H. Butterfield (Massachusetts Historical Society, 1963), 10-11.
[^9] John Adams, in Correspondence, 11.
[^10] See Lucy Mack Smith, Nauvoo Minutes, 24 Mar. 1842, 19.
