Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

Relief Society: So What?

MARJORIE DRAPER CONDER

Five years ago, while hurrying out the door to Relief Society one Sunday morning, I had a flash of inspiration for my lesson and ran back into the house to dash off a visual aid. During the lesson I listed some of the many voices that tell us there is always something more to do. Advertisers tell us we've got to try a new soft drink; the dentist thinks we should floss; our kids want the latest software. The list goes on and on. Sometimes even church can seem like a commandment-of-the-week club. To my Relief Society sisters I said, "After a while, you may just want to shut all the voices out. So I have a question for you. If you can't answer this question to your satisfaction, you don't have to do anything about anything we've said here today—and you don't have to feel guilty. You can just forget about it." I held up my hastily made cardboard visual aid that said, "SO WHAT?" Everybody laughed. But the question led to a productive discussion.

I have often asked myself this same question. In 1990, I was assigned to be in charge of the Relief Society sesquicentennial exhibit at the Church Museum. At first I was excited. Then I asked myself, "Relief Society, so what?" Why should we be spending sacred tithing money to put on an exhibit about the Relief Society?

To find an answer to that question, I first reviewed the history. In 1842, all of Nauvoo was focused on the construction of the Nauvoo Temple. Some women gave their churned butter to the workmen; some knitted socks and mittens. Sisters Mercy Fielding Thompson and Mary Fielding Smith collected pennies from as far away as England to buy nails and glass. Sarah Granger Kimball, only twenty-three but one of the wealthiest women in Nauvoo, was married to Hyrum Kimball, not a Church member. In her home lived "Miss Cook" who helped with domestic chores. Miss Cook had a great desire to help with the Nauvoo Temple but no resources. Sarah Kimball had resources but, with a new baby, little time. They combined their assets: Sarah provided fabric, needles, thread, and the warm parlor where Sister Cook and others met to sew shirts for the men constructing the temple.

As they sewed, the women discussed formalizing their association in some way. Apparently, however, no woman in this little sewing group had enough self-confidence to draft a constitution for the proposed group. So they asked Eliza R. Snow, the best-known writer in Nauvoo. Eliza took what she had written to Joseph Smith, who told her the constitution was the best he had ever seen and then added, "but this is not what you want. Tell the sisters their offering is accepted of the Lord, and He has something better for them." [^1] Then he invited the sisters to meet with him in the upper story of his Red Brick Store the following Thursday.

I have heard that pleasantly familiar story many times. As with the Christmas story, I enjoy knowing what is coming next. In preparing the sesquicentennial exhibit, however, I asked myself, "What exactly was the something better?" What I found led me to a new understanding of what God intends for women in these latter days—the civil and religious empowerment of women in the Restoration.

Although Emma Smith, elected president at the first meeting, declared, "We are going to do something extraordinary," [^2] the women involved in that first Relief Society could not have guessed what this modest organization, begun as a sewing circle, would soon accomplish in Nauvoo, not to mention its future into the present. In the founding meeting, second counselor Sarah Cleveland said, "We design to act in the name of the Lord—to relieve the wants of the distressed, and do all the good we can." [^3] After formally establishing themselves as the "Female Relief Society of Nauvoo," the twenty women in that initial group organized themselves two by two to survey the needs of the women of Nauvoo and do what they could to help. They called themselves the Necessity Committee. The name has changed, but what they were about has not. Of Nauvoo's nearly ten thousand residents at the time, most lived in desperate want in log cabins, shacks, and even shanties. We don't often think of Nauvoo as a frontier city of refugees and immigrants, but that is what it was. These women were also early activists. They even voted to boycott merchants who were cheating widows, hoping thus to combine their strength to safeguard sisters who were defenseless and economically oppressed.

Perhaps the most interesting Relief Society meeting ever was held a little over a month later, on 28 April 1842, again in the Red Brick Store. The Prophet Joseph, who attended some but not all of the meetings, was at this one. He preached to the women from 1 Cor. 13 on charity as a particular gift of women. The apostle Paul's phrase "charity never faileth" (v. 8) eventually became the Relief Society motto. He told the women to be kind to their husbands and to love one another. What he said next, recorded in the meeting minutes, has often been misquoted. He said, "I now turn the key to you in the name of God and this Society shall rejoice and knowledge and intelligence shall flow down from this time. This is the beginning of better days to this Society." [^4] Often he has been quoted as saying, ". . . as I turn the key in your behalf." But these statements are almost exact opposites. One is doing something, however nice, for somebody else. The other empowers women to act and to do for themselves in a way previously unheard of.

Perhaps the word key in this context has made some Church members uncomfortable. When we hear the word key, we generally think of priesthood; however, a key also symbolizes giving access to something you cannot do without a key. Your house key lets you (and not others) into your house. Your car key gives you access to your car. With this key the Prophet gave all women everywhere access to "better days." To the best of my knowledge, none of these nineteenth-century women ever claimed ordination to any priesthood office. They did, however, claim to have been empowered by what Joseph Smith did in that April 1842 Relief Society meeting in Nauvoo.

Later in the nineteenth century, Latter-day Saint women were charter members of both the National Council of Women and the International Council of Women. They were close personal friends of many leading women of their day, including Susan B. Anthony, who spoke in the Salt Lake Tabernacle in 1895. These LDS women, a tiny, tiny minority in the national and international councils of women, stated publicly in these forums that if a prophet of God had not turned a key to women, somehow empowering them, the women then gathered would be as powerless to move forward the righteous cause of women as women had been throughout history. In a general Relief Society conference held in 1945, President George Albert Smith said, "When the Prophet Joseph Smith turned the key for the emancipation of womankind, it was turned for all the world, and from generation to generation the number of women who can enjoy the blessings of religious liberty and civil liberty has been increasing." [^5] We have all witnessed this literal unfolding, and it is part of our heritage through the Relief Society.

Another part of our Relief Society heritage is its role in preparing women for temple covenants. At times, various brethren accompanied Joseph Smith to Relief Society meetings. Reynolds Cahoon, one of these men, stated: "This society is raised by the Lord to prepare us for the great blessings which are for us in the House of the Lord—in the Temple." [^6] This statement was indeed remarkable for the 1840s. Before the founding of the Relief Society, no woman in Nauvoo expected to take part in any type of temple ordinance. We often assume that because the Saints were building a temple, everybody knew what would happen there. That is not so. Temple ordinances as we know them had not yet been revealed. In Kirtland, the temple had been used primarily as a meetinghouse. The upstairs rooms housed the School of the Prophets. Even if the women had known about temple ordinances, they would not have expected to take part in them. They were women of their time and anticipated nothing more than they were used to.

Since Joseph Smith turned the key, women's social, political, and economic status has improved worldwide. Of even greater importance, the spiritual empowerment of women is central to our endowment as latter-day women of covenant. In July 1830, almost twelve years before the founding of the Relief Society, the Lord revealed the first openings of women's enlarged destiny. Among other things, he said in this revelation to Emma: "Thou shalt be ordained under [my servant Joseph's] hand to expound scriptures, and to exhort the church, according as it shall be given thee by my Spirit" (D&C 25:7). In 1830, it was very rare indeed for women to speak or take an active role in church. Most churches were still quoting Paul that women should be silent in church (see 1 Cor. 14:34-35). Women did not expect public roles in any setting.

A watershed event in women's history was the Seneca Falls Convention, held in Seneca Falls, New York, in 1848, six years after the founding of the Relief Society. [^7] The women and men who came together to this convention had been working for the abolition of slavery for many years. Eight years earlier, in 1840, an American delegation had traveled to England for an international antislavery convention. At that time in Europe, even more than in America, women were banned from virtually all public activity. Against custom, the American antislavery delegation included women. The convention officials, with great consternation, mulled over what to do with these Americans who so little respected "their place" as women. They finally decided to seat the women in the balcony behind a screen. Frederick Douglass, an influential black American, had the grace to sit with them. Perhaps only he fully grasped the implications of their situation. These American women, who had been fighting for the emancipation of Negro men, suddenly realized that their position was little better, except for their privileged economic circumstances.

That was in 1840. For eight long years, they muddled, uncertain what to do about their new awareness of the real status of women. I believe they were unable to do anything to move the cause of women forward at that time because a prophet had not yet turned a key to women everywhere. The most memorable event of the Seneca Falls Convention was a restatement of the Declaration of Independence to explicitly include women. "We hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men and women are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights," it began. Surprisingly, the most controversial issue was whether or not women should seek the vote. That issue almost split the convention.

Compare this group's timidity with Abigail Adams' bold request sixty-six years before. On 31 March 1776, she wrote to her husband John, away at the Second Continental Congress: "I long to hear that you have declared an independancy—and by the way in the new Code of Laws . . . I desire you would Remember the Ladies, and be more generous and favourable to them than your ancestors. . . . Remember all Men would be tyrants if they could. If perticuliar care and attention is not paid to the Laidies we are determined to foment a Rebelion, and will not hold ourselves bound by any Laws in which we have no voice, or Representation." [^8] Abigail was demanding the vote for women be written into the constitution of the new nation.

Abigail Adams was a witty, articulate, well-educated woman. George Washington, Benjamin Franklin, James Madison, and Thomas Jefferson were counted among her friends. Abigail was more forthright and courageous than the women of Seneca Falls, but the key had not yet been turned to women, and Abigail made no progress. John Adams this once (and the only time I know of, for John and Abigail are really a great American love story) penned a very condescending reply: "As to your extraordinary Code of Laws, I cannot but laugh. . . . Depend upon it, We know better than to repeal our Masculine systems." [^9]

Contrast that with the remarkable gifts—both temporal and eternal—bestowed on women from God through a prophet in 1842. The temple and its blessings are central to the changing status of women as part of the Restoration. We do not know when the first females were endowed, but evidence suggests that it may have been within a couple of months of the founding of the Relief Society. Those first men and women to be endowed were looked upon by other Church members as holy and set apart—perhaps a view we need to restore. By the mid twentieth century, when I was a teenager, teachers and parents spoke to us of temples almost exclusively as places to get married. Few girls my age thought of the temple as a place to be set apart and empowered to serve in the kingdom. For me, that is one of the "so-whats" of studying our history: it reaffirms my testimony of the centrality of temples and covenants with Christ.

Because of their experiences, first with Relief Society and then in the temple, the women of Nauvoo understood that they were being given holy power as daughters of God to act and not just to be acted upon (see 2 Ne. 2:26). Virtually all of the adults who left Nauvoo to come West had been endowed. That righteous empowerment of both women and men—Saints—made possible the faithful accomplishment of many daunting tasks as they settled the American West and sought to establish their Zion.

What ideas motivated these women? From the original Relief Society, I have identified several core ideas, as important to us today as when the Relief Society was founded. First is an underlying faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. Faith in Christ, nurturing, and compassion are foundational. A fourth ideal is that of sisterhood, learning to "cherish one another." [^10] The old Relief Society Magazine had a column called "Women's Sphere," which celebrated the accomplishments of women, most of them not Latter-day Saints. This tradition can be traced back to the Woman's Exponent, a periodical begun in 1870 for LDS women. [^11] The masthead of the Woman's Exponent during much of its forty years read, "For the rights of the women of Zion and for the rights of the women of all nations." That is truly how these women saw themselves—in the vanguard, leading out in the righteous advancement of women.

These early women also saw themselves as bettering their communities and developing their own gifts and talents. Women first voted in Utah in February 1870. In granting the franchise to Utah women, the federal government was trying to embarrass LDS men. The social stigma against women in politics was enormous. Cartoons from the era depicted what would happen to a woman if she voted. She would instantly turn into an ugly, snarling, beefy feminist—right at the voting booth! They also thought that LDS women would vote out polygamy. Polygamy remained, and Utah women voted in great numbers.

In the same month that Utah women were freely voting for the first time, in Rochester, New York, suffragist Susan B. Anthony walked into a barbershop voting station and was refused a ballot. When they denied her the right to vote, she protested, citing the recently ratified Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution and pointing out that these amendments giving Negro men the franchise specify every "citizen" and "person" shall have a vote. Was she not a citizen? Was she not a person? In some confusion, they let her vote, but they also called a constable to arrest her. When the constable arrived, she insisted that she go in chains, as metaphor of the state of women.

Women in Utah continued to vote for seventeen years, from 1870 to 1887, until the Federal Edmunds Tucker Act disenfranchised the Church and denied voting rights for many LDS men as well as the women. After the Manifesto in 1890, the Relief Society devoted its efforts single-mindedly to getting the vote for women included in the proposed new state constitution. And they were ultimately successful, even over the opposition of such articulate opponents as B. H. Roberts. [^12]

At this time, the national press rhetoric was still, "Oh, the poor oppressed women of Utah. They are under the thumbs of their husbands and their ecclesiastical leaders. They are the most oppressed of all women." Yet, running for one of five at-large state senate seats was Martha Hughes Cannon, a trained, practicing physician. Her husband was also running for an at-large state senate seat. [^13] He was her stake president, which made him not only her husband but her ecclesiastical leader, too. She was running as a Democrat, and he as a Republican. She won. He lost. The national press scratched their heads. At that time very few women in the nation were allowed to vote, even fewer were running for office, and fewer still were winning—especially against their husbands. Susan B. Anthony, still without the vote in New York, had rightly said that her Latter-day Saint sisters were the freest women on the face of the earth. Relief Society sisters knew that freedom was their heritage, bestowed by the Prophet in Nauvoo. These early Utah women saw themselves empowered to act in righteous ways because they were women of covenant.

Around the turn of the century, Utah's bid for statehood and desire to become part of the United States influenced the character of Relief Society. At the time, the women's club movement was forging full steam ahead in American society. This model appealed to many Latter-day Saint women hoping to be less "peculiar." These clubs were of three kinds: the basic sewing circle, sometimes expanding to other arts and crafts; the social activist groups working for the betterment of society; and the cultural-literary club whose aims were usually self-education. The Relief Society became all of them! For the first time, Relief Society meetings were formally divided up with systematized lessons: religion one week; arts and crafts, sewing, and homemaking the next; social ideas the third week; and culture the fourth.

Now at the end of the twentieth century, what seems to be a new tack is actually harking back to how things were in the beginning. Our Relief Society leaders provide fewer directions, and we are left to figure out more for ourselves. I think of the worldwide sesquicentennial Relief Society projects in 1992. To figure things out for ourselves is sometimes a messy process, but we have been asked to continually be looking at our local group, discovering its changing needs, looking to see what we can do to better our communities, just as did our earliest Relief Society sisters in Nauvoo.

I welcome this return to the foundational ideas outlined in the original Relief Society minutes, the "something better" Joseph Smith prophesied. We are to be women with faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; we are to nurture, to be compassionate, to be sisters, to better our communities, and to develop our own gifts and talents. We are to do all of those things within the context of being women of covenant. We covenant first at baptism. We covenant again in the temple. And we renew those covenants weekly in partaking of the sacrament.

I see us in Relief Society reclaiming the heritage that has been ours, the "something better" which was not to be a sewing circle or women's club. To me that is the "So What?" of Relief Society. It opens vistas to me as a woman and prepares me for the temple, where I can lay foundations, receive inspiration, and commit my all to becoming all that my Heavenly Father desires for me.

Notes

Marjorie Draper Conder received her master's degree from the University of Utah and is a curator at the Museum of Church History and Art. She and her husband, Darrell Conder, have six children and nine grandchildren. Marjorie teaches Spiritual Living lessons in her ward Relief Society.

---
Notas:
[^1] A Centenary of Relief Society [ed. Belle S. Spafford and Marianne C. Sharp] (Salt Lake City: General Board of Relief Society, 1942), 14.
[^2] Emma Smith, in Centenary, 14.
[^3] Sarah Cleveland, "A Record of the Organization, and Proceedings of the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo," 1842-1844, holograph, Archives of the Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, 17 Mar. 1842; hereafter cited as Nauvoo Minutes.
[^4] Nauvoo Minutes, 28 Apr. 1842; emphasis added.
[^5] George Albert Smith, "Address to the Members of the Relief Society," General Relief Society Conference, 4 Oct. 1945; in Relief Society Magazine, Dec. 1945, 717.
[^6] Reynolds Cahoon, Nauvoo Minutes, 13 Aug. 1843.
[^7] Seneca Falls is just at the other end of Seneca Lake from where the Church was organized at the Peter Whitmer farm eighteen years earlier.
[^8] Abigail Adams, Adams Family Correspondence, vol. 1, ed. L. H. Butterfield (Massachusetts Historical Society, 1963), 10-11.
[^9] John Adams, in Correspondence, 11.
[^10] See Lucy Mack Smith, Nauvoo Minutes, 24 Mar. 1842, 19.
[^11] In 1870 Brigham Young called his niece Louisa Lula Greene Richards, who was eighteen years old at the time, to be the editor of a new woman's publication. This was not an official Church publication—the idea of being "official" is a rather recent creation—but it was the voice of LDS women for more than forty years. Louisa had virtually no background that would have prepared her to do this, and she felt very inadequate. Nevertheless, she founded the journal. During her years as editor, she married, had a miscarriage, and became pregnant again. Because protecting this pregnancy was very important to her, she resigned her position as editor of the Woman's Exponent. The editorship then fell to Emmeline B. Wells, who was in her early forties at the time. For almost forty years Emmeline continued as editor and only gave up the position when at age eighty-two she was called to be the general president of the Relief Society. (She felt she just could not do both jobs at the same time.) The Woman's Exponent was the first and longest lived women's publication west of the Mississippi.
[^12] B. H. Roberts was not in favor of women receiving the vote; not surprisingly, he was not a favorite among LDS women during this period. When Spencer W. Kimball was born, his father wanted to name him after B. H. Roberts. His mother strenuously objected, and so the future prophet was named Spencer Woolley instead. After the issue was decided, B. H. Roberts eventually made his peace with Mormon women. See Edward L. Kimball and Andrew E. Kimball Jr., Spencer W. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1977), 18-19.
[^13] On the ballot for the first election after statehood were all the state officers plus members of the state legislature and senate. State senators represented various districts, but five senators were also to be elected as representatives at-large.
