Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

We Must Cherish One Another

AILEEN H. CLYDE

Scripture and our own Latter-day Saint history indicate a deeply rooted need in women—perhaps a female characteristic—to gather. Do you remember how quickly Mary of Nazareth went to her cousin Elisabeth for reassurance and support? Luke records that after the angel departed, "Mary arose . . . and went into the hill country with haste . . . and saluted Elisabeth" (Luke 1:39-40). Mary and Elisabeth, faced with momentous but deeply personal events that shook their lives and even their perceptions of themselves, turned to each other for confirmation, reassurance, and comfort. In each other, the cousins found empathy and strength as part of their blessing from the Holy Spirit.

I am convinced there are Elisabeths for every Mary. Such relationships are so worth having that women have long found ways to come together in combinations from two to twenty to hundreds, seeking light for their minds and nourishment for their feminine souls. In one another, we discover rich sources of spirituality, understanding, and comfort.

For LDS women, 1842 was a formative time. A society was created at women's initiative, with a prophet's authority, and with God's blessing. It was not a casual happening. Yet, many indicators suggest that today Relief Society is treated casually by significant numbers of women for whom it was created. Could part of this passivity about our Society be the result of our not understanding or practicing the basic spiritual principles upon which it was founded?

Earlier this year, I received a phone call from a young female reporter assigned by a Utah newspaper to write an article about the founding of Relief Society. Besides where and when, she wanted to know by whom and why the Society was formed. As her questions proceeded, I found myself giving her more and more complicated responses. I referred her to the fine recent one-volume history of Relief Society, Women of Covenant. Then I asked if I could give her other LDS names as references to complete her assignment. She said, "Oh, I'm LDS and I go to Relief Society every week. I just don't know anything about its history."

Our Society's history matters; it is a way to begin understanding who we are and who we can be. Eliza R. Snow's minutes of the first two years' proceedings provide a rich report of our Society's beginnings. Her minutes show that at the second meeting on 24 March 1842, Counselor Elizabeth Ann Whitney spoke: "We must pray much for each other that we may succeed in the work before us and have wisdom given us in our pursuits." [^1] Almost at the mention of the word wisdom, Mother Lucy Smith arose and addressed the group: "This institution is a good one—we must cherish one another, watch over one another, comfort one another and gain instruction that we may all sit down in heaven together." [^2] Wisdom indeed! May I remind you that throughout the scriptures wisdom has been identified as a feminine quality? In the book of Proverbs, we read: "Doth not wisdom cry? and understanding put forth her voice? She standeth in the top of high places, by the way in the places of the paths. She crieth at the gates, at the entry of the city, at the coming in at the doors. . . . O ye simple, understand wisdom: and, ye fools, be ye of an understanding heart. . . . For wisdom is better than rubies; and all the things that may be desired are not to be compared to it" (Proverbs 8: 1-3, 5, 11).

Yes, Mother Smith, with all that we face today, just as did our sisters in 1842, we need wisdom. The wisdom you pronounced to us is that we can learn to cherish one another. You said that learning to cherish can have eternal, celestial consequences. What you said speaks to women's hearts today as it must have then—but now, as then, there are impediments. We struggle mightily to live the truths our souls confirm. We struggle for an understanding heart.

What does it mean to cherish one another? Let's turn again to our history. In Women of Covenant, this succinct distillation points us to an answer that suggests that cherishing is an inherently spiritual act: "At the fifth meeting of the Relief Society, on April 19, 1842, Counselor Sarah Cleveland expressed 'the happiness she felt in the present associations of females.' At that meeting sisters nurtured one another spiritually, exercising the gifts of the Spirit spoken of in the New Testament and the Doctrine and Covenants. Some bore testimony, others spoke in tongues and interpreted tongues, and, following the closing prayer and song, the sisters exercised the gift of healing on behalf of an ailing sister. The secretary commented that 'nearly all present arose & spoke, and the spirit of the Lord like a purifying stream, refreshed every heart.' Not only did these gifts remain with the women, but even more frequently, the sisters enjoyed the gifts spoken of in the New Testament as the 'word of wisdom' and the 'word of knowledge': that all-important gift to know by the power of the Holy Ghost that Jesus is the Christ." [^3]

Those founding women experienced much that was spiritual. Such defining moments give us clarity and focus. That focus and faith in Christ makes Relief Society unique in the world. Reading Eliza's minutes, we see that "the society was not only to perform charitable work, but also to acquire and exercise the gift of charity, beginning within the group itself. Emma Smith admonished her sisters to 'divest themselves of every jealousy and evil feeling toward each other.' And the prophet [who was with them] exhorted, 'Let your hearts expand. Let them be enlarged towards others—you must be long-suff'ring and bear with the faults and errors of mankind. How precious are the souls of men [and women]!—The female part of the community are apt to be contracted in their views. You must not be contracted, but you must be liberal in your feelings.'" [^4]

Even with these great principles at work, our early sisters found perplexing problems. They wanted fervently to do good but were not always certain how to proceed. They were not sure, for instance, about whether and how to reach out to those they viewed as needing reform. In Christ's time there were sincere Pharisees quick to judge a deed and completely miss the principle. In our time, it may also be easier for us as women to judge than to cherish one another.

The Prophet Joseph Smith often visited those earliest Relief Society meetings. As the women sought to comprehend how best to exercise the gift of charity, they had the blessing of a prophet's immediate counsel. In June 1842 he said: "'Nothing is so much calculated to lead people to forsake sin as to take them by the hand and watch over them with tenderness.' He also noted that individuals who are 'unacquainted with the principle of godliness' display a 'contraction of feeling and lack of charity.' In contrast, 'the pow'r and glory of Godliness is spread out on a broad principle to throw out the mantle of charity. God does not look on sin with allowance, but when men [or women] hav sin'd there must be allowance made for them.'

"As far as the Prophet was concerned, . . . 'The Society is not only to relieve the poor but to save souls.' . . . Such is the end point of charity, 'the pure love of Christ.'" [^5]

Mother Smith turned us towards that highest law when she admonished us to cherish. Cherishing implies holding dear, fostering, nurturing, promoting development or growth, and encouraging. The varied circumstances of women's lives today suggest that we too need ways to cherish that will inform our decisions and enlarge our capacities to act.

Did Lucy Smith have any idea LDS women would number more than 3.7 million throughout the world by 1995? Cherishing requires great expansion of our minds and hearts, accomplished only by guidance from the Holy Spirit, "for the Spirit speaketh the truth and lieth not. Wherefore, it speaketh of things as they really are . . . for the salvation of our souls" (Jacob 4:13).

Knowing how things really are is no small matter—if it involves the salvation of our souls. Remember Joseph Smith's counsel to "not be contracted, but . . . liberal in your feelings." [^6] Did he mean we tend not to look beyond what is immediately before us in our daily routines? Let's broaden our view to women's circumstances worldwide. While making up half of the world's population, women today work two-thirds of the world's working hours. Their work yields them one-tenth of the world's wealth and one-hundredth of the world's land. Women form two-thirds of the world's illiterate people. More than three-fourths of starving people are women with their dependent children. [^7]

In addition to those bleak facts, women and their female children are disproportionately vulnerable to exploitation, abuse, battering, rape, and murder. These general conditions for women in the world today reflect pain and injustice not acceptable to us or our God. These stark realities bring new meaning to our covenants. Surely women can be a powerful part of opening up more humane ways of living for all people. To effect such good depends on recognizing that we live by choices and can work toward becoming perfect by choosing well. This perfecting does not have flawless living as its aim; rather, perfecting is the exercise of agency amidst difficult choices that yields growth and progress.

Mother Eve is the first and best example of facing a great dilemma. Her soul-wrenching decision and its eternal consequences were right for her—and for us, too. I think of Eve as the prototype of human choice. I also revere her as the exemplar of the female power known as motherhood. Like choice, motherhood shares the inevitable companionship of both pain and joy. In its responsible manifestations, it represents ways of cherishing that are essential, both now and in eternity, to human development and growth. While it has a literal meaning of giving birth, motherhood also refers to the nascent capacity to love. Maternal-type love, while tender and compassionate, also has a toughness and tenacity that outlasts awful disappointment. Quick to sense anything that will thwart the development and growth of the young and the vulnerable, this love can suffer long and sacrifice. It parallels the love our Savior offers unconditionally by his grace. This love has nothing to do with deserving and everything to do with divine compassion meeting human need. Thus the maternal metaphor applies both to those who have given birth and also to those who may not have children but love in ways that nurture and renew or reform. We read in Isaiah: "As one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you; and ye shall be comforted" (Isa. 66:13). God, who knows his children's needs, compares maternal love with his power to give comfort. Perhaps that's our best evidence of woman's divine nature and potential. Such love has as its goal a homecoming, a returning to the source of our spiritual creation, a sitting down together in heaven.

Unfortunately, maternal love is often condescended to and trivialized by sentimental stereotypes such as those that plague Mother's Day celebrations. Often focused too narrowly on biological role designations, these events can chill a mother's heart with too much embarrassing praise. We might see mater-nal power more clearly in the mother bear. She nurtures and protects her cubs, and woe to the intruder who may pose a threat. Her fierceness demonstrates her commitment to caring as well as her maternal power to recognize and deflect danger. Most of what she does is instinctive, inbred, and quite uncomplicated. Her basic task is completed in a season; not so for us humans. Because of the long and crucial childhood of human children, maternal influence—we could call it "cherishing"—is essential to the physical, emotional, intellectual, and spiritual development of our young. We also know our need for such love persists throughout our lives.

As women we have several distinct characteristics. Beside motherhood, I'd place sisterhood as a paradigm of our particular strength. I don't know how long women had been "gathering" for support and mutual benefit, but in the book of Judges is an old and unexpected example, the story of Jephthah's daughter. Jephthah was described as the son of a harlot. Jephthah's father, Gilead, already had a wife and other sons, who in due time banished Jephthah, explaining, "For thou art the son of a strange woman," which was another way of saying she was a prostitute (Judg. 11:2). In the first two verses of this story, Jephthah's mother is labeled with degrading names twice. Women, especially in their roles as mothers, have long been vulnerable to disparagement and harshness.

Jephthah grows up away from his people in the land of Tob. Known as "a mighty man of valour," he is strong and fierce enough that the Gileadites seek him out when they need a brave warrior to lead them in a crucial fight against the Ammonites. In spite of his "strange" mother, Jephthah was an Israelite. He reminded them of their earlier cruelty to him and exacted a promise that if he prevailed over their enemies, the Gileadites would make him their captain and leader. This was not a timid man. His next step was even more brash. "And Jephthah vowed a vow unto the Lord, and said, If thou shalt without fail deliver the children of Ammon into mine hands, Then it shall be, that whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my house to meet me, when I return in peace from the children of Ammon, shall surely be the Lord's, and I will offer it up for a burnt offering" (Judg. 11:30-31).

To be fair, this warrior had not had much nurturing; his religious instruction was obviously faulty. Anyone who knows God knows bargaining with him is not necessary. But the practice was, and is, widespread, and Jephthah made a foolhardy pledge. The record says he slew the children of Ammon in twenty cities "with a very great slaughter. Thus the children of Ammon were subdued before the children of Israel" (Judg. 11:33).

Now Jephthah, fresh from victorious battle and evidently unharmed, returned home. Brave warrior, denied a mother's or a father's nurture, he only knew how to make war and keep brash bargains. I don't know what or whom he expected to see first on his return home, but these are the rich Hebraic images: "And Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his house, and, behold, his daughter came out to meet him with timbrels and with dances: and she was his only child; beside her he had neither son nor daughter. And it came to pass, when he saw her, that he rent his clothes, and said, Alas, my daughter! thou has brought me very low, and thou art one of them that trouble me: for I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I cannot go back" (Judg. 11:34-35).

All too human, he blames her for this awful mess. I have heard this story related as an example of a man keeping his word. Though that element is surely there, that's not why I'm telling it. The story matters most to me for the painful, joyful consequences I see portrayed as humans struggle to relate to God and one another. With the next turn, the story becomes an example not only of female courage but also of the cherishing sisterhood Lucy Smith pointed us toward.

"And she said unto him, My father, if thou hast opened thy mouth unto the Lord, do to me according to that which hath proceeded out of thy mouth. . . . Let this thing be done for me: let me alone two months, that I may go up and down upon the mountains, and bewail my virginity, I and my [sisters]. And he said, Go. And he sent her away for two months: and she went with her companions, and bewailed her virginity upon the mountains.

"And it came to pass at the end of two months, that she returned unto her father, who did with her according to his vow which he had vowed: and she knew no man. And it was a custom in Israel, That the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite four days in a year" (Judg. 11:36-40).

Does that remind you of a teaching in Mosiah about bearing one another's burdens and mourning with those who mourn and comforting those who stand in need of comfort? These Israelite women grew spiritually by remembering their love for Jephthah's daughter and her integrity four days a year. Can't we use that pattern for our meeting as sisters to help each other face life's difficulties, lest we all be overwhelmed by them?

In 1830, the Lord said to Emma Smith: "Verily I say unto thee that thou shalt lay aside the things of this world, and seek for the things of a better" (D&C 25:10). Our everyday life, however, demands our labor and commands our choices even as we yearn to ascend beyond our daily work. It's not easy to "lay aside . . . this world and seek for the things of a better." Other women's stories can help us find ways. My own grandmother gave me a treasured glimpse of her labor and her choices as she told me in quiet conversations of the challenges of her life. When she was in the sixth grade, a bright and able student, she had to leave school because as the oldest daughter she was needed at home. She eventually had twelve siblings and was her mother's constantly needed helper. Her formal education thus curtailed, one of the "things of a better" life she actively sought was learning. Gospel learning was her focus.

Grandmother married in 1888 and bore eleven children. Grandfather, described as idealistic, served as bishop for more than thirty years, while Grandmother managed their temporal necessities. Besides their own large family, at one time or another, she and her husband provided a home for seven other children. The intertwining of everyday life and gospel life, motherhood, and sisterhood are evident in this one day's entry in her journal:

"I arose quietly so as not to wake George or the others at 4:30 a.m. Too cold for kneeling prayer.

"Got the fire started and put bread in the pans. [The rule in the house was that the last one in at night mixed the bread for slow rising.] Got breakfast going before waking the girls. Helen took a half hour for her piano. Her playing makes the morning cheerful.

"We did 5 pies before they left for school. Making lunches was slow because the bread wasn't cool.

"I mopped the kitchen and ironed until time to get ready for Relief Society. [They met on Tuesday afternoon, and they all wore hats! Grandmother always walked the six blocks to church.] Had a very good theology lesson on our covenants. I love the scriptures and wish I had more time to understand them better.

"Decided to stop in at Sister Pryor's on my way home. Although much awaited me, I couldn't just walk by knowing she had been abed 6 weeks. Her bedroom curtains were nearly black. No one could feel better in such a room so I took them down and carried them home. [The pollution in Utah valley was frightful in those days when all heating and cooking was done with coal and wood. Spring and fall cleanings really were necessary.]

"We had 14 for supper again tonight. While things cooked, I washed and starched the curtains. We dried them on the stretchers behind the dining room stove. [Do you feel the understatement of her dinner preparations for fourteen in the phrase 'while things cooked'? Then add to that the task of curtain stretching. I recall the stretchers looked like quilt frames stood on end with tiny pins all around the frame to hold the fabric borders taut.]

"I left for MIA early enough to get the curtains up. Sister Pryor was so relieved and grateful. It wasn't much for me but made a big difference to her.

"I was disappointed in the Mutual lesson. It wasn't worth the walk. Usually I'm glad I've made the effort.

"Tomorrow will be full of what I didn't get done today. I love the Lord. I don't know why I'm so weary." [^8]

Can you hear that paradox? After listing an eighteen-hour working day of family tasks, church involvement, and sisterly service, she pens a record and wonders if she has accomplished anything—and then wonders at her weariness! I honor her steadfast progress through things of this world toward a very grand design.

In Alma 9:26 is a promise that brings comfort to any human heart seeking an antidote for the ills of this life: "And not many days hence the Son of God shall come in his glory; and his glory shall be the glory of the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace, equity, and truth, full of patience, mercy, and long-suffering, quick to hear the cries of his people and to answer their prayers."

As we build on our rich tradition of cherishing one another, may we look together toward that day in full faith. When we gather, we find empathy and strength. When we labor together, we can accomplish much. It is our great honor to develop, as we go, those same qualities that will identify the Savior to us and us to him—grace, equity and truth, patience, mercy and long-suffering.

Notes

Aileen H. Clyde has served as second counselor in the General Relief Society presidency. She and her husband, Hal M. Clyde, are the parents of three married sons. She has also served as vice chairman of the board of regents of the Utah System of Higher Education. She graduated from Brigham Young University and was an English instructor there.

---
Notas:
[^1] Sarah Cleveland, "A Record of the Organization, and Proceedings of the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo," 1842-1844, holograph, Archives of the Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, 24 Mar. 1842, 18; hereafter cited as Nauvoo Minutes.
[^2] Ibid., 19.
[^3] Jill Mulvay Derr, Janath Russell Cannon, Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, Women of Covenant: The Story of Relief Society (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992), 36.
[^4] Ibid., 36.
[^5] Ibid., 37.
[^6] Ibid., 36.
[^7] "World's Women Data Sheet," Report of the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality Development and Peace (New York: United Nations, 1985). Quoted in Alexander B. Morrison, "The Sobbings of Their Hearts," BYU Literacy Conference, 24 Mar. 1995, 3.
[^8] Sarah Ann Eliza Brockbank Hales, journal in possession of the author.
