Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

The Turning of Hearts in the Book of Mormon

MARILYN ARNOLD

And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers. 3 Ne. 25:6

One abiding theme of the Book of Mormon is that people who love the Lord also love each other. Another equally persistent theme is pride. Like love, it, too, is a matter of the heart because pride places worldly things—such as power, influence, wealth, and class—above considerations of innate human worth and need. Love is a softening of the heart; pride is a hardening.

On the subject of love, or lack of it, it is interesting to compare the two voyages to the new world that are described in the Book of Mormon. The first, undertaken by the Jaredites, is a model in cooperation and tranquillity. Jared and his brother are in accord, and any disagreements are worked through peaceably. The second, undertaken by Lehi's group, is the reverse, full of dissension and violence.

Apparently, scarcely a squabble ruffled the peace of the Jaredite group through the 344 days and nights at sea, for the record says that day and night "they did sing praises unto the Lord" (Ether 6:9). Their arrival at the promised land was similarly sweet, for "they bowed themselves down upon the face of the land, . . . and did shed tears of joy before the Lord, because of the multitude of his tender mercies over them" (Ether 6:12).

A far cry from the optimistic tranquillity of the Jaredites is the experience of the Lehites. Their journey began on a tenuous note and was fraught with strife, animosity, disregard for others, and murderous intent. Instead of singing praises to God, Nephi's older brothers and some of Ishmael's children "began to make themselves merry, insomuch that they began to dance, and to sing, and to speak with much rudeness" (1 1 Ne. 18:9). Nephi's efforts to counsel them resulted in severe physical abuse, while Lehi's pleas fell on deaf ears. Lehi and Sariah nearly died of grief, and young Jacob and Joseph, along with Nephi's wife and children, shed many tears on that voyage. We are not surprised that upon arriving, Nephi merely says, "we went forth upon the land, and did pitch our tents; and we did call it the promised land" (1 Ne. 18:23). Despite the fertility of the promised land, the family rift that began in the wilderness outside Jerusalem eventually divided a nation and thwarted the hopes for a lasting covenant society.

The Jaredites had a happier beginning, but their promise, too, was shattered by the failure of human affection, particularly filial affection. The book of Ether presents only the sketchiest account of the succession of Jaredite kings, but it becomes apparent in generation after generation that the hearts of the children have turned from their fathers. King after king is slain by son after son, and countless brothers conspire against each other. Insurrectionists plot against monarchs and steal their thrones, friendships collapse, and God is forgotten by all but the prophets. In both the Lehite and the Jaredite nations, vast numbers of people forget their humanity, set aside their affections, and lose their very souls.

If this were the whole story of the Book of Mormon, it would be a grim book indeed. But it is not the whole story, not by any means. Some of the Book of Mormon's most powerful moments come when hearts are turned to God. And, invariably, that spiritual change produces an almost simultaneous turning to fellow beings. One of those precious instances of turning occurs during the reign of King Benjamin, as he addresses his people in a great outdoor gathering. Touched to the quick and brought to the depths of humility, they experience a great change of heart, and they receive a remission of their sins—the ultimate turning. But Benjamin clearly connects their being "filled with the love of God" and their "always[retain[ing] a remission of [their] sins" (Mosiah 4:12) with a similar turning of their hearts to others, particularly to those in need. The outcome of this turning to Christ, he promises, is that they "will not have a mind to injure one another" but "will succor those that stand in need" and "administer of [their] substance unto" them (Mosiah 4:13, 16).

We are all familiar, too, with the younger Alma's eloquent sermon on the changing of hearts. He experienced a dramatic change himself, and he knew that his father had also experienced such a change. Like Benjamin, Alma links the turning of hearts toward God with a similar turning to fellow beings. Even as he describes the change of heart, he cautions against pride and envy, warning any who would "make a mock of his brother" or "heap . . . upon him persecutions" (Alma 5:30). These public expressions, Benjamin's and Alma's, are impressive and inspiring, but the Book of Mormon teaches the turning of human hearts by example as well as by sermon. Buried in its pages is one particularly touching account of reciprocal personal devotion.

We remember that Alma met stiff resistance when he attempted to teach the gospel in Ammonihah. The people there "withstood all his words, and reviled him, and spit upon him, and caused that he should be cast out of their city" (Alma 8:13). Half-starved, Alma heads toward the city of Aaron. An angel intercepts him, but does the angel give him sympathy and relieve him of his duty? Not on your life. In fact, the angel's first words are hardly the words a man who has just been spit upon and reviled would expect or hope to hear. The angel says, "Blessed art thou, Alma; therefore, lift up thy head and rejoice, for thou hast great cause to rejoice" (Alma 8:15). Then the angel delivers a disheartening commission: Alma is told to return to Ammonihah. At first blush, the angel may seem a bit unfeeling, but he is most certainly looking out for Alma. The angel visits Amulek in Ammonihah and instructs him to care for a holy prophet who will ask him "for something to eat" (Alma 8:19-20), and Amulek does.

Alma "tarrie[s] many days with Amulek," so long, in fact, that the Lord has to nudge him to get on with his preaching (Alma 8:27-29). Amulek goes with him, willingly suffering whatever fate awaits his new friend. The bond of mutual belief has strengthened both men, spiritually and physically, and they set out "filled with the Holy Ghost" and endowed with heavenly power (Alma 8:30-31). Alma and Amulek together suffer imprisonment and torture, but of the two, Amulek makes the greater sacrifice for his faith. Whatever Alma endures in preaching the word, he still has friends and family and home to return to. Not so Amulek. He has "forsaken all his gold, and silver, and his precious things, which were in the land of Ammonihah, for the word of God, he being rejected by those who were once his friends and also by his father and his kindred" (Alma 15:16). Amulek has given up everything that he had valued before Alma came—home and wealth, yes, but more devastating still, family and friends.

It is appropriate that the narrative comes full circle. Alma takes a spent and broken-hearted Amulek home with him to Zarahemla, "to his own house," where he "did administer to him in his tribulations, and strengthened him in the Lord" (Alma 15:18). Alma returns the care and devotion that Amulek had once rendered him.

The Book of Mormon also contains striking instances of individual sympathy of another kind: examples of caring that do not necessarily involve physical acts of charity or service. There are persons who demonstrate an unusual capacity for empathy, for extraordinary feeling. One of those is Jacob, Nephi's younger brother. Although we cannot readily detect it in Jacob's highly sophisticated sermon in 2 Nephi, Jacob is very tender-hearted. He is also conscientious in the extreme. That he is not chosen to rule after Nephi suggests, too, that his gifts are spiritual rather than political.

Responding to divine direction, Jacob undertakes to instruct the Church on the men's hardness of heart, pride, and marital infidelity. The assignment is anything but easy for Jacob; he hates confronting the husbands with their shameful behavior. More than that, however, he loathes inflicting still more pain on their already suffering wives and children. He is aggrieved, he says, that he "must use so much boldness of speech . . . before [their] wives and [their] children, many of whose feelings are exceedingly tender and chaste and delicate" (Jacob 2:7). Jacob's sensitivity to the feelings of the women and children in his congregation and his desire to lift them rather than to increase their pain are apparent throughout his sermon. I do not recall seeing that extreme sensitivity, that deeply affecting concern for the emotional vulnerability of others, demonstrated more poignantly anywhere else in scripture—nor have I seen anything quite like it in a lifetime of church meetings.

We seldom pause to consider the nature of the man from whom such words come, and yet we can learn as much from his example in human sympathy as from his doctrinal teachings. How often do we measure, in advance, the consequences in injured feelings of our words, especially those we deliver in the presence of the innocent? We sometimes assume that justified righteous indignation relieves us of the obligation of sympathy. Jacob teaches us that it does not.

Others in the Book of Mormon also teach us important lessons in human sympathy. The book portrays several fathers whose hearts are turned to their sons. For example, we see great feeling in the patriarchal blessings Lehi pronounces on his sons, even the wicked ones, and in the blessings Alma and Helaman pronounce on their sons. In particular, Alma's words to the careless Corianton, words full of anguish and worry, show his great love for this inconstant son. Not only does Alma repeatedly use the term "my son," but he takes time to answer Corianton's doctrinal questions fully, thus showing his respect for the young man's mind and his potential for change. Alma's own willful youth perhaps created a special sympathy for the feelings and weaknesses of others.

Especially touching are the two letters from Mormon to his son Moroni, both written in the thick of battle (Moro. 8 and 9). The first is largely matter-of-fact and administrative, setting forth the doctrine forbidding infant baptism. Nevertheless, before Mormon addresses the doctrinal matter, which is of great concern to him, he first expresses his deep love for his son and his joy in Moroni's calling. "My beloved son, Moroni," he opens, "I rejoice exceedingly that your Lord Jesus Christ hath . . . called you to his ministry, and to his holy work. I am mindful of you always in my prayers" (Moro. 8:2-3). We sense a deep mutual affection between father and son, an affection that stands in stark contrast to some of the Jaredite father-son relationships chronicled in the book of Ether.

Mormon's second letter is more personal, detailing the grief and barbarity that marked the closing days of the Nephite nations. But that letter is also punctuated with tenderness, for Mormon frequently addresses Moroni as "my beloved son." And near the end of his letter, he verbalizes a prayer of great solicitude for his son's feelings: "My son, . . . may not the things which I have written grieve thee, to weigh thee down unto death; but may Christ lift thee up, . . . and the hope of his glory and of eternal life, rest in your mind forever" (Moro. 9:25). Here, indeed, is a father whose heart is turned toward his child. And Moroni's regard for his father leads him to engrave these two splendid discourses into the record for the ages.

Nephi is another son whose heart is turned toward his father. In fact, one thing that distinguishes Nephi from his older brothers Laman and Lemuel is the honor he accords his father. Where they are critical of their father and obviously consider him a doddering visionary, Nephi never fails to show respect for Lehi, his prophetic calling, and his position as family patriarch. So long as Lehi is alive, Nephi defers to him, obeying his injunctions, reporting to him on completion of assignments, and in all things supporting and venerating him.

Perhaps the most striking example of a child's heart that is turned to a parent is Jesus himself. The abbreviated record of his ministry among the Nephites, reported in 3 Nephi, is replete with references to the Father. And always, always, Jesus makes a point of telling his listeners that he obeys his Father in all things.

On the subject of the changing or turning of hearts in the Book of Mormon, we could expound almost endlessly—the people of the elder Alma who established a society without blemish at the waters of Mormon; King Lamoni and his queen; Lamoni's father, who was willing to sacrifice both his kingdom and his sins to learn of Christ; the people of Ammon, converted Lamanites who chose to die rather than to kill, even in their own defense; the penitent people whom Jesus taught with such power that two centuries of peace ensued. And with all these groups, like the people in King Benjamin's vast congregation, the turning of hearts to Christ meant the turning of hearts to one another. The Savior also linked the two when he defined the great commandments as love of God and love of neighbor.

If we think we can love God and disregard the feelings of our fellow beings, we are sadly mistaken. If the earth is visited with a curse, a possibility Malachi foresaw, it will surely be, as Malachi also foresaw, because the hearts of mortal children and mortal parents—the hearts of all of us—are turned from rather than toward the Lord and therefore from rather than toward each other (see Mal. 4:6).

Cheryl B. Preston, professor of law at the J. Reuben Clark Law School, Brigham Young University, teaches banking and finance and women's issues in law. She and her husband, Stanley J. Preston, are the parents of three children. Cheryl serves as a Gospel Doctrine teacher in her Bountiful, Utah, ward.

Sharon Lee Esplin Swenson, assistant professor of theater and film at Brigham Young University, specializes in critical studies in film history and theory and is interested in gender and family in film. Sharon and her husband, Paul Swenson, are the parents of two children. She teaches the Gospel Doctrine class in her Salt Lake City, Utah, ward.

Marilyn Arnold is professor emeritus of English and former dean of graduate studies at Brigham Young University. A widely published writer and the recipient of several teaching and research awards and lectureships, she serves as Spiritual Living teacher in her ward Relief Society.
