Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

Media Images of Women

CHERYL B. PRESTON, SHARON L. SWENSON, SUZANNE BARNES ENGEMANN

Cheryl: In the early 1960s, United States prosecutors charged the producers of a French film with marketing obscene mate-rial. The producers appealed all the way to the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court's opinion carved an obscure, complex, and virtually incomprehensible definition of obscene and then decided that this film did not qualify. In a concurring opinion, Justice Potter Stewart rebuked the court for its cumbersome attempt to define obscenity, concluding with these immortal words: "I shall not today attempt further to define the kinds of material I understand to be [obscene] and perhaps I could never succeed in intelligibly doing so. But I know it when I see it, and the motion picture involved in this case is not that" [emphasis added]. [^1]

Unless we are involved in government regulation or community activism, Latter-day Saints rarely deal with hard-core pornography. Even without firsthand experience, most of us know what constitutes hard-core pornography and why it is destructive—we know it without seeing it.

What we sometimes overlook are the more subtle moral and spiritual implications of commonplace images in our homes and offices. We fail to recognize the potentially dangerous messages contained in magazine and television advertisements. Moreover, we may actually encourage and perpetuate such images by purchasing the products these images sell. In short, we don't know it when we see it.

What is it?

The line between pornography and merely tasteless mate-rial is imprecise. Hard-core fades into soft-core at some point, and soft-core fades into indirect or camouflaged pornography. Because camouflaged pornography is pervasive and subtle, it is uniquely dangerous.

Efforts to control hard-core pornography, although important, should not ignore the dangers of camouflaged pornography. Law professor Nadine Strossen warns, "Given the pervasive presence of sexist, violent imagery in mainstream American culture, most such imagery would remain intact, even if 'pornography' could be effectively suppressed. Moreover, because the mainstream imagery is viewed by far more people than is 'pornography,' and because it has the stamp of legitimacy, it has a greater impact on people's attitudes." [^2]

Jean Kilbourne, who has been studying for more than twenty years how women are portrayed in advertising, suggests that, though people do not typically admit they are influenced by media images, "Americans are very culturally conditioned by ads, and children are particularly vulnerable to them." [^3]

Advertisements condition us to accept as normal, and even to prefer, the images they present. One advertiser experimented with a commercial featuring a "real" woman—average size, features, and abilities. Women in the test audience hated the commercial and were, in fact, brutal in expressing their dislike of the "real" woman in the ad. [^4] Should that alarm us? If media images of physical beauty lead us to demean other qualities in ourselves, then yes, we should be concerned. Claudia Bepko and Jo-Ann Krestan agree: "For many women, self-image becomes almost totally identified with body image. If they look good, they are good. But if, in their own estimation, they don't measure up, they may experience some serious and painful feelings of self-loathing." [^5]

Because we have been socialized to regard our normal selves as inadequate, we prefer seeing women in ads who are either inhumanly perfect or not whole women at all—just bodies or parts of bodies. Body parts and body-only shots are a staple of camouflaged pornography.

For instance, advertisers use women's bodies to sell everything from cars to men's shoes. Why show a Karastan oriental rug on an ordinary floor when we can drape it around a naked woman? Buffalo Blue Jeans backpacks seem more interesting when the entire backside of the model is arrayed in nothing but the pack. If voluptuous chests are the only way to sell products, I prefer the milk campaign featuring Naomi Campbell. Although the predominant feature in the picture is her breasts, which are too large to quite fit in her "supertight, little black dress," at least milk is arguably a "related" product. [^6]

As if to emphasize that it is the body, not the woman, that is important, ads often show only parts of bodies—typically not faces or eyes, but interchangeable parts, without individuality. As you flip through magazines, notice how many ads show women looking down, with closed eyes, or simply pictured from the neck down. One blatant example is a Gianni Versace ad for a beaded vest. The vest is open, exposing most of the model's breasts;her eyes are completely blindfolded with a matching scarf.

Even when the body parts depicted are not overtly sexual, this fragmentation is dangerous. Fragmented ads objectify women as things, rather than people; human beings become commodities. A faceless chest or thigh is not perceived as part of a person. Depersonalized objects are easier for soldiers to kill or for rapists to rape. Soldiers are trained to regard their enemies as not fully human. Rapists also depersonalize their victims. In interviews, convicted rapists frequently speak of their victims as "it," not "her." [^7]

Some ads do more than just objectify women as sexual objects; they actually perpetuate specific rape myths. Notorious for their rape themes are the recent Calvin Klein ad campaigns. One ad for Calvin Klein's Obsession cologne for men shows a naked woman, slung over a naked man's shoulder, being passively carried off. This ad depicts a pose uncommon in a healthy modern dating relationship, but not uncommon in the dynamics of rape. A similar ad for Guess jeans features a man carrying a kicking, screaming woman. On the next page, she sits in the back seat of a car looking ravaged. [^8]

These ads consciously and unconsciously link violence to sexual gratification. [^9] They suggest that women like to be carried off and overpowered physically and that doing so is both acceptable and "manly."

Another rape myth perpetuated by media images is that women actually mean yes when they say no. An ad for Macy's department store and Lagerfeld Photo Fragrance for Men shows a series of film frames in which a photographer forces his way into a model's dressing room as she clutches a towel for covering. By the last frame her attitude seems to have changed from aversion to enjoyment.

Rape and violence against women have become a national epidemic. Advertisements sometimes perpetuate an unhealthy link between sex and violence.

Is pornography the only problem?

Sharon: The hidden messages Cheryl has been discussing are conveyed even more insidiously in film. In TV advertising, movement and music plant images inside our psyche, and repeated viewings reinforce them. If our guard is down, they can pit us against each other and, worse, against ourselves. Far from being knit together in love, we may unravel in discouragement over never feeling quite good enough—not unless we wear size five designer jeans, tone up our skin color, polish our nails and teeth, spiral wave our hair, wash, brush, gloss, deodorize, perfume, accessorize, and then refresh our flagging spirits with a name-brand soft drink. The ever-changing criteria of what constitutes the ideal woman are impossible for any one individual to satisfy—without airbrushing, makeup and hair crews, computerized enhancements, and photographic touchup.

I am guilty. I am a co-conspirator. In my own home are two parents, one seventeen-year-old daughter, one thirteen-year-old son, two cats, one dog, one chameleon, two fish, and two polliwogs. In our bathtub/shower we have five kinds of shampoo, four conditioners, and four razors: two pink disposables, my Trac II, and our son's Trac II. (He doesn't shave just yet, but he's prepared.) My husband's electric razor is downstairs. We have two shaving soaps—a manly foam and a womanly gel—and three kinds of soap—two deodorant bars and one scented liquid. Plus we have antibacterial soap at the sink. Do we really need all these products?

One popular commercial, the Diet Coke midmorning office break, features strip-tease music and a reversal-of-gender stereotype: a group of office women share a bonding moment at the window ogling a construction worker. The singer croons: "I don't want you to be no slave, I don't want you to work all day, but I want you to be true. . . . And I just want to make love to you, love to you, uh hummm, yuh." The admiring women say, "See you tomorrow" to each other and shown in print is the phrase: "This is refreshment." We laugh and excuse the lie.

In one way or another, without malice, most commercials lie to us. They tell us that if we use a certain product, we will be captivating. Another product will make us glamorous and beautiful. The Diet Coke ad tells us (among other things) that Diet Coke will make us sexually desirable. The hidden message in commercials, the dangerous lie, is that love is conditional—I will be loved only if I look right, smell right, buy right.

A need to feel loved, attractive, competent, or happy is a real need. But advertising strategies also create new, unthought-of "needs." Some ads make us want their product by telling us that we must have certain qualities and that their product is the only way to get those qualities.

Even though we are daughters of God, with eternal spirits, laboring on this earth to develop our unique qualities, these ads tell us that without their products and complete physical beauty, we are not good enough and cannot be happy. Our hair is not good enough, our smell is not good enough, our bodies are not good enough. We are not good enough as we are. All these ads have a common message: our absolute insufficiency to exist without their products.

The world of television commercials is a world of surfaces and first impressions. In this world, we are judged not by what we do, think, or are but by how we look. We must even use products to achieve a "natural look." If we need products to achieve the "natural look," imagine what we need to look glamorous! We need all these products simply to be passable.

Sometimes advertisers use the guise of entitlement or self-fulfillment as the justification for purchasing their product. A glamorous model in a mink tells us, "I'm worth it." But the ad still reinforces the secondary message that we are not good enough as we are. Advertisers also may suggest, perhaps unintentionally, that we cannot be happy without certain qualities, such as youth, which no product can give us.

Note that all ads are for consumable material things that are irrelevant to our permanent, deeper needs. The scriptures warn us not to spend our money for "that which is of no worth, nor [to] labor for that which cannot satisfy" (2 Ne. 9:51). But in the torrent of modern media images, a woman is fighting the tide in her efforts to "hunger and thirst after righteousness" (3 Ne. 12:6). We must consciously resist wasting our lives "needing" more and more products.

Even though we are exposed to images of women in a variety of media, including television shows and news as well as commercial films, print ads, and television, commercials are the most effective way to change how we think about women's roles. They contain the most concise messages and are subject to the least examination. They are persuasive because they are multilayered, combining visual, verbal, and narrative elements. Also, we fail to scrutinize them because they catch us with our guards down: ads happen so quickly and are so common that they are just background noise in most homes. We dismiss them as silly, nonsensical, or irritating—but they have a great deal to do with the unacknowledged assumptions operating both politically and socially in our world.

Consider, for instance, our assumptions about men and women. Despite the fact that most commercials are addressed to women, commercials assume a stereotyped male point of view. [^10] This perspective is not a loving, Christlike male point of view but an artificially critical perspective that reduces both men and women to stereotypes. It implies that men value women because of certain limited characteristics that can be perceived quickly; beauty tops the list.

To some extent, ads also suggest that women's work is not really important. How do you keep your house spotless? You buy a product and twenty seconds later the whole house is transformed. There is new wallpaper, new linoleum on the floor, and the housewife just had a manicure. Women in the home are frequently portrayed as perpetually bouncy, bright, and bubbly. Whatever they are doing, it is not any more serious than deciding what color hair to have, what toilet bowl freshener to buy, or what to microwave for supper. There is no real work involved in what women do.

This attitude about women's work makes women objects and men actors. Over and over again, ads depict women preparing themselves to be looked at and admired by men—and by other women, who judge them. The men in ads make the decisions, control what happens, solve mysteries, and resolve problems. In 95 percent of television ads, for instance, male voices show up with the products that solve the problem posed in the ad. [^11] Women are primarily concerned with looking beautiful and with maintaining beautiful homes. "Women are sex objects, and men are success objects," points out Jean Kilbourne. "The emphasis for men is money and power and the goods that go with that, while for women it's youth and beauty and thinness." [^12] Thus, commercials flatten both men and women, making them one-dimensional. Both sexes are cheated of their full complexity and vulnerability as human beings.

How does the advertising industry work?

Suzanne: We all experience the gap between reality on and off screen in different ways. My name may not be familiar to you, but I have been directly involved for twenty years as an actress and model in selling you many things. Advertising has been a rewarding career for me.

Because messages in ads may distract us from pursuing what is truly important, we have focused exclusively on harmful messages. Let me put advertising messages in another perspective. Ads are completely focused on the outward person; they are not meant to give you internal or eternal validation. They are meant to sell you a product. Advertisers use society's values to appeal to viewers. Certainly the media does affect our attitudes, but the cause-effect sequence is not always easy to sort out. Which came first, the chicken or the egg? Our interest in visual beauty is part of our eternal nature, not a vice. Something innate in us prefers beauty over the banal. The motive behind the Karastan oriental carpet ad, for instance, may well be an appeal to this trait in us rather than a more prurient one.

Our concern is not to suggest you quit caring about how you look, smell, or dress (ditto for your house) but to encourage you to resist an emphasis on appearances to the exclusion of spiritual values. Only our connection with God can make us feel "good enough."

Now let me tell you a bit about how the advertising industry works. The bottom line in advertising is money. Advertising "generates $130 billion[annual[ly], diet industry revenues have been put at $33 billion, 'youth' cosmetics at $20 billion, and cosmetic surgery at $300 million." [^13] Because of the money involved, advertisers take care to use what works.

The details in commercials that seem incidental and casual are neither. A great deal of money is spent every year test marketing to find out what we, the public, will buy and how best to sell it to us. Decisions regarding the setting, lighting, music, wardrobe, makeup, hair, dialogue, and action are carefully made in board rooms with access to pages of demographics. The shape and coloring of a product also become an issue. My hair has been dyed for a commercial because it competed with the color of the bottle of shampoo being advertised.

Because of limited time and space, the advertising industry depends on shorthand messages to shape our perceptions. Advertisers use this method to encourage us to form an opinion or judgment quickly. The idea that brighter colors in your laundry means happiness is more easily shown by a smiling mom than said. Shorthand messages can be useful, but we need to be aware of them. They tend to be highly manipulative, promote stereotypes, and encourage us to accept an artificial ideal of perfection that is unhealthy and, ultimately, unattainable. They promise us status, success, acceptance, and popularity, if we use the right products.

Advertisers also use other techniques to evoke certain emotional responses. For instance, advertisements press our insecurity buttons: "Raise your hand if you're SURE." They can make us feel guilty: "All 'good' mommies buy JIF." Ads play on our need for love and romance: "I can't seem to forget her. Her Windsong stays on my mind."

Advertisers and the media in general sometimes grab our attention by annoying or shocking us. The whole idea of advertising is to plant a message we remember; sometimes a negative message is as effective as a positive message in selling a product. We can often name the products whose ads irritate us most. Controversy also leads to free publicity and, negative or not, generates awareness of a product. That also means that ads using camouflaged and soft pornography are increasing because a product benefits from any kind of publicity, even public outcry.

Not all ad campaigns are sexual, demeaning, or inherently misleading. Advertising does provide a valuable service to the consumer. But as consumers, we need to be aware of advertisers' techniques so that we can maintain a healthy perspective and make educated choices. We are responsible for filtering out harmful messages which can affect our emotional, economic, and spiritual lives.

The world of television commercials is, of necessity, a world of first impressions. Everyday life is not much different. What is the first thought that pops into your head when you see someone in a ripped T-shirt and dirty jeans? What about someone in a designer suit and expensive shoes? Did advertising force you to these thoughts? Letting the material world distract us from what really matters is a problem but "hungering and thirsting after righteousness" need not exclude a nice appearance.

I was once told by an LDS director that he could not give me a part in a Church film because, as he put it, "No one would ever believe you as a Mormon mother; you're too pretty, too sophisticated looking"! I don't expect to get every job I audition for, but I was hurt by the director's comment. I am a Mormon mother. What does a "Mormon mother" look like, anyway? I would venture to say that she might look very different in the Amazon rainforests of Peru than she would in a sacrament meeting in Utah. The experience taught me that even within our own church culture, some people have a narrow idea of what a "true Mormon" should look like, even though this "ideal" has nothing to do with the gospel. Judging by looks alone means misjudging. This kind of misjudgment promotes competition and discouragement and pits women against other women.

As sisters in the gospel, we need to support and encourage each other's individuality in all ways. We need to allow each other to be who we are by seeing each other as daughters of God instead of judging who looks most like any particular culture's vision of ideal.

Cheryl: Ads are a problem only if they confuse or distract us from pursuing what is truly important. If we recognize their influence, we can counteract harmful messages.

To loosely paraphrase Justice Stewart, we have not attempted to define precisely the kinds of material that are always harmful. In fact, we each have our own opinions about that. But we seek to raise awareness. As we become more conscious of the subtle influence of ideas, we can make decisions in our homes about what is harmful. Once we learn to know it when we see it, we can take steps to resist demeaning and damaging messages.

Consider one last scripture—with a few additions to liken it unto ourselves. I hope in this new context it will suggest a meaning of loving ourselves without worrying about our surface beauty. God made us beautiful—as we are, and in all our varieties. Jesus speaks of the wild lilies of the field, not hot-house roses, when he says: "And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin [and they diet not, neither do they color their hair]: and yet I say unto you, That even [Cindy Crawford] in all [her] glory was not arrayed like one of these" (Matt. 6:28-29; see also D&C 84:82).

Notes

Cheryl gratefully acknowledges the assistance of Sherrine M. Walker, Lisa Stamps-Jones, and Mary Thompson.

Cheryl B. Preston, professor of law at the J. Reuben Clark Law School, Brigham Young University, teaches banking and finance and women's issues in law. She and her husband, Stanley J. Preston, are the parents of three children. Cheryl serves as a Gospel Doctrine teacher in her Bountiful, Utah, ward.

Sharon Lee Esplin Swenson, assistant professor of theater and film at Brigham Young University, specializes in critical studies in film theory and is interested in gender and family in film. Sharon and her husband, Paul Swenson, are the parents of two children. She teaches the Gospel Doctrine class in her Salt Lake City, Utah, ward.

Suzanne Barnes Engemann, an actress and model, has worked in New York and Los Angeles for many years. She and her husband, Paul R. Engemann, are the parents of one son. Suzanne is the Young Women Mia Maid activities counselor in her Provo, Utah, ward.

---
Notas:
[^1] See Arnold Scheibel, "You Can Continuously Improve Your Mind and Your Memory," Bottom Line/Personal 21 (1 November 1994): 9-10. Professor Scheibel, director of the Brain Research Institute, University of California, has found that learning to play a musical instrument or taking your basic musical skill to a more advanced level stimulates mental function.
[^2] Bruce Hafen, The Broken Heart (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989), 101-2.
[^3] Jean Kilbourne, in "Advertisers Still Lagging behind the Times," by Nina Burleigh, Chicago Tribune, 7 Apr. 1991, C8.
[^4] Jeffry Scott, "Selling with Sexism: Resurgence of Hot Ads Fuels Social, Political Battle over Unequal Treatment," Atlanta Journal and Constitution, 24 Nov. 1991, H1.
[^5] Claudia Bepko and Jo-Ann Krestan, Too Good for Her Own Good (New York: HarperPerennial, 1990), 15.
[^6] The ad copy reads in part: "Milk, it's just what my body needs. Well, that and a closet full of ultrashort, supertight, little black dresses."
[^7] Teresa Hommel, "Images of Women in Pornography and Media," New York University Review of Law & Social Change 8 (1978-79): 211.
[^8] Scott, "Selling with Sexism," H1.
[^9] Marianne Wesson, "Girls Should Bring Lawsuits Everywhere . . . Nothing Will Be Corrupted: Pornography as Speech and Product," University of Chicago Law Review 60 (1993): 851.
[^10] Naomi Wolf, The Beauty Myth: How Images of Beauty Are Used Against Women (New York: AnchorDoubleday, 1991), 165.
[^11] Hilary DeVries, "The New Women in the Eyes of the Media," Christian Science Monitor, 21 June 1984, 24.
[^12] Jean Kilbourne, quoted in Burleigh, Chicago Tribune, C8.
[^13] Carlin Meyer, "Sex, Sin, and Women's Liberation: Against Porn-Suppression," Texas Law Review 72 (1994): 1174.
