Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

"Neither Shalt Thou Bury Thy Talent"

BONNIE L. GOODLIFFE

There may be women who can be super wives and mothers, work full time, sew all the family's clothes, bake their own bread from home-grown wheat, and (as I heard Erma Bombeck say once) wash and iron their scraps of aluminum foil, but I am not one of them. The things I do, I try to do well. But I can't do everything and have stopped trying. What is more, now that I am past fifty, I have stopped apologizing for what I don't do. I have discovered this basic truth: when we're twenty, we are terribly concerned with what others think about us; at thirty-five, we become less concerned with what others are thinking about us; when we're fifty, we realize that hardly anyone is thinking about us.

I am not very domestic. My motto has been, "In twenty years, my house will not remember me." Therefore, I refuse to give it my best time. Instead, as a professional organist—performer and teacher—I spend a lot of time practicing. I average two to three hours a day in practice plus more time for rehearsal and performance. People occasionally express surprise when they hear me practicing. They don't realize that even a frequent performer still needs to practice scales and other technical exercises. Some are surprised that I need to practice at all. Yet I practice more now than I ever did as a student. I practice more now because I am expected to perform at a professional level, and every minute of practice pays off eventually.

Even more important to me than my music is my family. Only the two youngest are still at home full time. The others all live out of state. One is a junior in college, one is a missionary in South America, and three are in graduate school. None is married yet. I have invested a great deal of my time and energy in my children, doing the standard parenting things such as driving car pools, being soccer team mother, and sewing costumes for dance recitals. My children are some of my best friends. They don't need much car pooling now, but they sometimes flatter me by asking my advice.

I have deliberately promoted my children's independence—for their welfare as well as my own. I have tried to emulate my own mother whose philosophy was, "Be sure that you are still somebody after your children are gone. Do not make your identity synonymous with your children. You should have some independent purpose and existence, not just be an extension of other people, even good people." I believe we do our children no favor by waiting on them. Service is a fine principle, but children should not think of their parents as servants.

I am also a strong believer in exercise, and I wish that I had been converted to it earlier in my life. Physical exercise enables me to think more productively. A guiding principle I have followed is, When the mind is tired, exercise the body; when the body is tired, exercise the mind. In the past I have participated in aerobic exercise classes. Currently I walk about thirty minutes a day, usually alone. It is my meditation time. And I believe that music is a form of mental exercise. [^1]

These are some of the life choices I have made. These choices, the things that are important to me and the way I invest my time, have defined who I am and what I now can do. I have a very powerful sense of stewardship. I feel strongly that, for reasons unknown to me, I have been granted certain abilities and opportunities but that I will be held accountable for what I do with them. I am under obligation to use these gifts in the Lord's service. That has not been a burden to me; it has been a great blessing. But some of the lessons I have learned have been unexpected.

I have been playing at the Salt Lake Tabernacle since 1979. My principal assignments are to accompany the Mormon Youth Chorus and Symphony in their rehearsals and performances and to play Tabernacle organ recitals for tourists. I also play for regional conferences, firesides, and other special meetings. I occasionally accompany the Mormon Tabernacle Choir in the "Music and the Spoken Word" broadcast. Even after fifteen years, I am still surprised to be playing at the Tabernacle. I had never aspired to the job. In fact, the job I have now didn't exist when I was an organ student. Playing the organ wasn't even my idea—it was my mother's way to keep me busy when my college piano teacher went on a sabbatical. Being an organist was all quite accidental.

I studied organ for six years in college, three of those years as a graduate student. I gave my graduate solo recital when I was six months pregnant with my first child. My husband Glade and I earned master's degrees at the same time; then he went to work, and I stayed home as I had always planned. If I wanted to practice the organ, I had to go to the church. For the three years we lived in Cleveland, Ohio, church was almost thirty miles away, and my practicing suffered.

When we were transferred to California and sold our house in Cleveland, we made enough money that my husband thought we should use it to buy an organ. It was a very substantial investment, but the profit on the sale of the house was almost enough for an organ. I borrowed the rest of the money from my parents and paid it back from my piano teaching. Buying the organ was a turning point in my life. I started to practice again. Within a year, we had been transferred again, quite unexpectedly, to Salt Lake City, where my life was to change dramatically.

In the summer of 1979, I was in the Primary presidency in my ward. Primary was then held on a weekday. One afternoon, as my children and I returned home from Primary, we heard the phone ringing. It was Robert Cundick, then senior organist at the Tabernacle. He asked if I would be interested in auditioning for a six-month guest organist calling at the Tabernacle. I still don't know how he got my name. I have thought quite a bit lately about my response to his question. Because I had just walked in the door, because it was so unexpected, I gave a very uncharacteristic response: I said yes. Normally I would have given a long, detailed list of why this was not a good time, not a reasonable request, and why I was not perfectly qualified for the position. Listing reasons why something cannot possibly work is one of my specialities. But on that one, rare occasion, I said yes. And it has altered the course of my life.

Let me tell you a few other things about myself that I don't usually talk about. I hope that I appear confident, well-prepared, disciplined, and in control. That is my public persona. I don't know how I could possibly perform without these qualities. They are not, however, the real me. I am in reality quite shy, very sensitive to criticism, and anxious to have others like me and approve of what I do. My real self sits in the car and cries after doing poorly on an organ exam or after making conspicuous errors in a performance. My real self is very fragile. But I frequently call upon my public persona to get me through tough situations. It can be very useful, but it is not really me.

Performers must do many things right simultaneously, stay very focused, and, above all, play accurately. As a performer, I must be able to recover quickly when something goes wrong (and you may be assured that something will go wrong). And I must be able to get through all of this without any distress registering on my face, because I may be on camera at any time. Of course, that is just acting.

In my music life, I can make and rely on certain assumptions. I have had enough training and experience as a performer to know that with sufficient practice and preparation time, I can perform almost entirely without errors. I very seldom get that kind of practice and preparation, but I believe an error-free performance is possible under ideal circumstances. I know what it requires: concentration, discipline, hard work, and time.

I know that careful preparation pays off. If I work through every conceivable problem mentally before I perform, I can overcome or eliminate most problems. I can even overcome a certain amount of performance anxiety ahead of time. I typically experience my worst anxiety in the days just before a major performance. I am usually quite composed for the performance itself.

Real life, however, is not like that. No amount of discipline on my part, no amount of planning or concentration, no amount of intelligence or study, no amount of time or hard work can assure me a life free of mistakes. I would prefer it to be otherwise. That has been a hard lesson for me to learn. My discipline, hard work, and choices are not the only deciding factors in my life. I am affected, positively and negatively, by everyone and everything around me. An infinite number of variables are at work which are impossible to control.

The very nature of mortals is that we make mistakes and that we will be affected by the mistakes of others. That is why we need the Savior. That is why we need the Atonement. What small part of this concept I now understand, I have learned from contrasting real life with my music life, where some of the laws are just the opposite.

One of the reasons I like to perform, especially baroque, contrapuntal music, is that for a short period of time, I am fully in control. I enjoy knowing that when I push my fingers down in a certain, disciplined way, I will hear music that I love. Always. I am never disappointed.

But there are very few things I can control in the same way. I am still trying to accept that fact. Brigham Young University provost Bruce Hafen beautifully explains the boundaries of human control: "From God's perspective on our lives, we can control the things that really matter: the righteousness of our desires, the purity of our motives, the wholeheartedness of our efforts to love God and keep his commandments, the genuineness of our interest in other people, and the extent to which our efforts reflect our inborn capacity. One way to distinguish what matters a great deal from what does not matter so much is to ask whether the subject is within our control. If it is, then it probably matters enough to merit our attention. But if the object of our fretting is inherently beyond our control, God is unlikely to hold us responsible for our ultimate success or failure as to that concern." [^2]

I do not mean to imply that I want to control other people's lives. I would, however, like to control my own. But even that is not really possible. My life has had many sharp turns with unexpected and unpredictable results. Some, like the one that brought me to the Tabernacle organ, have been good; others have been difficult and painful.

I am trying now to be less controlling of everyone, including myself, recognizing the importance of agency. I am trying to be more trusting in the Lord—trusting that he will move me where he wants me. Most of all, I am trying to increase my faith—faith in the Atonement and in the promise "that all things work together for good to them that love God" (Rom. 8:28).

Notes

Bonnie Lauper Goodliffe serves as Temple Square Organist and also teaches Relief Society in her ward. She and her husband, Glade P. Goodliffe, are the parents of seven children. She is a Fellow in the American Guild of Organists.

---
Notas:
[^1] See Arnold Scheibel, "You Can Continuously Improve Your Mind and Your Memory," Bottom Line/Personal 21 (1 November 1994): 9-10. Professor Scheibel, director of the Brain Research Institute, University of California, has found that learning to play a musical instrument or taking your basic musical skill to a more advanced level stimulates mental function.
[^2] Bruce Hafen, The Broken Heart (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989), 101-2.
