Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

The Thinness Obsession

HAROLD A. FROST

Anorexia, bulimia, compulsive eating—these are familiar words to most women today. One in a hundred females has anorexia nervosa, and almost 15 percent of female college students have bulimia. [^1] Most of us, however, have no concept of the full emotional upheaval and medical complications these eating disorders cause. I first learned how to diagnose eating disorders in 1974 in an abnormal psychology class. At that time, my class was told that those of us who would be working clinically in the area of psychology would be unlikely to see more than one or two eating disorders patients in our whole career. The reality of the 1990s is that I see twenty to thirty patients a week, all of them with eating disorders.

What might lead you to suspect that you or someone you love has an eating disorder? An anorexic person goes to extreme measures to restrict calories and burn them off, eating perhaps only three hundred calories a day and running eight or nine miles in an effort to be thin. Anorexics also abuse laxatives, diuretics, enemas, and diet pills. Their intense fear of becoming obese and their eating habits eventually interrupt their normal menstrual cycle.

Anorexics have a distorted view of what they look like. No matter how much weight they lose, they see themselves as fat. Let me give you an example. Several years ago, a stake president from Garden Grove, California, sent a young woman to me for treatment. Pictures she brought of herself taken before her eating disorder showed that she had been very beautiful. In fact, she had won the Miss Garden Grove title, standing 5'8'' and weighing 120 pounds—slender for her height. When we received her at the hospital, she was still 5'8'' but weighed only 60 pounds. And yet one of the first things she did was grab a fold of skin on her stomach and say, "See, Dr. Frost? See how fat I am? If I could only weigh five pounds less then I could live happily ever after."

Bulimic women also want to be thin, but they go about it differently. A woman with bulimia will eat large quantities of food, usually secretly, in a short time—called a binge—and then purge in an attempt to rid herself of calories. The most typical type of purging is vomiting. I've had patients who force themselves to throw up as many as forty times a day. Other women use laxatives to purge. One of my patients was taking two hundred Ex-Lax a day. Her whole life was spent roaming from grocery store to grocery store, buying and stealing Ex-Lax and candy bars. Still other women purge by exercising obsessively or fasting after a binge. This bingeing and purging is often cyclic.

Many women suffer from both anorexia nervosa and bulimia. Less serious but perhaps more prevalent is compulsive eating, which is basically binge eating. Compulsive eaters, too, have a desire to be thin, but they cope with their life by constantly eating. The more they focus on not wanting to eat, the more they think about food. These compulsive thoughts eventually lead them to the kitchen cupboard.

Sooner or later, women with serious eating disorders will develop serious medical complications. Insomnia, constipation, dry skin, hair loss, weak and brittle nails, and feeling cold are danger signs. Sore throats, tooth decay, gum disease, and swelling of the cheeks are an inevitable consequence of constantly bathing your mouth and teeth in stomach acid. Some of my patients have lost all their teeth as a result of incessant purging. Dentists are starting to recognize the connection between purging and dental problems. Recently a dentist told me, "On our final exam in dental school we were shown a picture of a young woman whose teeth were eroded starting at the back and going to the front. 'What is wrong with this young woman's mouth?' the exam read." Of course, the correct answer is that she is struggling with bulimia nervosa.

Victims of serious eating disorders almost always suffer from malnutrition. Osteoporosis, or the thinning of bones, is another medical complication. One woman I saw at the hospital had, as a result of her incessant anorexia and bulimia, shrunk from 5'8'' to 5'3''. When she was in the hospital, she reached across her bed to get a book and cracked a rib! The heart is also affected by eating disorders. I work with a twenty-seven-year-old woman who has already had three heart attacks. The first patient I lost, in 1987, died of heart complications.

Science and statistics can, however, distance us from the real loss. Details from one person's story may capture the human problem. A patient of mine—I'll call her Francie—has kindly allowed me to share part of her life that she kept secret for a long time.

Francie's Story

Hi. My name is Francie. I'm twenty-six years old, and I'm anorexic. I have been this way for years. I started gymnastics at the age of six, and I competed until I was thirteen when I switched to cheerleading. I was a cheerleader all through high school and for three years at college. I think that's where my issues with weight and food really started. We were weighed every day, and everybody knew how much you weighed and how much body fat you had. Since I was one of the tinier girls, I was a flyer, and it was even more important to be light. The lighter and skinnier you were, the better cheerleader you were. That's when I decided that being skinny meant being good enough. And so I started starving. I tried every diet there was. The cheerleaders taught each other dieting tricks: water pills, diet pills, starve yourself for six days and eat for one.

I come from a perfectionist family. In high school during my sophomore and junior years, I'd go to my father's office for help with writing a paper. By 11:30 or 12 at night, I would be on the couch falling asleep, saying, "I don't care what grade the teacher gives me. I just want to go home. I'm tired." I was sixteen. But my father would hold my paper up to the light, making sure that all the page numbers lined up on top of each other and that the first lines and the last lines of each paper lined up right on top of each other. "Just one more time," he'd say. "Let's print it out just one more time. Let's just change three words in this last paragraph. Just one more minute. It will just take a minute." I think that's where I learned to expect perfection from myself. I'm either number one or I have failed. There is no second place for me. There is no third place. There is no average.

My mother has struggled with food all of her life as well. When we went out to dinner, she never ordered her own meal. She only ate off my dad's plate. She didn't hit a hundred pounds until I was a senior in high school and by then I was a 105. I was giving her pants that I had grown out of. I think I learned my eating habits from her.

I run eight to ten miles every day. Remember, I'm a perfectionist. Everything is black or white for me. I decide every day when I get up in the morning how far I need to run that day and the time I need to do it in. If I run out of time and get off that treadmill even two minutes early, I have to go back to the gym. And not only do I have to make up for that quarter of a mile I missed, I have to run an extra two to make up for getting off early. Sometimes I go back to the gym two or three times in one day.

When I moved to Provo to attend Brigham Young University, I got involved in an emotionally abusive relationship. I dated a boy for about three and a half years, and every day for that three and a half years he told me I wasn't good enough. I wasn't funny enough. I wasn't sweet enough. I wasn't smart enough. I wasn't skinny enough. I wasn't . . . I went from thing to thing, trying to be perfect, trying to make him love me.

But no matter what I did, he kept saying, "If you'll just do this, then I'll love you." So I would do it. "No, that's not it. If you'll just do this, then I'll love you." It was such a roller coaster. When he got to not skinny enough, I had already had practice. I was really good at that. So I starved and I started exercising. Food and exercise were really the only things that I felt I could control. I needed control. And that control was all mine, something I knew I was really good at.

If you know or suspect someone close to you has an eating disorder, the best thing is to support them without trying to control their food. Don't police their food or follow them to the bathroom after they eat. The food is just the symptom; somewhere in their lives they feel out of control, if not everywhere. Just be there for them; find out what's really going on in their lives.

Eating Disorders Are an Addiction

Perhaps you sensed from Francie's remarks that eating disorders really are an addiction, and they are far more complex than they appear. In spite of the terrible consequences of eating disorders, I believe they are a way to manage pain. Let me illustrate with a letter I received from a sister missionary:

"Dear Dr. Frost,

"Hello, it's me. I just thought I'd drop you a line and tell you how things are going. To be honest with you, I have had culture shock in the worst way. This is the worst thing I have ever gone through. Being a missionary in SLC was like paradise compared to here. Every day I ask myself, 'Self, why are you doing this?' I get the same answer, 'I don't know.' All I wanted to do was serve the Lord and be good at it. The language has been a major barrier. I basically understand the people but as far as talking, I don't. It's just a lot easier to be silent than to try and make up conversation. I never was good at idle chat and now in Spanish, forget it!!!

"Ok, now to the stuff you want to know. Yes, I have thrown up. I guess I like talking to the toilet because there is nobody else to talk to. It wasn't even because I binged. I think it's because I feel I have lost control of everything. I float around here like a tumbleweed. . . .

"We have no scales so I'm always thinking I'm gaining weight. Now I don't want to eat anything because I think it goes right to my hips. . . . Sometimes I wonder if I'm using that as an escape. Maybe I think that getting rid of the food will get rid of my problems? Who knows? . . . I haven't done it more than once a day so it's still at the same point. I'll tell you if it gets worse. If you have any advice, please write. Thanks for listening."

I'm sorry to tell you that this young woman terminated her mission far short of completion.

It's easy for me to understand why the overwhelming majority of those with eating disorders are female. Women learn early and from diverse sources—their family, television, movies, the fashion industry—the message that appearance is of supreme importance: the body is where their value lies. Ambrose Bierce, a nineteenth-century satirist, summed it up: "To men a man is but a mind. Who cares what face he carries? Or what form he wears? But a woman's body is the woman." [^2] When I read this quotation to Relief Society women, they nod their heads knowingly. Only a hundred years ago, women were told that if they overstimulated their brains by going to college, their ovaries would atrophy. We must be careful what we buy into. Pushing ourselves to be perfect, when perfection is impossible, often causes families to place undue importance on externals—appearance and achievement, being first and best.

Carol Lynn Pearson offers some good advice in Blow Out the Wishbone: "This morning I was hugging and kissing Katy (my fourth child), and I said to her, 'Oh, Katy—how did I get you? I must have won the contest and you were first prize!'

"Katy laughed. 'Oh, no, Mom. I was fourth prize!'

"Fourth prize? You? Absurd!

"Do you know what, Katy? We human beings have got ourselves into such trouble since we learned how to count. Does there always have to be a first and a last, a best and a worst, or even a better than?

"Is first best? You put on your socks first and your shoes second. Does that mean your socks are better than your shoes? The Bible says that Adam was created first and Eve second, and lots of people think that makes man better than woman. But the horse was made before Adam. Does that make the horse better than man? You see, it gets very tricky. We have made up our games with our numbers and our prizes and we give out our ribbons and sometimes it helps and sometimes it messes us up.

"Go ahead and do your math papers, my dear. But sometimes let's forget we ever learned how to count. We're not numbered. We just are. And you know what we're going to find out one day? We're all first prize!" [^3]

People with eating disorders have hopes and dreams, just like everybody else; they seek love, success, happiness, and acceptance. But they have been misguided in their efforts to find these things. They have been led to believe that they must always win "first prize." When they fall short of perfection in any area, they feel like failures. From my patients, I hear:

I am defective/damaged/broken/a mistake/flawed.

I am incompetent/not good enough/ineffectual/useless.

I deserve criticism/condemnation/disapproval/destruction.

These kinds of feelings stunt emotional and spiritual growth. Spiritual healing is the real key to healing eating disorders. With the right kind of help, love, and encouragement, and with patience—people with eating disorders can return to a knowledge of "things as they really are" (see Jacob 4:13). We need to see ourselves as God sees us—as important, lovable, cherished children, whatever our current imperfections. One of my patients, in despair took every medicine in her medicine cabinet. She was in a coma for three weeks. While the doctors were telling her parents that she probably would not pull through, her only memory was the Lord sitting at her bedside telling her she would. A scale can only tell you how much you weigh. It can't even begin to tell you how much you matter to God.

Notes

Harold A. Frost is a licensed psychologist in private practice and president of the Center for Change, a residential program for women suffering with eating disorders. Brother Frost resides with his wife, Sue Anne Frost, and their three children in Orem, Utah. He serves in the high priest group leadership in his ward.

---
Notas:
[^1] People who are most at risk for eating disorders, depression, and low self-esteem generally label behavior and themselves as either bad or good. For them, bad/good is a global, dichotomous construct that can subsume almost everything. Bad is the word I've heard most of my clients with eating disorders use to describe themselves. It is a word they first hear used as a little child, and for some people whose cognitive/emotional development was slowed or arrested early in life (through trauma, lack of parental responsiveness to emotional expression, or a number of other possible circumstances), moral reasoning is better characterized by "good/bad" (good-me, bad-me) than the more narrow term "sinful."
[^2] For an ascetic with an eating disorder, it can be difficult to distinguish between desire and the expression of desire, or to distinguish between desire and the experience of feeling pleasure. The thought patterns of such persons tend to be dichotomus and global. Also, the boundaries between "self" and "body" often become blurred.
[^3] Carol Lynn Pearson, Blow Out the Wishbone (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1985), 20-21.
