Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

Spiritual beliefs and eating disorders

LYNNE A. BENNION

Mary is an attractive young college student who stands 5'5'' and weighs 140 pounds. She is very bright and is doing well in school. Mary constantly compares her body to those of other women around her, nearly always concluding that she is uglier and fatter than they are and that no man will ever be interested in her. Mary has a great secret that she tries to hide from everyone: she is bulimic. She binge eats when she is feeling stressed or depressed. During a typical binge, she may eat an entire box of sweetened cereal, three candy bars, a bag of tortilla chips, and a large bowl of ice cream. She then makes herself vomit and afterwards feels disgusted with herself for being so "weak and out of control." If Mary continues this pattern of bulimia, she will experience medical complications, including excessive dental cavities and damage to her esophagus and digestive tract.

This profile of a bulimic woman is based on the symptoms of several real-life clients that I have seen during the past nine years in my practice as a clinical psychologist. In addition to clients with very chaotic or very restricted eating patterns, I have seen others with somewhat healthier eating habits who have experienced a great deal of distress about the way their bodies look.

Research has shown that the causes of eating disorders are often complex. One factor can be the individual's typical pattern of thinking about herself and her world: beliefs and attitudes can make us either more or less vulnerable to struggles with self-esteem and body image. I have observed that religious beliefs can strongly affect how we view and treat our bodies. I will discuss four religious beliefs common to my clients with eating disorders.

The first belief is deeply rooted in our cultural history: One of the best ways to show devotion to God is to suffer. Pleasure is bad; [^1] suffering is virtuous. We must overcome all pleasure. [^2]

The Greek philosopher Plato believed that the spiritual and material worlds were separate realms and that the material world was inferior to the realm of ideals. In his view, the body drags the spirit downward, so one should escape the limitations of the body by fasting or denying oneself in other ways. In the Christian church, fasting did not become an extensive community practice until about the third century after Christ. During the third or fourth centuries, some Christians became increasingly intent on denying themselves any pleasure and purposely inflicting pain on themselves: for example, they starved themselves to root out the pleasure of eating, deprived themselves of sleep, and whipped their bodies in an attempt to force the body toward virtue.

In medieval Europe, several women (some of whom became Christian saints) had similarly extreme ideas. For example, one woman subsisted on only a few herbs or seeds: she would put five seeds into her mouth, suck on them, and spit them out. These women inflicted pain and suffering on themselves in various other ways as well. Their reasons for fasting obsessively (to the point where some died of starvation) are complex; however, one motive seems to have been the belief that denying themselves food proved holiness.

Thus, at various times in the history of the world certain people have believed that one of the best ways to show devotion to God is to suffer—not just experience the natural suffering that comes from living on a planet with natural laws and human agency but to seek purposely to deny themselves pleasure and inflict pain on themselves.

Several scriptures suggest that, on the contrary, God's intention is for us to experience joy and life: "For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith the Lord God: wherefore turn yourselves, and live ye" (Ezek. 18:32). "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy" (2 1 Ne. 2:25).

Isaiah addressed those who fast by "afflicting" themselves, suggesting that the Lord hopes we will experience a different kind of fast: "Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou seest not? wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and thou takest no knowledge? . . . is it such a fast that I have chosen? a day for man to afflict his soul? is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? wilt thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the Lord? Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh? Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily" (58:3-8). The Savior declared, "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly" (John 10:10).

These scriptures suggest to me that in choosing mortality under conditions of natural law and human agency, we do suffer, but suffering, or proving that we are holy by suffering, is not the main point. I want to keep the Lord's commandments not to be good but because in doing the things that God has recommended as good I will find joy and life.

The Word of Wisdom suggests the importance of nurturing and caring for our bodies so that we can be healthy, think clearly, and have energy. Although this health code details some specifics, such as the point that tobacco is "not good for man," many others are not mentioned (D&C 89:8). For example, the list does not include, "Don't put your tongue on the inside of a freezer. Don't cross the street in dark clothes at night without looking both ways." While we tend to emphasize all the things we should not do, the Word of Wisdom suggests that it is just as important to think about all the things we can do to take good care of our bodies. The Word of Wisdom teaches us that our bodies are important, our bodies are good, and our bodies are worth caring for.

In sum, to counter the belief that it is virtuous to suffer, I propose that God wants us to find joy, and he hopes we will nourish and take care of our bodies.

A second religious belief that prevails among some persons with eating disorders, A righteous person does not get angry or sad. I must therefore control and conquer all of my urges and all of my feelings.

Many persons who struggle with eating disorders find it very difficult to identify, acknowledge, accept, and appropriately express feelings. These individuals often come from families that discouraged or even punished expression of certain feelings. In some families that was done overtly; in others it was communicated in subtle, indirect ways.

An important part of managing eating habits is discovering one's own high-risk situations. For example, during what emotional states might you feel an urge to binge eat? For some women, it is when they feel angry. For others, it may be when they feel lonely, bored, or overwhelmed. A next step is to identify and then use other ways to soothe these feelings. The goal is not simply to stop the pleasure or comfort of eating but to substitute other appropriate comforts or pleasures.

I had a bulimic client who binged nearly every day, usually when she got home from school. During our initial interview, she stated that everything else in her life was under control: if she could just stop bingeing, everything would be perfect. All her efforts to solve the bingeing had involved controlling her life more tightly. As we talked, we discovered that the binges were the only time during the day when she was not in complete control—the only time when she allowed herself to experience pleasure; the only time when she allowed herself to be spontaneous. Paradoxically, as therapy progressed, she found that in letting go of controlling every last thing, scheduling time to "tune in" to what she was feeling and allowing herself little chunks of time to unwind, her bingeing episodes significantly decreased. Though recovery from an eating disorder usually takes time and a long-term commitment, improving awareness and appropriate expression of feelings is often a critical early step.

According to traditional psychodynamic theory, the notion that we can absolutely control feelings is something of a myth anyway: unexpressed feelings tend to stockpile. From this theoretical perspective, depression is defined as "anger turned inward." I believe that emotions are helpful tools. When we ignore them, we ignore problems that need attention. For example, a young married couple bought a home that had not been well maintained by its previous owner. The husband, Tim, began fixing things: he installed wiring for a dryer in the basement, repaired and painted a broken storm door, and so on. Tim thought he was being a good husband by taking care of his wife. Ellen, his wife, whose father had taught her how to use tools, had been looking forward to working with Tim on the house repairs. When Tim took control of projects and did not ask for her opinions or assistance, Ellen felt angry but "politely" decided not to say anything about it. Instead she went into the kitchen and ate a whole batch of cookie dough. In the following week, Tim noticed that Ellen seemed quiet, withdrawn, and occasionally critical of little things he did. Tim felt anxious, interpreting her changed behavior as a sign that she did not love him as much anymore, but he did not want to "make things worse" by talking about it. By ignoring their emotional cues of anger and anxiety and by attempting to avoid conflict, Tim and Ellen missed the opportunity to learn important information about each other.

Distinguishing between an emotion and the way one chooses to express it is important. To acknowledge feelings of anger places a person in a position to choose from a variety of ways to express the anger.

In sum, to counter the beliefs that we should never be sad or angry, I suggest that these feelings are important tools that can help us solve problems that would otherwise prevent close relationships with others. I believe God wants us to be feeling persons rather than sterile, unemotional beings. He cares about the emotions we feel. I believe God wants us to pray to him, even when we are angry or sad, without feeling shame for having those feelings. His main interest is to help and comfort us rather than judge us.

A third religious belief that I have observed in the thinking of many clients with eating disorders is, If I do the right things, all will go well for me. If things are not going well, it's my fault—I must be doing something wrong. It can be scary to live in a world in which we cannot control everything that happens to us; no one likes to feel helpless. The reality for all of us, whether or not we are working hard to live good lives, is that we experience both control and lack of it, both pleasure and pain. As Christ noted in the Sermon on the Mount, "Your Father which is in heaven . . . maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust" (Matt. 5:45).

Among the many theories proposed to explain human suffering, my opinion is that we asked to come to a world where we could experience good and evil, pain and pleasure, natural laws, and agency—both ours and others'—because we saw value in learning how to deal with reality. If we live in certain ways, we are less likely to experience certain problems, but we cannot control everything. I believe that if we ask the Lord for help, he will help us eventually get through problems that arise because of natural laws or human agency. Carrying unrealistic guilt—guilt for things over which we have little or no control, or guilt for being less than perfect at all times—is unnecessary and can impede our progress.

A fourth confusion for some persons with eating disorders arises when they transfer to God attributes from their experiences with human beings: Boys don't like fat girls. Being fat is bad and weak. Men like my father or the boys I went to high school with don't like fat girls. God probably doesn't like me as much if I'm overweight. If I'm skinny, other people and God will love me more.

Freud and other theorists have believed that people develop an image of God—their idea of what he is like—based at least in part on their experiences with parents and other people they know. Nevertheless, I would argue that our experiences with God—as we pray, for example—can also influence our sense of what he is like, though I agree that our experiences with human beings may influence how we perceive God and whether we feel unsafe approaching him to find out how he actually feels about us.

One such human experience can be the pressure to be "in style." Being in style not only places emphasis on outward appearance rather than the heart but also involves a status differential, or hierarchy: for you to be in style, someone else has to be out of style. According to this human philosophy, a woman must not only be beautiful and slender to be valuable but more beautiful and more slender than other women.

In the world of fashion, many companies actively promote this status differential to make money. A clothing company is not going to make much money designing and selling a new line of products if people feel they look fine in the clothes hanging in their closets. If an advertisement can make you believe that people will like you better if you are skinny, wear their clothes, or use their make-up, you may feel uncomfortable enough to spend money to look "better."

Having been taught by the media and others with earthly viewpoints that their value lies in their appearance, many women believe that others will like them better when they are skinny. A few of my clients have lost a hundred or more pounds and found, to their great disappointment, that they did not suddenly have more dates or more friends. Other clients note that people do seem more responsive to them when they weigh less. With further discussion, however, these clients come to realize that when they feel better about themselves (because of weight loss or any other reason), they are more open and warm. Others naturally respond to them with more friendliness. It is primarily their openness, rather than their body weight, that seems to make them more attractive.

Similarly, I have had clients who, when praying, approached the Lord with heavy shame, believing that their Father in Heaven was disappointed in them for one reason or another. Sometimes they had in mind a specific reason why God should dislike or be angry with them: for example, because they had not "controlled" their diet that day, or because they had not prayed for some time. Sometimes they had no specific weakness in mind but felt they were simply worthless in general. Just as people close themselves to others' friendliness when they feel ashamed and thus cannot detect the warmth that others actually feel for them, so humans may approach the Lord with so much conviction that they are no good that they are not open to receiving the warmth that he does indeed feel for them. My understanding of God is that he invites us to come to him at all times.

Several scriptures indicate that God does not share earthly notions of what makes us valuable. For instance, it is written in 1 Sam. 16:7 that "the Lord seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart." A similar statement is found in Isaiah: "My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways" (55:8). My own experience has been that God's love for me does not depend on my physical appearance or on my performance: he already loves me and values me. How I compare to others around me does not change God's feelings for me. Moreover, eternal progression involves never-ending opportunities for change and growth. In mortal life people are indeed dealt unequal hands, but over time we will all be given opportunities to overcome all obstacles and limitations.

To summarize, the scriptures and my experience with God suggest that God's interest is to help us, comfort us, and save us. He wants us to be happy. He knows we will also experience sorrow, anger, loneliness, frustration, and many other human emotions. In the process, he invites us to nourish and care for both our bodies and our souls.

When Laman and Lemuel were complaining that they could not understand all the things their father had been telling them about the Lord, Nephi asked them, "Have ye inquired of the Lord?" (1 Ne. 15:8). It can be scary to ask God directly to help you understand your own value or to help you feel his love for you. But it seems that we may learn how to love only after we have experience with being loved: "Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and everyone that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love. . . . There is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear: because fear hath torment. He that feareth is not made perfect in love. We love him, because he first loved us" (1 Jn. 4:7-8, 18-19).

Mormon also invites us to inquire of the Lord: "Pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with his love [the pure of Christ]" (Moro. 7:48). I believe that Mormon's words are not just an admonition to ask for love so you can love others but also an invitation to ask to feel God's love for you. We can seek the Lord's help in understanding our worth and how to love ourselves and each other appropriately. When we feel God's love, everything becomes different, including how we view and take care of our bodies.

Recovering from a well-entrenched eating disorder is usually a long and difficult process. Some people experiment only briefly with severely restricted diets and/or vomiting as weight-loss strategies, but those who continue those behaviors over time usually do so for reasons other than or in addition to simple weight regulation (for example, to sooth intense feelings). I believe that medical consultation, individual and group psychotherapy, and other forms of professional treatment can be helpful to these people. Identifying and revising spiritual beliefs and seeking help from the Lord to understand their own individual worth can also be an important part of recovery.

Notes

Lynne A. Bennion has a Ph.D. in clinical psychology and is an assistant clinical professor in counseling and development at Brigham Young University. She is a member of her ward's employment committee.

---
Notas:
[^1] People who are most at risk for eating disorders, depression, and low self-esteem generally label behavior and themselves as either bad or good. For them, bad/good is a global, dichotomous construct that can subsume almost everything. Bad is the word I've heard most of my clients with eating disorders use to describe themselves. It is a word they first hear used as a little child, and for some people whose cognitive/emotional development was slowed or arrested early in life (through trauma, lack of parental responsiveness to emotional expression, or a number of other possible circumstances), moral reasoning is better characterized by "good/bad" (good-me, bad-me) than the more narrow term "sinful."
[^2] For an ascetic with an eating disorder, it can be difficult to distinguish between desire and the expression of desire, or to distinguish between desire and the experience of feeling pleasure. The thought patterns of such persons tend to be dichotomus and global. Also, the boundaries between "self" and "body" often become blurred.
