Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

Breast Cancer: One in Nine

SAUNDRA BUYS

Breast cancer affects many women in this country, and it affects Latter-day Saint women at about the same rate as everyone else. What is that rate? A lot of women carry around the "one in nine" figure. Does this mean that if you and eight friends all get a mammogram the same day, one of you will end up being diagnosed with breast cancer? No. It means that if a woman is born today and lives to age eighty-five, she has a one in nine chance of getting breast cancer sometime in those eighty-five years. Another way to think about the likelihood of breast cancer is to consider: what's my chance of getting breast cancer in the next ten years? For a forty-year-old, that likelihood is between 1 and 2 percent. So one in nine is accurate in some sense, and breast cancer is common, but it is not as frighteningly common as a lot of people think.

As an oncologist, I would like to discuss some facts about breast cancer—basic concepts that women who get breast cancer should understand to make good decisions about dealing with it. Second, I'd like to stress that early detection of breast cancer is important in achieving the highest likelihood of cure. Finally, I will include some practical advice for women who have breast cancer and for the people who care about them.

Cancer is out-of-control cell growth. Normal cells line up nicely in a row; cancerous cells accumulate and pile up. Instead of being inhibited by their neighbors on either side, cancerous cells just keep on growing. In time, they invade surrounding tissue. From there they can spread elsewhere in the body. You would not find a normal breast cell in the bone, for example, but a cancerous breast cell could be found in the bone. These two characteristics of cancer—the ability to invade into surrounding tissue and the ability to spread elsewhere in the body—are important principles that guide how we think about treating the disease.

Cancer is caused both by genetic factors (genes) that we get from parents, and nongenetic or environmental factors, such as our age, diet, whether or not we have children and at what age we start having them, how much estrogen we have in our bodies, and maybe such things as how much we exercise and where we live. Notice that nothing in either genetic or nongenetic causes of cancer suggests we get cancer because we deserve it. Some people want so much to believe they can control what happens to them that they would almost rather believe that they did something to deserve it than to face the fact that life sometimes isn't fair.

Breast cancer is more likely to be cured if it is detected early, before it has spread. It can be found in three ways: breast self-examination, clinical examination by a doctor or nurse, and mammogram. Mammograms are an effective tool for detecting breast cancer, though most cancers are detected by women themselves. It's recommended that women examine their breasts every month starting at age twenty.

Normal breast tissue has some texture to it, and that confuses a lot of women. They say, "I don't know what I'm feeling. I always feel lumpy." I've heard women describe their breast tissue as having a Rice Krispies kind of feeling. What they are describing is normal fat and breast glands, and that's okay. Some women have cysts that are round and smooth and easily movable. Having fibrocystic breasts, as these are called, doesn't increase your risk of breast cancer. They just make it harder to detect, because cysts and cancer can be hard to tell apart on exam. If you are doing good breast self-exams and know what your breasts feel like, then the cancers you may detect are more likely to be small than large.

Let me offer some practical advice. First, if you find a breast lump, don't dillydally for months and months about getting a diagnosis. If somebody tells you not to worry about the lump and you are worried about it, don't stay quiet. Speak up. Go back to your doctor. If that doctor doesn't want to do anything, go to another doctor. If you've got a lump, then it needs to be evaluated. On the other hand, if you have been diagnosed with breast cancer, you don't need to feel like you have to do something this second. You've got time to think about it, to talk to people, to get second opinions. It's all right to take a few days or a week or two.

Good information is very important. The National Cancer Institute and the American Cancer Society offer many helpful books and brochures. In the rush to get information, though, be careful who you listen to. Take what you hear with a grain of salt. When I was first pregnant, I was shocked at how many people wanted to tell me horror stories about their pregnancies, their deliveries, and their first child. I was surprised to find that the whole experience was not really bad at all. And a lot of people—I used to call them well-meaning, but I'm not sure they are—will want to tell you gruesome stories about their next-door neighbor's experience with cancer. So be cautious about who you listen to, particularly if these voices are suggesting that you are in any way to blame for what's happening to you.

Support groups can be very useful. Not all women need them, but most gain a lot from them. I've heard women say, "It was such a relief to hear someone else express my fears and my anger and my anxiety." Sometimes you don't want to say things to your family for fear of worrying them, but your support group is happy to hear you complain about your doctor or your husband, or worry about your kids.

Finally, like any other big, life-changing experience—having a child, or having someone die—breast cancer is not something you get over in three months or six months or a year. The experience stays with you. As one very honest patient joked on a follow-up visit, "Oh, I'm just fine—except for my twenty recurrences a day." Every little symptom, sign, or suspicion may be much more frightening once you've had breast cancer. As with any other significant experience, then, breast cancer permanently changes people. In my experience, this change is for the better. Women often emerge from the breast cancer experience stronger, more confident of their ability to face and overcome challenges, more secure in important relationships, more empathetic, and more clear on their priorities.

Saundra Buys is an associate professor in the Division of Hematology/Oncology at the University of Utah School of Medicine. She is also director of the High-Risk Breast Cancer Clinic at the Huntsman Cancer Institute. She has served as ward choir director and Gospel Doctrine teacher. Saundra and her husband, Joe, have two children.
