Various authors, Hearts Knit Together: Talks from the 1995 Women's Conference ( 1996)

Fear Not

AILEEN H. CLYDE

It's quite wonderful when your breast cancer surgery was so long ago that you have to stop and think about how long it has been. I am more grateful as each year passes to put one more year between that time of fear and the present.

I was diagnosed with breast cancer in 1987, as were two other women in my ward. All three of us were afraid, yet we dealt with that fear in different ways. Our ages, too, were different. I was by far the oldest, being in my sixty-first year; the youngest had just passed her forty-first birthday. She had detected a lump in her breast a year before but because of her age had chosen to assume it was nothing. She pushed thoughts of any danger from her mind. (When we get fearful, we don't think much—we feel things, but we don't think much.) Time passed, and she could still feel the lump. It did not go away. She later told us she had felt that by not talking to anyone about the lump, she was somehow containing it and her fears.

After nearly a year, she arranged for a screening in another city. That, too, was irrationally motivated. She was now ready to peek at what the reality might be, but by going to a place where she was not known, she thought she could somehow continue to control consequences by controlling her privacy. The medical examination confirmed that her condition needed immediate attention. She was advised to go to a surgeon immediately for further diagnosis and treatment. When she finally did that, months after the screening, tests proved that the cancer had metastasized, or spread, and her prognosis was very grave.

My story was quite different. A full twenty years before 1987, I had awakened one morning, just a week before our first son was to leave for his mission, feeling excited and energetic. I had many things lined up to do that week. As I showered that morning, I noticed a lump in my breast. It was a shock, but my first impulse was to ask someone what should be done next. I immediately called my brother, a physician. "Well, don't dillydally about this. Go to someone immediately and have it diagnosed," he said. I did. He referred me to a surgeon who examined me and thought the lump should be biopsied. I sat in his office, nervously listening, as he canceled an early surgery the next day and scheduled mine instead.

I called my husband to tell him of the change of plans, and he and our soon-to-be missionary son came to accompany me to the hospital. The doctor had explained that if a frozen section of the biopsy indicated a malignant tumor, I should prepare to awaken from the anesthetic having had a mastectomy. All of this was disconcerting, but the step-by-step action seemed necessary and sensible. The crisis passed quickly when the biopsy showed the lump to be a benign cyst. When I had several other cysts at later times, I was happy to be treated by Dr. Charles Smart who aspirated them by removing fluid from the cyst with a needle. This procedure caused the cysts to collapse, eliminating the need for general anesthetic and surgery. Dr. Smart, who still is engaged in a lot of breast cancer research, said, "Cystic breast disease is not a serious matter at all unless you wake up one day and find a lump and think, Oh I've had a dozen of these, and don't follow it through."

And so in 1987 when I found another very small lump, even though I could just barely feel it, I went to Dr. James McGreevy, the surgeon who had been recommended for my regular checkups by our youngest son when he was a medical student. (Dr. Smart had gone on to do research at the National Cancer Institute.) Dr. McGreevy could not detect the lump but suggested I have a mammogram a little ahead of my regularly scheduled one. The little lump, or whatever it was I was feeling, did not show up on the mammogram. "Well, let's wait a day or two," the doctor said. I went home, but I could still feel it. After a week I went back, and this time the doctor could feel it, too. He tried unsuccessfully to aspirate the lump, so the next step was a biopsy. When I went in for the procedure, the doctor said, "I'm sorry to put you through this. I'm 99 percent sure it's nothing." After the biopsy, he came out and said, "I was 99 percent wrong." Because the tumor was very small and seemed self-contained, I had a mastectomy. That made it unnecessary to have chemotherapy or follow-up radiation. I could have had a lumpectomy, but that option would have required six weeks of follow-up radiation. I had a busy time ahead of me and made my choice on that basis. Dr. McGreevy required me to consult with at least one other surgeon and a radiologist before making any decision. The biopsy was on Friday and by the following Monday, the mastectomy was done.

I offer this background information to show that I had kept track of my own health to the best of my ability over a period of time. I feel it is my responsibility to take care of my health. It didn't take a lot of time. I did breast self-examination routinely. I wasn't overly worried about cancer or preoccupied with lumps. But when I felt a lump, my experience told me to get professional help. When the mammogram did not show the lump I had felt and the doctor couldn't feel it, yet at home I could feel it again, I followed up on my perceptions. I think the persistent follow-through is important.

My other ward friend, the third woman, was in her middle fifties. She discovered her cancer on a routine physical examination just prior to a mission. She wasn't able to detect any lump, but her cancer showed on a routine mammogram. She elected to have a lumpectomy, which meant the removal of a portion of the breast surrounding the tumor. This procedure is always followed by radiation treatment and is now known to be statistically as satisfactory a cure as the more disfiguring mastectomy.

She, too, had immediate support from her family and sought clearly stated options, so she could make an informed decision about combating her cancer. Her mission service was delayed a few months by her treatment, but her good health since has caused her to comment often how grateful she is that a complete physical examination made early detection possible.

Both she and I remember with regret our dear sister, whom we loved, who has now passed away. With extensive treatment, our younger friend did live for three more years, but her cancer had progressed too far to be cured. She said to me many, many times during her illness, "If only I had said something to someone as you did, and we could have talked about it together." Once I knew about her cancer, I often went along with her for her treatments just to be with her. She found that consoling. At the beginning, there was something almost primordial about her fear of admitting to herself or to anyone else that she might have cancer. I learned from her experience that we need to be able to talk together about this frightening topic. Turning to one another with our fears may supply the support and encouragement some of us need to take appropriate action.

As I considered how often fear can interrupt or interfere with what we ought to do for ourselves or for others, I recalled the many times in scriptures we are counseled to be wise and to get understanding. One of my favorites is in Prov. 3 beginning with verse 13: "Happy is the [woman] that findeth wisdom, and the [woman] that getteth understanding." That extends to all kinds of understanding. We are quite able to help one another work through whatever impediments there may be to accepting responsibility for our own health, however frightening that may sometimes seem to be.
