When I go to conferences and devotionals, I am often asked, especially by the youth, what my favorite scripture is. Usually I don’t have one. My favorite scripture depends on the day. It is always different. But, for some reason, for the past several months there has not been a single day that this scripture in one way or another has not come to my mind:

“For how knoweth a man the master whom he has not served, and who is a stranger unto him, and is far from the thoughts and intents of his heart?” (Mosiah 5:13).

I have reflected over and over again on this scripture from the amazing sermon of King Benjamin in the Book of Mormon. We all need to know our Master and Savior, Jesus Christ. By walking where He walks, loving what He loves, and embracing what He embraces, we can come to know Him.

We have the privilege and opportunity to learn about Jesus Christ through studying the scriptures. But to truly know Him and be His disciple, reading and studying are not enough. We know the Savior more deeply by doing the things He would do—especially serving others as He would serve.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="164933949" id="p_pBY9N">We know the Savior more deeply by doing the things He would do—<span class="dominant">especially</span> serving others as He would serve.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

After a disastrous earthquake in Europe, I visited camps where those displaced by the earthquake lived. I met many families living in tents. They didn’t know who I was or that the Church would bring assistance. But as I met with them, the very first thing they did was put something to eat or drink in my hands with smiles on their faces.

These people had lost everything. I was there to serve them. But they found it in their hearts to serve. This brought me joy and reminded me that one of the best ways to know Jesus Christ in a deep and profound way is to serve Him by serving God’s children.

For many people around us, the only way they will get to know about the Restoration and the true Church of Jesus Christ—and sometimes about Jesus Christ Himself—is through us. For this reason, we always need to be mindful of the importance of being a good example.

We should live in such a way that those around us can come to know the Savior. If we live differently from what we believe and teach, others may not believe our words or even in the power of the Savior’s Atonement. Instead, they can come to know Jesus Christ because they know you and can see and feel His light in your life.

This is especially true for parents. When my wife and I were expecting our first child, I called my uncle for advice. He is the one who introduced me to the Church, and I love him dearly.

“What can I do?” I asked. “How can I teach my children to help them grow and be strong?”

I was struck by what my uncle said.

“Don’t worry about them,” he said. “It’s about you. They will be with you and see you all the time. Try your best to obey the commandments. Be honest and worthy in all you do, and they will follow your example.”

A few years later, I was shaving one morning when my second child, who was about four years old, came in the bathroom with a stick and some soap and began to imitate me. When I saw him, I remembered what my uncle said. His advice came back to me in a profound way.

Many have embraced the gospel of Jesus Christ because they see something different in Church members. We need to be sure that the gospel is reflected in our countenances. We don’t have to be perfect, but we should be willing to strive to be more like Jesus Christ in all we do.

Elder Neal A. Maxwell (1926–2004) of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles once observed, “There could have been no Atonement without the character of Christ!” Even in the most difficult circumstances of His life, it was in Jesus Christ’s character not to think of Himself. He always thought of others.

After learning that John the Baptist had been killed, Jesus invited His Apostles to depart with Him to a solitary place to rest. A multitude of more than 5,000 followed Him. Jesus set aside His desired rest to heal, teach, and feed them—all of them (see Matthew 14:12–21).

When He discovered His disciples struggling with their boat on the Sea of Galilee, Jesus walked to them on the water and said, “It is I; be not afraid” (see Matthew 14:22–27).

Later, while in agony on the cross, the Savior called on the Apostle John to care for His mother (see John 19:25–27). After His Crucifixion, He went to the spirit world and “commissioned [the righteous spirits] to go forth and carry the light of the gospel to them that were in darkness, even to all the spirits of men” (Doctrine and Covenants 138:30).

As Elder David A. Bednar of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles once noted, as human beings, we naturally tend to turn inward during our challenges or distress, but Jesus Christ did exactly the opposite. Even in His most demanding and stressful moments, He always opened Himself to the needs of others. He still does. He accomplished the Atonement for us and opened the door so we can come unto the Father again. We can look to Him in every moment, and He will always be there to help us.

We live in a fallen world. The good news is that this did not happen by mistake. This fallen world has a purpose, and it is glorious (see Moses 1:39). Although we live in difficult times with much evil in the world, there is a way out because of Jesus Christ. He is the reason for all hope.

Every temple in the world testifies of our hope in the Savior. In a way, every time the prophet announces a new temple it is a declaration of the reality of Jesus Christ and His redeeming power. The only reason why we have temples is because of Him and His atoning sacrifice. And every time we worship in the house of the Lord and make covenants with God for ourselves and on behalf of those on the other side of the veil, we proclaim our faith in the resurrected Christ.

Jesus Christ lives. He walks with us in this mortal pilgrimage. He is full of grace. He loves us so much that He came to this world to do what was impossible for us to do on our own. He is our friend. “Greater love hath no man than this,” He said, “that a man lay down his life for his friends” (John 15:13).

It is a privilege for me to bear testimony of Jesus Christ. With all my heart, I want to be His friend. He leads this Church through prophets and apostles. He is mindful of every single one of us. He knows us by name and knows our needs, our struggles, and the desires of our hearts. Through Him we hold on to hope. As we serve others, strive to be an example, look to Jesus Christ, and hold on to “a perfect brightness of hope” (2 Nephi 31:20), we come to know Him and discover that He is always with us to fill our lives with peace and joy.
