Sister Jensen was facing some difficult problems. She had prayed for help and for peace of mind, but the answers seemed slow in coming. One particularly frustrating day, she cried out in prayer, “O God, why hast thou turned away from me when I need thy help?”

“Then to my mind,” she recalls, “came the still, small voice. It seemed to say, ‘When have I forsaken you? Was I not there when … ?’ Suddenly I remembered the many, many times in my life when I had received the Lord’s help and when I had felt of his great love for me. It was I who had not remembered him.”

At times, we may all be a bit like Sister Jensen. In our anguish over our problems, we may not remember all the times the Lord has helped and blessed us.

Sometimes we become so busy with our daily activities that we don’t always remember the Lord. How can we “always remember him?” We can think of him often and of what he would have us do. We can pray, read the scriptures, and keep the commandments. We can remember our blessings—past and present—and thank our Father in heaven for his goodness to us.

In times of trial, we may have difficulty remembering our blessings. But when it seems as if there is little recent evidence in our lives that God hears and answers our prayers and we feel as if he has forgotten us, we can do as Alma the Younger did—remember previous blessings he and others had received from the Lord. (See Alma 36:27–29.)

If we recall the many times the Lord has blessed us and others, we can then take heart that he will continue to bless us as we pray to him and seek his guidance.

Today, with so many forces of evil surrounding us, we need more than ever to remember the Savior and follow him. As Helaman said, “Remember, remember that it is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that ye must build your foundation” (Hel. 5:12). With Christ as our “foundation,” there is no challenge we cannot meet, no trial we cannot bear.

1.  You or the sister you visit may wish to share an experience of how the Lord helped you at a particular time in your life.

2.  Discuss ways we can remember the Savior in our everyday lives, and encourage the sister to do so in ways that are meaningful to her.

(See Family Home Evening Resource Book, pages 7–11, 17–19, 23–30, 36–63, 73, 109–115, 127–129 for related materials.)
