I have subscribed to the Liahona (Spanish) for two years, and I enjoy reading it each month. Every article just hits the mark, helping us come closer to our Heavenly Father.

Since my baptism, my life and that of my family has changed. I have realized that the life the Lord gives us is the most precious thing we have. We must not let this opportunity pass to demonstrate to him that we truly love him by putting into practice all his commandments. We will truly be saved if we fulfill our duty with all our will and heart.

I know that the Spirit influences us and helps us to do the things that are right.

Now that I am a member of the Church, I can testify to you that knowing the truth is something truly marvelous, and that no one can change that. I have found many friends, good friends, and earned the respect of many people.

Just remember that the blessings that the Lord pours out on us are many, but if we keep his commandments, there will be many more.

Jenny Amaya A.
Huacho, Perú

I am a school teacher, and some time ago I decided to buy a subscription to the Liahona (Spanish) for each of my teaching colleagues and for each of the pastors of other Christian churches in the area. Many have thanked me for this gift, and many of my colleagues who do not belong to any particular church anxiously await each new issue of the magazine.

In addition, whenever I receive an invitation to a birthday celebration or a graduation, I respond with a copy of the Liahona and the Book of Mormon as a gift. Through this means of sharing the gospel message, the Church here has gained some new members and I have gained some new friends.

From my point of view, the Liahona is one of the best Spanish-language publications there is. It provides not only good reading, but also genuine guidance and direction.

I particularly enjoy the First Presidency messages and the general conference reports. I like to see photographs of the Brethren and of the conference visitors. I truly love the Brethren and ask that the Lord bless them in their callings.

Congratulations to you for publishing Book of Mormon Stories in color. I hope that this series will include the entire Book of Mormon.

I hope the Liahona never ceases publication. If that ever happened it would leave hundreds of thousands of people in darkness. Keep up the good work.

Gamaliel Alcides Vásquez Pérez
Bishop, Río Blanca Ward
San Marcos, Guatemala
