Randal A. Wright, Protecting Your Family in an X-Rated World ( 1988)

Preface

We live in an exciting but very challenging world. Never before in history have so many inventions been available for the benefit and enjoyment of mankind. Through these modern miracles, we have been blessed with more leisure time than ever before. Yet, in an attempt to use this added time, many have only increased their pace of living, rather than effectively using the added moments of leisure to strengthen themselves and their families. Never before have families had so many options to choose from in planning how to use their time and money. As a result, the most basic and fundamental unit of society, the family itself, has been placed in extreme danger. What is causing such pressures on families? What can we do to protect ourselves and stay strong?

President Ezra Taft Benson pointed out the dangers we face when he said:

We live in a wicked world. Never in our memory have the forces of evil been arrayed in such deadly formation. The devil is well organized. Never in our day has he had so many emissaries working for him. Through his many agents, his satanic majesty has proclaimed his intentions to destroy one whole generation of our choice young people. Evidence of the dastardly work of evil forces is increasingly evident. On every side we see the sad and heart-rending results. The devil-inspired destructive forces are present in our literature, in our art, in the movies, on the radio, in our dress, in our dances, on the TV screen, and even in our modern, so-called popular music. Satan uses many tools to weaken and destroy the home and family and especially our young people. Today, as never before, it seems the devil's thrust is directed at our youth. [^1]

Several years ago my wife and I rented a house that had been placed on the market to be sold. I had personally painted this home for the owners and inspected it closely to be sure it was in good shape. Everything looked in order to me, so the owners proceeded to list the home with a realtor. Soon a buyer was located and the loan papers began to be processed. As part of the loan procedure, inspectors were sent to check the condition of the home. I was surprised when these experts found not only evidence of termites, but a cracked foundation as well. I could hardly believe their report, since the home appeared in perfect shape to me. I soon found that the problem with my inspection was that I hadn't known what to look for. When I learned how to inspect for damage, I was able to see the evidence that confirmed the experts' diagnosis. After some effort and expense, the owners were able to correct the problems and the home was quickly sold.

Since this experience, I have frequently thought of the need for some type of checklist for the spiritual foundations of our homes. We may do well to ask ourselves when was the last time we closely checked that foundation. Was there evidence of cracking? Do we know how to identify the spiritual termites that seem to be destroying so many families in our society? This book is an effort to help us check our family foundations, identify some of the sources of our problems, and offer possible suggestions in dealing with them. Obviously, we cannot deal with all the challenges and problems that face us. In fact, we can consider only a few of the potential problem areas. But in my research and work with the youth, the evidence keeps pointing to these specific areas as a source of many of the difficulties families face, difficulties that seem to be taking a tremendous spiritual, as well as physical, toll on many families, and especially on youth. I have tried to present this information in an interesting and uplifting manner. But remember, we must look closely at the evidence, and sometimes this is not pleasant to consider. The seriousness of the problem has prompted this examination.

The words of King Benjamin to the people of his day seem to apply here. I truly believe they were written for our day as well. He said: "And finally, I cannot tell you all the things whereby ye may commit sin; for there are divers ways and means, even so many that I cannot number them. But this much I can tell you, that if ye do not watch yourselves, and your thoughts, and your words, and your deeds, and observe the commandments of God, and continue in the faith of what ye have heard concerning the coming of our Lord, even unto the end of your lives, ye must perish. And now, O man, remember, and perish not." (Mosiah 4:29-30.)

May we each watch our thoughts, our words, and our actions, and strive to keep the commandments of God, so that our home's foundations will remain strong.

Preface: Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Go to your local video rental shop to try to find a good movie to watch? J. Wilbur Chapman, Better Homes and Families (Wrights Enterprises, 1982), p. 8.
