Randal A. Wright, Protecting Your Family in an X-Rated World ( 1988)

Chapter 1

Follow the Brethren

Several years ago my brother Jack bought a go-cart for his sons for Christmas, He lives in a neighborhood that has approximately thirty children under the age of sixteen, so you can imagine the excitement the go-cart produced. Every time one of the boys would get on to take a ride, about fifteen other kids would be running behind begging for a turn.

After Jack, my father, and I had observed the scene for a short time, we found a solution to the problem of who should take the next turn. In a nearby open field, we marked off a circular go-cart track. We then told the kids to get in a line and wait their turn for a ride around the oval track. My brother helped each new rider settle into the go-cart and then pushed it to get a fast start, while my father and I enjoyed watching.

Everything was going fine until Jack's son Shay, age six, got on for his turn. He was very excited, grinning from ear to ear. When he was situated on the cart, Jack asked him if he was ready to go. He answered by pushing the gas pedal all the way down and taking off. The neighborhood kids roared their approval as the tires spun on his quick start.

The track we had marked off was circular, but as Shay neared the first curve, he didn't turn when he was expected to and proceeded on a straight course instead. The children cheered even louder, thinking this was really exciting. But three adults were viewing the same scene in terror, for Shay was headed straight toward a busy major highway. Seeing the danger his son was in, Jack took off as fast as he could, sprinting after the speeding vehicle. The crowd still cheered in the background, not realizing the peril facing their friend.

Just before Shay reached the highway, he turned the wheels and headed back toward the track. This allowed Jack to cut his lead and come within a few feet of the go-cart. But the chase was still on, as the father tried desperately to catch his speeding son. Then, as suddenly as it had begun, the chase was over. As Shay glanced triumphantly at his friends, the cart ran head-on into a tree. On impact, Shay's head went forward, slamming his mouth and nose into the steering wheel. Jack was running so fast behind him that he couldn't stop and crashed into the back of the go-cart, banging both legs at shin level.

By this time the crowd had settled down and there was no longer excitement in the air as the battered go-cart rested against the tree and a bloody six-year-old walked toward us with his badly limping father.

I've reflected a lot about that experience and have since concluded that it is not unlike the situation in some of our families. How many of us as parents do essentially the same thing with our own children that my brother did with his? Like the go-cart ride, we spend little or no time instructing and training our children on how to navigate safely through the perilous journey called youth. Many teenagers embark upon their dating years about the way Shay did on his go-cart ride, grinning from ear to ear, but unprepared for the temptations and dangers facing them. When dangers do come, many of their peers, like Shay's neighbors, cheer them on through peer pressure. When parents finally realize the tremendous risks their children are facing, they often go chasing after them. Unfortunately, many times both the youth and the parents become seriously hurt, as was Shay. Occasionally one of the young people even ventures out onto a spiritual highway and is hit. Others are seriously injured, and some are even lost. In many cases they could have been saved, if parents had only trained and prepared them better, while they were young, for the "ride" they would one day take.

Heavenly Father expects us to teach and protect these spirits who have been placed in our care. One man put it this way:

I was standing in Tiffany's great store in New York, and I heard the salesman say to a lady who had asked him about some pearls, "Madam, this pearl is worth $17,000." I was interested at once. I said, "Let me see the pearl that is worth $17,000." The salesman put it on a piece of black cloth, and I studied it carefully. I said, "I suppose Tiffany's stock is very valuable." And as I looked around that beautiful store, I imagined them bringing all their stock up to my house and saying, "We want you to take care of this tonight." What do you think I would do? I would go as quickly as I could to the telephone and call up the chief of police, and say, "I have all Tiffany's stock in my house, and it is too great a responsibility. Will you send some of your most trusted officers to help me?" You would do the same, wouldn't you? But I have a little boy in my home, and for him I am responsible. I have had him for nine years, and some of you may have just such another little boy. I turn to this old Book and I read this word: "What is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?" [Matthew 16:26.] It is as if he had all the diamonds and rubies and pearls in the world, and held them in one hand, and just put a little boy in the other, and the boy would be worth more than all the jewels. If you would tremble because you had seventeen thousand dollars' worth of jewels in your house one night, how shall you go up to your Father and the lad be not with you? [^1]

While I was growing up, we used to laugh at how loud my father snored. I remember once asking my mother if his snoring ever bothered her. I was surprised at her comment: she actually said she never knew he snored. I thought she was kidding, but I soon learned that she was not. I wondered how that could be possible. How, with the bed almost shaking, could she lie beside him and read a book and never hear a thing? Occasionally, when I would walk into their room with my father snoring and my mother reading, I would ask her if she could hear him then. She would laugh and admit she could hear him if I pointed it out to her. I thought how strange it was that she could go for all those years and never notice the noise until it was pointed out.

A few years ago I began to understand better what my mother had meant when she said she wasn't bothered by his snoring. My wife and I bought a home on a piece of commercial property with hopes of selling it one day for a profit and buying the home we really wanted. The house was in a very high traffic district, and visitors often asked how we could bear living in this area with the constant roar outside. We would usually answer that we must be used to it because we never noticed the noise. I could tell by the looks we received that many considered this very strange.

One night my wife and I were discussing some of the dangers that modern families face. Since I work with youth and deal with their challenges daily, I pointed out how some of us as parents seem to be asleep to these dangers, even though we are active in the Church and should realize the threats. As we talked, I thought of the fact that my mother couldn't recognize that my father was snoring until it was pointed out, and that we too had failed to recognize the noise from the traffic passing by our home. Was it possible that destructive forces were influencing our families and we were not even able to recognize the danger? It was a frightening thought. Together we read a statement from President Spencer W. Kimball that further alarmed us to the dangers we face. He said:

[There] are Church members who are steeped in lethargy. They neither drink nor commit the sexual sins. They do not gamble nor rob nor kill. They are good citizens and splendid neighbors, but spiritually speaking they seem to be in a long, deep sleep. They are doing nothing seriously wrong except in their failures to do the right things to earn their exaltation. To such people as this, the words of Lehi might well apply: "O that ye would awake; awake from a deep sleep, yea, even from the sleep of hell, and shake off the awful chains by which ye are bound." (2 Nephi 1:13.) [^2]

We spent considerable time that night discussing areas in which we had been negligent with our own family, and the challenges that other families may face. After words I spent a miserable and sleepless night. I had never noticed so much noise and commotion: cars and trucks roaring by, horns honking, tires squealing, dogs barking, the wind blowing through the trees, and the dripping faucet all became so noticeable that sleep was impossible. I clearly saw that we all need to be aware of the temptations placed before us and our families—and especially our teens and young adults—if we are to avoid these trials.

By daylight I vowed that I didn't want to be in the third category described by Nicholas Butler, who said there are only three kinds of people: (1) those who make things happen; (2) those who watch things happen; and (3) those who have no idea what is happening.

I pledged to myself that night that I would try to identify and study some of the dangers placed in our path and try to find solutions, if possible. I am convinced that if we were to identify all the techniques being used in our day, Satan would find new ones to replace them. But three areas in particular stand out: movies, television, and music—and more specifically, the inappropriate variety. If we are to be protected from their influence, we must be alert and heed the words of our living prophets.

If I have learned any lesson in my own life and in my study of the scriptures, it is this: Blessings and safety come to us if we follow the prophets, and consequences result when we go against their inspired teachings. President Harold B. Lee expressed it this way:

Now the only safety we have as members of this church is to do exactly what the Lord said to the Church in that day when the Church was organized. We must learn to give heed to the words and commandments that the Lord shall give through his prophet, "as he receiveth them, walking in all holiness before me; . . . as if from mine own mouth, in all patience and faith." (D&C 21:4-5.) There will be some things that take patience and faith. You may not like what comes from the authority of the Church. It may contradict your political views. It may contradict your social views. It may interfere with some of your social life. . . . Your safety and ours depends upon whether or not we follow the ones whom the Lord has placed to preside over his church. He knows whom he wants to preside over this church, and he will make no mistake. The Lord doesn't do things by accident. . . . Let's keep our eye on the President of the Church. [^3]

I know, from my own experience, this statement is true. Many of us can take instruction well unless it contradicts our social or political views or interferes with our social life. For example, some teenagers have no problems accepting counsel and instruction from their basketball or football coach, but they have a hard time accepting the church authorities' teachings on not single dating during their early dating years. A person may do quite well accepting counsel related to ballet, art, drama, or speech, but struggle with and even reject the church authorities' teachings on not listening to inappropriate music. It seems that instruction and counsel are welcomed and even sought after in areas like basketball, yet we sometimes ignore or even refuse to listen to advice in the crucial areas of our lives.

One day I decided to try to teach this lesson to the ones who had made me aware of it to begin with—my early-morning seminary class. To do this, I asked my wife to dress up our little three-year-old daughter, Natalie, in her nicest outfit. Then I put my sleepy little girl in the car and off we went to my 5:55 A.M. class. Before class Natalie sat in the laps of several students, as I had hoped she would. About halfway through class, I brought her to the front of the room and sat her on the table in front of everyone. I reminded the class that my wife was about to have another baby and asked if any of them would be willing to take care of Natalie after school for the few days that my wife would be in the hospital. Most of the students volunteered to do so.

After some discussion, I singled out one young woman that I thought needed a lesson on following the counsel of her church leaders. I said, "Angie, would you take care of Natalie for us?" She replied, "Yes, I'd be glad to." I then explained to her that I was a very protective father and would want her to watch my daughter very closely, because when she was smaller, she had occasionally gone toward the busy street. Angie promised to keep a close watch on her. I then asked what she would do if Natalie started walking toward the street. She said, "I'd tell her to come back," I replied, "What if Natalie told you to leave her alone, that she would go if she wanted to?" Angie replied that she would go get her and bring her back anyway. Then I asked what she would do if Natalie cried and screamed and told her to leave her alone—that she could play in the street if she wanted to. Angie said, "Look, I'll do whatever it takes to keep your little girl out of the street, even if I have to drag her back. You don't need to worry about her if I keep her."

I had received the very answer I had been seeking. I then explained that Heavenly Father knew when he sent us to earth that there would be many dangers and temptations placed in our paths—or busy streets, so to speak. For this reason he placed guides on earth to help us stay away from the danger. These guides are called parents, teachers, and prophets, and in a sense, they are our babysitters placed here to help us avoid danger.

I asked, "When these leaders see us going toward the busy streets of temptation or actually playing in the middle of the highway of sin, what should they do?" All of the students agreed they should warn us. I told them that that is exactly what these leaders are trying to do. They warn us not to play in the highway of sin, or we may be seriously injured spiritually. We may even be killed. But unlike Angie, these leaders can only warn us of the dangers; they cannot force us away from sin, because that would be tampering with our free agency. Then I concluded that none of us should be offended when we are given counsel that may be critical to our very salvation. We must keep our eye on the prophet if we are to avoid the hazards of the busy highways of sin that Satan has placed in our paths in these last days. That morning in seminary, I believe that we all realized the importance of taking counsel from those assigned to watch over us and keep us safe.

How are we—you and I—at taking instruction? Do we have an easier time following the counsel of a coach than we do our living prophet? We must never forget how critical it is to follow his counsel, if we are going to make it through the test of life safely. President Spencer W. Kimball gave us safety instructions when he said: "Every normal person may have a sure way of knowing what is right and what is wrong. He may learn the gospel and receive the Holy Spirit which will always guide him as to right and wrong. In addition to this, he has the leaders of the Lord's Church. And the only sure, safe way is to follow that leadership—follow the Holy Spirit within you and follow the prophets, dead and living." [^4]

Imagine the following scene. You are casually driving home one evening after work, and as you look out the window to your left, you notice a frightening black cloud in the sky. You turn on the radio quickly to catch a weather report. A radio announcer is urgently warning of a gigantic tornado headed directly toward your city. Over and over you hear the warning and instructions on what to do to protect yourself. In buildings with no basements, the announcer says, a person should lie flat beneath a table or bed, away from windows. Arriving home, you find your family at the door waiting for you. They are all crying. They tell you the news you have just heard and repeat the instructions that have been given: a person should lie flat beneath a table or bed, away from the windows.

At this point what would you, as a parent, instruct your family to do?

8, Play some music on your stereo?

Most people would, of course, choose the last of these options. It would seem absurd to make any other choice. Yet, isn't a gigantic tornado exactly what is coming toward us in the last days? Satan may change the names, but the danger is the same. The tornado is called sin and apathy, and it is leaving destruction and misery in its path. This storm is very real. The number of casualties is staggering, yet many are choosing not to follow the instructions for safety provided by our prophets.

In 1940 public school officials were asked to name what they saw as the top discipline problems in their schools. In 1982 these officials were asked the same questions. Here are the results: [^5]

1940 1982 1. Talking 1. Rape 2. Chewing gum 2. Robbery 3. Making noise 3. Assault 4. Running in the halls 4. Burglary 5. Getting out of turn in line 5. Arson 6. Wearing improper clothing 6. Bombings 7. Not putting paper in wastebasket 7. Murder 8. Suicide 9. Absenteeism 10. Vandalism 11. Extortion 12. Drugs 13. Alcohol 14. Gang warfare 15. Pregnancy 16. Abortion 17. Venereal disease

It would probably be safe to say that the problems our schools face are a reflection of our homes and society. The obvious question, then, is: Why the tremendous change in discipline problems from 1940 to 1982? Do you believe the discipline problems that occurred in the schools of 1776 at the beginning of this nation's history were much different from those reported in 1940? Probably not. Then how do we explain the enormous differences between the problems reported in 1940 and those reported in 1982? I'm sure there are various reasons for this drastic change, and it would be difficult to identify and explain all the reasons. But one thing is obvious. The tornado of sin and destruction is real in our day. Immorality in the United States is rampant. One source of these dramatic changes is the deterioration of standards in the media—movies, television, music, magazines. The media are very powerful tools that can influence people for good or evil. Keith Merrill, a well-known Latter-day Saint movie director, has said, "We're not even remotely aware of how influenced we are by the media. [They are] so pervasive." [^6]

Yes, the media are very powerful, but the tools themselves are not the problem. It is how they are being used. We should keep in mind that the hand of the Lord has been involved in major developments in the media. Priesthood holders have been directly involved in the development of sound on film, the television picture tube, and the satellite. We now have the potential to reach more people in one night through broadcasting via satellite than our missionaries have reached in more than 150 years through knocking on doors. The great tools of the media will be used to preach the gospel to every creature. Church authorities realize this power and have a communications system in place to spread the gospel to the world.

But let's not forget that someone else realizes the tremendous power of the media. Actor Gordon Jump made this observation: "There is no question in my mind that the Lord has his direct hand in the inventions of today. but the adversary has an incredible understanding of how to use the media." [^7]

A tremendous battle rages between the forces of good and evil, as we approach the Second Coming, and the media play major roles in this battle. Sheri L. Dew has written, "The battle for the minds of men that began with the war in heaven, continues today. But time is short, and many remain to be influenced. The media is perhaps the last great battlefront." [^8]

President Ezra Taft Benson also identified the media as a source of temptation in an address to Aaronic Priesthood holders in April 1986:

Consider carefully the words of the prophet Alma to his errant son, Corianton, "Forsake your sins, and go no more after the lusts of your eyes." (Alma 39:9.) "The lusts of your eyes." In our day, what does that expression mean? Movies, television programs, and video recordings that are both suggestive and lewd. Magazines and books that are obscene and pornographic. We counsel you, young men, not to pollute your minds with such degrading matter, for the mind through which this filth passes is never the same afterwards. Don't see R-rated movies or vulgar videos or participate in any entertainment that is immoral, suggestive, or pornographic. [^9]

The amount of time Americans spend with the media is staggering. Movies, television, and music have great appeal, yet these tools, when used for the wrong reasons, can be a source of many temptations, as President Benson has warned. Many of the problems facing our schools and society are the very things glamorized in the media. How can we, as parents, help neutralize these temptations? Again, there is one comforting safety net provided for those who will give heed. It is called following the prophet. President Wilford Woodruff taught: "When counsel comes we should not treat it lightly, no matter to what subject it pertains, for if we do it will work evil unto us." [^10]

Let us resolve that we and the members of our families will avoid anything that our prophets have warned us against. In a very literal sense, what they instruct us to do is what the Lord is actually saying to us, for he has declared, "Whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same." (D&C 1:38.)

If our families are to avoid the trials and temptations of the last days, we must follow the brethren.

Follow the Brethren: Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1965), pp. 462-63.
[^2] Edward L. Kimball, ed., The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), p, 152.
[^3] Check the schedule to see what's playing on TV? 3. Conference Report, October 1970, pp. 152-53.
[^4] Play games on the computer? 4. Spencer W, Kimball, May 14, 1968, "In the World But Not of It," BYU Speeches of the Year, 1968, pp. 11-12.
[^5] Read the latest best-selling novel? 5. Harper's Magazine, March 1985, p. 25.
[^6] Take a nap? 6. Sheri L. Dew, "To Every People," This People, February/March 1983, p. 27.
[^7] Call a friend to learn the latest gossip? 7. Ibid.
[^8] 8. Ibid., p. 30.
[^9] Go shopping? 9. Ensign, May 1986, p. 45.
[^10] Lie flat under a table or bed, away from the windows? 10. Journal of Discourses 14:33.
