Randal A. Wright, Protecting Your Family in an X-Rated World ( 1988)

Chapter 2

Latter-day Deceit

During my junior high school days, I had a good friend named Jimmy. He was a very creative person, but unfortunately, he sometimes used his talent in less than ideal ways to annoy and pester others, especially his teachers, with playful pranks. I learned over the years to stay clear of most of his ideas and schemes because they usually ended up causing trouble. One day, however, he came up with what I considered a fool-proof plan. I just couldn't resist becoming involved in it, although I knew we would be taking the risk of getting into trouble with our school officials.

Between the fourth wing of our school and the football stadium was a large practice field. You could see this field plainly from the classrooms in the fourth wing. One day Jimmy told about thirty of us boys to meet him out on the field during our lunch break. There he told us his plan and gave us specific instructions to help carry it out.

Our assignment was to form a circle around Jimmy and Paul. This we did. Then those on the outer circle were to start shadow boxing and to yell as loudly as we could, "Hit him! Hit him!" This we also did. In about two minutes, the desired results occurred. Three teachers came running out of the building toward our circle, waving paddles as they ran.

If you had been one of the teachers, what would you have assumed you'd find in the middle of that circle of boys? We can't be certain what went through their minds, but I have a strong feeling that they thought they would find two boys engaged in a fist fight and that the crowd had gathered to watch and cheer for their friends.

As the teachers reached the edge of the crowd, they began pushing us aside while we continued to yell, "Hit him!" When they had cleared their way toward the center of the circle, they found Jimmy and Paul down on their hands and knees. Was the battle over? No, but the teachers seemed to be upset or maybe just embarrassed as they turned, without saying a word to any of us, and made their way back toward the school building. You see, Jimmy and Paul were not fighting at all but were involved in a friendly little game of marbles.

I've thought a lot about that experience over the years. While I am not proud that I was involved in that prank, I did learn a valuable lesson from it. You see, I realized that if Jimmy could deceive three teachers, all college graduates, while he was still in junior high, it is feasible that Satan could deceive even the very elect in his almost six thousand years of experience with deception.

One of the most frightening things about deception is that when people are being deceived, they do not know it is happening. To be deceived is to believe something that is not true. The fact that so few of us have any fear of being deceived seems in itself evidence of the overwhelming success Satan is having. When was the last time we asked ourselves in what areas we are being deceived, or when was the last time that we asked our Heavenly Father in prayer to please point out the areas in which we are being deceived? Most of us seem to feel that deceit is what happens to the other guy—the one who just isn't quite as wise as we are.

The scriptures are full of warnings about the deception that will occur in the last days and the effectiveness of Satan's efforts. Nephi warns: "They have all gone astray save it be a few, who are the humble followers of Christ; nevertheless, they are led, that in many instances they do err because they are taught by the precepts of men." (2 Nephi 28:14.)

How is it possible for so many people in the latter days to go astray, including some followers of Christ? What methods is the adversary using to accomplish this? How are we being taught by the precepts of men?

For most of my life, I thought that that scripture applied to others and that it had nothing to do with Latter-day Saints. All that complacency disappeared when I read a statement by President John Taylor that pointed out a new possibility I hadn't considered before. He said:

We are told that "Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in Thy name and in Thy name have cast out devils, and in Thy name done many wonderful works?" Yet to all such he will say: "Depart from me, ye that work iniquity." You say that means the outsiders? No, it does not. Do they do many wonderful works in the name of Jesus? No. . . .This means you, Latter-day Saints, who heal the sick, cast out devils and do many wonderful things in the name of Jesus. . . . Hear it, ye Latter-day Saints! [^1]

When I first read this statement I wondered how this could be. Surely active members of the Church cannot be deceived by Satan. Not me, anyway. Then I thought of some experiences, like the marble game, that helped me realize that it was possible the adversary could deceive even some Latter-day Saints, if we are not extremely careful.

One such experience happened to me in 1975. I had just graduated from Brigham Young University and had taken a job with a large business products company. Part of the training included a three-week workshop in Saint Paul, Minnesota. My wife had just delivered our second child, so she and our two young sons stayed behind in Texas.

One Saturday afternoon several of the new employees and I became bored just sitting around the hotel. We decided to go to the Minnesota State Fair. We had a nice time looking at the exhibits, and it helped take our minds off being homesick. After several hours we decided that we had seen enough and began making our way to the exit gate. Just before we reached the gate we stopped to observe a few people at an age-guessing booth. I was impressed that the man in the booth guessed the ages of two women to the exact year. I had my own guess of their ages and had miscalculated badly. I was now interested in this man and wondered how he had guessed the ages of the two women—and if he could guess my age. I was twenty-six at the time and was always being told that I looked about seventeen. Another man in our group, Reynard, also looked like a teenager, even though he was twenty-seven. We all decided to sign Reynard up to see how good a guesser the man really was.

According to the rules, if the man guessed an age within a year of the correct age, he won. If he missed, the challenger was the winner and received a prize. We paid the entry fee of one dollar, and Reynard wrote his correct age on a card for the assistant in the booth. The man looked closely at Reynard and wrote his guess on a card. We were excited because we knew he would miss the correct age by several years. The assistant turned over the card on which Reynard had put his correct age, twenty-seven, and showed it to the crowd gathered to watch. Then she turned over the card of the man in the booth. He had guessed Reynard's age as eighteen. We were all ecstatic. He had missed the correct age by nine years! I remember thinking as we walked away, "Boy, did we ever fool him—and he thought he was so smart." We laughed all the way to the front gate. Then we noticed the prize we had just won, and as suddenly as the laughing had begun, it stopped. The prize was a small plastic toy that had probably cost about ten cents. What a shock to think that we had just paid one dollar for a ten-cent prize! I then realized that the people in the booth didn't really care if they actually guessed an age correctly or not. If they guessed it correctly, they made a profit of one dollar; if they missed, they made a profit of ninety cents. It was not the people at the booth who were fooled, but we ourselves. It was a humiliating experience for us all.

This experience is not so different from what Satan is trying to do. He makes things look so inviting that many people just can't resist giving them a try. I found out that day at the age booth that even active Latter-day Saints with temple marriages and college degrees can be easily deceived. If a group of college graduates can fall for the age-guessing trick, is it possible that Satan can present temptations so attractive that they will be hard to turn down, with far greater consequences than losing a dollar?

When I was younger, I thought that if I went to church every Sunday, married in the temple, and paid a full tithing, I would never have to worry about being led astray. I now realize the great danger of this philosophy. We must always be alert to the temptations and deceit, no matter who we are. Nephi warned us against such a misconception when he said, "And others will he pacify, and lull them away into carnal security, that they will say: All is well in Zion; yea, Zion prospereth, all is well—and thus the devil cheateth their souls, and leadeth them away carefully down to hell. . . . Therefore, wo be unto him that is at ease in Zion!" (2 Nephi 28:21, 24.)

But even with this very direct and plain warning, many continue to believe as I once did, that as long as we go to church, we no longer need to worry about Satan's deceptive devices. Perhaps Joseph Smith's revision of Matthew 24:24 will help us become even more fully aware of the dangers of this false assumption. It reads: "For in those days there shall also arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch that, if possible, they shall deceive the very elect, who are the elect according to the covenant." (JS—M 1:22. Italics added.)

This scripture should leave no doubt in our minds as to the danger we face, even as members of the Church. But who are these false Christs and false prophets who will come in the last days? I think most of us have assumed over the years that they must be the leaders of false organized religions and cults. But do false prophets need to be members of organized churches? If so, it makes our job easy to avoid them. However, if these fraudulent teachers come from areas other than organized religions, they will be much harder to detect.

While I do not know who these false prophets are, I do know that on very few occasions have I ever witnessed an adult who was elect "according to the covenant" led away by any TV evangelist or leader of a religious cult or even another established religion. And yet I have seen far too many led away by the temptations of the world. Our real temptations seem to come from immorality, pride, pleasure seeking, riches, and other things of the world. Seldom do we lose to another religion a young person who is active in our church, but we have lost many to Word of Wisdom violations and immorality in its various forms. The forces of evil can make these things look so enticing that even some of the "elect" can't resist the temptations.

Who are these counterfeit prophets who are leading so many away from the truth? And what techniques are being used to mislead the people in our day, especially our youth? President Spencer W, Kimball gave us clues on where to look when he gave this wise counsel concerning sin: "Whoever said that sin was not fun? Whoever claimed that Lucifer was not handsome, persuasive, easy, friendly? Whoever said that sin was unattractive, undesirable, or nauseating in its acceptance? Transgression wears elegant gowns and sparkling apparel. It is highly perfumed, has attractive features, a soft voice." [^2]

One day I presented a seminary lesson on the subject of deception. To demonstrate this statement by President Kimball, I brought to class a beautifully wrapped present. To make it even more appealing, I used a hundred-dollar bill for the bow. At the beginning of class, I stepped out into the hall and made a few adjustments to the present. Then I asked the students how many of them were interested in receiving the gift, which I held before them. I told them that inside the gift wrapping was a very useful item, that there was nothing inappropriate about it, and that I was sure their parents would not mind if they were to bring it home. The students' reaction was predictable. Not only did every one of the sixteen students want the present, but several started grabbing for it. I almost had to threaten a few to get them to sit down and stop trying to take it away from me.

I finally singled out one student and asked, "Diane, do you want this present?"

"You know I want it," she replied.

I reminded her that she didn't even know what was in the package.

"I don't care what's on the inside," she said. "I want that present!"

I'm sure Diane's desire was increased greatly by the hundred-dollar bill being used for the bow. I again asked, "Are you sure you want this present?"

"Yes, I do," she replied.

I told her to come to the front of the class and get it. Just as she reached up to take the small package, she let out a loud scream, as did several others in the class. The reason for the uproar was that inside the gift wrapping was a large and very powerful rat trap. When I had stepped out into the hall, I had cocked the trap and had kept my fingers on it until just before her hand came near it. When I let go, the wrapping paper was ripped apart and the loud noise from the released trap startled the whole class, especially Diane.

I had a very attentive class as we discussed how Satan tries his deception on us. He makes things that are very dangerous look so enticing that even good people sometimes fall for his lies. Alcoholic beverages, for example, are responsible for many problems in America, and yet the percentage of people who drink is increasing.

While doing some family-history research, I ran across some poems that were written by one of my relatives. I was very interested to find out more about him, since I had never met him. I learned that Billy had died a few years ago after spending the last years of his life totally alone, as a hopeless alcoholic. Although his father had been a branch president and his mother a Relief Society president, Billy rebelled as a teenager and began to associate with people who didn't have Church standards. He began to drink and steal and then dropped out of school at a young age. He became interested in boxing and eventually spent time as a professional in this sport. He married, but his life-style produced a strain on the relationship. The birth of a daughter brought new hope to Billy, and for a while he straightened his life out. But the pressures of life soon became more difficult and his drinking continued. Jobs were scarce, especially for someone with a drinking problem and no training or skills. This produced a terrible strain on his marriage, and his wife finally left him, taking his precious daughter with her. Billy's life was very lonely from that day forward. He lived his later years in a small apartment with no friends and no one to take care of him, and finally he died of the health problems related to his alcoholism.

Recently I found a poem, titled "I Remember You," that he wrote to his daughter during the last years of his life. It's a pitiful reminder of the consequences of following the deceits of the world.

It was a long time ago when I kissed you good-bye— Yes, I let you go, but I'll never know why. You waved a farewell as you went through the door, And I never once dreamed that I'd see you no more. Your sweet baby picture is all that I own To remind me that maybe someday you'll come home. The little pink pillow that cradled your head, And your little rag that sat on your bed, Have been carefully wrapped and placed softly away, Just waiting for you to come home some day. How I miss your gay laughter and your sweet baby touch. If I only had known that I'd miss you so much Things might have been different in more ways than one. I'm the person who knows what your leaving has done. Your picture has faded, through the years it has worn Like this rum-sodden heart that's all tattered and torn. But I gaze at it still, with a tear in my eye, For it's all that I have to remember you by.

Lucifer has a way of making things appear very different from what they actually are. Many in our society are falling for his most malignant vices because of the enticing way they are presented. Many temptations lie concealed from view, but sometimes we see a thing so often that we overlook the obvious, even though it may pose an extreme danger to both ourselves and our families.

Try this experiment. Count all the F's as you read the following sentence: FINISHED FILES ARE THE RESULT OF YEARS OF SCIENTIFIC STUDY COMBINED WITH THE EXPERIENCE OF MANY YEARS. How many did you find? I came up with three the first time I read the sentence, although the correct answer is six. Most people overlook the three of's, even though they are right before our eyes and the sentence is not meant to be tricky.

Satan's desire to deliver us down to wickedness is no less intense than the Savior's desire to bring us to eternal life. Satan is trained, he has experience, and he has become very efficient and increasingly determined. We must be careful to examine our lives very carefully and realize whom we are up against.

If our families are to make it safely through the trying times associated with the last days, we must be constantly alert. Installing burglar alarms, dead-bolt locks, and window bars is futile in barring Satan from our homes. These devices are effective when used for the purpose for which they were designed, but it takes more than a dead-bolt lock to stop the dangers we are discussing here. Only through careful planning and Heavenly Father's help can our families find protection.

Latter-day Deceit: Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] How would it be to have to wear this brand of pants all the time? "Fantasy Friends Fill a Gap in People's Lives," A Conversation with John Caughey, U.S. News and World Report, July 16, 1984, p. 106.
[^2] How can the brand of pants change the public's opinion of your personality or character? Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country: Our Three Great Loyalties (Salt Lake City; Deseret Book, 1975), p. 250.
