Randal A. Wright, Protecting Your Family in an X-Rated World ( 1988)

Chapter 3

Heroes and Peer Pressure

About twenty young adults and I recently enjoyed an activity in Dallas, Texas, at a water amusement park that had swimming pools, water slides, wave pools, and various other water attractions.

We were all having lots of fun, when someone suggested we go down the dreaded "black hole." This ride was an enclosed tube about six stories high in which you twisted and turned in every conceivable way in darkness until you finally shot out the end, at a high rate of speed, into a pool of water. I assured the person who made the suggestion that I was doing just fine without going down this tube. But when someone else accused me of being "chicken," I had no choice but to ride down the "black hole." It turned out to be as bad as I had envisioned it. I was completely disoriented while going down, and my head was spinning badly by the time I hit the shallow pool of water at the bottom. But at least I couldn't be called a chicken, and I felt good about that.

A few minutes later we were joined by another group of young adults. Among this group was an energetic young returned missionary, Benny. After some small talk, Benny came up with a frightening suggestion—at least it was scary to me! He said, "You know what would be totally awesome? To go down the black hole backwards!" I exclaimed, "That ride is terrible going down frontwards! Why would any normal person want to go down backwards?" Some of the group agreed, but another member of the group, Danny, said, "Let's go for it—it WILL be awesome!"

With that remark, like a bunch of sheep, we followed Benny and Danny up the stairs to the top of the "black hole." As we waited for our turns, Benny turned to me and asked if I was going down backwards. I replied, "Why don't all of you guys go first and show me how it's done." All of the group in front of me went down the tube backwards, and with them went the pressure to give in, for fear of being laughed at. My guess was that they would be so dizzy at the end of the ride that they would never notice that I was going to come down frontwards.

Then, to my surprise, Angie, the young woman behind me, asked if I was going backwards. Chuckling, I said, "No. I am going frontwards. The guys will never know the difference." Then she said, "I can't believe it. Randal's a chicken! Even I am going down backwards!" Well, that's all it took. I wasn't going to have anyone laughing at me and calling me a chicken for being afraid. So I went down backwards—and, as I expected, I hated every minute of it. By the time I reached the bottom I couldn't tell whether I was going frontwards, backwards, or sideways, I was so disoriented.

The consequences of our actions came immediately. I staggered over to some chairs after the ride and sat down. Benny was sitting down on the grass looking about the same color as his green surroundings, while Danny leaned against a fence post and moaned with discomfort. Several of us felt ill for the rest of the day. And to my amusement, Benny and Danny were the sickest of all.

I've done a lot of thinking since that event and have decided that the process we were involved in that day is closely related to the techniques the adversary uses to ensnare us in sin.

Luckily for our group, going down the "black hole" backwards was not a sin. But the process that was used to get us to do it is similar to the one that Satan uses. The process goes something like this: Someone does something wrong. He tells his friends it was "totally awesome." If the friends don't do it also, others will laugh and call them "chicken," a "goody-goody," or a similar name. Finally they give in. Once these friends try the forbidden, they use the same methods to talk others into doing the same thing. And, like the young adults' experience with the "black hole," most victims do not think of the consequences of their actions until it is too late. Sometimes it takes years to see the effects of smoking, drinking, immorality, and other sins in a person's life.

If our families are to survive safely in today's world, we must be able to recognize the methods Satan uses and find ways to counter them. We should also realize that the people whom these methods affect most is our youth.

Before the school year started a couple of years ago, our family held a council to discuss our budget and determine what school clothes needed to be purchased for the year.

Our two sons in middle school said they each needed a few more pairs of blue jeans. When I asked them what brand name they felt we should buy, the immediate reply from both was Levi 501's. I then asked them why they wanted that specific brand, since the price was almost double that of some of the plain-pocket jeans. They replied in near unison, "Because they're the best."

I asked my wife, Wendy, to bring me a pair of Levi 501's and a pair of plain-pocket jeans out of my own drawer. I took one pants leg of each pair and turned the legs so that the overlapping stitching of both was showing, and then covered the upper part of the jeans with a towel. Then I asked the boys to tell me which pants leg was that of the Levi 501's. They looked for a long time, not wanting to make a mistake. Finally they admitted that they didn't know one from the other. I pointed out both pairs of jeans were made out of similar denim material; and except for a little thread on the pockets of one, there really didn't seem to be enough difference to justify the significant price differential.

Then the plea came that I had expected. Nathan, our oldest, said with a quivering voice, "Please, Dad, don't make us wear 'plain pockets' to school. Everyone will laugh at us if we do." I had to agree with him. It was probably true; many of the kids at their school would laugh at them, Of course, not all would; but the pacesetters of the school would probably look down on them for not wearing clothes accepted as being stylish and cool.

We had a long discussion that night about peer pressure and why we let others determine how we dress and even sometimes how we act. The boys didn't know all the answers, but they did agree that the pacesetters at school have an influence on many things, including dress, hairstyles, and choices of music and movies. I then asked my boys, "Where do you draw the line on their influence? What if they laugh at you for being honest in your schoolwork or for not participating in smoking, using drugs or alcohol, or indulging in premarital sex? Will you give in because they laugh at you or call you chicken?" Both replied they would not be influenced in those areas, but they again implored, "Please, Dad, don't make us wear plain-pocket jeans to school."

What should we have done? After a lengthy discussion, we did buy them Levi 501's to wear to school. As a family we decided that they really couldn't be very good missionaries for the Church if they were being laughed at and ridiculed because of the way they were dressed. But we have had several long talks since then about their feelings of fear, the impact of the media and advertising on our lives, and where to draw the line with the influence others will have on us.

To illustrate the power of peer pressure, I decided to see if other young people had been similarly affected by peers who all wore the same type of blue jeans to school. I called ten boys, ranging in age from middle school through high school, and asked them if they wanted to make a little money. They all said they did, but they wanted to know what the catch was. I told them I would give them each ten dollars to wear a pair of plain-pocket blue jeans to school for one day. The only catch was that if anyone asked, they had to say they were wearing the jeans because they liked them. Eight of the ten would not wear the jeans even though I kept increasing the amount I would give them. Several refused fifty dollars, and two even refused one hundred dollars. One said, "I won't do it for any price!"

When I asked the boys why they wouldn't take the challenge, they each said, "Because everyone will laugh at me if I do!"

Finally our stake president's son, Dan (who owed me ten dollars anyway), agreed to do it. The deal was that he could pay off his debt and, at the same time, help to prove a point about peer pressure. He would wear the plain pocket jeans for one day, but he couldn't tell anyone (at least not until the next day) why he was doing it. That night I bought him a pair of jeans at a local bargain store and took them to seminary the next morning. Here is the report he wrote on his day's experience:

I was hoping the pants wouldn't fit or something else would happen, so everyone would know it was just a joke. All my confidence was replaced with fear as I stepped out of the car and noticed the stares of the cheerleaders, who were standing next to the school entrance. I thought I saw them giggling at me, but I couldn't be sure.

As I walked down the hall to my first-period class, I heard someone yell behind me, "Hey, I love those pants!" When I walked into choir, about ten people burst into laughter. "Why did you wear those?" they asked, pointing at my pants. I answered, "Because I like them." The rest of the day went on in much the same way, with everyone laughing at me. This has been a real eye opener for me concerning the power of peer pressure. It's an experience that I don't care to repeat! At the end of the day, I asked myself the following questions:

Why do you think certain things are accepted by the young people in our schools and neighborhoods? Who sets the trends these young people are following? Why would anyone laugh and mock those who choose not to follow the crowd? Who are the pacesetters of our society that our young people admire, and what influence are they having on their lives?

Let's look first at the pacesetters or heroes on the national level, and maybe this will help explain, in part, what is happening on the local scene.

Determining who young people look up to becomes critical if we realize that people often imitate those whom they admire—the heroes in their lives. This is especially true of impressionable youth; they often try to imitate popular or well-known people in their own day-to-day living.

In a nationwide survey of teenagers, one researcher found that the first nine names listed as heroes were either movie and television personalities or rock musicians. Professional athletes appeared farther down the list. Dr. John Caughey, a University of Maryland anthropologist, explains:

Imaginary social relationships pervade our lives. We spend at least as much time with imaginary relationships as in actual interactions with people. Many of these imaginary relationships are formed with celebrities because in our society we spend so much time consuming the media. The figures we encounter in the media invade our consciousness in such a way that it is impossible to grow up without being affected by them, even though we have never met them.

The media world is fantastically attractive compared to real lives in which relationships may not be satisfying or stable. Media relationships are with people who are, almost by definition, famous, successful, dynamic and good looking. Celebrities have become the gods of our social system because our success-oriented culture has placed them at the top. [^1]

Are LDS teens much different in their views of those they most admire from teenagers in the national polls? After several surveys, I have been a little shocked and dismayed to find that results of the LDS teens surveyed match, almost exactly, the youth in the national polls. Young people both in and out of the Church, with some exceptions, are consistent in looking up to three main groups of people as their heroes: movie and television stars, rock musicians, and professional athletes. And all of these groups share a common factor—they have all been created by the media! I'm convinced that there are some teenagers, both in and out of the Church, whose heroes don't fit into one of these three categories. But equally convincing is the large number that are looking to these three groups as persons to admire and pattern their lives and way of thinking after.

In most cases, Satan uses people on earth to carry out his work. If he could corrupt any group of people, whom would it be? It seems logical that if he could go for any group, it would be the very people so many look up to and admire. That way he gets not only those individuals but also the huge number who follow their examples.

How can we find out who our children's heroes are? A good place to start would be their bedrooms. Are there posters on the walls? Ask your children, in a spirit of love, to explain about the people or things pictured on the posters and why they have chosen to look at these pictures every day. Ask them to show you their record albums and to tell you about the songs on them and the soloists or groups that sing them. Ask them about their favorite TV and movie stars and why they are impressed with them.

Now let's look a little closer at the people who seem to be at the top of almost every poll. Why are these persons at the top of the heroes list of our teenagers? What influence are they having on our young people and on society in general? What do they, as a whole and not individually, think or feel about the following areas: premarital sex? divorce? living together unmarried? tobacco? liquor? cocaine? illegitimate births? extravagance in clothes, cars, homes, or jewelry?

Unfortunately, several studies have shown that among these particular groups, there is an extremely high amount of participation in these activities.

Now, let's look at these "heroes" again with some different topics. How might these people (again, as a whole and not as individuals) feel about someone who prays regularly? reads the scriptures? attends church regularly? is morally clean? lives the Word of Wisdom to its fullest?

Would they be very impressed, somewhat impressed, or not impressed at all? If these persons, pacesetters of our society, are being looked up to and imitated, then the answers to these questions become extremely important to our families, since these are the very things we are trying to teach. Let's examine the use of profanity, as an example.

Recently I asked my nephew Cory, a sophomore in high school, to count the profane words he heard at school in one day. That evening he called and asked me over to his house to look at his profanity count. I soon found he had gone a little further than I had asked. He not only counted the number of profane words he heard that day, but he also had listed the first letter of each word on paper and then put them in order by the actual number of times each word was used. Although he didn't count before school, during lunch, or after school, his total came to 194 profane words used in the classrooms during the day!

The next day, I had to stand in line for an hour and fifteen minutes to pick up some basketball tickets at the university where I teach. I did a similar profanity count while in line. I counted 115 profane words used by those standing around me. It was interesting that the top three words on my list were the same three as on my nephew's list.

Next, I wanted to try to find out if there was a relationship between our lists and the words celebrities were using in the media. I asked ten regular moviegoers what they felt were the two profane words used most often in the current movies they had seen. All ten told what they thought were the first and second words used most often by giving me the first letter. All ten listed the same word as number one, and that word was the same one as had appeared on both my nephew's list and my own personal list. And eight out of the ten moviegoers named as the second most commonly used profane word the same word as on my other lists!

Several students found out about my study and began bringing profanity counts from movies and from the different schools they attended. Overall, the results were the same.

One student even brought me a detailed count from a cassette tape of a popular comedian. In the tape, over four hundred profane words were used—and the two most frequently used words were the same two as on my other lists. This entertainer had just been voted in one poll as the number-one hero of young Americans between the ages thirteen and eighteen. And in a poll at our local university, he received twice as many votes as all other entertainers combined as the person students most wanted to see brought to campus for a performance.

The student who gave me the information from this cassette added this comment on his paper: "As I listened to the comedian's tape, extracting the profanity, I found it was very easy to find them at first. But as I got more into the tape, I found myself listening to the stories he was telling, often thinking them very funny, although they were very vulgar. Several times I had to rewind the tape to see if he had said a bad word or not!"

Later, while reading a national newspaper one day, I noted a study on profanity done by a professor at North Adams State College in Massachusetts. I called him and he sent me a study he had just completed in the eastern United States. At the top of his list were the same two words as on all the other lists I had collected. I wondered how it could be that of all the hundreds of possible four-letter words that could be used, the lists in Massachusetts, Southeast Texas, and the surveyed movies all had the same top two.

Now comes an interesting question. Did these celebrities come to both Texas and Massachusetts to ask teenagers which profane words they liked the most so they could include them in their movies or comedy acts, or have the young people not only in Texas and Massachusetts, possibly in our whole society, come to speak certain words because the people whom they admire use them? Although the relationship seems to be a definite possibility, it is hard to prove. I do feel, however, that there is enough evidence that we should consider the possibility of a link.

During the last few years there has been a tremendous increase in the use of snuff, or smokeless tobacco, among teenage boys, particularly football and baseball players, and cowboys. The amount of smokeless tobacco sold annually in the United States has increased 60 percent in recent years. And while national figures on teenage use are not available, local surveys suggest that between 20 percent and 40 percent of all high school boys are now dipping. In Texas, 55 percent of all young dippers started before age thirteen. This is happening despite the warnings that the nicotine level in the blood is higher in smokeless tobacco users than in cigarette smokers.

To what might we attribute this dramatic increase? Why do football and baseball players and cowboys have the highest rates of use? And why boys and not girls? Perhaps one reason is that teenage boys have been inspired by TV commercials and other media advertisements featuring well-known sports stars, including a professional baseball player, a former professional football player, and a professional rodeo star.

Another example comes from one of the largest manufacturers of athletic shoes in the United States. This company pays a well-known professional basketball player one million dollars a year to appear in ads for the company's shoes. Does this strategy work? Are young people influenced to buy these products? Look around to see which shoes sell the best. Why? The answer seems obvious. Many teenagers buy certain brands of shoes because a star athlete wears them and they want to be like their hero, and not necessarily because these particular shoes are the best for the money.

If heroes, pacesetters, celebrities, or whatever we choose to call them, can sell shoes and smokeless tobacco to young people, can they also sell their moral values and life-styles by their examples? The evidence suggests that this is the case.

On a local level, young people have pacesetters in their schools and neighborhoods. Who are the popular teenagers at your schools? Are they the horn players in the band, members of the yearbook staff, the future farmers, the athletes, the cheerleaders, the library staff? The responses may vary somewhat from area to area, but many times we find that the life-styles and beliefs of the local pacesetters come very close to those of the national pacesetters whom they admire. Many young people see nothing wrong with drinking, occasional drug use, or premarital sex. Material things, such as expensive and stylish clothes, keeping up with the latest fads, fancy cars, expensive stereos, large record collections, and the freedom to go and come as they please seem to add to the popularity of youths in many areas. This influence is often referred to as peer pressure. Although it can take many forms, one of the most common and most effective methods used is mocking. In the Book of Mormon, Alma clearly warns us against its use: "And again I say unto you, is there one among you that doth make a mock of his brother, or that heapeth upon him persecutions? Wo unto such an one, for he is not prepared, and the time is at hand that he must repent or he cannot be saved." (Alma 5:30-31.)

I know from my own experience that mocking is a powerful tool. When I was in the ninth grade, I was a bench warmer on our ward softball team. Most of the starters were seniors and helped make our team good enough that we advanced to the all-Church tournament in Salt Lake City. We had several extra practices that summer, trying to get ready for our trip. One day it was very hot, so I decided to wear shorts to practice. As I walked up, one of the star players whistled at me and yelled across the field, "Hey, everybody, look at bird legs!" I turned around and walked home, feeling about two inches high, and changed into some long pants. Since that day, some twenty-three years ago, I have never liked to wear short pants or even a swimsuit. The strange thing is that I don't have skinny legs at all and I know it, but I still feel self-conscious. Mocking is a powerful tool!

On another occasion I was the unknowing mocker. I still feel bad about it, but the worst thing about mockery is that it is nearly impossible to undo the damage it causes. When I was in high school, my sister's fiancÃ© came to visit our home wearing some new pants. These particular pants were the latest fashion, but I said, "Hey, did your daddy let you wear his pants today?" I thought it was a fairly funny comment, although I don't remember his laughing much. Later my sister told me that he had just purchased those pants and it was the first time he had worn them. After that evening, he never wore them again.

When I was about ten, I leaned over to my mother as she was singing the opening song in church and said, "Momma, you need singing lessons!" Twenty-eight years later, my mother still doesn't like to sing, and guess whom she blames? I have tried many times to get her to believe I was only joking and that she really does have a nice singing voice, but nothing I have said has restored her confidence.

Yes, mocking is a powerful tool, and few can withstand its power without giving in.

It is for this reason that Lehi's vision of the tree of life becomes so frightening. He says that he saw people grasping hold of the rod of iron, pressing forward to partake of the fruit of the tree. Then he saw something that made him exceedingly fearful:

After they had partaken of the fruit of the tree they did cast their eyes about as if they were ashamed. And I also cast my eyes round about, and beheld, on the other side of the river of water, a great and spacious building; and it stood as it were in the air, high above the earth. And it was filled with people, both old and young, both male and female; and their manner of dress was exceedingly fine; and they were in the attitude of mocking and pointing their fingers towards those who had come at and were partaking of the fruit. And after they had tasted of the fruit they were ashamed, because of those that were scoffing at them; and they fell away into forbidden paths and were lost. (1 Nephi 8:25-28.)

Although the people in his dream were both old and young, both male and female, they had a few things in common. What were they? Lehi says that "their manner of dress was exceedingly fine," which apparently describes people who were being looked up to, people who were probably pacesetters. Lehi also said they were "in the attitude of mocking and pointing their fingers at those who were partaking of the fruit." And then we come to the most frightening part of the dream. Obviously those who had progressed along the rod of iron (word of God) until they had actually partaken of the fruit (love of God) were good people and possibly even active church members; yet Lehi says, "And after they had tasted of the fruit they were ashamed, because of those that were scoffing at them, and they fell away into forbidden paths and were lost." They must have had some respect for those who mocked them, or why would they have given in?

As I have taught and observed the young people of the Church, I have witnessed this same powerful tool being used over and over on them. Some are strong enough to endure and overcome adverse pressure by their peers, but others receive the same kind of mockery and scoffing and fall away into forbidden paths and are lost. There seems to be at least some correlation between those who have worldly heroes and those who fall away.

In our families we must help our children develop their self-esteem so they can withstand this kind of pressure. We must expose them to real heroes, such as Jesus Christ, Moses, Nephi, Alma, Ruth, Naomi, Moroni, Joseph Smith, Ezra Taft Benson, and others. If we don't expose our families to such examples in our homes, it is doubtful they will ever think of them as heroes and people to follow.

There is apparently a direct correlation between the amount of exposure we receive to something and our attitude toward it. For instance, if we are constantly exposed to classical music, we will probably like classical music and look up to the great composers. If we are constantly exposed to the national average of approximately twenty-eight hours of TV per week, we will probably admire and look up to TV stars. And I'm confident that if we are exposed to the scriptures and church history for large portions of time, we will choose prophets and church leaders as the people we look to for our examples. In our homes, who receives the most exposure—righteous heroes or worldly heroes?

Somehow we must find the strength to stand against the tremendous odds Lehi described as the large and spacious building, or the world. President Ezra Taft Benson has given us this counsel: "Most of these heroes who are being glamorized today are no longer noble, accomplished, humble, or righteous. From reports in books, magazines, and newspapers—especially the youth sections—we learn that they are lewd, obscene, immoral, avaricious, and in some cases even cruel. It is the very life-style we are here to avoid that is paraded before our young people by their celebrated peers. To deflect the admiration of youth from these examples of the ugly life, we must start young." [^2]

Recently our family visited the San Jacinto battlefield and monument where Texas won its independence from Mexico. As we walked through the museum on the site, my eye caught an old tattered flag. It had scorched spots on the corners, and the "Lone Star" appeared very dingy. The caption under the flag read "This is the flag that flew at the Battle of the Alamo." Although the flag was a replica, a chill went through me as I thought of that event and the heroes who fought there for their lives and for liberty. Encased in glass beside the flag was a letter from Colonel William Travis, the commander of the 182 men who fought and died for Texas and its independence. The letter, a plea for help addressed "to the people of Texas and all Americans in the world," read:

Fellow citizens and compatriots—I am besieged, by a thousand or more of the Mexicans under Santa Anna—I have sustained a continual bombardment and cannonade for 24 hours and have not lost a man. The enemy has demanded a surrender at discretion, otherwise the garrison are to be put to the sword, if the fort is taken—I have answered the demand with a cannon shot, and our flag still waves proudly from the walls. I shall never surrender or retreat. Then, I call on you in the name of Liberty, of patriotism and everything dear to the American character, come to our aid, with all dispatch. The enemy is receiving reinforcements daily and will no doubt increase to three or four thousand in four or five days. If this call is neglected, I am determined to sustain myself as long as possible and die like a soldier who never forgets what is due to his honor and that of his country—Victory or Death.

Colonel Travis underlined the last three words three times. A short time later, he and all his men gave their lives for their cause, rather than surrender to the enemy.

As our families face the tremendous forces of evil in these last days, and we face wickedness, mocking, and scorn on every side from the people of the "large and spacious building," may we too answer with cannon fire—the cannon fire of courage to say, "I shall never surrender or retreat to evil, no matter what the odds! Victory over evil, or death!"

Heroes and Peer Pressure: Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Be Not Deceived," Ensign, November 1983, pp. 45-46.
[^2] Edward Jay Whetmore, Mediamerica: Form, Content, and Consequence of Mass Communication (Belmont, California: Wadsworth Publishing Co., 1985), p. 194.
