Randal A. Wright, Protecting Your Family in an X-Rated World ( 1988)

Chapter 4

The Most Successful School System

Have you ever wondered what the most successful school system in history has been? By school, I mean the process of teaching and learning, not a room or building. I believe that television is that most successful school system. While some may debate my nomination, I would challenge them to find a more successful one. With television, both teaching and learning are occurring. In fact, one of the most significant findings of research on TV viewing and its effects is that there is no significant difference between what students learn from TV and what they learn from face-to-face conventional teaching. In a way, that is very exciting, assuming that what is being taught will make us better people because of it. On the other hand, it is very frightening if the ideas being conveyed are false or in any way harmful.

To better understand the power and influence of television, let's think of all the programs offered on TV as independent study classes, Every time we turn on the TV set, let's imagine that we are actually attending a class. This shouldn't be hard to imagine, since in a very real sense this is, in fact, what we are doing. The actors and actresses in our illustration are our teachers, and the TV script writers are the authors of the textbooks that the teachers use. Following are just a few of the accomplishments of this gigantic and immensely successful institution, the TV school.

Community Involvement

The community involvement achieved by this school system has never been matched in American history, or, for that matter, in the history of the world. In fact, 98 percent of all men, women, and children in America are not only signed up for classes, but are actually attending on a regular basis. I challenge any other educational institution to match this feat. Over 100 million people will be attending class on any given night in the United States, with close to 230 million individuals taking classes at least on a part-time basis.

The time spent by Americans in this school, according to a 1987 Nielsen Report on Television, is staggering. Consider the hours Americans spend attending TV classes each week. For ages 18 through 34, men spend 23 hours and 54 minutes, while women spend 29 hours and 32 minutes. For ages 35 through 54, men watch TV 28 hours and 26 minutes, and women watch 32 hours and 34 minutes. Men 55 and over watch TV 39 hours and 14 minutes, and women watch 43 hours and 58 minutes.

Thus, the average American individual spends over 28 hours a week attending class, and this figure is rising yearly. Attendance in this school system ranks behind only sleep and work as a consumer of our time. Before a child reaches five years of age, he or she will already have spent more time attending television classes than the average student spends in the college classroom to get a four-year degree. In a one-year period, the average American will spend approximately 1,456 hours being instructed by the TV. By high school graduation, an average American child will have spent more than 11,000 hours in the public school and 22,000 hours in TV school, but only an estimated 1,200 hours in meaningful conversation with his or her parents.

Dropout Rate

Another astounding accomplishment of this school system is the dropout rate. It doesn't seem to matter at what age a student begins attending classes: once enrolled, most become so excited about education that they almost never drop out. There are no mandatory attendance laws in this school, and students are free to sign up for classes or to drop out at will, but most have a strong desire to stay.

Class Times

A unique feature of this school is the times classes are available. They are held 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 365 days a year. The old saying "we never close" truly applies to this school. If you are interested in taking a class, the school will provide the teachers at any time of the day or night. No major school system has ever offered such a schedule.

Class Restrictions

There are no restrictions or prerequisites to any of the classes offered in this school. Anyone, from newborn child to teenager to senior citizen, can attend any class. Even whole families are encouraged to attend class together. The more students in a class, the better, as far as the school's administrators are concerned. Children are not restricted from attending even the many classes on adult subjects. Occasionally the administrators do point out that the subject of a class may be more appropriate for adults, but they usually don't bother because they have found most young people really enjoy attending adult classes.

Dress Codes

There are no dress codes of any kind at this school. You never have to worry about getting all dressed up to come to class unless you choose to. It's a "come as you are" type of learning environment, though there is a tendency for some students to try to dress and look like their favorite teachers.

Classes for Everyone

The TV school is the most completely integrated institution of learning in the history of education. People from all religions, nationalities, and races and all walks of life may attend. It is also interesting to note that the uneducated, those who have no desire to complete a public-school education, attend the school in extremely high numbers.

Child-Care Service

A tremendous service provided by the school system is child care. It is the largest child-care and babysitting service in the nation. The teachers will entertain your children 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 365 days a year. Most parents feel that the biggest enticement for using it is that this service is provided free of charge, no matter how much you use it.

Free Tuition

You are probably wondering by now what the tuition must be for a school that has so much to offer. Amazingly, the school has free tuition. All you need to do is purchase your own school materials, which come in a set and can be purchased at any appliance store. Who pays the bills? Surely there must be a tremendous cost involved to provide such a wide variety of classes and services. It's true that the cost of running the system is staggering. To pay the operating costs, the administrators solicit huge sums from business sponsors. In exchange, the school administrators allow the businesses to come into the classrooms to sell their products to the students. Because so many of the students buy their products, the businesses may pay up to $500,000 a minute to come into the classrooms and sell their wares.

Life-Styles of the Teachers

No schoolteachers have ever been paid such high salaries as those of the people teaching in the TV school system. It would be difficult to imagine any teachers who have ever had as much attention from their students as these now enjoy. In some cases millions flock to any given class just to see and listen to the teachers whom they admire so much. Maybe it is due to this excessive admiration and high salary structure that some of the teachers indulge in unbecoming behavior. Although there are many fine teachers in the system, there are also many who openly engage in sexual affairs, illegitimate births, abortions, cohabitation, homosexuality, alcohol abuse, pride, and vanity.

President Gordon B. Hinckley has shared the following information about the life-styles of those who write the texts upon which TV teachers base their teachings. Notice that he uses the words "educate us" in describing their influence:

"A survey of influential television writers and executives in Hollywood has shown that they are far less religious than the general public and 'diverge sharply from traditional values' on such issues as abortion, homosexual rights and extramarital sex. . . . While nearly all of the 104 Hollywood professionals interviewed had a religious background, 45 percent now say they have no religion, and of the other 55 percent, only 7 percent say they attend a religious service as much as once a month.

"This group has had a major role in shaping the shows whose themes and stars have become staples in our popular culture. . . .

"Eighty percent of the respondents said they did not regard homosexual relations as wrong, and 51 percent did not deem adultery as wrong. Of the 49 percent who called extramarital affairs wrong, only 17 percent felt that way strongly, the study said. Nearly all—97 percent—favored the right of a woman to choose an abortion, 91 percent holding that view strongly. By contrast, other surveys have indicated that 85 percent of Americans consider adultery wrong, 71 percent regard homosexual activity wrong and nearly three-fourths of the public wants abortion limited to certain hard cases or banned altogether." (Los Angeles Times, 19 Feb. 1983, part 2, page 5.)

These are the people [TV script writers and executives] who, through the medium of entertainment, are educating us in the direction of their own standards, which in many cases are diametrically opposed to the standards of the gospel. [^1]

Class Offerings

The TV school offers a great variety of classes for its students. Hundreds of different classes and subjects are covered each year. Some acceptable family classes are offered if you look closely for them. Class offerings include such subjects as foreign affairs, history, current events, medicine, entertainment, sports, music, and the arts. Although most would agree that the school has been one of the most important things that has ever happened to education, many are concerned with some of the classes being offered.

While it is true that the school offers some positive, uplifting classes, it also offers many very degrading classes. Students can choose classes in rape, robbery, assault, burglary, arson, bombings, murder, suicide, dishonesty, vandalism, extortion, drugs, alcohol, gang warfare, illicit sex, and abortion. Many public-school officials and researchers contend that some of the students in the TV school actually demonstrate in society lessons that they learned in a TV class.

School officials claim that they are only giving students what they want and reflecting society's standards. Their opponents argue that the TV students are so interested in this type of education that they will attend classes no matter what is offered and that school administrations should offer more positive classes. The opponents also contend that many classes do not reflect society, but create society.

We could go on and on, but I hope the above illustration of viewing television as a school has been helpful. It has helped me on many occasions to control the programs (classes) that have been offered in our home as I realized that my family was being taught by what we viewed. As one writer has said, "The genres of TV combine to give us everything we always wanted in real life and could never have, everything we always wanted in real life, but were afraid to have, everything we used to have in real life, but lost. In doing this, they have actually become real life, influencing every action we take and every word we say." [^2]

Television is one of the most remarkable and powerful inventions in history. Its potential for good is well documented. What a great privilege it is to watch general conference and the Tabernacle Choir, to see a man actually walk on the moon, to witness the inauguration of a president and to listen to his addresses and reports to the nation. How thrilling it is to watch a favorite sports team play in our own living room in living color and even to see a favorite play repeated through instant replays. How delightful it is to be entertained by some of the greatest musicians in America. How fortunate we are to see history in the making.

In many ways we would be very unfortunate to live in a world without the benefits of TV. In some ways it has been a great influence for good in our society. But because of the tremendous influence that it wields, we must be extremely careful of its use. President Ezra Taft Benson has warned: "The magnetism of TV and radio is in the accessibility of their mediocrity. Lovely is not an adjective to describe most of their products. The inventors of these wonders were inspired by the Lord. But once their good works were introduced to the world, the power of darkness began to employ them for our destruction. In each medium—the phonograph, motion pictures, radio, and television—the evolution of decline from the inventor's intentions can be easily traced." [^3]

It is possible to trace the decline in American television from its original programs. As an example, a prime-time (7:00 to 10:00 P.M.) schedule check going back thirty years found that in 1955, no violent, crime-oriented programs were offered. By 1965, six hours of such programs were offered each week. By 1975, twenty-one hours of violent programs were being offered. By 1986, twenty-nine hours of violent programs were being offered.

Not only is violence increasing on TV, but every form of immorality, vice, and corruption is also being paraded before our family's eyes in ever-increasing amounts. Ask yourself if the same kinds of sexually related scenes and messages of all too many programs of today were found in the programs of twenty years ago. We are being exposed to growing amounts of inappropriate material if we choose to watch TV without being selective.

Recently I completed an extensive survey for a major broadcasting company on the content of television programming. My task was to monitor one week of prime-time television on all three major network stations. I recorded all three network programs for the week on VCR tape, a total of sixty-three hours of prime-time programming. This may seem like a lot of television time until you compare it with the 420 hours of programs actually shown that week on the three network affiliates in my area. My sample came only from prime time, and it did not include even one-sixth of the total programming offered that week on just the three major networks. Compared to the total programming of all the cable and satellite stations, my sample was actually extremely small.

In my research, I viewed the programs using a video recorder, so I could start and stop more easily all the scenes during the actual programming or in advertising that were predetermined to be appropriate or inappropriate behavior or messages, I was to look for twenty-six different behaviors and messages that were predetermined to be negative and twenty-six that were labeled positive. The list of negative behaviors included such things as murder, use of a deadly weapon, destruction, physical abuse, alcoholic beverage use, drug use, profanity, theft, and scenes or talk related to sex. On the positive side, I was looking for such things as stable families, expressions of love, family activities, patriotism, anti-drinking messages, anti-illicit sex messages, and church attendance.

As you might imagine, this research was a very painstaking project that took hundreds and hundreds of hours to complete. The end result was a report of almost four hundred pages titled American Prime-Time. Figures I through 4 are only a small sample of the things observed in this research project. I do not identify the individual networks by name, but only call them network 1, network 2, and network 3. The percentages listed refer to the total percent of prime-time programs presented by that network that had the listed behaviors or messages for the week of May 24 through May 30, 1986.

Figure 1 Sample Percentages of Social Problems in Prime-Time Programs Deadly Use of Property Physical Sexual Network Profanity Weapons Alcohol Destruction Abuse Material 1 88 60 88 56 72 80 2 86 90 95 86 86 81 3 73 64 86 55 64 64

Figure 2 Sample of Combined Social Problems in Prime-Time Programs Social Problem Number of Instances Total If Continued at or Scenes for Week This Rate for 1 Year 1. Deadly weapons 370 scenes* 19,240 2. Profanity 319 instances 16,588 3. Use of alcohol 228 scenes* 11,856 4. Sex-related material 188 scenes* 9,776 5. Property destruction 153 instances 7,956 6. Physical abuse 138 instances 7,176 7. Murder 30 instances 1,560 *Scenes mean the actual number is much higher, but it was impossible to identify actual numbers involved. For instance, the number of deadly weapons used in a large shoot-out could not be determined. Only the number of scenes was counted.

Figure 3 Percentage of Prime-Time Programs Containing Positive Aspects Expressions Physical Stable Anti- Family Network of Love Fitness Families smoking Activities 1 24 20 20 0 8 2 43 24 24 10 0 3 23 23 27 9 9 Note: None of the programs viewed promoted church attendance or sexual morality.

Figure 4 Sample of Combined Positive Aspects of Prime-Time Program Positive Aspects Number of Instances Total If Continued at or Scenes for Week This Rate for 1 Year 1. Expressions of love 31 1,612 2. Physical fitness 18 936 3. Stable families 14 728 4. Anti-smoking 5 260 5. Family activities 5 260 6. Anti-illicit sex message 0 0 7. Church attendance 0 0

The project turned out to be one of the most depressing experiences of my life. I wondered what had happened to the good, clean family programs I had watched as a youth, and I gained an even stronger testimony that we need to be very careful with our use of television. It can be a useful and positive tool if it is used properly, but it must be controlled closely.

Although many other points could be made, I believe enough evidence has been cited here to show that we have a challenge on our hands. The research also indicates that the problem is growing rapidly as the networks try to hold onto their audiences in the face of ever-increasing competition. If we as families are to survive, we must monitor not only the amount of TV shown in our homes, but also the types of programs that are allowed in our homes. Satan's main purpose is to try to destroy our families. If he can accomplish this, he will not only win the battle, but he will also win the war. Let us not allow his teachings to enter our homes by our own invitation. Remember the words of President Spencer W. Kimball:

Again we see history repeating itself. When we see the pornography, the adulterous practices, homosexuality gone rampant, the looseness and permissiveness of an apparently increasing proportion of the people, we say the days of Satan have returned and history seems to repeat itself.

When we see the depravity of numerous people of our own society in their determination to force upon people vulgar presentations, filthy communications, unnatural practices, we wonder, has Satan reached forth with his wicked, evil hand to pull into his forces the people of this earth? Do we not have enough good people left to stamp out the evil which threatens our world? Why do we continue to compromise with evil and why do we continue to tolerate sin? [^4]

If we fail to monitor the influences that 'come into our homes, our families may be desensitized to sin in our own living rooms by our own invitation!

The Most Successful School System: Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Violence. In polls conducted by Lou Harris, Americans were asked if they felt crime was a serious problem. In 1963, 2 percent of the respondents considered crime a major problem. By 1970, 70 percent considered it a major problem. And by 1983, the figure had risen to 81 percent. Why the drastic change of opinion in just twenty years? Could the deterioration in television programming be related to the change of opinion? How much crime and violence is shown on television? In 1954, 17 percent of prime-time programs contained violence. By 1961, the figure had risen to 60 percent, and by 1986, it was 80 percent. Have a purpose when you watch television. Know what you want to see before you turn the set on. Avoid "channel jumping" just to see what is on. Does the program encourage worthwhile ideas, values, and beliefs? Does it uphold acceptable standards of behavior and promote moral and spiritual values and respect for law, decency, and service? Post a world map near your television set. Point out to your children where the events are actually happening when world news is given. Discuss the situation and ask questions of your children. Charge a fee for each hour of TV viewing. The greater the past abuse has been, the higher the cost will be. A bank could be placed on the TV set for this purpose. Do not use the money collected to benefit individual family members. Address at the Tidewater Assembly on Family Life, Norfolk, Virginia, September 24, 1975.
[^2] Immorality. One of the most pervasive problems I found in accumulating my TV research was that 75 percent of the programs had episodes of either actual or implied illicit sex. One family-planning group has estimated that in 1986, TV programs in America had 20,000 episodes of "suggested sexual relations." This cannot help but affect the attitudes of viewers, especially when the immorality is portrayed as desirable and usually with no negative consequences. While we do not know the exact relationship between the increase in sex on TV and the increase in immorality in our society, we do know that in 1986, the number of adolescent pregnancies was more than one million a year. The number of births to unmarried women rose from 141,600 (3.9 percent of all births) in 1950 to 770,400 (21 percent of all births) in 1984. Add to that the fact that 1.5 million abortions are now being performed in the United States each year, and we can see that the problem is enormous. Can your family live without TV and not complain about it for a day? a week? a month? a year? Use a TV program guide to help you determine which programs you will select. During family council, schedule in advance programs that the family can watch. Refuse to watch anything that is not scheduled. Does the program stimulate constructive activities? Does it encourage you to learn more, to do something constructive, to be creative, to solve problems, or to work and live with others in peace and harmony? Try to remember the names of people you see in a TV program. Quiz each other during or at the end of the program. This will be good practice for helping you remember the names of people you meet in real life. Set up a schedule for trading time. For every hour of reading (excluding homework), a child is allowed one-half hour of television. Many variations of this concept could be used, including bartering with homework, chores, and practicing an instrument. "Worst Ad (for all of us)," Parade, January 5, 1986, p. 6.
[^3] Word of Wisdom Violations. In the research on television programming, excessive use of alcohol, tobacco, and drugs was noted in 90 percent of the combined prime-time programs. Most of the usage occurred among the leading characters of the programs and among celebrities featured in commercials. What is the effect on society of these vices being portrayed as desirable and with no negative consequences? Do you ever watch TV while eating breakfast, lunch, or dinner? How often? Set limits on the number of hours the TV will be on in your home. Set daily and weekly viewing maximums for each individual. This will help your family be more selective in their viewing. Ask younger children what is happening in a program. Verbal tools can be enhanced as children describe to older family members what they think is really happening. Keep a small portable TV in the game closet and bring it out just as a game would be. The TV should be considered one of many entertainments that the family could choose. Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1986 (Washington: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1985).
[^4] Poor Academic Performance. The amount of television children watch has also been linked to lower scores on the Scholastic Aptitude Test. Verbal scores in the last decade have dropped from 455 to 424, and math scores, from 502 to 466. Many researchers believe that TV viewing may be related to problems that children have with reading. Watching TV usually requires that the viewer do little more than stare and stay awake; it requires virtually no talent and exercises no skills that might contribute to the development of social or intellectual competence. Students who spend lots of time watching television may become accustomed to having information "spoon fed" to them instead of actively trying to obtain it through research and study. Some educators report that children who watch excessive amounts of television develop a low tolerance for learning; rather, they become accustomed to being entertained. In our own homes, could our children have better grades in school if a portion of the time spent with TV was spent doing homework or reading? Do you insist on silence in the room when your TV is on? Discuss the positive and negative points of programs that are suggested for viewing. Teach children to be discriminating in their program choices. Discuss the meanings of words that are unfamiliar. Ask each other during the program the meanings of words as they come up. Have a dictionary nearby to verify the definitions. Establish a token system, with each token worth one-half hour of television per week. Determine how many tokens each child will be allowed for the week. This will teach the children to be careful about how the tokens are used and to be selective in their viewing. Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1976, 1986.
