Randal A. Wright, Protecting Your Family in an X-Rated World ( 1988)

Chapter 5

Learning to Control Television

One of the most enjoyable callings I have ever held in the Church was teaching a group of five-year-olds in Primary. In one class period these youngsters taught me more about the power of television than I had learned from years of studying the subject. Before that day I had always thought that TV influenced children out in the world, but that it didn't have that much effect in the homes of our Latter-day Saints because we would be able to counter its influence with the gospel. I have since changed my opinion, in part because of my Primary class.

As part of the lesson, we talked about the beautiful creations of the world and how powerful Heavenly Father and Jesus are to have been able to create so many wonderful things for us. To help reinforce this concept, I asked the children who they thought was the most powerful person in the universe. Almost in unison, the children answered, "He-Man!" Knowing that He-Man was a popular TV character, I first laughed at this response. But my laughter was soon replaced with concern when I saw that they were very serious. They really did believe this to be true.

I told the class that He-Man was not really the most powerful being in the universe, but that Heavenly Father and Jesus were. Some of the students seemed to believe me and some didn't, so I repeated some of the things I had said. Then I asked one of the boys, "Damon, who is the most powerful being in the universe, Heavenly Father and Jesus or He-Man?" He didn't hesitate. "He-Man can lift Heavenly Father and Jesus over his head with one hand!" Needless to say, I was shocked with this answer, and I soon learned that no matter what I said, he and a few of the other children would not change their opinion.

After class, I told Damon's father what had happened. That evening the father called to tell me he had talked to his son at length and had tried to convince him that He-Man was just pretend and that Heavenly Father and Jesus were the most powerful beings in the universe—but he wasn't sure he had changed Damon's opinion.

Later I thought about all the children who must hold a similar belief. Many of them do not have parents who try to teach them otherwise. Why would programs such as this one, even in fun, want to teach our children to believe false teachings such as this? Are we being influenced by the programs on television? If so, is the influence positive or negative? If you have a small child, ask him the same question I asked my Primary class. You may be surprised to learn how much influence television has had in your own home.

Television is perceived by most persons as a form of entertainment, but I believe it is much more than that. It is the only experience that almost everyone in our society has in common. TV not only shapes culture, it spreads culture. Let's look at a small sample of areas that may be affected.

How TV Influences Viewers

It is estimated that by the time a child has graduated from high school, he will have witnessed some 150,000 violent episodes, including an estimated 25,000 deaths, on television. Does this bombardment of violence have an impact on its viewers? Many researchers studying the effect of the media say yes. Dr. Victor L. Cline, a Latter-day Saint who has written extensively on this subject, has said: "The hard scientific evidence clearly demonstrates that watching television or movie violence sometimes for only a few hours, and in some studies even for a few minutes, can and does instigate aggressive behavior that would not otherwise occur." [^1]

On TV, few arguments or conflicts are ever settled without a fight. Violence is depicted as a way of life. From the evidence, it appears that some viewers may attempt to act out what they are viewing.

Is it a coincidence that the violence in our society is increasing at a rate similar to that shown on TV? Is it possible that society is being influenced by the constant barrage of violence being shown? Let's consider at a few examples, keeping in mind what has happened to television programming.

Have you ever wondered what the number one murder weapon used on television is? I found in my research that the handgun was by far the number one choice by criminals. What is the number one choice of real criminals in America? In 1985 handguns killed 48 people in Japan, 8 people in Great Britain, 34 people in Switzerland, 52 in Canada, 58 in Israel, 21 in Sweden, 42 in West Germany—and 10,728 in the United States. [^2]

Other types of violent behavior in America have also risen dramatically, as these figures indicate: [^3]

Aggravated Assault Rape Year Number Year Number 1960 154,000 1960 17,200 1970 335,000 1970 38,000 1975 485,000 1975 56,100 1980 673,000 1980 83,000 1985 723,000 1985 87,300 Robbery Child Maltreatment Year Number Year Number 1960 108,000 1960 N/A 1970 350,000 1970 N/A 1975 465,000 1975 669,000 1980 566,000 1980 1,154,000 1985 498,000 1985 1,727,000

The Apostle Paul counseled the saints in his day to "abstain from all appearance of evil." (1 Thessalonians 5:22.) How well do we keep this commandment if we apply it to television viewing? Would we allow our children to associate with a violent criminal in our own neighborhoods? If not, should we allow them to associate with such characters in our homes through violent television programs?

Another area that has seen a dramatic increase is the number of unmarried persons living together. In 1970 the figure was estimated at 523,000 couples; by 1984 it had risen to an estimated 1.988 million. [^4]

Is it only coincidental that the rates of immorality in our society apparently parallel the amount portrayed in the media? President Benson has told us that the phrase "The lusts of your eyes" in Alma 39:9 in our day means "movies, television programs, and video recordings that are both suggestive and lewd." [^5] Many of the programs filling the airwaves today are both suggestive and lewd. We may well ask ourselves if lust is being instilled in our children in their own living rooms and with parental approval.

Is the use of alcohol increasing as we see more and more advertisements and portrayals of its use? The answer is a definite yes. In 1974, 54 percent of adolescents surveyed had used alcohol; by 1982, the percent had increased to 65.2. In 1974, 81.6 percent of young adults admitted to using alcohol; in 1982, the percent was 94.6. Among adults, alcohol usage increased from 73.2 percent in 1974 to 88.2 percent in 1982. [^6]

It has been estimated that 25,000 people are killed and 1.5 million are injured each year in alcohol-related automobile accidents; that 67 percent of sex crimes against children and 39 percent of sex crimes against women are alcohol-related; and that 70 percent of all drownings are alcohol-related. Some $43 billion a year is lost in medical costs, property damage, lost wages, legal fees, and other related expenses. This does not include the toll of such problems as divorce, suicide, and shattered self-image that this increasingly growing evil produces. Alcohol is the number one drug problem in America.

Why would television programs glamorize the use of alcohol and make it look so sophisticated and accepted when the harm from using it is well-documented? Though we don't know the answer to this question, we can—and must—ask ourselves, should we invite anyone into our living room who will try to entice our children to drink alcoholic beverages?

The desensitization manifests itself on different levels. Children have an inborn capacity for sympathy. But that sympathy has to be cultivated. This is one of the most delicate points in the education process. And it is this point that the mass media trample on. Even before the natural feelings of compassion have a chance to develop, the fascination of overpowering and hurting others is displayed in endless profusion. Before the soil is prepared for sympathy, the seeds of sadism are planted. The clinical result is that feelings for others are interfered with. These youngsters show a coarsening of responses and an unfeeling attitude. [^7]

Ultimately, this may be one of the greatest dangers of television. Jesus taught that loving our neighbor is the second great commandment. How frightening to think that something as critical to our salvation as is this commandment could be interfered with because of repeated exposure to violence through television!

A recent study by the University of Michigan found that parents spend very small amounts of time reading, conversing, or playing with their children. Working mothers spend an average of 11 minutes on weekdays and 30 minutes a day on weekends; fulltime homemakers spend about 30 minutes a day on weekdays and 36 minutes a day on weekends; and fathers spend an average of 8 minutes a day on weekdays and 14 minutes a day on weekends, Maybe we need to ask ourselves if we really have time for much TV!

As Latter-day Saints we have a further warning: "Wo unto him that has the law given, yea, that has all the commandments of God, like unto us, and that transgresseth them, and that wasteth the days of his probation, for awful is his state!" (2 Nephi 9:27.)

Are these teachers accurate in their assessments? Do children today really have shorter attention spans than in the past? U.S. News and World Report commented on this subject in an article about the effect of television: "Another difficulty is the rapid linear movement of TV images, which gives viewers little chance to pause and reflect on what they have seen. Scientists say this torrent of images also has a numbing effect, as measured electronically by the high proportion of alpha brain waves, normally associated with daydreaming or falling asleep. The result is shortened attention spans—a phenomenon increasingly lamented by teachers trying to hold the interest of students accustomed to TV." [^9]

Many things of value take long periods of time to develop. Learning to play the piano takes years of practice. Becoming proficient at a skill or gaining a sound knowledge of the gospel takes time and patience. Our families need to develop more patience and certainly not less.

Have your children ever imitated a character they have seen on TV? While some imitation may be harmless—or even desirable—a growing number of the behaviors displayed on TV can be very dangerous if imitated. The evidence seems strong that television has created major changes in our culture in such areas as fashion fads, hair styles, and music, often because viewers imitate the heroes of their favorite programs. It would seem reasonable to assume that our society also imitates the attitudes and moral values of the models provided by television.

It has been estimated that children see more than twenty thousand TV commercials each year. On a typical Saturday morning the average American child will see approximately one hundred commercials, all trying to get them to talk their parents into buying their products. And as long as we keep buying, we are going to be bombarded with advertisements, because we have proved that they work.

Controlling Our TV Viewing

With all the research available on the dangers and negative influence of television, we could react by eliminating it altogether in our homes. This would be a mistake. We should remember that the physical instrument—the television set—is not the cause of our problems. As newsman Edward R. Murrow once said, "A communications system is totally neutral. It has no conscience, no principle, no morality. It has only a history. It will broadcast filth or inspiration with equal facility. It will speak truth as loudly as it will speak falsehood. It is, in sum, no more or less than the men and women who use it." [^11]

Television does have enormous influence, but we should not condemn the system because of the message. Those who developed the technology were undoubtedly inspired in their work. But if religious people do not use the media effectively and properly, then the anti-religious will, and they will form the value systems of our country. We have the most exciting communications systems ever; the challenge is to create the messages to be used with it. Many good people work in the television industry producing shows that are inspirational and uplifting. Others are more concerned with ratings and profit than with values and principles. Television provides both types of programs—some beneficial and worthwhile and some that is of poor and even degrading quality. A problem occurs when we assume something worth watching will always be available when we turn on our TV sets. Too many people watch TV out of habit no matter what is on, and even switch stations until they find the least offending program, instead of turning the set off. When we have the TV set on, we are casting a vote that tells the television industry, through the ratings, that this is the type of program we want to see. If ratings are low for any show, you can be sure that it will not continue to be shown, because businesses will not advertise on programs no one watches.

With so many different types of programs available on TV, how can we protect our families and still enjoy the worthwhile productions? Self-discipline is essential if we are to use television for the benefit of our families.

What can be done to break the TV habit? One suggestion is to have a family council to discuss the family's involvement with TV. This might be a good time to take the following tests and discuss the findings.

TV TEST 1. Name the four children who star on the Cosby show. 2. Give me a light, a _______________ ______________ (Fill in blanks.) 3. Plop, plop, fizz, fizz, oh what a ____________ ________ ________! (Fill in blanks.) 4. It's a good time for the great taste of __________________________. (Fill in blank.) 5. Who is the host of the Tonight Show? 6. Who plays a vice officer in a show set in Miami? 7. What is the name of your local TV evening news anchor? 8. Who plays the leading role on a show based in Dallas? 9. What is a Smurf? 10. Did you average 30 minutes of TV a day for the past week? (Answer yes or no). Score 10 points for each question answered correctly or in the affirmative. Score: _______.

BOOK OF MORMON TEST 1. What are the names of the four sons of King Mosiah? 2. Alma and ________ were missionary companions in Ammonihah. (Fill in blank.) 3. __________ was the first chief judge of the Nephites. (Fill in blank.) 4. Ammon defended the flocks of King __________. (Fill in blank.) 5. Who was the last writer in the small plates of Nephi? 6. What is an onti? 7. What happened to Zeezrom after he contended with Alma? 8. Who was Nephihah? 9. Mormon gave the plates to Moroni. Who gave the plates to Mormon? 10. Do you spend 30 minutes a day reading the Book of Mormon? (Answer yes or no.) Score 10 points for each question answered correctly or in the affirmative. (Use the index in the triple combination for references to help you answer the questions.) Score: ________.

On which test did each member of your family score the highest? Do the members of your family know more about the scriptures or television? Some may claim it is not important to their salvation to know answers to trivia questions from the Book of Mormon. That may be true, assuming that we study the scriptures every day as our prophets have counseled us to do. And even though the trivia may not save us, a related question may be asked: Why don't we know the trivia? If we spend enough time with something, we learn both the important and the trivial points about it. If you scored higher on the TV test, how did you do it? In both cases the key is exposure. The more we are exposed to something, the more familiar we are with it, If you scored higher on the TV test, is it an indication that you watch TV more than you study the scriptures? Are the scriptures given as much emphasis and time in your home as is television? The following questions may be helpful:

1, Where is your TV located in your home? Is it the center of your most-used room?

If television has become a problem in your home, what can you do about it? If you are still not sure, the following test will quickly let you know where your family stands: Unplug your TV set and put it away for seven days. That's it—end of test! If your family is addicted, you will see evidences of withdrawal symptoms, similar to those experienced by people who are addicted to tobacco, alcohol, or drugs. There will be a craving to turn the set back on. Those who are addicted won't know what to do with their spare time, and they may become restless or irritable. This is a simple, yet revealing and accurate, test. However, I have discovered that few people will take the challenge. Most will claim they don't have a problem. Others will admit they enjoy TV too much and have no desire to alter their viewing habits.

Several years ago I gave that challenge to a church group. A mother told me after the meeting that when I made the suggestion, her six-year-old son had turned to her and asked, "Mama, are we going to turn off our TV for seven days like he said?" She replied, "Yes, son, we are." He then looked at her and said, "I hate him!" Another sister called me later and said, "We have total rebellion in our neighborhood." Her family and two of her neighbors were taking the test and their children were very upset about it. But I still think it is a good test. Try it in your own home. I guarantee you will be surprised at the results.

After you have taken this seven-day test, the next step in gaining control of the TV is to view everything you watch with a pencil and paper in hand and play the "What Am I Being Taught" game. In other words, for the next seven days view every program as if you were in a school class and were preparing for a test on what you had viewed. Look for both the positive and the negative aspects of each program: record both what you see that you like and what you see that offends you.

I am convinced that once you have completed this exercise you will be ready for some family rules concerning your TV. Discuss and adopt the rules in a family council so that everyone in the family will have input. Following are some suggestions for rules others have used to get control of their television viewing.

Suggested TV-Viewing Rules

In deciding how much TV to watch and what programs to view, ask the following questions. Sometimes a final evaluation cannot be made until after the program begins, but don't be afraid to turn the set off if the following criteria are not met.

3, Finally—and perhaps most important—is watching this particular program the best use of your time?

Ideas For Making TV Beneficial

Here are some ideas for discussion and activities based on what is seen on TV:

Ideas For Controlling TV Viewing

Here are some suggestions of things your family might do to control television watching:

By controlling the television viewing in our homes, we can have the best of two worlds. We will have more time for communication, work, church, community service, and pleasure, yet we will be able to see the programs that will provide quality entertainment or give us valuable information.

Learning to Control Television: Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Know the content. Before you attend, buy, rent, or borrow any movie, learn all you can about its content. Many magazines and newspapers have movie reviews that may be helpful. You might also talk with people who have seen the film. Ask specific questions: What was the language like? Any violence? Any immorality? Who are the stars? What other movies have they appeared in? Call the theater and ask the staff there about the movie. By carefully selecting the movies we view, we can increase the chance that our experiences will be uplifting and wholesome. Remember, if you still have doubts after you make your inquiries, the best advice may be to not see it. Theme. What do you believe is the purpose or the message of the movie or program? Why did the producers spend so much money to bring you this message? How would you characterize the overall message—good, bad, spiritual, silly, patriotic, or what? Address at Tidewater Assembly on Family Life, Norfolk, Virginia.
[^2] Require parental permission. Young people should have their parents' permission whenever they view any movie, whether at the theater or at a friend's home. Language. What kind of language is used? Are people respectful in communicating with one another? Or do they ridicule or mock? Are off-color or vulgar jokes or dialogue included? How many profane words are used? Is the Lord's name used in vain? How many times? Note: If you have never listened closely to the language you are exposed to in the media, you may be in for a big surprise when using this idea. Victor L. Cline, "How Do Movies and TV Influence Behavior," Ensign, October 1972, pp. 14-15.
[^3] Reject anything that is obscene. Agree that you will get up and walk out of a movie if anything obscene is depicted. Most theaters will refund your money if you are offended by the material in a film. If the obscene material occurs on a video, agree that you will turn it off immediately. Violence. How many acts of violence are there? Why were they included? Are they essential to the plot? Edward L. Kimball, ed., Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), p. 283.
[^4] Ask, how would you feel if . . .? Ask before attending or during every movie you see if this is the type of movie you would feel comfortable seeing if your bishop or the prophet were sitting beside you. If you feel embarrassed, then choose another movie, one that you would feel good about. Sex and Nudity. Was premarital or extramarital sex shown or implied? Were there any portrayals of couples living together unmarried? How were the heroes portrayed—sexually promiscuous or virtuous? Were there any consequences for immorality? What were those consequences? Victor L. Cline, "Obscenity—How It Affects Us, How We Can Deal with It," Ensign, April 1984, p. 32.
[^5] Ask, Will it make a difference? Always ask will it make any difference in a few years if you see the movie or not, even if everyone else you know is attending. Too often we subject our minds to material that becomes part of our thoughts just because everyone else is doing it. Choose only those movies that will help make you a better person, regardless of what others may do. Other Inappropriate Behavior. How much drug, tobacco, and alcohol abuse is shown? How are marriage and family life portrayed? How are the heroes and heroines portrayed? What crimes were committed and what were the consequences? David Pirie, Anatomy of the Movies (New York: Macmillan, 1981), p. 14.
[^6] Avoid that "one bad scene." How often have you heard someone say, "It was a great movie if it hadn't been for the one bad scene," or "It has a good message if you can get past the filthy language." Avoid such films. Remember that Satan will give you many truths just to get in his one lie. Think back on a movie you have seen with "just one bad scene." If you can still see the scene in your mind, it has nullified any temporary pleasure you may have received from viewing it. Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1966), p. 127.
[^7] Apply Moroni's counsel in Moroni 7:16-18: "For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to judge; for everything which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God. But whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do evil, and believe not in Christ, and deny him, and serve not God, then ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of the devil; for after this manner doth the devil work, for he persuadeth no man to do good, no, not one; neither do his angels; neither do they who subject themselves unto him." Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1975), pp. 229-30.
[^9] Shortened Attention Span. In 1985 Parade Magazine surveyed elementary and secondary schoolteachers in the United States to determine their attitudes toward their careers. Teachers with at least ten years of classroom experience reported that their students today seemed to be less interested in learning and harder to teach than in the past and did not appreciate the job teachers were doing. They overwhelmingly commented that students today expected to be entertained in the classroom, had shorter attention spans, and were more responsive to visual methods of teaching. [^8] Do the things taught on your TV reinforce the messages that the Savior taught? The messages of the General Authorities? your Sunday School class? your own parents? Be sure that any programs watched on Sunday are in keeping with the spirit of the Sabbath. This should apply to Monday night also. Discuss the consequences resulting from controversial subjects that portray a decadent moral system, so that children can grow in the power of discernment between good and evil. Point out the consequences of the behaviors shown if one were to follow such a course in real life. "What Is TV Doing to America?", U.S. News and World Report, August 2, 1982, p. 28.
[^11] Unrealistic Career Expectations. U.S. News and World Report noted that "researchers have found unrealistic career expectations among people who watch a lot of TV. According to 'Television and Behavior, the new federal report': 'Heavy viewers want high status jobs, but do not intend to spend many years in school.' " [^10] It may be more difficult in the future to convince young people that they need to take school seriously when the highest monetary and social rewards are reserved for the occupations of media stars in which education is often unnecessary. Are our children prepared to pay the price of success? Spend an evening listing possible activities that could be accomplished by each member of the family if the average time per person spent in watching TV (28 hours per week) were devoted to other areas. After making your list, plan which activities you will carry out. 11. Frank J. Kohn, ed., Documents of American Broadcasting, 3rd ed. (Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 1978), pp. 251-61.
