Randal A. Wright, Protecting Your Family in an X-Rated World ( 1988)

Chapter 7

The Challenge of Modern Music

In 1968 at the height of the war in Vietnam, I received a letter that read in part, "Greetings! You have been inducted into the United States Army." I have never felt sicker than I did the day I reported for active duty at Ft. Bliss, Texas. Although we went to bed that night at eleven, I found it difficult to sleep as I lay thinking of my home, family, and friends. At exactly 3:30 the next morning, all the lights in the room went on and a drill sergeant began hitting the metal railings of the bunk beds with a metal rod. I have never before nor since wanted so much to be home in my own bed as I did that first morning of basic training.

After making our beds and eating breakfast, we were marched over to a large auditorium for orientation. An officer told us how proud we should feel to be serving in the U.S. army, but I thought to myself, "I'm not proud to be in the army. I just want to be home."

Next, we watched some films on our military history and previous war efforts. I was still convinced that I didn't want to be there, no matter how much they played on my emotions. Then a strange thing happened. The curtains on the stage opened to reveal a military band. After a short introduction, the band began to play patriotic songs. At first I still had negative feelings about the whole situation. I said to myself, "Okay, I kind of like the music they're playing, but I still hate army life. I want to go home." But the more the band played, the more I could feel my attitude changing. Soon I found myself thinking, "Maybe this place isn't so bad after all. Maybe I really should be here to do my part." By the end of the concert, when the band played "The Battle Hymn of the Republic," I thought, "You know, the army isn't so bad, I fact, I think I like it here."

After the program ended that day and we walked out into the 105-degree heat, my homesickness returned. But in that auditorium that day, I learned a valuable lesson in life. I learned that music is a very important part of our lives and can be a very powerful tool. In fact, it was so powerful that at least temporarily this music had totally altered my emotions and feelings to the point that I was not even afraid to go to war—at least as long as the music was playing.

Music has been called the universal language, because it speaks directly to our emotions. Our emotions and feelings can, in turn, actually influence our behavior.

History is replete with examples of the power of music. When Christ needed strength to face his terrible ordeal in the Garden of Gethsemane, he turned to music. The scriptures record, "And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives." (Matthew 26:30.) Joseph Smith also turned to music before facing his death. One of the last things he did in Carthage Jail was to ask John Taylor to sing a song. And in our day, music plays an important role in our church services and activities.

Today, more than ever, music is involved in many aspects of our lives. It would be very unusual to go for even one day without hearing some form of music. We hear music in our homes and cars; in restaurants, department stores, elevators, and doctors' offices; on TV and radio; and at almost every public event, including sports. It has been reported that the average American listens to the radio for approximately twenty-five hours a week.

Over the years, I've observed a few things about music that to me are quite remarkable. Have you ever noticed that regardless of the message of a song, if you like the rhythm and beat, you can listen to it over and over again without tiring of it? This is not usually true with the spoken word. When we hear stories, experiences, and even jokes that we have heard before, how many times have we thought to ourselves, "Oh boy, here we go again with a story I've already heard." Often when this happens, we immediately turn the speaker off. Yet when we put music to words, something almost magical happens. Instead of being bored or annoyed at the repetition, we tend to enjoy it even more with repeated exposure. Have you ever heard teenagers call a radio station to ask that a particular song not be played again because they have already heard it? Something inherent in music can make repeated exposure to the message enjoyable. And once we have heard a song repeated many times, the words may remain with us for the rest of our lives.

In a lecture at BYU Education Week about the power of music, I asked class members to try to fill in the words to songs that had been popular many years ago. As I read the first words in the songs, almost every person in the room completed the lines. Let's try the same test here and see if you can fill in the blanks:

In the Education Week class, I asked one woman, who appeared to be in her late forties, when she had last heard one of the songs mentioned above. She replied that it had been while she was in high school, nearly thirty years ago, yet she remembered the words as if it were only yesterday.

When words are put to music, our ability to recall those words increases greatly. This point was demonstrated in a seminary class I once taught. One of the challenges in teaching seminary is to help the students learn and remember the forty basic scriptures for the year. For one class, I divided the scriptures up equally among the students and let them teach their assigned scriptures to the rest of the class. The students used various methods to teach their scriptures to one another, but the students who used music in their presentations were by far the most successful.

I can still see Letitia Alvis as she came to the front of the class and turned on a cassette tape of a song she had recorded the night before to the tune of "The Bear Went Over the Mountain." She started out singing her song very slowly and then got faster and faster as the song progressed. Try it!

The stone cut out of the mountain, The stone cut out of the mountain, The stone cut out of the mountain, Daniel two, four four, four five. Daniel two, four four, four five; Daniel two, four four, four five. The stone cut out of the mountain, The stone cut out of the mountain, The stone cut out of the mountain, Daniel two, four four, four five.

I don't think I will ever forget the scripture or the reference: Daniel 2:44-45, "The stone cut out of the mountain."

Another student, David Packard, conducted a round for one of his assigned scriptures. He divided the class into two sides, Then one side of the class started the song, and, at the end of the first line, the other side started singing. They sang to the tune of "Three Blind Mice":

For I am not ashamed Of the gospel of Christ, For it's salvation to all who believe, To the Jew first and also the Greek, This is the scripture to learn this week, Romans 1:16 For I am not ashamed.

We sang this song through twice and had a little contest to determine which side of the class sang the best. I can assure you that I have not forgotten David's scripture, Romans 1:16, and the key words: "For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ."

But as great a tool as music is for building spirituality, lifting our spirits, and helping us learn and remember positive messages, it can also be dangerous when used in the wrong way. Music is one of the deadliest weapons the adversary has in his vast arsenal. With its power, he can create a sugar-coated poison that can slowly destroy our spirituality and that of our families. If we can remember the messages and words to songs for extended periods of time and perhaps for a lifetime, what effect will these messages then have on us if they are negative or immoral? This seems to be what has happened to much of our modern music.

Edward Jay Whetmore has commented on this problem: "Rock lyrics are learned by rote—that is, through repetition. Lyrics that may be barely recognizable the first time around usually become quite clear by the 10th, 20th or 200th time. Both AM and FM rock stations tend to play relatively few songs, most of them by just a handful of superstars. That way we hear the same songs over and over again, and we can't help learning the words. Millions of Americans share the same words and ideas simultaneously." [^1]

Illicit sex, divorce, drugs and alcohol abuse are common topics of many popular songs. But we make a mistake when we say that the problem lies only in a certain type of music. Immoral messages can be found in many types of music, and we would do well not to point the finger at just the music of teenagers. When questionable lyrics are pointed out, the standard answer for many people is, "Yes, I know the words are bad, but I don't listen to the words. I just like the music and the beat," According to research in this area, this simply is not true. Our brains are very perceptive, and we actually pick up the messages, whether we are conscious of it or not, It seems improbable that we could listen to a song repeatedly without recording the message in our minds. Recent surveys have indicated that over 70 percent of all popular songs are about what the world would call love. But on a closer examination, we find that many are not actually about love at all, but about lust. I recently purchased a magazine containing the lyrics to eighty-one popular songs of our day. In analyzing the messages, I found that forty-one of the songs had messages about either premarital or extramarital sex. But that's not all. Some of the songs also included messages about violence, drugs, drinking, smoking, homosexuality, incest, and rape.

If there are any doubts about the influence of some of the current popular music, I think we can judge it by its fruits. The perversions of its practitioners are well documented and should be enough to condemn its powerful influence. But even with these obvious signs of danger, some young people still fall into its dangerous traps. Recently a controversial hard-rock group appeared in concert in our area. I was hoping that no Latter-day Saints would attend, though I knew, as I visited the seminary classes in our area, that the concert was generating excitement. After the concert I learned that several LDS teenagers had attended with complete approval of their parents, I asked one of the teenagers to write a brief description of the concert. This is his response:

The concert was one of the best concerts I have ever attended. I might even venture to say that it was the best! The light show was superb! They had green lasers that created excellent special effects. I thought the concert, as a whole, was great. The rest of the crowd apparently thought it was good also, because they were screaming and yelling and applauding for more. There were a few distractions like the haze of marijuana smoke and the girls who threw underwear and bras and class rings up onto the stage. But even with these minor distractions, I thought the concert was well worth the money I spent on it. The tickets were $16 apiece and I took an LDS girl as my date. We also bought T shirts for $14 each. Counting gas, I spent around $65.

This evaluation was written by a boy whose father is out of work but who still went with parental permission. Music indeed has a drawing power among youth. I wonder if we realize the dangerous effects that attending this type of concert can have on them. I challenge every parent to become more aware of the music that we and members of our families listen to. We can help our families stay strong if we are aware of music's power, use it as a positive tool, and screen out the negative aspects. We must be willing to take the time to find out what type of music our children are buying or listening to. Record producers are in the business for profit, and if enough people refuse to buy inappropriate records, profits will drop and changes will definitely come. But as long as undesirable records continue to sell, there will be a problem. And as long as people will pay to attend objectionable concerts, the groups that perform them will continue.

Over the past several years I've had the opportunity to talk to many youth groups about music, its influences, and why we must be careful in its use. Here are a few ideas I've found effective in demonstrating this point.

Music can drive the Spirit out or bring the Spirit in. I demonstrated this to a group that had just returned from a spiritual temple trip. I told them to take two or three minutes to think of the most spiritual part of the trip. As soon as I gave this assignment, I turned on a cassette tape and played a popular song at a fairly high volume. As soon as the song ended, I called on the stake president's son to describe his spiritual experience. He said, "I don't have one to relate. No matter how hard I tried, I couldn't think of anything spiritual while that music was playing." I pointed out that some music does drive the Spirit away.

Later in the program I played a soft, soothing song and asked the group to again think about the spiritual experiences they had had in going to the temple. This time the responses flowed from several individuals. Again, I think most of those in attendance understood and agreed with the point that some music invites the Spirit in.

In general, certain types of people are either attracted to or repelled by different types of music. To demonstrate this, I made a demonstration tape with short excerpts from various types of music, including classical, LDS hymns, silly children's songs, non-LDS gospel songs, soft rock, country western, hard rock, bluegrass, and Primary songs.

After playing a short excerpt from a song in each category, I ask members of my audience to describe in general terms, the type of people who listen to each particular type of music. This exercise has limitations, of course. Though a group of people who enjoy a certain type of music may, as a whole, behave in a certain way, individuals who enjoy the same type music may differ. With this in mind, think about each of the categories of music and ask yourself:

The question really becomes this: Are people who listen to certain categories of music perceived as acting a certain way? Both teens and adults are quick to point out that a particular type of music is associated with use of tobacco and beer, or another one is associated with drugs and rebellion, while another one is associated with older people.

If these observations are correct, then ask yourself this question: Is a certain type of person attracted to this kind of music, or does exposure to the music create that type of person? Think of music you listen to the most and ask yourself what kind of person others would expect you to be. What about the music your children listen to? Are you or your children really that type of person? Do you share similar ideas with the group associated with your favorite music? Is there a correlation between actual behavior patterns and the type of behavior associated with a person's favorite music?

Music can change our moods and sometimes even our actions. In demonstrating this point to youth groups, I play short excerpts from three different songs. After hearing each song, members of the group are asked what they wanted to do when the song was playing. The real question is whether it influences their actual behavior.

The first is a very fast-paced, popular dance song. I ask the group what they feel like doing when they hear this song. The answer is almost always to dance or do something physical. The second song has a familiar, catchy melody with easy words to learn. The listeners point out that they want to sing along with this tune. The third song is a soft, mellow melody that they say makes them feel like relaxing, sleeping, studying, or meditating.

When we consider that the average American listens to almost thirteen hundred hours of music each year, it would seem wise to choose music that will build our spirits up rather than tear them down.

I wonder if parents are aware of the types of music their children are listening to. I'll never forget the surprise I received while trying to teach my own children the importance of music and the influence it can have in our lives. When I read that a famous hard-rock group was appearing at our local civic center, I decided to take my children to the area just to watch the people going to the concert. I expected the fans to drive up on motorcycles with knives and chains fastened to their belts, and that this would frighten our children into avoiding this type of music. Instead, I was startled to see mothers and fathers drive up in station wagons, vans, and cars and drop off well-dressed teenagers. Among them, unfortunately, were several LDS teens. Although it wasn't the lesson I had planned on my children's learning, I gleaned something from the night's activities. Many good children are listening to and supporting unworthy music, and many parents are not aware of the dangers of this kind of music. In fact, they are actually helping to support this bad influence by providing money for their children to purchase the record albums and attend the concerts.

As parents, we must expose ourselves and our children to good music in our homes if we are to counter the degrading music available in our society. If we do not provide our children with opportunities to hear worthy, uplifting music, then we shouldn't be surprised if they learn to enjoy the music they are being exposed to by their peers and society.

What can we do to counter the negative influence of music and turn it into a positive experience in our families? First, we need to realize that perhaps some family members may already be deeply attached to harmful music, and it will take an understanding spirit to work this situation out. Second, we must remember that if our family does not enjoy good music because of lack of exposure, the fault rests squarely on our shoulders. It is our responsibility to teach appreciation of good music, and if it has not happened yet, we can resolve to do better from now on.

In an attitude of cooperation and love, we can call our family together to discuss music, and let each of them express their ideas and opinion regarding this subject. The lines of communication must be kept open. Remember, relationships need to be maintained, so we must be very sensitive in dealing with this problem. We should try to remember how we felt about the music that was popular when we were young. To be accepted in the teenage society often requires at least some acquaintance with current music fads. To many young people, the music appears to be youthful, sophisticated, exciting, and harmless. But they should be reminded that society has undergone subtle but powerful changes in recent years. It has become increasingly more permissive in what is accepted in popular entertainment, including music. As the Lord's people, we must be willing to eliminate the inappropriate music from our homes. But, if we simply eliminate the music from our homes, we have only won a part of the battle. We also need to cultivate love for appropriate music. Only then will we have won the war.

Here are some suggestions to consider for your family council:

I have found the following suggestions helpful in providing a deeper appreciation for good music. I hope some will be useful to your family.

There are many things we can do to help our families learn to appreciate good music, if we are willing to invest the time and effort.

Recently, I taught a class on the martyrdom of Joseph Smith and the beginnings of the Church's exodus to the West. At the conclusion, I played the tape of a song titled "Joseph." As we listened, I could see the effect the song was having upon the class members. Almost everyone in the class was wiping away tears. The spirit and emotion were so strong that the young woman who gave the closing prayer had to struggle to speak the words. We had planned to have an activity after class, but one student said, "It just doesn't seem appropriate now." It was one of those special experiences that you do not forget. It was an experience brought on by beautiful music.

Yes, music can have a very powerful influence in our lives. Let us make sure that in our homes and among our children, this influence is uplifting and good.

The Challenge of Modern Music: Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Organize with like-minded citizens in your community. Spencer W. Kimball, "God Will Not Be Mocked," Ensign, November 1974, p. 7.
