Randal A. Wright, Protecting Your Family in an X-Rated World ( 1988)

Chapter 8

Protecting Our Communities

It would be comforting to think that our responsibility regarding obscenity ends with our own families, but this is not the case. We must also be concerned about our neighbors and do all in our power to help protect them from the evils of our day. President Spencer W. Kimball said the following concerning this duty: "We hope that our parents and leaders will not tolerate pornography. It is really garbage, but today is peddled as normal and satisfactory food. Many writers seem to take delight in polluting the atmosphere with it. Seemingly, it cannot be stopped by legislation. There is a link between pornography and the low, sexual drives and perversions. . . . We pray with our Lord that we may be kept from being in the world. It is sad that decent people are thrown into a filthy area of mental and spiritual pollution. We call upon all our people to do all in their power to offset this ugly revolution." [^1]

A few years ago in a priesthood lesson on our responsibilities as citizens, the teacher asked us what our responsibility was toward the obscenity that had become so prevalent in our society. One brother expressed the opinion that we just needed to worry about our own families and not get involved in this type of problem in our society, because it's a free country and the peddlers of smut have their freedom of speech and should not be interfered with. Another pointed out that the U.S. Supreme Court has ruled in several cases that obscenity is not protected under the first amendment to the Constitution and that obscenity could be defined according to contemporary community standards. I wondered to myself, Where does the truth lie? What is our responsibility? What have our modern prophets said on this subject?

Later I found that President Kimball had commented on this very subject several times. On one occasion he asked the same question we had been discussing and added two other questions: "Should people be free to infect society with obscene pictures and vulgar articles and flaunt corruption before children and others? Why should a few be granted freedom from restraint when many are fettered by the ugliness to which they are exposed?" [^2] President Kimball gave us the answers in many general conference talks. Here are two examples: "Important as it is, building stronger homes is not enough in the fight against rising permissiveness. We therefore urge Church members as citizens to lift their voices, to join others in unceasingly combating, in their communities and beyond, the inroads of pornography and the general flaunting of permissiveness." [^3] "Teach your children to avoid smut as the plague it is. As citizens, join in the fight against obscenity in your communities. Do not be lulled into inaction by the pornographic profiteers who say that to remove obscenity is to deny people the rights of free choice. Do not let them masquerade licentiousness as liberty. Precious souls are at stake—souls that are near and dear to each of us." [^4]

After much discussion that day in priesthood meeting, our group came to general consensus that obscenity is really not protected by law and that we have a responsibility to fight it in our community. Then one of the brethren said he was thankful to live in an area that didn't have a problem with obscenity. I pointed out that not only did we have a problem in our area, but that pornographic magazines were available at a convenience store within a mile of the chapel, and that all of the video rental shops in town carried triple-X-rated movies that anyone could check out. Several older brethren couldn't believe that this was happening, but some of the younger ones finally convinced them it was true.

Before the lesson ended, we resolved to try to do what we could to help eliminate the problem in our area. Since I was the only one in attendance that day who lived within the city limits, it was decided that I should try to do something about obscenity in the city, and the rest of the group would attempt to get rid of it outside the city limits. Knowing that almost all of the offending businesses were located in the city, I wondered what I had gotten into.

During the next week I did nothing to try to solve the problem. At church on Sunday I learned that some of the brethren had turned over the assignment to their wives, who in turn had had some success. After a few friendly phone calls to store owners, ministers of other faiths, and the added impact of a threatened boycott of their stores by church members who usually traded in their stores, most of the managers had removed obscene materials within a few days. The owner of the largest privately owned convenience store removed the offending magazines from all his branch stores because of one phone call.

That night I called our mayor and asked him if an ordinance against obscenity hadn't been passed in our city. He replied that yes, a very detailed ordinance made it unlawful to sell, rent, display, lend, give away, show, advertise, or distribute any obscene magazine or movie within the city limits. I asked him why the law was not being enforced, citing examples of several video rental stores in the city that were renting triple-X-rated movies. He replied that someone needed to make a complaint that the law was not being enforced before the city could officially act on it. I said, "Then I complain." He informed me that I had to appear before the city council the next Tuesday night with proof that the films were actually available and that the owners of the video shops would rent them. We decided that it would be even better if I could find a minor who would check out the movies, since the ordinance had even more specific provisions pertaining to those under eighteen.

That night I hung up the phone wondering what I had just agreed to do. What had started in the priesthood class as a simple challenge had now gotten much bigger than anything I wanted to be involved in. But the following Tuesday my ten-year-old son and the seventeen-year-old daughter of one of our ward members walked into a video rental shop and rented two of the most controversial and financially successful XXX-movies of all time. They handed the videocassettes to me, and I drove directly across the street to city hall with the evidence in hand. (I was praying that the city leaders would not want to view the films, but would recognize the titles as obscenity because of the publicity the movies had received in the nationwide press. My prayers were answered because they never asked to see the films, and we returned the unopened cases the next day.)

As I took my seat, I felt the cold stare of a man whom I knew to be the owner of the largest video rental chain in the area. The mayor came over to shake my hand, and I asked him what the other man was doing at this meeting. He said, "He heard you were going to be here to make a presentation on obscenity," he said, "so he came to hear what you had to say." I suddenly became frightened and also tempted to get up and leave without making a complaint. But a quick silent prayer gave me the courage I needed to stay.

After disposing of other business matters, the mayor finally stood up and said that "a concerned citizen, Randal Wright, would like to express some concerns he has regarding our city." As I stood up and started to talk, to my own surprise my first words were that I felt we needed to make an effort to attract a good triple-X movie theater to our city. I then paused and listened to the shocked reaction of the mayor, council, and the observers of this very conservative Bible-belt city. The mayor asked me to repeat my statement, which I did. He then asked me to explain why I thought we should seek to get a triple-X movie theater in our city. I replied, "It's not that I really want to see this happen, I am totally opposed to it. But I would much prefer an adult movie house to the situation we have now." I then explained that we now had adult movie houses all over our city, but they were located in people's homes. "We have adults as well as minors checking out triple-X-rated movies from video shops and playing them in their own homes, in clear violation of the city law," I said.

I then related how my ten-year-old son and a seventeen-year-old friend had just checked out two very controversial pornographic movies within five hundred feet of city hall. Many in the audience gasped when I gave the titles of these movies. "At least," I pointed out, "adult movie theaters are controlled and monitored by police, and they do not allow minors to enter. That's more than I can say for our present situation. As it is, we now have absolutely no control over obscenity in our city." Then I read the city ordinance and the state law regarding obscene materials and asked the council to please enforce these laws that were on the books.

There was complete silence in the room. Then the owner of the video-store chain stood up and began contending with me. He said that his business did not rent to minors, and that he had over $150,000 invested in adult movies and could not afford to lose this investment. He spoke of people's rights under the first amendment and used many other arguments. When he finished I said, "Sir, would you do anything that you knew would harm the adults or the youth of our city?" He said, "Of course not. I would never do anything to harm the people in this area." Next, I held out a stack of papers and said, "I hold in my hand over fifteen hundred references to research that links obscenity to antisocial behavior and sex crimes and warns of the dangers to those involved." He said that he was unaware of the research, but repeated that his firm did not rent adult films to minors and that it was his right to rent such films. I then asked him, "Sir, at what age does your mind grow a 'smut filter'?" He asked me to repeat the question, "At what age does your mind grow a 'smut filter'? Is it age sixteen, eighteen, or twenty-one? At what age does the human mind filter out obscene material to the point that it doesn't have any effect on you?" He said that he didn't understand the question. Suddenly a man who identified himself as a church youth leader stood up and said he understood the question, because a lot of his time was spent counseling young people who had been damaged by obscenity. Another person stood up and then another, each voicing objections that the city was not enforcing the laws and ordinances on obscenity. At this point the mayor called for a closed-door session and we were asked to leave. Several people expressed their support to me as we walked out to our cars.

The next morning as I walked into seminary, a student asked if I had seen the front page of the morning newspaper. I hadn't, so he showed me the headline: "City Council Outlaws Selling of Pornography." The article stated that the city council had voted unanimously to enforce and even expand the current obscenity laws. After a two-week grace period, all obscene magazines and movies were to be out of our city limits.

From that day on, the law has been enforced. It is not possible to buy or rent any obscene movie in our city. Several businesses that rented both good and bad movies were forced to close, and I regret that. I also received several calls from individuals who did not agree with my stand. But overall the people have rallied around the law and are proud of the better image our city enjoys. I have found through personal experience that we can have an influence in our families and our communities when we follow the words of our prophets.

The Church News some time ago presented several excellent ideas to help us have a positive impact in our communities, including these:

It is our duty and responsibility to teach not only our own families the dangers of obscenity, but our communities as well. We must become more involved because of the precious souls at stake. How can we expect to have success teaching the gospel message to people who have been immersed in obscenity? Obscene materials will desensitize them to the truth. In the Book of Mormon, Jacob felt not only a responsibility to teach his own family, but also to teach others. He said: "And we did magnify our office unto the Lord, taking upon us the responsibility, answering the sins of the people upon our own heads if we did not teach them the word of God with all diligence; wherefore, by laboring with our might their blood might not come upon our garments; otherwise their blood would come upon our garments, and we would not be found spotless at the last day." (Jacob 1:19.)

What is our office unto the Lord? Do we not have a civic as well as spiritual responsibility? Our prophets have repeatedly said that we do. Our cities and our nation are a part of the environment in which our families dwell. If our citizens are not informed, it is our responsibility to inform them of the acts and dangers that will bring upon them shattered lives and misery.

When our two sons were younger, I took them and their eight-year-old cousin Max to the Southeast Texas State Fair. We had a good time riding all the rides and looking at the exhibits. As we were preparing to go home, I asked the boys if they wanted some cotton candy to eat in the car. They did, so I bought each of them a large bag. As we drove home, I could tell they were enjoying the treat. Max looked especially funny with cotton candy all over his hands, mouth, nose, and chin. I was just about to tell him he needed to clean his face, when he said, "I sure am glad I finished that cotton candy before I got home!" When I asked Max why, he said that his mother had told him before he left home that he couldn't have any cotton candy. I debated whether or not I should tell him about the candy all over his face, but I finally decided to let him go in the house with the evidence still there, to answer to his mother for being disobedient.

I'm afraid some of us are going to be a lot like Max when we stand before the judgment bar of Christ. Some may think they are going to get away with disobeying our Heavenly Father while on earth. Some may think they will get away with watching inappropriate movies or allowing family members to do so without any negative consequences. Others may refuse to follow the living prophet's counsel or assume they will never have to answer for not becoming involved in our communities to fight this increasing threat. But in the end none of us will be able to escape giving an accounting for ourselves at the judgment bar. Some will find, as Max did when he faced his mother, that we will not be able to fool our eternal judges with our earthly actions, because the evidence will be apparent by either our clean or unclean appearances. Let us do our duty so we can return to our Father in heaven clean, having obeyed all of his commandments.

Protecting Our Communities: Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] One of the best protections youth can have against immorality is good self-esteem. If children feel good about themselves, they have a much better chance of remaining virtuous. On the other hand, when children feel insecure or bad about themselves, the chances of their being immoral increase dramatically. We need to constantly encourage and build up our children so they feel good about themselves. One of the best ways for a child to achieve high self-esteem is through excelling at something. A child who can play a musical instrument, sing, participate in sports, debate or earn good grades usually has a higher self-esteem than one who accomplishes little in life. But such achievements take work, and many children do not have the drive to achieve without constant encouragement from their parents. And when things go wrong and children want to quit or give up, parents must be there to build them back up and give them the courage to keep trying. We all have days when nothing seems to go quite right. We give each of our children a kiss before they go to bed. This tradition, if it is started early and kept up through the teenage years, has many benefits. It lets the children know that they are loved, and this in turn helps build their self-esteem. It allows us to look into the children's eyes on a daily basis. If something is going wrong in their lives, we should be able to detect it early and take appropriate action. And a goodnight kiss can also be a deterrent against drinking, smoking, and drug use by the children. No dating until age 16. "God Will Not Be Mocked," Ensign, November 1974, p. 7.
[^2] Another protection against immorality, one that is closely related to high self-esteem, is to set goals. I'm continually amazed at how many graduating high school seniors don't even know what they will be doing in the fall after graduation. Setting the right kind of goals and striving to achieve them can help children stay morally clean. But they can't wait until they are caught up in a situation to set their goals. They need to set them while they are very young. I've found that most children need guidance in setting the kinds of goals that will help protect them in their dating years. I have tried to help my own children set some of their life's goals when they turn eight years old, the time when they become responsible for their own actions. At that age, they are also young enough that most of them have not really been tempted in any moral areas. We believe that parents should wait up for their children when they go out, no matter what time they come in, so they can discuss the evening's activities. This discussion should be done with genuine interest and not be an interrogation. Such a discussion can help us find out what problems our children are having and allow us to help them correct the problems in the early stages. The mother of one of my best friends in high school always waited up for her son to discuss his night's activities, no matter what time he came home. He later told me that he had been tempted several times to be immoral during his earlier dating years, but the knowledge that mother would always be waiting up for him was an effective protection and deterrent. This practice is so simple that one would think everyone would want to use it. Unfortunately, many parents disagree. For those who do disagree, these questions may be asked: How much sleep will you lose if your child is immoral? Would you rather lose a little sleep now or a lot of sleep later? No single dating until high school graduation for girls and after missions for boys. "Save the Youth of Zion," Improvement Era, September 1965, p. 763.
[^3] If children are to take their goals seriously, they also need some kind of accountability regarding them. This can be done through a monthly interview. The first Sunday of every month, we take down our children's goal sheets and use them as the basis for interviews. We discuss each goal and give encouragement and counsel on how to achieve it. This interview is also an excellent time to teach children about moral issues and answer any questions they may have. President Spencer W. Kimball said: "The home is the teaching situation [for sex education]. Every father should talk to his son, every mother to her daughter. Then it would leave them totally without excuse should they ignore the counsel they have received." [^1] While attending Brigham Young University, I heard of another tradition from one of my professors. His own father has given each of his children a father's blessing every year on their birthdays. Although this professor now has eight children of his own, he still goes to his father once a year for his blessing. I liked this idea so well that I began it in my own family. To this day our five children have each received a father's blessing every year on their birthday. One of the things I always bless them with is the strength and determination to stay morally clean for the coming year. A special father's blessing could also be given at the beginning of the dating years for further protection. Let us never underestimate the power of the priesthood in helping to keep our youth morally clean. No steady dating until high school graduation for girls and after missions for boys.
[^4] No dating nonmembers or unworthy members of the Church.
