Randal A. Wright, Protecting Your Family in an X-Rated World ( 1988)

Chapter 9

Helping Youth Stay Morally Clean

A few years ago two of my seminary students attended a conference on rape prevention at our city's civic center. Many experts spoke and provided safety tips to help young women avoid being sexually assaulted. The ideas included always going in teams to public places, wearing modest clothing, not accepting gifts from strangers, and above all, not getting into a car with a stranger, no matter how pleasant the individual or the invitation may be. The conference leaders then presented statistics related to the dangers in our area and described in detail some of the consequences of not following the safety precautions.

My students listened very carefully to the presentations. In fact, they listened so well that they became terrified and were afraid to walk back to their car, parked some distance from the civic center. They stood in front of the building and debated whether or not they should call their parents to come and pick them up. At that point, a man and woman, who were total strangers to them, walked up and asked what the problem was. When the girls explained that they were afraid to walk to their car alone, the man invited them to get into his car so he could drive them to their car. What do you think they did? The girls, relieved with this proposal, actually got into the car with two people they had never seen or met before, Now luckily this is not a horror story, as it could have been, because the man did drive them to their car and they returned home safely. The next morning at seminary the girls told us about the conference and their experience. It wasn't until they heard the comments from the other students that they realized they had done exactly what the experts had told them not to do when they had gotten into the car with two strangers.

Sometimes parents are a lot like these students. They hear the counsel repeatedly about protecting their children from the dangers of immorality, and then, when the danger comes, they feel perfectly at ease letting their children enter dangerous situations without so much as a warning. Several years ago a mother told me that she had agreed to let her daughter celebrate the end of the school year by spending three days at a lakeside resort with the daughter's nonmember steady boyfriend and his parents. I thought of how dangerous this trip could be for this young girl and tried tactfully to point this fact out to the mother. However, she let me know quickly that she trusted her daughter and that she was not going to force her own ideas or concerns onto her child. I thought to myself that this was like trusting a small child to play on a busy freeway. I also thought about how I trust my children too, but I don't trust Satan, and when we put ourselves in his territory, we have no promise of safety—but I said nothing. Nine months later this teenage girl was a new mother. When our daughter Natalie started kindergarten, she was happy for the first week and was always the first one up and ready in the morning. By the second week, I noticed that she was still excited but was no longer the first one up. She would just as soon stay home to play with her little sister. By the third week, she wasn't excited at all. One morning when I told her it was time to get up, she didn't even open her eyes. "Don't want to go to school," she told me. I said, "Natalie, you need to get up and get ready for school." She said even slower, "Not going to school."

What should I have done? I didn't want to force my daughter to do something against her will and thus take away her free agency. But I also didn't want to have a kindergarten drop-out, because I knew that one day she would thank me for encouraging her to get an education. So I decided to try to reason with her. First I stated that our government had made a state law requiring young children to attend school. This had no effect on her whatsoever. I then told her that her parents had gone to school, her older brothers and sister were going to school now, and we expected her to continue to go. She was not impressed. Next I told her that she needed to go because it was a family rule and goal that all our family go to school. This helped somewhat, but she still wasn't convinced. Finally after attempting several other tactics, I told her that if she would get up and go to school, I would buy her a big ice cream cone that night. Now I was talking her language. She now had a goal, so she got up and happily went to school. And since that day, she has never complained again about going to school. She was able to make her own choice, and her free agency was preserved.

Without goals and encouragement from parents and leaders, most youths would avoid almost anything that is hard to do. In today's permissive society, staying morally clean is very hard to do. It takes effort on the part of both parents and children to accomplish this goal.

Children need to be able to make correct decisions on their own. And helping them achieve this should be the goal of all parents. But as parents, we also need to make sure they are protected until they are old enough and mature enough to make these decisions. They need freedom, but they also need protection. It takes the promptings of the Spirit to know when to let them go—and when to step in and try to protect them. I've made it a goal and even a rule that in our home we should always try to be where we are supposed to be, when we are supposed to be there, and doing what we are supposed to be doing. Weekend trips to a resort with a boyfriend are forbidden, no matter how much trust we have in our daughters. This is not where they should be. On the other hand, they should be at youth conferences, at seminary, and at activities sponsored by the Young Women and Aaronic Priesthood quorums. There should be no questions about whether they will go to such programs or activities any more than whether or not Natalie should go to school.

Many will say, "What about letting them make their own decisions? We can't force them to do good." No, but there are still plenty of opportunities for decisions and free agency, even when they are always where they are supposed to be. For instance, we may ask a child what he wants to wear to church, but not if he wants to go to church. Or does he want to take a camera to youth conference, not if he wants to attend. If children are allowed to make all their own decisions, with no counsel, what is the purpose of parents?

Suppose your teenage daughter comes in one day and shows you a pillowcase a friend has given her. She explains that this friend told her that if she jumped off a high building, the pillowcase would act as a parachute and protect her fall. She then asks for permission to jump off a tall building using the pillowcase as a parachute. Would you allow your daughter to try this feat? What would you say if she begged you? How about if she promised to keep her room clean for a year? What if she said you could trust her? We all know what your answer would be, no matter what argument she used. It would be no, under no circumstances. And then, as a loving parent, you would explain why you could not allow her to do this.

Yet, some teenagers come in with plans, like a weekend at a lake resort or long evenings alone with their boyfriend or girlfriend, and many parents say yes. Sometimes the consequences of these decisions are disastrous. If our children are going to remain safe and morally clean, they need to be taught the dangers and to have some safety guides and rules set by their parents to help protect them. We must be concerned about where they go, what they are doing, whom they are associating with, and when they will be home, if they are to be safe.

Some may question whether it is even possible to get children through their teenage years totally moral. Others may believe that parents can do nothing, and that luck is responsible if teenagers remain morally clean. I don't believe that this is true. Young people can stay morally clean, but it takes work on both the parents' and the children's part.

I'll never forget the missionary farewell of a young man named Eric Wold. He had done everything he was expected to do in the Church. I had observed his family and knew that it was no accident that Eric was going on a mission. They had expectations, goals, rules, and plenty of encouragement for their children. But Eric was even more outstanding than I had at first thought. When his father talked, we learned of an experience in Eric's life that really made us proud of him. After high school he applied to work at a convenience store, and before he was hired, he had to take a lie-detector test. His father was with him when the man who had administered this test came out with the results. The man said, "Are you Eric's father?" He replied that he was. The man then said, "Well, I just wanted to tell that you have a fine boy here. I've been giving these tests for thirty-six years, and Eric is the first person who has ever answered no to all the questions," Tears came to my eyes as I thought about this young man who had attended a high school with two thousand students, a school where he and his sister were the only Latter-day Saints enrolled, and who had stayed completely clean and virtuous in the face of all the many temptations.

How can we keep our children morally clean? What are some of the things that successful families do to produce such fine and moral children? Here are some things I have learned about helping our families stay morally clean.

When I was in the ninth grade, I wanted to play basketball on our church team. Every day after school, I would go down to the outdoor basketball court at the church and practice for several hours. Soon I could feel myself becoming better at the game, and my self-esteem increased until I felt I was really worth something as a player and as a person. Finally, the basketball season came around, and our ward began to practice as a team. Our coach (who had never played organized basketball before, so he knew very little about the game) gave us a pep talk before our first game. He said, "Okay, men, if you want to win this game, you are going to have to give the ball to Randal and let him shoot. If he misses, get the rebound, pass it back to him, and let him shoot again." I thought to myself, This coach is a genius. I was very eager to show off my ability.

Our ward was out in the country, and we didn't have a lot of money as the city wards did. None of our players had basketball shorts or jerseys, and only two had basketball shoes. Two others went barefoot, and I wore my scuffed-up Sunday shoes, which I also wore Monday through Saturday. One of the first things the coach of the opposing team did was to tell me to take off my hard-soled shoes before I messed up the gym floor, so I now became the third member of our team playing barefoot. The opposing team all had basketball shoes and matching uniforms with their names printed on their jerseys.

When the game started, I did what my coach had told me to do. On offensive plays I dribbled the ball down the court and shot every time I got near the basket. If my teammates got a rebound, they would pass the ball back to me and I would shoot again. I continued to shoot the ball over and over again, just as the coach had told me to do, but the longer the game went on, the more my feet hurt and the bigger the blisters on them became. Finally, with about two minutes left in the game, the coach took me out. The first time my replacement got the ball, he scored two points. The final score that day was 52 to 2. My replacement had scored our only two points. Needless to say, I was humiliated, and I didn't want to go to church that Sunday to face those who had watched the game. It's times like these, when we are down and discouraged and our self-esteem is low, that Satan likes to work on us. What a great protection it is to have a parent say, "Son, just because you had a bad day, it doesn't make you a bad person or a failure. Get back out there and keep practicing, and you'll do better next time."

When my son Nolan was eight years old, we sat down together and helped him set his goals. Then we typed them on colored paper, put the paper in a frame, and hung it on his bedroom wall, so he could see his goals every day of his life. Following are the goals he set:

I will study the scriptures every day.

I will pray to Heavenly Father both morning and night.

I will be a full tithe payer.

I will strive to achieve 100% attendance at church, school, seminary, etc.

I will always keep physically fit.

I will try to be a good sport.

I will learn to play the piano and one other musical instrument.

I will never break the Word of Wisdom.

I will become an Eagle Scout.

I will be a faithful priesthood holder.

I will not begin dating until age 16, and then only in groups; no single dating until after my mission.

I will be diligent in school, church, and other responsibilities.

I will always stay morally clean.

I will strive never to think I'm better than others.

I will graduate from seminary.

I will strive to understand and develop every talent with which the Lord has blessed me.

I will always keep a personal journal.

I will always dress modestly.

I will never turn down a church assignment.

I will strive to develop a good sense of humor and look for the positive in life.

I will fill an honorable full-time mission.

I will graduate from college.

I will be married in the temple for time and all eternity.

After these goals were typed, Nolan signed his name at the bottom of the paper with the date they were set. If he will consistently work on these goals, I believe he will be able to build an almost impenetrable barrier against immorality. We will do all we can to help support him in each of these goals.

If our children knew they would have consistent and effective interviews on a monthly basis, I believe that much of the immorality in the Church would be eliminated. Interviews should be conducted with love and should always begin with prayer. In teaching your children and asking them to give an account of their progress on their personal goals, you may occasionally wish to ask them to imagine that they are five years older than they actually are, and to participate in role-playing situations they may face five years from now. If they can determine a course of action early, they will not have to make decisions when a difficult situation actually presents itself in the future.

In our family, we have started several traditions that I believe can help keep our children on a safe path if followed consistently:

If we are to help protect our children from immorality, we also need to establish some dating rules before they are old enough to date. If rules are implemented in a family early, there should be no questions when the dating years actually arrive. But if we wait until our children have already started dating and then try to establish rules, the rules will be much more difficult to implement.

The following rules are suggested as a strong deterrent in preventing youth from falling into immorality. All are based on the teachings of our prophets.

President Kimball said: "Dating—and especially steady dating in the early teens—is most hazardous. It distorts the whole picture of life. It deprives the youth of worthwhile and rich experiences; it limits friendships; it reduces the acquaintance which can be so valuable in selecting a partner for time and eternity. Steady dating is the source of much evil. The casual relationship grows rapidly into intimacies, develops heavy temptations, and stirs passions far beyond the ability of most young people to cope with." [^2]

I believe that the four dating rules suggested above, if followed carefully, would eliminate much of the immorality in the Church today. But parents must have the courage to implement these rules and then insure that they are strictly followed.

Recently I discussed these rules with a long-time bishop. He made an interesting observation: "Of the dating-age youths I have interviewed who have followed the rules, to my knowledge not one has been immoral." On the other hand, he said that almost all of those teenagers who had freedom in their dating experiences with no rules at all had immorality problems. This same view was verified a short time later by a nationally known LDS family researcher who had just completed a major government research project on teen pregnancy. He said that the teenagers who had no dating rules had the highest percentage of premarital sex, while those who had strict dating rules had the lowest occurrences of premarital sex. And yet even with such evidence, many parents still refuse to adopt any dating rules. I've heard several say, "We don't need these rules. They are too strict. Besides, I trust my children." To all such responses I say, "I trust my children too, but I don't trust Satan." When we allow our children to place themselves in situations where our prophets have warned that they should not be, we are permitting them to go into Satan's territory, and he almost always wins on his own turf.

Finally, we need to control our use of various media if our families are to remain morally clean. Inappropriate magazines, TV, movies, and music can stir up lust that will nullify everything else we may teach our children. Satan desires our children and will do whatever he can to try to tempt them to be immoral. But with carefully planned goals and rules and a lot of prayer, we can eliminate much of this evil influence and help keep our children morally clean. As parents, we must be prepared and willing to make any effort necessary to counter the temptations they will face. It can be done!

Helping Youth Stay Morally Clean: Notes

---
Notas:
[^2] Have you held a family home evening every week for the past 52 weeks?
