Randal A. Wright, Protecting Your Family in an X-Rated World ( 1988)

Chapter 10

"Inspire Them to Greatness"

Several years ago a friend commented that he was tired of hearing the same subjects taught repeatedly at church meetings, such as tithing, missionary work, family home evening, keeping a journal, and food storage. He asked why the church didn't move on and emphasize some different topics. We talked about a few good reasons why such topics were constantly emphasized, including the fact that so many converts coming into the Church need to hear the basics and that some people are not living even the basics and need to be constantly reminded of their duties. My friend said that he understood those points, but he still thought we needed to move on to some deeper subjects for those who had been in the Church for years. As I drove home that night, I wondered, why doesn't the Church move on to deeper subjects? Aren't we already doing the things asked of us, and don't we need further enlightenment? That night, I imagined myself at the judgment bar and Christ telling me I would be judged only for the last year of my life and only on the basic principles that our leaders have taught us over and over. I thought how easy for me this imaginary judgment was going to be, and wished that our real judgment would be that easy. Then I thought about some basic questions I might be asked, and I sat down and wrote them down. Here is what I wrote:

Bonus: Are you caring for your physical body through proper nutrition and a regular exercise program?

How would you answer these questions? Are you, like my friend, ready to move on to some of the more difficult questions? Or do you need to continue working on some of these basic principles? Now, actually reaching the celestial kingdom will require much more than answering these few simple questions. But we might all do well to ask ourselves, how am I really doing as a parent? Could my family achieve more if they followed my example in every way? Do we know who we are and where we are going in life? If not, this is a good time to start.

Being a parent is one of the most difficult, frustrating, and challenging—as well as fun-filled, rewarding, and joyful—experiences anyone could ever ask for. Our experience will usually depend on our attitude and the amount of effort we are willing to put forth. We must learn who we are and then teach our children who they are, if the experience is to be a positive one. But we should also remember that no Latter-day Saint parent is going to be totally successful every day. Some days we all struggle and become discouraged. But no matter how hard the task may be, we simply cannot give up if we want our families to do the things we were sent here to do. The key is to never give up. We must set the proper example, use every means possible to try to reach our children, and then persist and never give up.

We should also be constantly looking for ideas and ways to inspire our families. To do this, we need to avoid some of the extraneous distractions of our day, distractions that would keep us from pondering the things that will help our families most.

One of the best things that ever happened to me was that the radio in my car stopped working. One day as I drove to work in quietness, I discovered that without the distraction of the radio, I had time to ponder the things I need to do in my own life and to think of ways I might help others over whom I have stewardship. Now every day I set a goal or think about a problem and then try to come up with a solution before I arrive at work. For example, one of my seminary students said he saw nothing wrong with sampling a few grapes in the grocery store when he shopped. Most of the other students in class agreed and said that four or five grapes was such a small amount that it was not a big deal. After class, as I drove without distractions, I pondered this problem and prayed for guidance to help my students see that this view is definitely wrong. The next day I gave everyone in the class a handout headed as follows: "Thou Shalt Not Steal . . . Nor Do Anything Like unto It." (D&C 59:6).

Issue: Eating a few grapes at supermarket without paying for them. Question: What's wrong with sampling the grapes while shopping? Number of grapes sampled: 5. Weight of 5 grapes: 1 ounce (average). Cost of grapes per pound: $1.00. Question: If grapes were sampled every day, what would be the loss to the store? CASE I 1 person 1 day=$.06 (1/16 pound of grapes) 1 year =$21.90 (21.9 pounds of grapes) CASE 2 1 family (16 people) 1 day=$1.00 1 year =$365.00 CASE 3 City of Vidor, Texas (38,000 people) 1 day =$2,375 1 year=$866,875 CASE 4 State of Texas (15 million people) 1 day=$937,500 1 year =$342,187,500 CASE 5 United States (250 million people) 1 day=$15,625,000 1 year=$5,703,185,000 CASE 6 Worldwide (6 billion people) 1 day=$375,000,000 1 year =$136,875,000,000

I pointed out that this amount of grapes sampled by one person may not seem significant, but if everyone in the city or the country did so, the results would be devastating. After reviewing the scriptural teachings regarding honesty, most of the students had a change of heart regarding the harm of taking a few grapes. We must constantly be on the alert for teaching moments with our children. But unless we take time to ponder, the opportunities will usually go by, and our families will be left without a stronger desire to be better.

After a stake assignment in a neighboring city several years ago, I came home to find my wife, Wendy, upset and frustrated. I asked her how the children had behaved at church, and she told me that they had been irreverent in sacrament meeting. Irreverence is not usually a problem in our family, so I gave my children a quick lecture and sent them on about their Sabbath day activities. Wendy, however, felt that the subject needed more attention, so we decided to devote our family home evening to reverence. During my quiet time in the car the next day, I tried to come up with a solution.

The lesson that night began in the usual manner—another message on why we should be reverent and what would happen the next time the children chose not to be reverent in church meetings. The children didn't seem particularly interested and began to fidget and look away. Then the lesson took on a new twist that our family will never forget.

I asked Nathan, who was eight, to go into another room for a few minutes, then return when called to tell the family a story he liked. While he was out of the room, I told the other three children that when he returned and began to tell his story, we would all talk, giggle, and fidget.

Nathan returned and began his story. He is an excellent storyteller and has won awards for his talent, so he thought this would be an easy assignment. Then he realized that no one was listening to him. Without his audience's attention, he began fumbling for words. Finally, totally frustrated, he sat down without finishing his tale.

When I asked him how this experience had made him feel, he hung his head and replied, "Really bad!"

Next we asked Nolan, who was seven, to leave the room. When he was invited back to tell us a story, he said, "I don't know any stories." He knew what was about to happen, and he wanted no part of it. We suggested a story to him and asked him to tell it to us. But when he tried to tell his story and we didn't pay attention, he burst into tears and said, "I can't do it! I can't talk when other people are talking!"

Here was the teaching moment I had hoped for. I explained, "Now you know how speakers and teachers feel when the people in the congregation or class are irreverent. They feel bad inside, just as you do now. They would like to just sit down and quit too. But they can't do that. They have to continue."

My children understood. We had all learned an important lesson.

In order to experience the positive side of this lesson, we then asked the other children to sit up straight, fold their arms, and look at Nathan as he told his story again. This time there was a dramatic difference. He did an excellent job, using facial expressions and hand gestures without stumbling on one word.

After the children had gone to bed that night, I felt proud of the lesson on reverence. They had truly learned something that night. But then a thought came strongly to me. The children had learned, but what about me? Did I know the meaning of the word reverence?

I thought about my past behavior. How many times had I whispered during church meetings and classes? How many times had I worked on talks or read during meetings? How many times had I interrupted others when they were speaking? Upon examining my own actions, I found I had not always looked at teachers or speakers when they were speaking to me, and I seldom expressed appreciation to the teacher, the speaker, or others for a job well done. I found that I needed to work on being more reverent as much as my children did.

Since that day our family has learned to enjoy our meetings and glean more from them than ever before. But that lesson was not learned until I had pondered the problem and asked for help. To help our families change undesirable behavior, we must constantly seek solutions and teaching moments. I am confident the Lord will show us the way to improve ourselves and to teach our families if we will only seek.

In a priesthood class I once attended, we discussed the need and the responsibility we all had to attend the temple. Because of the distance a few mentioned the financial sacrifice that it required to make a temple trip regularly. I considered this awhile and thought to myself, "You know, it's very strange what we can afford and what we can't." That evening, as I sat thinking of these comments, I wrote the following:

It's amazing, isn't it? I mean, what we can afford and what we can't. I know that we should plan a regular temple trip to renew our marriage covenants and do work for the dead, but maybe later. We just can't afford it now, with the payments due on our new car. And fast offerings—I just can't afford any more than I'm already giving. ("Honey, call the Joneses and see if they want to go eat steak and seafood Friday night after the game.") I realize my sons should have suits for church and our daughters better dresses, but times are hard. ("Who wants to go get treats tonight and play a few computer games?") Buy some spiritual music for the home? I'm going to get some soon, but I just spent my extra money on the top rock album. And good books, yes, I need more good things to read in the home, but my sports magazine subscription is just so expensive these days. Maybe later.

Did you go to the "Know Your Religion" lecture? No, I wanted to, but three dollars a person is a little steep for my family. Besides, Top Gun cost us enough for that week. A year's supply of food? You must be kidding! I can't even afford the gas for my boat!

I've always wanted to go to Nauvoo and Independence and other church historical sites, and we are going to go as soon as we can afford it. ("All right, everybody, the water park opens in just two hours. Hurry, we'll be late!") Musical instruments for my kids? Too expensive! Anyway, we're still paying for their three-wheelers.

We can't afford to put in a garden this year, because seeds and fertilizer cost too much. But next year for sure! ("Honey, look here—the supermarket has tomatoes on special for 96 cents a pound!") You know, I'd like to fix up and beautify our home, but building expenses are out of sight. But we did buy a beautiful new TV, which looks very nice in our living room.

Boy, it's expensive being a good Latter-day Saint! There is always something to donate to. If things don't get better, I may have to sell my pool table to have enough to pay a fast offering. And talk about expensive—have you looked at the price of a college education? It's ridiculous! You know, I didn't pay much more than that as the down payment on our cabin at the lake. And missions—they say that one month of a typical mission now costs as much as our hunting lease and golf course membership combined! Yes, times are bad. There are many things we can't afford. But isn't it amazing how much we feel we can afford?

Let's not rationalize away the things we need to be doing with our families. Let's keep our priorities straight and set an example worthy to follow.

When times get really tough, I recall an experience I had while attending Ricks College. Because of a money shortage, my roommates and I got jobs in a potato cellar at harvest time. Our assignment was to use large pitchforks to shovel about thirty-five pounds of potatoes at a time onto a conveyor belt. Within thirty minutes we were breathing heavily, and within four hours one of my roommates had quit. After two more days, all the rest of my friends had quit. I continued for two reasons. One was the fact that I was broke. The other was that on the other side of the mounds of potatoes was a sixty-five-year-old man who had the same job that I had. Although he never said a word to me, his example got me through the experience. By the third day my arms were so sore that I could hardly lift them, but every time I wanted to quit, I would look up at that older man and say to myself, "There's no way I am going to let him get the best of me." And I would keep shoveling.

I soon learned a great lesson from that experience. I found that the more I shoveled the potatoes, the greater my capacity became to accomplish my task. Soon the soreness was gone, and I could shovel without tiring. In fact, I became so adept that I could beat the old man's production quite easily. The supervisors soon gave me a raise—although the pay remained the same. My new assignment was to carry 100-pound sacks from the conveyor belt to the storage rooms. So it was a raise in weight, instead of in pay. I quickly found out what real work was. I had just thought the shoveling was hard!

To our children, we should be like the old man in this story, always there working hard and setting a good example for them to follow. Often, children will go on to achieve even more than the parents who have set the example.

Sometimes as parents we get so keyed up about how hard it is to be a parent that we forget how hard it is to be a child. Children have tremendous amounts of pressure placed on them by society and even their own peers, Sometimes we are too quick to judge them by outer appearance or habits. They need example, encouragement, and teaching, not criticism.

Recently I stopped at a gas station to gas up my car. While the gas was pumping, a young man drove up, got out of his car, and started to pump gas also. He had a sloppy beard, was not dressed well, and hadn't combed his hair the way I thought he should, and I thought to myself with pride, This poor boy just doesn't have it! As I walked over to the cashier to pay my bill, I discovered I didn't have enough money with me. I explained my situation to the cashier, then went back to my car to search for some loose change, but soon found I had none. As I walked back to tell the cashier of my dilemma, the young man whom I had earlier judged walked past me and said, "Don't worry about it." I ignored his comment. But when I asked the cashier if she trusted me to go home and get the money, she said that the young man had seen what had happened and paid the bill for me. I ran back to the pump to get his address so I could pay him back, but he just said, "Don't worry about it," and drove off. I had never seen that boy before that day, nor have I seen him since, but he taught me a valuable lesson. Sometimes we are too quick to judge others. Sometimes we are even too quick to judge our own children. Let us remember that these are they who have been saved to come forth in this last dispensation to prepare the way for the Savior's second coming. Within our children are the seeds of greatness. Our responsibility is to help them recognize who they are so they can fulfill their divine destiny.

If we are to be successful in our callings as parents, we must pray for help and guidance. We are told, "Counsel with the Lord in all thy doings," and if we will do this, "he will direct [us] for good." (Alma 37:37.) I testify that prayer will help us guide our families safely through these trying times. But I believe that the Lord requires more than prayer. We pray that we will be great and noble parents and have successful families. The Lord then provides us with the opportunity of being parents. Whether we are successful or not depends on what we do with our opportunities. We have free agency. Are we putting forth the effort that it takes to learn how to have successful families? Or are we just praying that a miracle will happen?

Do we know where we are going as parents? Do we have family goals to achieve, or do we just go along and hope for the best? If we don't set family goals, how can we ever hope to achieve them? Achieving hard goals through prayer and work will bring much joy and happiness into our homes.

One of the hardest things my wife and I ever did was to help our second son, Nolan, reach a personal goal. He wanted to read the entire Book of Mormon before his eighth birthday. We realized what we had gotten into the very first day when we had to explain every single word in the First verse except the word I. It was a very slow and tedious process, and almost every day I wanted to quit. Day after day we read; hour after hour we explained the words he didn't know, and he would then repeat them. Then, after several months of reading, we all began to receive blessings. We found that Nolan was beginning to read more on his own. His reading skills were improving, and he was gaining a testimony of the Book of Mormon. Finally, the night before his birthday, he read the last verse of this great scripture, having completed his goal. I can't describe the feeling of joy that came into our home or the inspiration that came into our lives that night, but it was real. We had discovered that appropriate family goals will help us achieve what our Heavenly Father has sent us here to do. We also had reaffirmation of the power of the Book of Mormon to inspire us in achieving our mission.

President Ezra Taft Benson has given each of us a challenge to read the Book of Mormon daily, and has promised us great blessings if we will follow this counsel. In his first conference address as president of the Church, he quoted and endorsed the words of President Marion G. Romney:

If we would avoid adopting the evils of the world, we must pursue a course which will daily feed our minds with and call them back to the things of the spirit. I know of no better way to do this than by reading the Book of Mormon. . . .

And so, I counsel you, my beloved brothers and sisters and friends everywhere, to make reading in the Book of Mormon a few minutes each day a lifelong practice. . . . I feel certain that if, in our homes, parents will read from the Book of Mormon prayerfully and regularly, both by themselves and with their children, the spirit of that great book will come to permeate our homes and all who dwell therein. The spirit of reverence will increase, mutual respect and consideration for each other will grow. The spirit of contention will depart. Parents will counsel their children in greater love and wisdom, Children will be more responsive and submissive to that counsel. Righteousness will increase. Faith, hope, and charity—the pure love of Christ—will abound in our homes and lives, bringing in their wake peace, joy, and happiness. [^1]

The promises that were made concerning the blessings that will come to our families from our study of the Book of Mormon are almost too great to comprehend. I pray that we will all take this book seriously, use it as the guide for our families, follow its teachings, and then endure to the end. If we read it closely, it will lead us to a foundation that will not fall. Helaman gave us the key in his counsel to his sons: "And now my sons, remember, remember that it is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that ye must build your foundation, that when the devil shall send forth his mighty winds, yea, his shafts in the whirlwind, yea, when all his hail and his mighty storm shall beat upon you, it shall have no power over you to drag you down to the gulf of misery and endless wo, because of the rock upon which ye are built, which is a sure foundation, a foundation whereon if men build they cannot fall." (Helaman 5:12.)

"Inspire Them to Greatness": Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Have you said your personal and family prayers every day for the past 365 days? Marion G. Romney, "Drink Deeply from the Divine Fountain," Improvement Era, April 1960, p. 436.
