Neal A. Maxwell, All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience ( 1979)

Preface

Books are born in many ways, though they inevitably reflect the author. In the instance of this volume, several shaping experiences led to its creation.

Watching, for instance, new converts (who are often so soon tested) become "Church broken" caused a fresh pondering about spiritual growth, both its pain and its beauty.

Trying to respond to recurring questions about God and how much He knows created a resolve to attempt some clarifying comments on the omniscience of God, a reality the acceptance of which is such a fundamental part of real faith.

Comments by helpful and thoughtful colleagues, who did not even realize they were being helpful, induced some deeper thinking about the role corrective commentary plays in one's growth. One beloved colleague, upon hearing a clever but somewhat cutting comment by the author about a certain situation, gave mild reproof in the form of "You could have gone all day without saying that." Deftly done. Lovingly done. Remembered.

The specific and loving responsiveness of members of the First Quorum of the Seventy to a presentation on brotherhood underscored the relevancy of brotherhood to personal growth.

Hearing others expound on the scriptures and being surprised when they opened up insights that have escaped me: Elder Marion D. Hanks did such a thing in noting the words about what a marvelous leader Moroni was (see Alma 48:11-20), but stressing the less noted words about others of the Brethren, such as Helaman, who "were no less serviceable unto the people than was Moroni." This was a wise and important insight in the Book of Mormon that had gone unnoticed in spite of many readings.

Dr. Allen Bergin helped without knowing it in a significant conversation about suffering.

Seeing the quiet example of others, such as President and Sister Spencer W. Kimball, ceaselessly implementing "pure religion," served as a reminder about the relentless requirements of service, especially in selfish times like these.

A noticing and caring wife urged that the often unanswered or poorly answered concerns of others be responded to in better ways than in my first attempts in conversations heard by her. She knew there were better answers.

Perhaps more than anything, however, the gallant and even gracious suffering of friends with different forms of cancer led to the effort on the role of suffering in the second estate, a most difficult doctrine, and yet so vital for us all. It is to these friends that this volume is dedicated.
