Neal A. Maxwell, All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience ( 1979)

Chapter 1

Hard Doctrines and God's Love

When one decides whether or not to deal with hard doctrines, the tendency is to put them off or to be put off by them. Not only are they in some respects puzzling, but they may even offend our mortal pride. Just as there are some good deeds we do gladly and quickly (while others are put off time and again), so it is with certain gospel truths: we accept some with joy and alacrity, but others we keep at arm's length. The hardness is usually not in their complexity, but in the deep demands these doctrines make of us. They are actually harder to accept than to understand, for there is a breathtaking simplicity about them.

Why, therefore, is the resistance to them so often present? Is it a lack of humility? Or, once accepted, is it that these truths carry unwanted implications and heavy responsibilities with them? Is it because we are not yet ready? Is it that these truths seem almost too much to comprehend? Probably it is all of these. Therefore, it is not because we refuse even to think about these doctrines; rather, it is that when we have explored them somewhat, we return from such a brief reconnaissance less than anxious to make further sorties in that direction. This is a pity, however, because our adoration for and appreciation of God will be measurably increased as we increase our understanding of Him and His plan of happiness.

Meanwhile, do we nevertheless feel somehow diminished by the reality of the omniscience of God? Does His foreknowledge (which grows out of His omniscience) seem to make us less significant or less free? Does the perfect predictability of our behavior (in God's eyes) seem to squeeze out some of the sense of adventure in mortality? And if so, do we childishly want to play-act just a little longer—risking righteousness and true happiness merely in order to be reassured about our independence?

Since, alas, a holding back regarding the hard doctrines does seem to be characteristic, why don't we at least resist equally the gravitational pull coming from the other direction? The adversary would claim us, too! Somehow he gets away with it, even though his way is monotony masquerading as individuality, and even though the selfishness he encourages is merely an apostate individualism.

Would that we might worry as much about being taken for granted by Lucifer (or be as concerned with freedom from sin) as we sometimes are about opting for the Lord. Besides, if it is real adventure we want, there is none of it in wickedness. Perhaps the tilt to the telestial occurs because many feel less compromised when they are led carefully down the paved, gently descending, wide way, on which there is no exhilaration, whereas in climbing up the straight and narrow way, one seems to notice every chuckhole and all the loose gravel.

In any event, to ignore the hard doctrines deprives us of much-needed doctrinal rations for the rigorous journey.

The lyrics "Come, let us anew our journey pursue" (Hymns, no. 17) suggest getting on with our impending mortal experiences, some of the most glorious of which will be adventures of the mind and heart as we ponder and explore new truths—truths that both penetrate us and envelop us. How can we, for instance, develop even a beginner's appreciation for God's omniscience, if we do not have a measure of understanding for His perfect love? Can we ponder His ultimate brilliance, if we do not commence to feel His ultimate warmth?

God loves us all—saint and sinner alike—with a perfect and everlasting love. We have His love, if not His approval. It is our love for Him that remains to be developed. When we come to be genuinely concerned with pleasing God—more than with pleasing any in the world, even ourselves—then our behavior improves and His blessings can engulf us. This sublime feeling can be experienced only if we come to know enough about Him so that our awe melts into adoration, and our respect into utter reverence.

We cannot make such deep commitments to Him or have such deep experiences at His hand without accepting and pondering the simple doctrines that lie at the center of it all. The basic doctrines are lofty, but they are not abstract; they actually knit together daily life and eternity.

To those who mean well but thoughtlessly speak of "building a better relationship" with God (which sounds like a transaction between mortals desiring reciprocity), it needs to be said that our relationship with God is already established, in a genealogical sense. Perhaps what such individuals intend to say is that we must draw closer to God. But we are to worship, to adore, and to obey God, not build a better relationship with Him!

There is an attitudinal and behavioral bridge that we need to build in order for us to draw closer to Him, and thus be ready to return Home—cum laude or summa cum laude—to receive of His loving fullness. We must want to do this more than we want to do anything else. Otherwise, even if we avoid wickedness, our journey will end in the suburbs, somewhere short of the City of God.

The central doctrines can quicken in us this desire for a full reunion. The hard sayings can help us in hard times, so that we do not lose the way. These sublime truths will enliven our consciences and stir our dimmed memories of promises made and vows taken—and at those very moments when we would otherwise be pulled from the path. These key truths, when kept before us, will lift our hopes and our eyes when we are downcast or in despair, and will lift our minds and thoughts from lower inclinations that are unworthy of who we are.

So lifted, we can, afresh, see the distant but beckoning City of God on the hill. When weary legs falter and detours and roadside allurements entice, the fundamental doctrines will summon from deep within us fresh determination. Extraordinary truths can move us to extraordinary accomplishments! And, strangely enough, even as we partake of the bread of adversity (with its unique calories), this will provide us with new and needed energy. The hard doctrines will also keep us from that flabbiness which has called a sad halt to many a journey—as well-doing individuals have grown "weary by the way."

This volume, therefore, focuses first upon the omniscience of God, then upon the special experiences of the second estate of chastening, suffering, serving, growing, praying, and following—and all this in the last days of the last dispensation.

Concerning all of these challenges, a loving God said of us, as we stood on the edge of this mortal experience, "We will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." (Abraham 3:25.) Should this stern reminder not be adequate concerning how serious God is about schooling and stretching us, then let us ponder what the Savior said to the Prophet Joseph Smith, who was in the midst of being proved: "All these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good." (D&C 122:7.)

Furthermore, in the succeeding words of that revelation (which are unfortunately quoted far less often), the Lord said to His suffering prophet, "Hold on thy way, . . . fear not what man can do, for God shall be with you forever and ever." (D&C 122:9.)

"Hold on," "fear not"—these are the words of Him who has passed perfectly through "all these things," and who now seeks to bring us lovingly and safely through our own individually designed experiences.

It is the journey of journeys!
