Neal A. Maxwell, All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience ( 1979)

Chapter 4

Service and the Second Great Commandment

Before we discuss the requirements of service, it is necessary to note, in the next number of paragraphs, some features of the special circumstances in which we find ourselves that cause the development of this virtue to be so demanding in our time. Rendering service has never been an easy requirement, but hard times and hard people have made it an even more difficult requirement.

In the first two great commandments we are adjured to love God and to love our neighbors as ourselves. How very difficult these duties are when people become selfish. The more they become self-centered, the more their interest in God wanes; if some think of Him at all, it is only in an attitude of "What has He done for me lately?" Neighbors suffer because selfish people likewise seldom think of others. Selfishness leads to self-pity, which leaves no room for compassion, empathy, or service to others. A selfless President N. Eldon Tanner has observed, "The most difficult thing for us seems to be to give of ourselves, to do away with selfishness. If we really love someone, nothing is a hardship." (Conference Report, April 9, 1967, p. 104.)

Indeed, in the macropolitical processes and trends in the world, we are seeing the large-scale consequences of individual selfishness; there is even in some areas a possible loss of nationhood in the recurrence of sectionalism and tribalism. There is surely a hardening of regional and class interests. These trends are ominous manifestations of selfishness and of the coarsening of people. The less love, the less service. The more selfish assertiveness, the less neighborliness.

These times, therefore, with their hardening effects and the abnormal way in which people will be selfish "lovers of their own selves" and when "the love of many shall wax cold" will make the giving of wise and loving service to others a particular challenge, like maintaining one's balance on the tilted deck of a sinking ship. (2 Timothy 3:2; Matthew 24:12; D&C 45:27.)

Yet, regardless of the times, one of the vital but hard things all of us must do is to keep serving—for among "all these things" will be some of our most choice mortal experiences that occur as we serve others in fulfillment of the second commandment.

Isn't it interesting that of the many ways in which the Lord might have phrased the object of the "thou shalt" in the second great commandment, He chose the word neighbor—not mankind, not organizations, not people, and not society, but neighbor.

It has only been in recent times, since people started saying they loved all mankind, that neighbors have suffered so much neglect.

In keeping the second great commandment, the most significant and basic service we can regularly render unto others will emerge from our most basic roles—as brothers and sisters, as parents, as neighbors, as disciples. What we do vocationally and professionally matters, of course—and sometimes very much. But those of us who try to escape from, or neglect, our basic roles will find that we have only made the effective keeping of the second great commandment even more difficult.

Keeping the commandments and sharing the gospel of Jesus Christ are the two most relevant things we can do to assist our fellowman in our time. In addition to keeping the second commandment by direct service to others, what a service we render others when we do not commit adultery or steal, even though these become more and more fashionable!

But genuine service to others will clearly set us against the prevailing political and social tides. Thus, among "all these things" that can give us good experience in mortality is the experience of giving loving service in selfish societies; it is another hard doctrine for hard times.

Parenthetically, the adversary, who displays no true love, has sought (with renewed efforts in recent times) to cripple the family, the natural locus of so much love. The adversary, interestingly enough, has even tried to ruin the word love itself, making it seem to be a one-dimensional thing, a base act instead of a grand thing. If the adversary could have his way, loving would mean only copulating—and even that in violation of the seventh commandment. Such a narrowing is nonsense, for it is like saying that freedom is merely voting or that literature is simply words in print. Carnality is always such a profound contraction of life; it destroys even that which it pretends to focus upon!

Serving others is one of the best ways to nourish our testimonies, but, more than in the past, paradoxically we will need to be spurred on to give service by our testimony and by the counsel of the prophets. We can thus go on feeling responsible even when human institutions seek to excuse us from our duties to others—or when service may seem to be such a futile gesture.

In a very real way, service, to be understood and effectively pursued, requires us to restructure our view of things from a worldly to a heavenly point of view. To do this is simple—but not easy. It is somewhat like flicking a light switch from "off" to "on"—lighting up a room so that we see more clearly (or for the first time) all the possibilities for service that we simply did not see in the darkness of devotion to self.

There are direct, obvious, and traditional services to be performed, such as providing food, clothing, shelter, and physical care. But there are also more subtle needs to be met that are no less real for not being quite so visible. This chapter focuses more on the latter than on the former, but only because a different emphasis seems more needed.

We see in the life of the Savior, of course, all forms of service. He healed many and fed many. Yet He also provided much subtle service, too. Tutoring Peter to come forth with the right answer ("Whom say ye that I am?") and tutoring the Twelve ("Will ye also go away?") involved a transcendent service that would long outlast in value the calories that the Savior provided in the loaves and the fish. (Matthew 16:15; John 6:67.) Is there not mirrored in Peter's declaration to and healing of the lame man—"Silver and gold have I none; but such as I have give I thee"—the mark of the Master's teaching as well as the use of the power of His priesthood? (Acts 3:6.)

So often what parched and thirsty people need is to be nourished by the drinking of true doctrines and to be revived by the food of fellowship. Giving genuine companionship to the malnourished mortals who have known so little love and so few friends is as vital as food for the starving.

So often we can serve by bathing the wounded and bruised egos of others in the warm waters of deserved commendation.

So often what people need is to be enveloped in the raiment of real response.

So often what people need so much is to be sheltered from the storms of life in the sanctuary of belonging. Such a service cannot be rendered by selfish people, however, because the response of the selfish will always be that there is no room in their inn. Chronic self-concern means that the "No Vacancy" sign is always posted.

Frequently, we busily search for group service projects, which are surely needed and commendable, when quiet, personal service is also urgently needed. Sometimes the completing of an occasional group service project ironically salves our consciences when, in fact, we are constantly surrounded by a multitude of opportunities for individual service. In serving, as in true worship, we need to do some things together and some things personally. Our spiritual symmetry is our own responsibility, and balance is so important.

We should balance the service we give as between, for instance, the young, pretty, and handsome and the old who are worn and frail

We should balance our service between those who give us immediate response and gracious appreciation and those who are grumpy—so grumpy they almost dare us to love them. We should balance visits to the sick between those in rest homes and those sick but vivacious friends in their own homes who lift us even though we came to lift them.

As we strive to render significant, though often quiet, service, we should avoid life patterns in which the seeming pressures can make for superficial service and rushed relationships. What C. S. Lewis said of our reception-oriented social gatherings is often true: meeting people in such settings is like reading only the first page of one hundred different books—very unfulfilling! All of us should strive, therefore, to have some friendships that are deep and solid—so solid, for instance, that if they were interrupted, the unfinished conversation could be resumed months later almost in mid-sentence, just as if we had never been apart.

You and I are believers in and preachers of a glorious gospel that can deepen all human relationships now as well as projecting all relationships into eternity. Friendships, as well as families, are forever.

If our regard for others is tied solely to their role, how real is that regard?

We, more than others, should carry jumper and tow cables not only in our cars, but also in our hearts, by which means we can send the needed boost or charge of encouragement or the added momentum to mortal neighbors.

One of the great lessons given to us by the Savior is the episode involving Martha and Mary. Martha, being task-oriented, as are some of us, was cumbered with much serving. She was filled with what has become known as Martha-like anxiety, which in this instance consisted of trying to get supper on the table. In a way, Jesus commended her for her conscientiousness, but He also pointed out that Mary had chosen the "good part, which shall not be taken away from her." (Luke 10:42.) Mary sensed that she was in the midst of a special, never-to-return opportunity to be given by the Savior Himself, the Bread of Life. Martha was so busy preparing perishable calories that she let that opportunity go unused. While there are times when we apparently can't avoid being badgered by events, it ought not to become a way of life. The consequence of our good choices will not be taken from us either.

The traditional ways of service are as much needed as ever. Indeed, the times just ahead will bring mankind to a fresh appreciation of such basics as food, clothing, transportation, and shelter—from which opportunities for service no detraction is intended by noting in this chapter additional emphases in the realm of service.

Why should we be concerned about service? When we contemplate the consequences of the conditioning of the past two or so decades in America and, alas, elsewhere, we are confronted with a very harsh reality—to which, of course, there are some happy exceptions. But the pattern is clear. So many things have combined to underwrite a surging selfishness that presents us with a sobering scene. Many people assert their needs, but where have we lodged the corresponding obligations? Many have become demanders, but where are the providers and the deliverers? We have even drawn down the carryover selflessness that has been brought forward from better days. The reserves of regard for others are dangerously low. We have raised expectations but lowered the collective levels of love, patience, and concern. The drives for self-fulfillment and self-awareness and self-assertion have been heightened—even made militant—but without increasing the available selflessness. There are, for instance, many more people with things to say than there are listeners. There are more neglected and aging parents than there are attentive sons and daughters—though numerically it clearly should not be so.

Scoffers may say that the human condition was always so. But ours has been a time of relative affluence in which we have allowed full generations to be nurtured on the notion that, somehow, they are the center of the universe, and that meeting their needs should become the priority task of others—others who are expected to be very devoted. Some expect to receive—indeed, they demand—unilateral love.

The old aristocracy of wealth at least had some sense of noblesse oblige, but the new aristocracy of appetite has no such sense of obligation to others. Selfishness is a near-religion for some. Its theology is "me," its hereafter is "now," and its rituals consist of sensation!

Never have so many been schooled so much as to their rights while, at the same time, being taught that there are no behavioral wrongs. If we can but realize that Satan is selfishness at the end of its journey, then we can see where our selfish society is headed.

Once there are not enough individuals who believe in and practice the second great commandment (loving their neighbors as themselves), then we are short of a most vital commodity: the lubricant of love, which is needed to make society work at all. The precise size of the critical mass of seemingly common people who are possessed of the uncommon capacity to love is a number known to God, not to us. But you and I can feel the harsh effects, even though we cannot identify the precise point when things begin to come apart and fabric of society begins to fray.

The Sermon on the Mount, for instance, clearly requires, for implementation, selfless individuals who have an unusual capacity to love—even if their love is not returned. How many peacemakers can there be if too many are too concerned about winning and asserting their rights and their prerogatives?

If selfish confrontation reigns supreme, from where will reconciliation come? How many poor in spirit can there be if inflamed egos constantly seek to enrich and to vindicate themselves at the expense of others? How many pure in heart can there be as many people become sensually selfish and lose their capacity to feel? How much genuine compassion for others can there be if too many people are filled with self-pity?

Winston Churchill once employed a sobering figure of speech to describe the race for atomic supremacy between the Soviet Union and the U. S. in which "two atomic colossi [were] malevolently eyeing each other over a trembling world." In a selfish society, citizens are antagonists—not brothers and sisters. They end up malevolently eyeing each other to see what new need of theirs can be met at someone else's expense, an even more forbidding scene than Churchill's! Appetites are arrayed against appetites and finely honed needs protrude like so many porcupine quills. Someone has observed that it is difficult to pat a porcupine. As so many people become less lovable, they get even less love—in a cruel cycle of deprivation.

It is no accident that unlike secular literature, the scriptures are not replete with jargon about self-fulfillment and meeting our needs. The stern emphasis on keeping the commandments is an emphasis on duty and obedience rather than on self-fulfillment. In the chemistry of duty and demanding obedience, there is not much place left for exulting while we are in the act of obeying. By obeying and serving, we are growing, to be sure, but there is little room—and almost no time—in which to notice our growth. We are, in a sense, being fulfilled because we are being emptied.

Jesus did not find pleasure in hanging on the cross; joy came after duty and agony. He went to Gethsemane and Golgotha out of a sense of supreme service, not because it would meet his needs. He fulfilled all things by giving all in that remarkable and special act of service. He descended below all—taking more than all of us put together have taken—before being lifted up.

But selfish people are forever taking their own temperature, asking themselves, "Am I happy?"

Our eternal happiness is insured, if we keep the commandments. But the finding of oneself is a process that is both gradual and constant; it is an accumulative accomplishment; it is a patient process. We lose ourselves in righteous service and in wise and good causes through a thousand deeds rather than one single spectacular act. Even Calvary came only after much service and after the seasoning from the special stress of the Mount of Temptation, the scourging, and Gethsemane.

Let us not be drawn off the straight and narrow path of service, as have some new converts to the religion of selfishness, by misplaced envy of those traveling in other directions whose happiness is the mock happiness of selfish lifestyles. How ironic it is to envy someone who has a pretty figure but who is a spiritual cripple. The fleeing and transitory "advantages" such individuals seem to have dissolve even as the multitude drools over them. Sophisticated selfishness is still selfishness, even when cleverness tries to pose as substance. Glibness by someone who leads a flawed life cannot cover, except cosmetically, the spiritual speechlessness that afflicts that person. Nor can large bank accounts fill the empty vault of the soul.

Think for a moment how different it would be if people took on that physical appearance which would reflect distinctly how well they are doing spiritually. How would some of today's so-called beautiful people really look? A highly publicized movie star, if her life were fully represented in her appearance, might be ugly, perhaps with a hunched back, a prune face, and a withered arm. In contrast, think of Quasimodo, the Hunchback of Notre Dame, whose beauty was not seen by the multitude. Under such telling circumstances—when the outer person reflected the inner person—whom would we applaud? And who would really deserve our pity?

John the Beloved said to those at Laodicea who were very lukewarm and self-sufficient and who had "need of nothing" that they were actually "wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked." (Revelation 3:17.) Prophets have a way of seeing "things as they really are." (Jacob 4:13.) Would, with Moses, that every man were a prophet and could so see!

Are not the real heroes and heroines of today those who are givers rather than demanders, those who are selfless rather than selfish, those who share rather than grab, those who care about tomorrow as well as today, and those who do their duty quietly without the accompaniment of crashing cymbals and trumpets?

The faithful but perhaps plump woman whose nails are worn but who is a giving mother, wife, and neighbor has a queenly beauty and a regal way, if we would but see her as she really is; her beauty will not be taken from her by the passing years. The paraplegic in the wheelchair who refuses to indulge himself in self-pity—his giving and achieving has genuine glamour. One day he will stand very tall and straight; he should do so already in our eyes.

When we see "things as they really are," we shall see others and ourselves as we really are.

Let us, therefore, define service to others as including genuine listening—a listening that is more than just being patient until it is our turn to speak; rather, a listening that includes real response, not simply nodding absorption.

Let us think of service not only as giving, but also as receiving righteously. Parenthetically, one of the many reasons some of today's children have not learned to give is that some parents do not know how to receive.

We can serve others also by developing real integrity, which is more than being honest and true only until it becomes too expensive. In the crowds of chameleons in the world today, daring to be the same good self is being different. When our goodness is constant we are on the road, albeit only a short distance along, to the unvaryingness of Godlike love.

Let our service, at times, include a willingness to hold back in conversation when what we would have said has already been said—and perhaps better. To contribute, not money, but time and space, so that another can expand is to reflect a quiet nobility. There are so many times when to forgo is to make way for another.

Let us in our professional and vocational chores serve with excellence even if others care more and more about pay and less and less about quality in their workmanship.

Serving also requires us to know that we should not be worrying over our own adequacy when our concern is really over how we look rather than about what we have given. There is a marked difference between the introspection that focuses on "How did I do?" and the introspection that asks, "Did I do enough?"

Moffatt's translation of Paul's great chapter on love says that "love is never glad when others go wrong." But true love also includes real rejoicing when others do well—even if their success seems to change, somehow, our own place in the mortal peck order. We may actually be moved down in a mortal peck order, but when we rejoice righteously in the accomplishments of others, we are truly lifted up.

Genuine responsiveness to the achievements of others is a noble, though subtle, way to serve. It means, of course, that there will be times when we applaud and no one notices our pair of happy hands, and no one even hears our added decibels—except us and the Lord. There are so many times when genuine human service means giving graciously our little grain of sand, placing it reverently to build the beach of brotherhood. We get no receipt, and our little grain of sand carries no brand; its identity is lost, except to the Lord.

And why not? The greatest act of service in all of history—the Atonement—was clearly unappreciated. It was fully understood only by the Savior and the Eternal Father while it was in process. But it was completed to the glory and eternal benefit of all humanity. When Jesus groaned the words "It is finished," immortality had just begun—for billions upon billions of souls.

We can serve by not endorsing, in word or deed, the seductive slogans of the world, by refusing to be trendy when those trends would take all who follow them toward destruction.

In this respect, the young will live to see a certain madness in some majorities in the world in a way heretofore thought impossible. Pilate yielded Barabbas instead of Jesus to just such a crowd. Someone has recently coined what is called the Gadarene Swine Law, which is, simply put, that just because a group is in formation does not mean that it is going in the right direction. (Paul Dickson, The Official Rules [New York: Delacorte Press], p. 67.)

There are other times when one of the greatest acts of service we can perform is to stop something. The emotional chain of reaction and overreaction can come at us like electric voltage; it is very tempting to simply pass along. But we must say, "Let it stop with me." Brave but battered French soldiers in World War I finally held against an invading enemy at a place called Verdun, where the solemn password was "They shall not pass." At times we too should be stern, sweet sentries willing to expose ourselves to misunderstanding and pain in order to keep undesirable things from spreading any farther.

We can serve by enduring well, for our steadiness will steady others who are otherwise on the verge of giving up.

We can serve by giving deserved, specific praise. The militarily brilliant and much decorated Duke of Wellington was asked late in his years what he would have done differently. He did not say he would have fought the magnificent Battle of Waterloo or any other battle differently. He said quite simply, "I should have given more praise." (Elizabeth Longford, Wellington: The Years of the Sword [Panther Press], p. 506.)

Jonathan Swift wisely wished for others, "May you live every day of your lives." Let us so live that we can be said to have really lived, remembering that only the righteous really and fully live.

Evil people exist. The in-betweeners merely survive. But those who have really lived will be those who have lived righteously, because they will have lived righteously and served selflessly in a time of stunning contrasts. They will have managed to keep clean in a dirty world. And being free, they will be happy in otherwise sad times, and all their experiences will be for their good.

The righteous and serving will feel when others are "past feeling." They will love when the love of others has waxed cold. They will have also been different enough to have made a real difference in the world. They will know inner peace when fear envelops others. They will go on serving while others are lost in raging selfishness, a selfishness that is like the relentless and wild pounding of the "troubled sea, when it cannot rest." (Isaiah 57:20.)

Righteousness preserves and sharpens the taste buds of the soul, while selfishness first scalds and then destroys them. Selfishness also shrinks the soul and brings down our antennae of affection. Righteous service is everlasting in its impact, while other deeds are like "plowing furrows in the ocean," to use the imagery of Bolivar.

Meanwhile, let us not be dismayed with the actions of defectors and dissenters from the Kingdom who will go out into the cold because they cannot stand the heat.

Service softens, not hardens, our hearts. The gospel gentles us and tames us—it does not make us more wild. Service keeps indolence at bay. Pure love keeps us from all manner of lasciviousness. Service keeps us from forgetting the Lord our God, because being among and serving our brothers and sisters reminds us that Father is ever there and is pleased when we serve, for while the recipients of our service are our neighbors, they are His children.

Let us so live and serve as to give no one cause to speak with justifiable spite of us. People may say untrue things that hurt us and that may even temporarily hurt the work, but let us never give cause for calumny. Let us so serve that those who are unrighteous, as Paul counseled, "may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say" of us. (Titus 2:8.)

Then, even in the heat of the final summer, we can come to know the deep reassurance and security that Paul, stretched by service, felt when he said, "We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; Persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed." (2 Corinthians 4:8-9.)

The Duke of Wellington, after winning the vital battle for the soul of Europe at Waterloo, quietly observed, ". . . I don't think it would have done if I had not been there!" (Wellington: The Years of the Sword, p. 590.) And when the summer of which we have spoken is over, let it be said of each of us, with regard to our influence upon and service to the people in these glorious but perilous times in which we live, that it would not have done for us not to have been here!

Surely God will reinforce us and help us after we have made prayerful and wise choices as to how best to serve others, for as He has said, "When ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.)

Kahlil Gibran observed that work is love made visible. There is no servitude in service with love, for all such efforts are ennobling. Indeed, God's work and glory, "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39), is ultimate love.

At several points the scriptures speak of bearing one another's burdens that they may be light. (Mosiah 18:8; Galatians 6:2.) Paul clearly connects this form of service with the keeping of the second commandment. (Galatians 5:13-14.) He even coaches us on how to do this so that it will be efficacious: "We then that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves. Let every one of us please his neighbour for his good to edification." (Romans 15:1-2. Italics added.) Even the service we render must be so selfless that it is not self-conscious!

The lessening of the load of another comes, in part, from our very expression of genuine concern transmitted to the burdened. Empathy expressed can do much to lift the heart of another. Objectively, in fact, the burden (the loss of health, a loved one) may remain, but the capacity to cope and to carry on is increased by our administering the adrenalin of affection.

The two great commandments are inextricably bound up with each other. Mortals can clearly do much good even though they are disbelievers, but someday they will see that even their good deeds were done because of who they really are and because of forces deep within them that moved them to such actions—even though they did not, at the time, recognize or acknowledge those divine forces within them.

It is possible for all to develop such love, because carried within each soul born on this planet is the Light of Christ, which can illumine the landscape of life, even if the carrier does not understand that light within. (D&C 93:2.)

For those who think they can keep the second great commandment without keeping the first, it may be enough for now to say that we cannot really love others unless we know who others really are. How can we know their deepest needs without knowing their true identity? Yes, the glass of water given by a disbeliever to the thirsty individual is just as refreshing and the crust of bread just as filling. But irreverence for, or an unwillingness to acknowledge, the Ultimate Source of both the water and the bread keeps that moment of giving and receiving from its completeness. As the Savior said, water from the well is useful, but we will thirst, again and again, unless we drink of the living waters. (John 4:13-14.) Disbelievers do good, but it is a good that is not good enough.

We cannot say we love God if we hate our fellowmen. Likewise, we cannot love our fellowmen if we do not rightly regard and know our God!

As in all things, the example of Jesus Christ is a perfect example for us in the matter of serving and loving others. He displayed His perfect love for all mankind by various means—means that, strangely enough, because we are so often reminded of them, sometimes need to be looked at from a distance, as it were.

Jesus loved people enough to teach them specific things. He did not merely live among people as so many of us do, for co-existence is not real brotherhood. Teaching is a significant form of service, just as is witnessing to one's neighbor.

Jesus loved others enough to share His work with them, as appropriate. Giving others meaningful things to do is a part of loving and serving. Work is one of the ways we witness our love, for genuine affection is not an abstract thing at all.

Jesus loved us enough to put His own needs in the background in order to better serve others. There was no selfishness about Him, nor any of the "I must meet my needs" philosophy that has seduced and captured so many in our time. Just as He has told us to do, He found and fulfilled Himself by losing himself in the service of others. But we must lose our life for His sake—not just any cause. There are those carefully masqueraded versions of service to others that are really ego exercises coated with a thin layer of public interest. One sees it all the time, especially when some politicians have some temporary glee as their selfish interests appear to be visibly aligned with the public good; they almost enjoy it too much, suggesting it is not a regular experience.

Jesus loved us enough to sacrifice and suffer for us, more than we can know—and, perhaps, ever fully appreciate. His love is not that love which follows us only as far as the border of inconvenience and then halts. There are so many times in life when we recoil from further service to others as they become too demanding. When we see what it is we are getting into, we so often want to get out.

While clearly there are inappropriate impositions to be avoided, how do you and I expect to learn much about long-suffering if our service to others involves only quick acts of affection and brief brotherhood? Do we not see how it is that God has been longsuffering with us, and that to know Him we must be prepared over much time to experience such things ourselves?

Perfect love is perfectly patient. Loving patience with a disobedient child, long-term service in the sickness of a loved one who needs to be waited upon hand and foot—these are things that will stretch our souls more than so many other forms of service. To write a check, though the financial sacrifice is real, is not quite the same thing as, day in and day out, providing brotherhood for the bedridden. Those of us who see others so ministering are privileged to see a gallantry that is Godlike in the regularity of service and in its selflessness.

Yet keeping the second commandment—to love our neighbor as ourselves—requires, more than we know, the development of healthy self-regard. Unless, therefore, we ourselves are improving and growing, our neighbors and associates will tend to suffer at our hands—if only from acts of omission.

We will be much aided in loving and serving others if we are able to give and accept counsel, correction, and commendation as we move along the straight and narrow path. Moreover, this is not a trek we can make alone—either without Him or without helping neighbors.
