Neal A. Maxwell, All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience ( 1979)

Chapter 5

Growth through Counsel, Correction, and Commendation

It is much easier to believe in eternal progression than to practice daily improvement. Likewise, the need for humility is easy to assent to, but it is so difficult to receive corrective counsel humbly. The hard doctrines discussed in this chapter are more keys to personal growth. This scripture could well be their theme: "He that refuseth instruction despiseth his own soul: but he that heareth reproof getteth understanding." (Proverbs 15:32. Italics added.)

In the closing session of the April 1979 general conference, President Spencer W. Kimball gave Church members, individually and collectively, some major challenges, each of which involve our getting off of our present plateaus of performance. Some very common plateaus are the plateaus in our relationships with each other. We can be so much more genuinely and regularly helpful to each other than we usually are, for these experiences are among "all these things" which can be for our good and which can accelerate growth.

Latter-day Saints should actually be concerned more about the quality of their human relationships than are others, because we understand that we are going to be together with others, not only the rest of our lives, but everlastingly. Clearly, therefore, ours are not fleeting relationships even when the press of daily life and hurried handshakes and fleeting smiles would suggest otherwise. We do not know any "mere mortals." This is true of family life, of friendships, of collegial associations at work, in neighborhoods, and in the Church.

Our capacity to grow and to assist each other depends very much upon our being "willing to communicate." (1 Timothy 6:18.) Communication includes proper measures of counsel, correction, and commendation. Since we depend upon each other to supply these ingredients in our lives, our insensitivity in communicating can be far mor damaging than we realize. When we "pass by" others and "notice them not," a degree of deprivation occurs. (Mormon 8:39.) One of the ways, therefore, we will be "proved herewith" is our determination as to whether or not we love others enough to give and to receive such vital communications. We may quickly say that communicating thusly with those close to us is difficult; indeed, it is, but with whom else is it really possible? Are not the people proximate to us our tiny portion of humanity, given to us by God as our social stewardship?

We can scarcely attain that attribute of sainthood—being "full of love" (Mosiah 3:19)—unless we are willing to communicate by giving and receiving appropriate counsel, correction, and commendation. True, some disciples have been offended by counsel and correction, but many more are significantly aided thereby. It is safe to say that many of our sins of omission are those that occur in the realm of communications that were needed but not given.

Yes, one of the great challenges of life is for us not to give justifiable offense, nor to be offended. This can be more easily avoided if our brotherhood and sisterhood are real—and if we are willing to communicate, including the difficult giving and receiving of counsel, correction, and commendation. Helping relationships always involve some weighty communications. The true Christian is a communicator.

To make an effort so to minister one to another often takes us out of our way and perhaps even out of organizational channels. "And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and looked on him, and passed by on the other side. But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: and when he saw him, he had compassion on him." (Luke 10:32-33. Italics added.) It is so easy to pass by, especially when we are busy and when we are on the equivalent of the other side of the street. We are busy being busy. We are often actually less generous with our time than with our money. We keep forgetting where our time comes from!

Further, it is clear that in our daily labors, in our families, and in our Church associations is a significant share of the clinical material that God has given us to practice on. This means we will experience at each others' hands some pain, some lack of finesse, and certainly some genuine mistakes. In fact, as we see each other developing and growing (as well as sometimes when we are not at our best), we are privy to an intimate and precious thing.

Sometimes we must step forward, uninvited, to aid growth and to prevent further problems. A discerning Jethro volunteered counsel to Moses—counsel that was as direct as it was caring: "And Moses' father in law said unto him, The thing that thou doest is not good. Thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people that is with thee: for this thing is too heavy for thee; thou art not able to perform it thyself alone." (Exodus 18:17-18. Italics added.) However, we must measure our communications carefully, especially when these involve the self-image of another. Weighing what we impose on others can be vital. The Lord does this with us: "Behold, ye are little children and ye cannot bear all things now; ye must grow in grace and in the knowledge of the truth." (D&C 50:40. Italics added.)

Occasionally, even with full communication, we may continue to hold to differing points of view—but at least with increased appreciation of another's views. Isn't it interesting in this connection how often in life some of our richest relationships grow out of early differences and out of poor beginnings? Especially when these are followed by a determination to make things better, which involves taking a loving initiative: "Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother." (Matthew 18:15.)

Taking the initiative and consulting in private are good not only for resolving trespasses in human relationships, but impasses, too.

The withholding of key communications can be even more serious than withholding one's material substance. Food and raiment can sometimes be supplied by others, but the needed spiritual substance is often not available elsewhere.

There are some important ground rules for us all that pertain to the giving and receiving of such weighty communications:

In general conference in April 1962, President David O. McKay observed of the phrase about giving reproof—"when moved upon by the Holy Ghost"—that this "limiting clause" is very significant. Reproof, he said, should not be given because of "selfishness, not because of any personal antipathy, not because of personality." He then described verse 43 of this section of the Doctrine and Covenants as being without parallel "in governing people." (Conference Report, April 1962, p. 93.)

Whether at home or the office, real growth requires sharing the available growth opportunities, some of which are unique and nonrecurring. It takes real brotherhood to hold back in order that another might move forward. Candid communication with one's self is often called for in such situations.

One story of generosity among ostensible competitors is the episode in which General George C. Marshall, who was seen by some as likely to be the Supreme Allied Commander in Europe who would head the invasion forces, was told by President Franklin D. Roosevelt he could have that job if he wanted it. However, President Roosevelt preferred that Marshall stay in Washington as Chief of Staff. Marshall decided the post belonged to Dwight Eisenhower. It was a never-to-return opportunity for which Marshall had, in a sense, prepared himself all his life. But he gave it to Eisenhower, choosing the less visible position because that course seemed to him to be the path of duty. How much human history was affected by that quiet decision in which a person communicated with himself and then deferred to another!

Envy, however, provides no such opportunities for others; it erodes the soul and retards our growth—of which fact Lucifer is Exhibit "A." Envy may be overcome in solitude, but loving and corrective counsel is often necessary for us to wrench ourselves free of its clutches.

Sometimes we discount useful communications, perhaps unintentionally, because of their source. Most are familiar with the marvelous episode in 2 Kings 5 wherein the leprous Naaman gets feedback not from the prophet, but from his servants. But he was man enough to receive correction from his servants and thereby was aided in finally being obedient to the prophet's direction.

"And his servants came near, and spake unto him, and said, My father, if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, wouldest thou not have done it? how much rather then, when he saith to thee, Wash, and be clean?

"Then went he down, and dipped himself seven times in Jordan, according to the sayings of the man of God: and his flesh came again like unto the flesh of a little child, and he was clean." (2 Kings 5:13-14.)

We ought to listen as carefully to those we supervise as to those who supervise us. You and I are usually pretty good at paying attention upward, but we are not nearly as good at heeding that which comes from other directions. Likewise, while parents are to teach their children, my, how we can learn from them at times!

Each of us has had some great experiences in life wherein we have been told something corrective that we may not then have appreciated or wanted to hear. Each of us has also had that glorious experience of having people communicate with us in a commending way that gave us confirming hope and fresh perspective about ourselves.

We should, therefore, without being artificial, regularly give deserved, specific praise. One of the reasons for doing this is that we are all so very conscious of our shortcomings that it takes a persistent pattern of appreciation to finally penetrate. We are so certain, sometimes, we do not really have a particular skill or attribute that we severely discount praise. One of the reasons we need regular praise from "outside auditors" is to offset the low level of self-acknowledgment most of us have. Flattery is a form of hypocrisy to be avoided, but in overreacting to it, some close the door to commendation.

An autobiographical example of how commendation can be a sustaining force in our lives is a postscript, written by the author's mission president, Floyed G. Eyre, over thirty years ago, that was added to a rather standard but thoughtful letter of release sent to my bishop. The encouraging sixteen words probably took President Eyre thirty seconds to write, but I have been running on them for thirty years, desiring, even now, to live up to that praise!

We ought to give deserved praise, even if it is not reciprocated. Remember the story of General Robert E. Lee? He was asked for and gave his high opinion of a certain man. Someone apparently observed that that was not how that person felt about General Lee. General Lee reportedly replied, "But you asked me for my opinion of him." Commending communications ought to flow from us without too much concern with "the balance of trade."

There is a straight and narrow path of communication, and off to each side are the perils and pitfalls of poor communication that is too caustic, too flattering, too little, too much, too general, too narrow, too soon, and too late.

In the case of commendation in particular, sometimes it comes too late to be maximally helpful. Further, if we are not careful (and there is this tendency sometimes in the Church), we may be a little artificial and flowery. We are quick to discern undeserved praise, which we then discount—along with the credibility of the giver.

Sometimes we even communicate too soon. We have all had the experience as parents of being so anxious to praise our children that we sometimes overpraise them before their job is done.

There are even times when we must remove ourselves from communicating patterns, as an insulating individual. Our being in between others may have kept past collisions from happening all right, but there are times when we must let the collision occur, painful as it is, with the hope and prayer that some growth and fresh understanding will arise therefrom. Sometimes we delay learning and resolving moments unwittingly, but artificially delaying moments of truth is no service to truth. Some differences simply cannot be worked out unless they are talked out.

Thus our communication suffers whenever we wander off the straight and narrow path into any one of those patterns.

We ought to build a climate around us in which we are, in all situations, open to the comments of others. We should not make it too expensive emotionally for others to try to communicate with us. If it is too hard to do so, people will just pull back. If we are too well protected and too well defended, they are not going to extend themselves overmuch in an effort to communicate with us. It is difficult to say which is most dangerous—the mote in one's eye or the moat around his "castle" that keeps out the needed communications, involving correction, counsel, or commendation.

Perhaps our difficulties with receiving justified reproof stem from our thinking of love as being all sweetness. Love surely includes sweetness. But love must sometimes be tough love, sinew as well as sweetness. So it is with loving communication also. Again, the marvelous story about Samuel and his mentor, Eli, is cited. Following a message of the Lord to Samuel, Eli asked Samuel to speak to him about what the Lord had said about Eli. Then this marvelous example of full and courageous communication occurs: "Samuel told him every whit, and hid nothing from him. And he said, It is the Lord: let him do what seemeth him good." (1 Samuel 3:18.)

If our efforts to communicate with someone are tied to their role rather than our regard for them, these efforts will not survive when that individual's role changes. If our friendship is a matter of function, what do we do when the function is changed or dissolved—cease caring? This is a bigger block to communication than we may care to acknowledge.

While the blocks that seem to get in the way of brotherly communication include the obvious, much restraint no doubt reflects the fact that communication is not risk-free. Communication opens the windows of our soul—and what is inside will be seen.

Communication, of course, needs to take careful account of the realities of our mortal relationships in order to avoid errors.

William Edward Norris said:If your lips can keep from slips, Five things observe with care: To whom you speak; of whom you speak; And how, and when, and where.

We must be prudent and discreet and yet be willing to communicate, for true brotherhood is such that our friends and families will blow away the chaff in our communications—and do so with the breath of kindness.

Thus one of the biggest blocks to Christian communication is that we are so afraid of being misunderstood. So, when in doubt, we withhold. Yet Paul said to speak the truth in love; we can then take the chance. We worry (and understandably so) that some communications will only produce more distance. But silence is very risky, too.

Another common fear is that we cannot manage the consequences of candid communication. But smooth words slide off the soul so easily. In the above episode, Samuel could have been smooth and spared Eli, but would Samuel have been a true friend?

Further, we are sometimes too afraid of going out of organizational channels. We ought to read, again and again, that story of the good Samaritan who crossed the street to help.

Sometimes the gears of proffered help do not always mesh with the gears of received help. But even so, we should not shift into neutral; we ought to go on trying.

Obviously, another of the great risks is that we could become overly anxious, too self-conscious, and end up running around saying, "How am I doing," "Let me level with you," taking our pulse to see how we are doing. This insecure style does not go with good communicating. Just as effective communication is one of economy in words—not their profusion—so it also finally produces more serenity than anxiety of soul.

Usually, when we do not know somebody, it is difficult for us to trust them, and this becomes a restraint upon communication and growth. Opening the windows of the soul helps us to build healthy relationships. But if those windows are always closed or the blinds are drawn, it is difficult to help; one simply does not know what is needed.

Since each of us needs the aforementioned "outside auditors" to confirm our worth and occasionally to confront us, some of these ought to come from among those with whom we spend so much of our daily lives. If we freeze out those who see the most of us, such as family members, others who do not see us as much can only tell us less of what it is we usually need to know. A stranger may get a glimpse of a need and help us, but family and friends are much more to be relied upon.

Our habits often result in our getting locked in a particular role. This is not always good for others, and it is not automatically good for us if we are serious about growing in a spiritually symmetrical way. Some of these roles, whether in the family or in friendships, are idea producer, reconciler, evaluator, compromiser, restrainer, and mover. Each has its uses and carries within itself its own satisfactions, but to confine one's self too much is like owning land one has never explored, because of ignorance or timidity.

The point is that if we play the same role all the time, we may become misshapen and our communications with others become too confined. Constancy as to principle is always to be desired, but relentlessness as to role is not always the same thing. One can, for instance, become the inveterate "watch dog of the treasury," but this may not hasten the cure of him who is the spender. Roles need not be necessarily reversed, but sometimes ought to be shared.

Some of us may naturally be producers of ideas, memoranda, and so forth. Some of us are, at times, compromisers. Some of us are, in a sense, evaluators; we like to think through carefully what is being proposed to identify any problems. Some are good at reconciling and resolving. Some are movers in pushing things forward. Some are needed restrainers.

Our self-esteem is stretched, however, only as we are stretched, and true humility includes believing in and exploring our own possibilities.

As we press forward let us also make room for others to do likewise. How wonderful, therefore, when, as parents or a bishopric, we take time to provide for our children—and others—the most appropriate growth experiences for them.

In a spiritual sense, repentance and growth require the flowering of our fellows, and we must aid and abet "the mighty change." Encouraging communications will not only stretch the shy, but the able also, who possess additional but unused abilities.

For instance, if one in a family or an elders quorum presidency is a chronic holdout all the time—someone whom everybody has to cope with in trying to get something approved—this is not good. On the other hand, if we compromise with too much efficiency, just to move things along, we might grow careless about our integrity.

Improved communication will even make more time for people to explain why they have done something, or why they see something a certain way. Intentions do count for something in the arithmetic of the gospel. Besides, a neighbor is apt to hold to a view all the more until he has a chance to explain it. Counsel is more apt to be received after listening has occurred.

Another real challenge one sees is this: If we are not careful, our own ego too often becomes a net that snares the good ideas of others—ideas that we will not let pass simply because they are not ours. We should sponsor more ideas than our own. Further, we should not mistake our reticence for principle and our stubbornness for integrity as we deal with the ideas and insights of others.

Our communications with each other need to be an appropriate blend of commendation and, where needed, counsel and, on occasion, correction. We will thus increase our self-esteem and the self-esteem of others. We will resolve misunderstandings. We will get better information. We will get better ideas. And we will provide fresh encouragement and fresh starts for ourselves and others.

If we received a genuine and regular flow of deserved recognition and appreciation, we would be freed from the concerns over whether or not we are valued and whether or not we are going to get credit for something. We would know that we are valued—whether or not a particular idea of ours makes its way through the network successfully! When life is seen as good, a bad day can easily be absorbed.

There is clearly more in the revelation in D&C 67:10 than many of us may now care to explore. But some key words are there: "Strip yourselves from jealousies and fears." Christian communication can do so much to peel off those worldly ways. The gospel of Jesus Christ is a gospel of love and hope—not jealousy and fear.

What a wonderful way for us to witness to others that the gospel is true—by letting others see that we believe in it enough to accept counsel so that we are actually growing, even though our pace may seem slow and even though there are setbacks. And at the same time what a wonderful way to assist them in the same glorious process!

What a tremendous way to testify that it is all true—by demonstrating discernible improvement in our lives. How special to receive from others confirming commendation.

What a soul-satisfying thing for us to be able to respond to the query from the Lord, "What manner of men ought ye to be?" by achieving a significant increase in the quality of our relationships through better communications, including those with our spouse and relatives. (3 Nephi 27:27.)

A humble communicator desires, if he has said anything that is inappropriate, untrue, or unwise (in the words of the Old Testament prophet), that his words will "fall to the ground." (1 Samuel 3:19.) We surely do not want immortality for our errors. Our pride should not hold us hostage when we have erred, nor should we mourn our mistakes for the wrong reasons.

We must not feel dismayed if, when we proffer counsel or correction, it is rebuffed, for human nature does not make accepting such advice easy. W. Somerset Maugham said, "People ask you for criticism, but they only want praise."

The real test, of course, is the degree to which we are concerned for our growth and that of others. If we are truly concerned, we will be open to counsel and correction. We will even, when moved upon by the Spirit, be willing to give it. Effective communication provides much of the material out of which rich relationships are made. It assumes an integrity and love between individuals. It assumes that things can be worked out, where there is love and a will to do so—a great attitudinal antidote to the selfishness of our time. If we assume others are our brothers and sisters, and they are, then we have every reason to make an effort to give and to accept counsel, correction, and commendation.

Christians can have the benefit of candor without being cutting. They can be communicative without being manipulative.

How marvelous it is when of a relationship of two individuals it can be said, "We took sweet counsel together." (Psalm 55:14.)

Correction should be wisely and correctly administered, however. When it is clumsily administered, it is not usually as effective. When it is administered for the wrong reasons, it is not likely to be accepted. But oh, the joy one feels when he finally sees an emancipating truth about himself, an insight that has made him free—free at last from false perceptions or from error.

Yet correction, when it comes, is seldom welcome, and often the issue becomes "Can we take it?" Yet those who have proved that they can "take it" usually have so much to give!

Correction when it comes often has a cutting edge, and normally there is no anesthetic. Hearts which are so set upon wrong or worldly ways must first be broken, and this cannot be done without pain. And so it is that speaking the truth in love matters so very much!

Genuine communication, of course, requires resilience in each of us—a bouncing back that permits us to take advantage of each new day in spite of the blunders and the failures of the previous day. We should learn from our errors, but we ought to forget them as soon as we can.

There may be some value in "instant replay" in order to learn what we can and then move on. But some of us engage in "constant replay," which can be enervative and destructive of our self-confidence.

In growing spiritually, first to be preferred is to learn vicariously from the mistakes of others without having to make these same mistakes oneself.

Next in order of preference, however, is to make the needed course corrections in our life as expeditiously as possible, so that our mistakes are minimized and do not take up too much of the terrain of life. This latter posture obviously assumes our openness to counsel and correction. Furthermore, it assumes a willingness to give and to receive commendation as we serve those about us. In such a nutritive environment real growth occurs in spite of mistakes.

In the absence of counsel and correction we are left to learn in isolation—and isolation can be such a poor friend. Learning, in solo, is often retarded greatly by our pride. Even when we see that what we have done is wrong, it is difficult for us to adjust when left alone. Others can be very helpful to us in this process of making our regret productive.

In a way that is as subtle as it is pivotal, others may not want our candor; even so, they are sometimes disappointed when we are not lovingly candid with them. Our failure to be forthright is seen by them as our being condescending by assuming they cannot handle loving candor. Or, worse, our love and concern for them is seen as not being strong enough to propel us to be forthright. When we withhold, chronically, that which might help another in our communication, we can scarcely say that we truly love him. When we brush off an opportunity to communicate, we may actually be brushing someone off the straight and narrow way.

We have only to examine the revelations given earlier in this dispensation which contain truths for us all but which were, initially, aimed at individuals about whom the Lord said some very candid things. Yet He loved them with a perfect love. Although those individuals are long since departed from mortality, the fact that their frailties are preserved in the records of latter-day revelation (and this from a perfectly sensitive Lord) should remind us that counsel and correction are thought to be of sufficient importance by Him that—even so—He is willing to have certain deficiencies publicly spoken of and noticed.

Nor should we neglect the power of gentle reproof. Sometimes we need not declaim the actions of others so much as remind them of who they are and what they should be.

Corrective communication, when inspired, can help us to face the facts about ourselves. This, in turn, can help us to face God by asking for His help in the changing of ourselves. In business, auditors often report to the board of directors—and not to management, lest unpleasant truths be muffled. In life, however, the outside auditors who give us corrective counsel can cause us, when we err, to turn ourselves in—to God. Then, when we realize what we are and what we could be, we will understand that which God has known all along, and we will find that He is waiting for us to converse with Him.

Not all the necessary correction is administered by comment. Sometimes it comes to us by circumstances, as noted in Chapter 3. Indeed, the latter is perhaps the workhorse way of learning for most of us, because it is tied so directly to our daily experience. For instance, if one is impatient and patience is a requirement for sainthood, the Lord appears willing to have tribulation visited upon such so that he may learn patience—because it is a virtue that seems to be acquired in only one way. (See Mosiah 3:19; James 5:11; Romans 5:3; Romans 12:12; Mosiah 23:21; D&C 66:9; D&C 31:9.) Correcting circumstances, therefore, can be a form of divine communication to us.

Paul, who suffered much, observed that "our light affliction . . . is but for a moment." (2 Corinthians 4:17.) The Prophet Joseph was told that his afflictions would be "but a small moment." (D&C 121:7.) Learning by correcting circumstances is apparently a process not to be hurried.

Let us in our ministry be nondiscriminatory in the giving of commendation. True, he who is downspirited needs to be lifted up. True, those who are fledglings in the faith may need extra encouragement and deserved, specific praise. But meanwhile, let us not forget the often unnoticed, faithful veterans, lest, like the son who stayed loyally at home and saw the banquet and benefactions given to the prodigal son, the faithful wonder if they are truly appreciated. Let us not assume that another has no need of commendation. Let us give it even if the other does not seem to need it, for we need to give commendation in any event.

The giving of commendation keeps us alert and noticing of the good deeds and qualities of others. It permits us to be more concerned with them and less with ourselves. As long as we avoid artificiality and generality, commending is one of the great dimensions of brotherhood and sisterhood. Let us never unwittingly turn others in the direction of the praise of the world merely because they are so starved for the praise of the righteous!

Finally, the counsel and correction so necessary to our growth will not all come from circumstances, family, and neighbors—some will come from the Lord in our prayers. It too will be hard to bear and hard to follow. Indeed, so much of our growing depends upon our following counsel, including paying heed to the correcting counsel of the loving God. But not all of His commending words of "well done" will be uttered at judgment day; some will come to us in special moments of listening as we pray to Him!
