Neal A. Maxwell, All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience ( 1979)

Chapter 6

Prayer and Growth

One can pray and yet not really pray. Prayers can be routinized and made very superficial. When this happens, there is very little communication and very little growth. Yet, given the times in which we live, improving our prayers should be one of our deepest desires if we are genuinely serious about growing spiritually.

Prayer may not be a hard doctrine, but it can be a very deep and soul-satisfying experience. It is the means by which we can draw close to our Heavenly Father and understand better His deep doctrines.

Certainly, in hard times, prayer is no less needed. It is sobering to remember that we have been told that in the final days of this dispensation the righteous will pray almost unceasingly to the Lord for Him to hasten His coming—so bad will be the circumstances on the earth. However, even apart from such stressful circumstances, praying is a part of that triad of things we must do: serving, studying, and praying in order to find joy and happiness and to grow closer to the Lord.

Even though mortals have been praying for centuries, prayer is not something we can clinically diagnose and dissect, giving ready answers for every question about every dimension of this great process.

Prayer is clearly a commandment, and we are even asked to urge others in the Church to pray. (Moses 5:8, 16; D&C 20:47.) It is likewise clear that there are different types of prayer—prayers of adoration, of appreciation, of confession, and of petition. Since in our humanness we seem to utter many more of the latter than any other kind, it is out of these prayers that some of the most frequent questions and concerns seem to arise.

First let us note, however, that the Lord tells us to pray over our crops and our herds, our fields and our flocks. (Alma 34:17-29.) Jesus counseled us to pray for our daily bread. We are even reminded of the adversary and how we are to pray with regard to him that we will "come off conqueror." (D&C 10:5.) Our duties are to be done, if at all possible, after we have prayed to the Lord in the first place. (2 Nephi 32:9.)

Marvelous promises are given about what can be received if we pray properly. "If thou shalt ask, thou shalt receive revelation upon revelation, knowledge upon knowledge, that thou mayest know the mysteries and peaceable things—that which bringeth joy, that which bringeth life eternal." (D&C 42:61.)

Prayer, in fact, is to be a reflection of our attitude toward God and life. In this sense, we can always be praying. (Luke 18:1.)

Clearly, however, since praying is a part of living, if we are not living righteously the quality of our prayers will be affected. Likewise, routine personal prayers will scarcely reflect the unevenness of life, especially those moments when we are in deep need. When in deep need, we, as did He, "being in agony" will need to pray "more earnestly." (Luke 22:44.)

Nor is merely placing the petition before God enough, as Oliver Cowdery was told, for he had not fully understood the process, supposing that God would give him answers "when you took no thought save it was to ask me." (D&C 9:7.)

It should not surprise us as we grow if we are sometimes less than fully comprehending of prayer. The Lord's disciples said to him, "Lord, teach us to pray." (Luke 11:1.) Jesus then gave a marvelous model of what prayer could be. Yet even this model did not suffice for the needs of Gethsemane. Nor was it as sublime as His prayers given in the special circumstances after His resurrection when Jesus prayed among the surviving Nephites. (3 Nephi 17:15-18.) The point is obviously not to detract from the tutoring nature of the wonderful Lord's Prayer, but to underscore how prayers will reflect circumstance; no single prayer will suffice for all circumstances!

There are no Christlike prayers, however, that do not include, as did the Lord's Prayer, deep expressions of gratitude and appreciation to our Father in heaven along with a submittal to Him.

So very much of pure prayer seems to be the process of first discovering, rather than requesting, the will of our Father in heaven and then aligning ourselves therewith. The "Thy will be done" example in the Lord's Prayer reached its zenith in the Savior's later prayer in Gethsemane and in His still later submittal on the cross: "Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt." (Matthew 26:39.)

When we do conform to His will, God will pour forth special blessings from heaven upon us, as was the case with Nephi, the son of Helaman. Of him the Lord said, "And now, because thou hast done this with such unwearyingness, behold, I will bless thee forever; and I will make thee mighty in word and in deed, in faith and in works; yea, even that all things shall be done unto thee according to thy word, for thou shalt not ask that which is contrary to my will." (Helaman 10:5. Italics added.)

Paul observed that we all need the help of the Spirit to help us even to know what we should pray for: "Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered." (Romans 8:26. Italics added.) This truth may be justifiably linked with an episode involving a petition submitted to the Savior during His mortal ministry. The mother of the sons of Zebedee, James and John, approached the Savior and asked that they be on His right hand and left hand in the world to come. Jesus' tutoring but disapproving response was: "Ye know not what ye ask." (Matthew 20:22.) Clearly, when our prayers are uninspired, we petition for things we should not ask for, even though we do so innocently. This is, in effect, what we do when we pray and "ask amiss." (James 4:3.)

When we ask amiss, God, being perfect, must reject our petitions: "And whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you." (3 Nephi 18:20. Italics added.)

The task is to draw close enough to the Lord that we progress to the point where we petition Him according to His will, not ours. "And this is the confidence that we have in him, that, if we ask any thing according to his will, he heareth us." (1 John 5:14.) In modern revelations the Lord has declared His willingness to grant us the requests contained in our petitions if what we ask for is expedient for us. (D&C 88:64-65.)

When we become sufficiently purified and cleansed from sin, we can ask what we will in the name of Jesus "and it shall be done." (D&C 50:29.) The Lord even promises us that when one reaches a certain spiritual condition, "it shall be given you what you shall ask." (D&C 50:30.)

Thus we clearly need to have the Spirit with us as we petition, because "in the Spirit" we will ask "according to the will of God; wherefore it is done even as he asketh." (D&C 46:30.)

If, meanwhile, in the face of such sublime ultimate promises, our prayers sometimes seem so very proximate, we should not be discouraged. So much can be done "in process of time" to improve our petitioning. Neither the pure City of Enoch nor pure prayers are arrived at in a day!

To grow to that point when we can utter inspired prayers (which we can do only insofar as we can align ourselves with the will of God and petition Him in faith and righteousness and appropriateness) is part of being proven.

The powers of heaven simply cannot be drawn upon except on the principles of righteousness—whether it is the powers of the priesthood or the powers relating to prayer also.

We clearly cannot have the Spirit in our prayers if our lives do not reflect reasonable righteousness. We should, therefore, using the criteria given by the Lord, want to avoid trying to cover up sins, gratifying our pride and advancing our vain ambitions, or exercising compulsion over others. We should want to live in such a way that our way of living reflects relationships with others that are filled with persuasion, long-suffering, gentleness, meekness, love unfeigned, kindness and pure knowledge. (D&C 121:36-41.) When we are developing and living in these ways, we can access the powers of heaven and petition with especial effectiveness, having done much to align ourselves with the will of our Father in heaven. It may be helpful in this regard for us to remember that we must finally come to have "the mind of Christ" and then we can pray as He did. (1 Corinthians 2:16.)

Prayer, therefore, that is too self-conscious of itself is not yet really praying. What is needed by us all are feelings of adoration that produce a mental posture of contemplation—and more meditation and less premeditation.

When we pray, we are not conveying any information to God that He does not already have. Nor, when we confess our sins before Him, is it news to Him that we have misbehaved. It is vital, therefore, that we open our souls to Him and tell Him what our concerns are now, as well as acknowledge what we now are, for this is a part of the process of aligning ourselves with His will. We cannot, for the purposes of real prayer, hurriedly dress our words and attitudes in tuxedos when our shabby life is in rags. More than we realize, being honest with God in our prayers helps us to be more honest with ourselves.

Furthermore, some of us actually feel we are too good for a petitionary prayer, especially when life is going reasonably well. It is part of our childish resentment of our dependency on God.

We are also sometimes too proud to pray over small things, and thus we get out of practice. Then the moment of agony comes. Just as we must learn to "follow the Brethren" in small things so that we can follow them in large things, so it is with prayer. Sometimes, however, the little things are the big things.

We need also to be careful about our petitions in yet another way by remembering to whom we pray and His omniscience. C. S. Lewis observed, "I've heard a man offer a prayer for a sick person which really amounted to a diagnosis followed by advice as to how God should treat the patient." (Letters to Malcolm: Chiefly on Prayer [New York: Harcourt, Brace, and World], p. 20.) It is not condescension but humility that is required as we approach our Father in heaven.

We sometimes find ourselves praying for others when we should be doing things for them. Prayers are not to be a substitute for service, but a spur thereto.

As to the questions asked—even by faithful Saints—such as, "If what is going to happen is 'all set,' why pray?," the answer is that God foresees, but He does not compromise our agency. All the outcomes are not, for our purposes, "all set." True, God's foreseeing includes our prayers, our fasting, our faith, and the results that will thereby be achieved. But until our mortal actions occur and our decisions are made, things are not "all set." The Father foresaw the Atonement, but the Atonement was not wrought until the very moment of Christ's death when He gave up His spirit, which He had the power to retain.

The Prophet Joseph said, "The great Jehovah contemplated the whole of the events connected with the earth, pertaining to the plan of salvation, before it rolled into existence." (HC 4:597.) This contemplation included all our petitions!

If we can but agree and acknowledge that God has known the bounds of the nations beforehand and has planned accordingly, surely He has taken into advance account the petitions and prayers of His people.

As C. S. Lewis concluded, "I would rather say that from before all worlds His providential and creative act (for they are all one) takes into account all the situations produced by the acts of His creatures. And if He takes our sins into account, why not our petitions?" (Letters to Malcolm, p. 48.)

Thus, though our freedom is preserved, God took into account our petitions just as he took everything else into account in the unfolding of His plan, because he exists in "one eternal now."

The time will come when we will thank Him for saying no to us with regard to some of our petitions. Happily, God in His omniscience can distinguish between our surface needs (over which we often pray most fervently) and our deep and eternal needs. He can distinguish what we ask for today and place it in relationship to what we need for all eternity. He will bless us, according to our everlasting good, if we are righteous.

Perhaps the parable about the gospel seed falling on different kinds of soil and not flourishing in one type of soil because there was "no deepness of earth" also describes the shallowness of those who do not ponder and pursue the basic doctrines—of which true petitionary prayer is surely one! (Matthew 13:5.)

Thus in a very real way, one of "all these things" through which we must pass (the experiences that we must have that are for our good) is growing and learning by praying. Most often this learning will occur in personal and secret prayer rather than in public prayer.

It is through true prayer that we can refine and adjust our desires to those of the Lord's so that we do not "ask amiss." In prayer we can actually learn more than we imagine about His will for us.

In prayer we can learn more how to seek the Spirit, so that even our very prayers will be inspired.

In prayer surely we will learn more about the omniscience of God as we are helped so obviously by Him through our periods of suffering.

In prayer we will be opened to more service and to more love of others.

In prayer we can also be corrected and tutored, including being softened, attitudinally, so that we can follow the Brethren even when their direction seems to go against our personal preferences.

Let us never forget, however, that our needs will take us to our knees in agony at times. We too will say, "Father, if it be possible." In those moments we will not be worrying about whether or not God knew beforehand what we then petition for. Indeed, we will actually be glad that He knew before that moment—for we will come to Him in desperation, not to bring Him new information!

In those moments our desires of the day may have to be sacrificed to our needs in our endless tomorrows. A mortal life may need to be "shortened" by twenty years as we might view it—but if so, it may be done in order for special services to be rendered by that individual in the spirit world, services that will benefit thousands of new neighbors with whom that individual will live in all of eternity. Perhaps this reality is yet another reason and reminder why we are urged to pray only for "our daily bread," for disciples must be portable. Our omniloving and omniscient Father will release us when it is best for us to be released. But each such release of a righteous person is also a call to new labors!

Prayer is a marvelous process that pierces the veil, and, therefore, requires much faith and persistence on our part; this is so precisely because prayer is that point where the agency of man meets the omniscience of God, and it is where time melts as it touches eternity—scarcely a process we who now live in time can be expected to fathom fully!

Meanwhile, we can scarcely be in tune with God if we are not in harmony with His prophets. We are not likely to hear God's instructions to us as we pray if we neglect the counsel of His leaders.

God has placed among us these good shepherds. His sheep will recognize the voice of His servants, for the Lord has declared that "whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same." (D&C 1:38.)
