Neal A. Maxwell, All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience ( 1979)

Chapter 8

Our Moment in Time

Paul, who passed through "all these things," observed, "For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us." (Romans 8:18.) The same can be said of the sufferings of the faithful in the last days, real as these may be, for we live in a time of singular opportunity.

After He had spoken of some of the specific signs of His second coming, the Savior gave to His disciples, and to us all, the parable of the fig tree. He said that just as when the fig tree puts forth its leaves, we may know that "summer is nigh," so we may be warned by certain signs that His second coming is nigh. (Matthew 24:32.) The "summer" Jesus cited is now upon us, and you and I must not complain of the heat. Nor, indeed, should we let that heat, as Alma counseled, wither our individual tree of testimony. If we neglect to nourish the tree, "when the heat of the sun cometh and scorcheth it," it can prove fatal. (Alma 32:38.)

As already observed, the scriptures refer to the last days as being a time in which the love of many will especially wax cold. (Matthew 24:12.)

We read of the last days as being times when "men's hearts shall fail them." (D&C 45:26; 88:91.) We are indebted to the Lord for placing in the Pearl of Great Price an added insight into this specific condition, which says: "But before that day he saw great tribulations among the wicked; and he also saw the sea, that it was troubled, and men's hearts failing them, looking forth with fear for the judgments of the Almighty God, which should come upon the wicked." (Moses 7:66. Italics added. See also D&C 63:33.) Apparently some of the fear that will envelop mankind will not be agnostic fear at all; rather, it will be old-fashioned fear and foreboding over the impending "judgments of the Almighty God."

Conditions before Jesus' second coming, we are further told, will resemble those in the days of Noah when there was a misdirected sense of self-sufficiency among the citizenry, a resistance to the Lord's prophet and a dangerous wickedness as usual. The attitudes among some latter-day scoffers will reflect this same scornful self-sufficiency. Events and signs will be discounted because, said Peter, such people will say "all things continue as they were." (2 Peter 3:3-4.) Joseph Smith in the inspired translation of the Bible added, significantly, that these same latter-day scoffers would also deny the Lord Jesus Christ, a sad reality that is well advanced even now. There will be some clear parallels between conditions in the last days and other wicked points in human history.

Paul spoke of a society that contained too many people who were "fierce" and "without natural affection." (2 Timothy 3:3; Romans 1:31.)

The absence of true affection brings unnatural affection. "For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections: for even their women did change the natural use into that which is against nature." (Romans 1:26.)

Moroni saw a people who had lost their love one toward another and who were "brutal" and "past feeling." (Moroni 9:19-20.)

The Lord, speaking centuries earlier to Enoch, described how He had given to mortals their agency along with the commandments "that they should love one another." Yet, said the Lord of people in Enoch's time, "they are without affection, and they hate their own blood." (Moses 7:33.)

Paul witnessed a trend that produced "trucebreakers."

Moroni saw a people reach a point when they were "without order."

Paul saw people becoming "unmerciful."

Moroni saw people who were "without mercy."

Paul saw the rise of "false accusers" and "covenant breakers."

Moroni viewed contemporaries among whom things were so broken down that they were "without civilization."

These are chilling comparisons, made even more sobering for, when laid alongside emboldened evil in our time, one sees such striking similarities!

But surely, some may say, people will notice that society is sick in sufficient time. Remember, however, starving children have swollen bellies, and sick societies may not seem sick, if viewed superficially.

There will be those in our time, too, who will say of the clearly fulfilled prophecies of the Lord's anointed that the prophets simply "guessed right, among so many" prophecies. (Helaman 16:16.)

Without faith in the omniscient God and in the marvelous rescue mission of Jesus Christ, it would be difficult to see how our living (especially in a time of some of these experiences) can be for our good. But God placed us here now, and it is no good looking over our shoulders at another age, dark as some of our days will be. God, who loves all and knows all, has divinely determined as among His spirit children who goes where and when—and we should be glad that it is so arranged.

We should not even be dismayed either if, in the winding-up scenes, the enemies of God attack the very foundation of the Church. Their assaults will include derision of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Book of Mormon, and the reality of continuing revelation. These efforts will surely fail, but not before damaging some unsteady members—those who have unnecessary difficulty in following the Brethren.

The attacks on the Prophet Joseph, for instance, will be new variations on the old themes. Where once some tried to put down the Prophet in terms of his personal abilities, newer critics will acknowledge the brilliance but not the prophetic powers of Joseph Smith.

Basically, however, any supposed issue will do for those who seek a grievance with the Church, for detractors are very flexible. Those of little faith can always find a cause or make a man "an offender for a word." (2 Nephi 27:32.)

The self-sifting will be very real. However, it will normally grow out of one basic flaw: President George Q. Cannon said, "Those who commit sin gradually leave the Church." (Millennial Star 57:801-2.)

The drumbeat of disparagement will be the work of some who are cynics, whose hopes have gone sour. These sad sorties will also include the efforts of those who are sarcastic and skeptical—who once believed but are afraid to believe again. But, most of all, these dark deeds will be works of those who are clear-cut enemies of the Kingdom of God!

Some may simply drop out because of their fear of man, because of their parched quest for the praise of men. Unable to accept the basic doctrines, these individuals will say, as their counterparts centuries before them said, "This is an hard saying." (John 6:60.) "Thou hast declared unto us hard things." (1 Nephi 16:1.) "The words of truth are hard." (2 Nephi 9:40.)

In our time and in such settings, our need for virtues like humility and obedience will be very great. Humility is not the disavowal of our worth; rather, it is the sober realization of how much we are valued by God. Nor does true humility call for the denigration of what truth we already know; rather, it is the catching of one's breath, as he realizes how very little that which we mortals presently know really is!

Neither is obedience a mindless shifting of our personal responsibility. Instead, it is tying ourselves to a living God who will introduce us—as soon as we are ready—to new and heavier responsibilities involving situations of high adventure. Obedience, therefore, is not evasion; it is an invasion—one that takes us deep into the realm of our possibilities.

What God says He has in store for us will, in literal actuality, require a peculiar people (as mortals measure peculiarity), a people particularly suited for everlasting chores elsewhere. Therefore, it isn't that God seeks to shape us capriciously, just to prove that He is in charge; He is fitting us for special chores for which there are rigorous and nonwaivable specifications.

There will be only one recruitment effort among us for any aspirants to such adventure, only one set of standards to be followed, and only one narrow and precise path of development for those so recruited. But when we are safely beyond the narrowness of this mortal passage, we will come upon a scene of such expansiveness that solar systems will seem like backyards and galaxies like neighborhoods! Indeed, as we grow, the universe shrinks—and yet our developed capacity to love our neighbors will find no difficulty in being put to work among God's creations.

As we come to understand and experience God in all His perfected attributes and as we struggle to develop these same attributes in ourselves, we move from appreciation for Him to adoration of Him!

Just as the love of God for us is unconditional, one day ours for Him will be likewise. This is what the first commandment is all about. But even then, the adoration and awe we have developed for God will take humble and eternal notice of the vital fact stressed by John—that God loved us first. (1 John 4:19.) Indeed, while God's great plan of redemption was made feasible by His omniscience and His omnipotence, it was made inevitable because of His perfect love for us!
