The work of ministering, heaven-sent as it is, is not complicated. Offering more care and concern comes down to a few basic practices that, when thoughtfully considered, help “lift our spiritual eyes toward living the law of love more universally.”

We are counseled to “watch over [our] people, and … nourish them with things pertaining to righteousness” (Mosiah 23:18). Some of the key ways to minister include:

- Reach out to them. This is how ministering opportunities are opened.

- Let them know you care by learning about them and developing empathy.

- Pray for opportunities to minister and seek inspiration to know their needs.

- Stay in touch with regular contact so you can be prepared to serve.

Opportunities are all around us to minister as the Savior would. Here are four examples that highlight Christlike ministering.

  By Francisco Lázaro Campos de Sousa, Brazil

  During an elders quorum presidency meeting, I felt a desire to meet a quorum member who wasn’t active, someone I hadn’t met. One day after shopping I felt an urge to go to his home. I hesitated, but the feelings to meet him intensified. I introduced myself and said things that came to mind. I told him that the Lord needed him, and he needed the Lord.

  He shared his pain of loneliness and other difficulties. “You’ll find friends in the quorum who will help and support,” I told him. He readily accepted my invitation and attended Sabbath meetings.

  I didn’t know him at first, but the Lord did and felt his heart. My conviction was reaffirmed. As we minister to our Father’s children and pray to know their needs, the Lord leads us to them. We share in the joyful experience of “lift[ing] up the hands which hang down, and strengthen[ing] the feeble knees” (Doctrine and Covenants 81:5).

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="166306463" id="p_k1MlG">As we minister to our Father’s children and pray to know their needs, the Lord leads us to them.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

  By Ana Rodriguez Ramirez, Spain

  One day on my mission, my companion and I were prompted to visit a sister in the ward. We cut out paper hearts and wrote loving messages on them to remind her of her worth.

  We arrived at her house, thinking she wouldn’t be home. As we were setting up the paper hearts, her car pulled right up to the house. My companion and I tried to hide to keep up the friendly surprise, but to no avail. She saw us.

  The sister got out of her car with tears on her face. She hugged us and said, “You two are my angels. You’re always there when I need you most. Thank you.”

  She invited us in and told us of the long day she had dealing with a serious family situation. We just listened to her. We shared how much God loves her and that He didn’t forget about what she was going through. We read scriptures with her, and her home was filled with the Holy Ghost when we left.

  Disciples of Jesus Christ are “willing to … comfort those that stand in need of comfort” (Mosiah 18:9). He trusts us to be part of His great work—higher and holier ministering. When we take the time to get to know people and listen to them, we are more equipped to be God’s earthly angels.

  By Talia Rodríguez, Switzerland

  Prayer is an integral part of ministering like the Savior. Prayer can begin our search to know whom to bless. It can help us come to understand heaven’s will regarding how to bless. Prayer is also a key step in learning how to perform our duty.

  My husband, Mario, suffered from COVID in the early days of the disease before vaccinations. The bishop asked an elder in our ward, Moroni, to give him a priesthood blessing.

  Because he didn’t want to contract the virus and spread it to his family, Moroni needed heaven’s confirmation before proceeding. He knelt in prayer with his wife, waiting for peaceful assurance. When they felt at peace, his wife told him, “Go with your armor, Moroni.”

  When he entered our home, we saw a warrior of the Lord. My husband shed tears of joy when he saw the brother bravely coming to give him the blessing he desired. It was an indescribable experience.

  The Savior came through His servant, our dear brother Moroni, who laid his hands on Mario’s head and blessed him as Christ would.

  By Geiziane Morais Freitas Duarte, Brazil

  I once ministered to a sister who had stopped attending church. When I visited her, I would share how much the Savior loved her and her family. I would always invite them to come to church the following Sunday. This practice went on for a long time, but they never came. I felt discouraged. The temptation to give up was strong. But every time my companion and I visited their home, we had a glimpse of heaven. We would always picture them in the temple, dressed in white. We knew we had to keep trying.

  After many prayers and visits, the day finally came—the family came to church! They kept coming back each week. The family put in hard work to grow their faith and get on the covenant path. It became evident that the gospel had strengthened them.

  Eventually, I received an invitation to their temple sealing. As I watched the sacred ordinance, I couldn’t help but shed tears of joy. It was a miracle.

  At times I wanted to give up. But every time I visited them, I saw the temple. God showed me a glimpse of His plan for this family. He used me as His instrument to stay in touch with them. I am grateful to Him for showing me the true vision of ministering.

The joy and power of ministering are found when we become a blessing in someone’s life, serving them as the Savior would. Relief Society General President Camille N. Johnson taught that “whenever you do anything to bring relief to others—temporal or spiritual— … you are bringing them the love of Jesus Christ. I testify that as you do, you will be blessed to find your own relief in Him.”

We become more like the Savior in our ministering as we turn to the Lord for help in our efforts. We follow promptings, get to know those we serve, pray for them, help them make and keep covenants, and persist in our efforts.

The Savior’s ministering—one by one—is a good pattern for our own (see 3 Nephi 11:15). As Elder Juan Pablo Villar of the Seventy has taught: “If we will follow Jesus Christ—the Master minister—and minister to others as He would, He will strengthen and empower us. Through our ministering, we can bless others’ lives and find peace and joy for our own.”

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="166306606" id="p_yvSYr">Which of these stories shared an idea that you could use in your own ministering? Did someone come to mind you could reach out to?</p> [/SIDEBAR]
