The temple is the house of the Lord. Temple ordinances and covenants bless Heavenly Father’s children. Heavenly Father invites all His children to qualify for and receive temple ordinances.

Uniting families for eternity is part of God’s work of salvation and exaltation (see 1.2). Temple and family history work is the means for uniting and sealing families for eternity (see Matthew 16:19). This work includes:

- Making covenants as we receive our own temple ordinances (see Isaiah 55:3; Doctrine and Covenants 84:19–23).

- Discovering our deceased ancestors and performing ordinances for them in the temple so they can make covenants with God (see Malachi 4:5–6; 1 Corinthians 15:29; Doctrine and Covenants 128:15–18).

- Going to the house of the Lord regularly, where possible, to worship God and perform ordinances for our ancestors (see Luke 24:52–53; Doctrine and Covenants 109:13–14).

This chapter guides Church leaders and members on how to unite families for eternity through temple and family history work. More information is available at “Temples,” “Baptisms for the Dead,” and “Family History” (Topics and Questions, Gospel Library).

Church members have the privilege and responsibility to help unite their families for eternity. They prepare themselves to make covenants as they receive temple ordinances. They strive to keep those covenants.

They also help family members understand, receive, and strive to keep temple covenants. Parents have the primary responsibility to help their children experience the blessings of temple and family history service for deceased family members.

Church members are encouraged to identify their deceased relatives who have not received temple ordinances. Members then perform the ordinances on behalf of those relatives (see Doctrine and Covenants 128:18). In the spirit world, deceased individuals can choose to accept or reject the ordinances that have been performed for them.

Members also invite family and friends to learn about their ancestors and discover their stories.

Many tools are available to help members in their temple and family history work. Some of these are described in 25.4.1 and 25.4.2.

Church leaders support members in their temple and family history efforts as described in 25.2 and 25.3.

Members determine for themselves when and how often to worship in the temple. Leaders do not establish quotas or reporting systems for temple worship.

Individual members and families who have current temple recommends may attend any temple they desire. They may schedule an appointment with the temple. See temples.ChurchofJesusChrist.org for each temple’s contact information.

Each Church unit is assigned to a temple district. Organized ward or stake visits to temples outside the assigned temple district are not encouraged.

All ward and stake temple trips should be scheduled with the temple. See temples.ChurchofJesusChrist.org for each temple’s contact information.

From section 25 of General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Gospel Library.
