Carlfred Broderick, My Parents Married on a Dare and Other Favorite Essays on Life ( 1996)

Part I

My Life and Times

CHAPTER ONE

My Parents Married on a Dare

This is the only piece in the collection that was originally written for a professional rather than an LDS audience. Marvin Sussman, himself one of the most creative and productive scholars in the field of family studies and currently editor of The Journal of Family Issues, decided to do a special edition of the journal on the personal and professional lives of some of the leading lights in that discipline. I was flattered to be included in this august company and submitted the following account of my own life and times. I apologize to the nonprofessional reader who may find a few paragraphs directed beyond his or her interest, but I am hopeful that for those interested in my life experiences there will be sufficient compensations.

My parents married on a dare. Fred Broderick, an Irish Catholic Brooklynite, had arrived in Salt Lake City by "poorman's pullman" (i.e., by hopping a freight car) only a few months before. My mother, Napina Bartholomew, had grown up a Mormon in the city of Mormons but was at a vulnerable place in her life. She was living at home and unhappy to be there, and she had a job working in a "mom-and-pop" neighborhood grocery store where "Pop" was, in modern parlance, sexually harassing her. To her, Fred Broderick, ten years her senior, a world traveler, and a veteran of the World War, seemed like a sophisticate. They had been dating off and on for some months when a couple of friends decided on the spur of the moment to run off to Sin City (alias Ogden, the Las Vegas of its day) to get married. They invited Fred and Napina to be the witnesses at their wedding. On the way to Ogden, the eloping couple rode in the front seat of the open coupe, my parents-to-be in the rumble seat. About two-thirds of the way there, the bride-to-be leaned over the backseat and yelled, "I dare you guys to get married too!" And so they did. My mother says of that marriage, that I was the only good thing that came of it.

My entrance into the world a year and a half later was an extended family event. I was born April 7, 1932, in my maternal grandparents' home on Roosevelt Avenue in Salt Lake City. In attendance were a large number of relatives, including, of course, my grandparents, Elizabeth and Carl Bartholomew. Grandmother had been head nurse at the Latter-day Saints Hospital and was an experienced obstetric assistant, but on the occasion of my birth she exercised her Victorian prerogative and fainted.

Grandfather, on the other hand, a hale-fellow-well-met traveling salesman, noted for his practical jokes and inexhaustible store of off-color stories, was calling the color shots. "I can't tell if it's a boy or a girl yet," he yelled over his shoulder to those who couldn't get a close view, "but it's a blond."

In this crowd, my father was the outlander. All of my newborn features were immediately parceled out among the maternal kin: the nose was my grandfather's, the chin was my Aunt Adah's, my ears were a direct legacy from Uncle Jasper. His genetic contributions ignored in the general consensus, Fred Broderick was heard to mumble, "Well, at least he's got my brains." And, perhaps I did.

There was a certain amount of contention over what to name me. The local clan felt that since I was the first grandchild, I should be named Carl Bartholomew Broderick, after my grandfather. My father was firm in the opinion that I should be named Fred Broderick Jr. A conciliatory aunt finally hit on the compromise, Carlfred (no middle name) Broderick, to which everyone agreed. In the end, however, it was my grandfather who performed the naming ceremony in front of the congregation in the Mormon fashion, and he solemnly pronounced me Carlfred Bartholomew Broderick, "by which name he shall be known throughout his life and on the records of the Church." My parents and a number of others gasped at the perfidy, but the deed was done. My grandmother (whom I suspect of being confederate) commented only, "Well, thank heavens he's not a small child."

My paternal ancestors came to America from County Waterford, Ireland, during the Potato Famine era. My father's grandfather, Richard Broderick, was listed as "twenty years old, occupation carpenter," on the 1851 passenger manifest of the overcrowded Universe out of Liverpool. Traveling alone, he was ready to take on the New World. He managed to find work with a contractor in Yonkers—and love. According to family tradition, Ellen Ryan had also recently arrived on these shores in the company of her sister, the last of seven Ryan children sacrificially sent to America by their parents, before they themselves perished from the famine. Richard and Ellen married in 1857. By the time of his death twenty-two years later, of dysentery, he had become proprietor of his own contracting business and was an officer in the local Democratic Party organization. He left his widow with seven surviving children (out of eleven births), all minors. Ellen was a feisty woman who, although illiterate, had a good head for business. For a few months she tried to operate his contracting business by herself, but after it became clear that this was not going to work, she was successful in selling it to a former competitor. She invested the money in tenements and died many years later with an estate substantial enough to cause her surviving children several years of litigation over its distribution.

My father's father, John R. Broderick, was Richard and Ellen's fourth child. He was sixteen at his father's death. At twenty-five he married Susan Murphy, the daughter of another contractor in the area. After trying his hand at several enterprises, he eventually bought and operated the Broderick Bar and Grill on Third Avenue and 39th Street in Brooklyn. My father, the youngest of their eight children, was born in the family apartment over the bar in 1899. Apparently it was not a happy marriage because when Fred was only eighteen months old, his mother abandoned her husband and children for reasons that can only be surmised. The five younger children, including my father, were placed in the Orphanage of the Diocese of Brooklyn. A few months later, their father, John R. Broderick, died of cirrhosis of the liver at age thirty-nine. Two years later, his widow, Susan, also died, leaving the children orphans, indeed.

One by one the Broderick children ran away from the orphanage. The last to leave was my father, the youngest, who finally made his escape when he turned fourteen, as he believed. My own research into the baptismal records of the family prove that he was, in fact, a year older than he thought (and that his "twin" brothers were actually born a year apart). It is poignant evidence of the emotional poverty of the orphanage environment, that these children did not even know their own ages. In any case, he joined the Army in 1914, lying about his age (but by one year less than he thought).

He served in France, driving a munitions truck back and forth to the front. After the War he bounced from job to job and town to town, ending up, as we have noted, at the somewhat unlikely destination of Salt Lake City, Utah.

My Bartholomew ancestors came to Pennsylvania from Germany in the early 1700s, working their way west, generation by generation, through Ohio and Illinois. It is a curious fact that somehow, Carl Bartholomew, my mother's father, managed to find his way to the copper mining community of Bingham Canyon, Utah, and there became the proprietor of a bar and grill. Clearly, if a family coat of arms were ever designed, it ought to feature a bar and grill in the foreground.

It seems to me that my maternal grandparents were an exceedingly unlikely pair. He was a thoroughly worldly man with no religious interests or pretensions, a hard-gambling, hard-drinking, fun-loving man. She was a starchy Mormon nurse working at the local hospital. He was four years younger than she and four inches shorter and roughly the dimensions of Santa Claus. It is reported that she married him to reform him and "because he was the cutest man I ever met." He is said to have married her because she was the only woman he ever met that he couldn't get into bed without marrying her first. Their first child was born in a little apartment over the bar, but by the time my mother was born, Grandma had "prayed him into bankruptcy" to get him out of the tainted business. He went straight and became a traveling salesman. By the time I was born he had also become a Mormon, of sorts, but the kind that drank coffee (and more than once offered to let me taste it, to my grandmother's horror). It was a continuing family embarrassment that he never really gave up having a couple of drinks with his friends from time to time.

Nearly everybody liked my grandfather, but my mother did not, and I think that getting away from home was a part of her motivation to elope with my father. If so, it didn't work. He couldn't keep a job, and they lived with her family for the entire duration of their marriage. She divorced him when I was eighteen months old, and, leaving me with my grandparents, went to California to find a job. On my third birthday, we were reunited in Los Angeles where we came perilously close to starving while trying to live on what she made working in the Sears-Roebuck employee cafeteria. She confesses to having stolen food to feed me, although she would not eat purloined provender herself. When we were finally rescued, she weighed, at 5'4", only eighty-nine pounds.

Our benefactor was an older second cousin of hers, Allen Howard, whom her mother had sent to check up on her welfare. Within a few months Mom had married him. I give my mother credit: she learned from her marital mistakes (one at a time). Allen Howard was no itinerant ne'er-do-well, but a financially well-established divorcÃ©, who, having taken an early retirement as president of a steel company, had invested in Southern California real estate. To that extent he was a clear improvement over Fred Broderick (who, incidentally, soon after this, disappeared over the horizon, never to be heard from again). From my point of view, however, the new marriage was, at best, a mixed blessing. We did manage to ride out the rest of the Great Depression in comfort and security. But from the beginning, Allen Howard did not like me, and I returned the sentiment. I was never physically abused (thanks to my mother's commitment to the sound principle that "If you don't love him, you can't hit him"), but I remember him, without fondness, as my "wicked stepfather." To the best of my recollection he never permitted a kind word toward me to cross his lips. It was his often expressed view that I was lazy and stupid and worthless and that I badly needed the thrashing my mother wouldn't let him administer. (He used to tell the apocryphal story that when my mother took me to kindergarten on the first day she told the teacher, "Carlfred is a very sensitive child; if he does anything wrong, hit the child next to him.")

Fortunately, my mother's alternative view was that I was an extraordinary child, whose destiny was, like cream, to rise to the top in any situation. I dare say that the determination to prove her right and him wrong has been a governing dynamic throughout my life.

He died when I was twelve. I did not mourn his passing; in fact, my unseemly attitude toward his demise so offended one of my schoolteachers that I felt compelled to explain that I had not personally done him in; I just was happy that he was gone.

Mother was married a third time, when I was fourteen, this time to Victor Astley, the mail carrier who had walked our route as long as we had lived there. In my view, he was by far the best of the bunch. For one thing, he had enough sense not to try to parent me, and we managed to work out what began as a pretty good relationship and evolved over the years into a very warm and meaningful one. Vic Astley is the grandfather of my children, and when I use the word Dad, I refer to him.

I suppose it must be admitted that I was raised in a "dysfunctional" family, but in truth, I do not think I had any sense of that as I was growing up. Probably part of the reason was that all of my extended kin had families at least as dysfunctional as mine. Just to give a little of the flavor of it, my "Aunt Fern," who lived just across the street and was one of the most present and puissant female relatives in my life, was, to be genealogically precise, my mother's brother's, first wife's, second husband's, father's, 3rd, 4th, and 5th wife. (She married "Uncle Lew" three times in the course of her seven matrimonial ventures.) But beyond lacking a more functional comparison group, I think I was not a particularly introspective or socially insightful child. My interests were in the hard sciences. In the summer between elementary school and junior high, I managed to smuggle myself into a high school physics course and got the highest grade in the class. In high school I was always on the math, physics, and chemistry teams that competed for statewide recognition. In several such competitions I placed among the top ten in the state. On the application form for admittance to Harvard it seemed natural to declare myself a math major. My early conversion to the social sciences was partly a function of the intellectual energy in the Social Relations Department at Harvard in that era. But I wonder if the ground was softened a little by my having had an Aunt Fern.

Before I move on into my academic history, one other aspect of my growing up deserves mention. I grew up Mormon. None of my mother's husbands were believing members of the Church, although long after I left home, Vic Astley eventually joined the Church and even became a Mormon bishop, serving the local congregation I had grown up in. But growing up, one of the axial tensions in the household (I was the other) was the unresolvable conflict between my mother's unwavering, unsophisticated commitment to her faith and Allen Howard's very well-documented and highly sophisticated attacks on all religion. I remember a very early, very conscious decision to aspire to her faith and his scholarship. From an early age I became a student of the scriptures, of comparative religion, and of Church history. And I have never wavered from the faith.

I met Kathleen, the woman I eventually married, at church, when we were both three years old. Our family picture album begins with a picture of our kindergarten class: I was the tallest one in the back row and she was the shortest one in the front. In third grade we were in a play together. I was William Tell, and she was my son. The dramatic scene where William Tell is forced by the wicked Austrians to prove his fabled marksmanship by shooting the apple off his own, beloved son's head was rigged. I was supposed to aim high, and she was supposed to pull on the string attached to the apple. In the event, I knocked the apple cleanly off her head with my first shot. Not too shabby, considering I had never pulled a bow before (nor since). For reasons that escaped both of us, her mother got very upset over the incident and, I think, held it against me all her life.

I had a perpetual crush on Kathleen from kindergarten forward. At fourteen, she was my first date, but in high school we both dated other people, and the first clue I had that she really liked me as more than just her oldest friend was when I got admitted to Harvard and she cried and cried. We married between our junior and senior years in college. By graduation, the first of our eight children was already on the way. Since then, more than forty satisfying years of marriage have come and gone; the children, too, have come and gone, and we are enjoying those much touted (and doubted) pleasures of the empty nest that evaded so many of our contemporaries.

I count it a great good fortune that the years I spent at Harvard (1949-1953) were also part of the golden age of the Social Relations Department there. In a somewhat unusual configuration, it combined sociology, social anthropology, social psychology, and clinical psychology into a single major. George Homans taught the introductory course in sociology, Talcott Parsons taught social structure, Gordon Allport taught social psychology, Clyde Kluckholm, social anthropology, Robert Sears, child development, and Samuel Stouffer and Fred Mosteller taught the two semesters of social statistics. By any measure, that was a star-studded cast.

Of particular importance to me was Carle Zimmerman, who taught the family course. He and his good friend Pitrim Sorokin were out of favor in those years. Their offices were on a different floor from the mainline group, and they were never assigned teaching assistants. Zimmerman remained an associate professor until his retirement, his style of sociology considered passÃ© (partaking of neither the rigorous empiricism of Stouffer nor the grand theorizing of Parsons). It was definitely not politically correct to study with him, but he was the only one teaching about families, so I took his courses anyway (thus establishing a pattern of nonconformity that has served me well ever since).

Carle had let a colleague at the medical school persuade him that a lobotomy would effectively relieve his hypermania with few intellectual side effects. It resulted in slurred speech and a peculiar scrambling of his order of presentation. To compound his problems, I believe he kept a bottle in his desk, and it was easy for colleagues to explain and dismiss him as an alcoholic. But I learned a great deal of good sociology from him. There was an order underlying his presentations, and once I figured out how to decode him, I found his scholarship to be impressive and his ideas exceptionally logical, creative, and thought provoking.

He sponsored my first empirical study. He had developed a theory about the functions of the informal networks of families, and he realized that the temper of the times was such that no one would take his idea seriously without empirical support. Together we developed a questionnaire, and I took it back to Long Beach where, as my undergraduate honors thesis, I collected information on almost 2000 families and their closest friend-families. We published a report on it in Marriage and Family Living, the forerunner of the Journal of Marriage and the Family, in 1954. It was my first publication. This study, together with those by Marvin Sussman and Elizabeth Bott at the same period, were the first on the nature and function of family networks. In our case, we were interested in network size and homogeneity of the network and how these variables impacted various family issues. We found strong correlations between both variables and the ability of the family to avoid divorce, delinquency, and school dropouts. Somehow in the printing of the article the tables got scrambled so that they could not be readily understood. I have never seen the article cited (except by the authors, of course).

Later, another of Zimmerman's students, Lucius Cervantes, a Jesuit priest, oversaw the replication of the study in eight additional cities, substantiating my findings. When the book reporting this expanded study was published by Zimmerman and Cervantes in 1960, my name appeared only once, in a footnote on page 8, and it was misspelled. As it turned out, it didn't really matter. Zimmerman's chief conclusion from this massive empirical effort was that one should protect one's children from having anything to do with families who were blemished by divorce, delinquency, and school dropouts. Probably there was never a good time for such an idea; certainly it was not in the year John F. Kennedy was elected president of the United States on a platform of social conscience and involvement and outreach. The book was stillborn, an instant antique. The only reason to mourn its demise was the fact that it reported one of the most substantial investigations of family networks, then and since.

Harvard was not all classes and theses, of course. It was a good deal of fun, especially after I was able to bring Kathleen back as my wife. She sang in the Radcliffe Choral Society and I in the Harvard Glee Club. Together we performed some marvelous music with the Boston Symphony under the baton of Charles Muensch: Bach's B minor Mass, St. Matthew's and St. John's Passions, Berlioz' Requiem, and Hindemith's Oedipus Rex. Also, having an apartment of our own, we became something of the social center of the little community of Mormon undergraduates. We all became very close and have maintained contact over the years. Nearly all of them have gone on to become professionals of substantial reputation—university presidents and the like.

I applied to three graduate schools. Harvard admitted me, but offered no financial support. I had heard of Reuben Hill at North Carolina and of Robin Williams at Cornell, so I applied to both schools and got accepted by both. Cornell offered me $100.00 more, so I went there. In later years, after I got to know Reuben, I sometimes wondered idly what it might have been like to have worked with him and whether my professional interests might have been shaped differently by such an experience.

Cornell was an exciting place also. It turned out that, since my application was to work in the family, I was admitted into the Department of Child Development and Family Relations in the School of Home Economics rather than into the Sociology Department where Robin Williams had his appointment, but I did succeed in getting him as a member of my committee. Urie Bronfenbrenner was there and Harold Feldman, a clinical psychologist of the Rogerian persuasion who had an influence on my later clinical work. Coming to Cornell from Harvard turned out to be a happy circumstance because everyone at Cornell was in awe of the things happening at Harvard. I had just come from the feet of the gods and was viewed as retaining just a bit of the Olympian aura. For example, several faculty members refused to let me sign up for their seminars because they were certain the material would be "old hat" and "derivative." One seminar on Parsons and Bales's new book on the family was canceled after only two or three sessions when it became clear that the instructor didn't understand the somewhat opaque material as well as one of the class members. I confess that this sort of thing did not distress me as much as it might have had I been of a less arrogant disposition. In any case, I plowed right on through the degree in three years, passing the French and German exams on schedule and, if it may be believed, actually enjoying the five-day written and oral qualifying exams. My dissertation followed a class of 100 entering freshmen home-ec majors and predicted the friend-formation process over the first several months, utilizing a similarity/opportunity matrix. It worked out well, although for years I dreamed about that 100 by 100 matrix laid out on our apartment floor. At twenty-four, I had my Ph.D., three children (the third, born the summer after I got the degree), and an exciting new job at the University of Georgia.

Carle Zimmerman had always said that no one ought to be allowed to practice sociology in the United States unless he or she had lived at least four years in the South. I had job offers from BYU and Merrill Palmer; in fact, the job market for Ph.Ds was so favorable in those far-off, palmy days that I actually received telephone calls from the presidents of those institutions. But I chose Georgia because, in addition to my finding Zimmerman's reasoning persuasive, they offered an absolutely top salary and—as a measure of how competitive the bidding for new faculty could get in that era—the rank of associate professor.

In many ways, 1956 was an exciting time to be in that place and situation. The Brown v. the Board of Education decision had been handed down by the Supreme Court, and the gears had been set in motion that led to the civil rights movement and eventually reshaped American society. But none of that change had been effected yet. When we got off the plane in Atlanta, we walked into a Quonset-hut air terminal with separate drinking fountains and bathrooms, a cafe open only to whites (no place at all for blacks to get food), and segregated cabs. As a matter of principle we went to the Black and White cab stand. The name sounded progressive. The cabby was very patient with us: "You folk from the North, ain't you? Well, you see the thing is this, I can take you where you want to go, but if I do, won't be no cab for any colored folk. Why don't you folk just take one o' them nice Yellow cabs down there?"

At that time segregation was the fundamental principle upon which all race relations were founded throughout the South. I remember in 1957, the Southeastern Council of the NCFR had its annual meeting in Tallahassee, Florida. We had a handful of black members. There was literally no public facility in Tallahassee that would accommodate us: not a hotel or motel or restaurant, not a civic center, and (most shocking to me) not the University. We finally met in an Episcopal church whose pastor came from New Jersey. It feels as though centuries, rather than decades, have intervened in the social history of the United States since those days.

Everything at Georgia seemed tailor-made for me. I had this remarkable salary and rank, the established faculty were welcoming (and somewhat in awe of my Ivy League education), and I had a third of my workload freed so I could develop research projects. But as a matter of fact, it was one of the hardest periods of my life. The problems were not in the setting, but in my own expectations for myself. This was my big chance, at last, to do some significant work—under my own name. So I would sit down at my desk, hour after hour, with a set of sharpened pencils and a blank yellow pad, trying to think of something really significant to study. I would covenant with myself that I would know neither food nor water until I had put something important on that pad. But in the end I would get nauseous and headachy and come crawling home—where, incidentally, my wife was already fully occupied with three rambunctious, demanding, preschool kids and didn't much need a fourth.

This was the period when I got into therapy as a client. My choice of a therapist was fortunate. She had been one of Carl Rogers's early trainees at Chicago, and in a relatively short time (I think I went for six sessions), I arranged to work through my block and get some research going. The first project (on preschool friendship formation) was a useful learning experience for me, but eventually fizzled. It led me, however, to a second project with a colleague, Stan Fowler, that laid the foundation for the following twelve years of my scholarly life. We got a grant to study the normal sociosexual development of children. At that time the Freudian theory of psychosexual development reigned supreme. But it did not square, either with my own personal experience or with my observation of how actual children developed in their relationship to the opposite sex. In particular, in the aborted study of preschool children's friendship patterns, I had observed, informally, that there was an unmistakable difference in the emotional tone children used in describing same-sex and cross-sex friends. This was not consistent with Freudian doctrine. Moreover, I never experienced Freud's famous latency period. I always liked girls and suffered unrequited crushes during that post-oedipal period when I was supposedly oblivious to the whole heterosexual issue. On checking it out with my students, I discovered that my own experience was replicated in most of their memories. So Stan and I decided to challenge the received paradigm and study children in the supposed latency period directly, using a mix of direct questions and projective techniques. The results were dramatic.

Among the fifth and sixth graders we surveyed in that first study, romantic fantasy and heterosexually structured social interaction reigned supreme. Not a whiff of latency anywhere, among about 80 percent of the kids. There was, of course, the often observed segregation of the sexes at the lunch table and elsewhere. But far from being the result of lack of interest in the opposite sex, it grew out of a lack of social skills that made them self-conscious and awkward, effectively preventing their acting on their all too present awareness of the heterosexual potentials of these social situations. But in their fantasies and dreams and even in their conversations with same-sex peers, they exhibited a pervasive attraction to the opposite sex, and the majority explicitly looked forward to dating, courtship, and eventual marriage.

Meanwhile, having found no established congregation of Mormons nearer than Atlanta, seventy miles away, we invited the scattered members of the Church we were able to locate in that area to meet in our home every Sunday. Only a few months after we arrived in Athens, a formal branch of the Church was formed, and I was called to be the first branch president. We soon outgrew our living room, and by the time we left in 1960, we were meeting in a rented hall and had purchased property for our own building. During those same four years, we had two additional children, girls, whom we always referred to as our Georgia belles.

In 1960, when I was twenty-eight years old, I was invited to join the faculty of the College of Home Economics at Pennsylvania State University as a full professor. Fortunately, I had enough sense to insist on coming at the associate level. Although I had never developed a good nose for departmental politics, it did occur to me that a number of associate professors on that faculty would have a good deal more seniority than I, and that some of them just might feel some resentment over such an appointment. It took them nine years to get around to offering me the rank again, but I have never doubted that my decision at that time was the right one (and I can still take private pleasure in knowing that I could have been the youngest full professor in the profession if I had been foolish enough to accept the offer).

Based on the work that Stan Fowler and I had done at Georgia, I was able to get a grant from the U.S. Department of Mental Health to expand the research on children's normal sociosexual development. In the end we obtained data from 6000 children from rural, urban, and suburban areas in three states, ages 3-18, plus interview data from a subsample of parents. It was a very comprehensive data set with direct questions, projective material, sociometric data, cross-validation from both parents of some of the children—I feel that it is safe to claim that no one else before or since collected as much information on that aspect of children's development.

Since the topic was a "sexy" one, I suddenly found myself getting a lot of media attention. For the most part this was a positive experience. I enjoyed finding my work the subject of articles in all of the news magazines—not to mention Life, Playboy, and the PTA Magazine. I enjoyed the talk-show interviews.

There are certain risks in this kind of exposure, of course, and early on I stubbed my toe on some of them. For example, in my very first encounter with a major news magazine, at the end of an extensive discussion of my findings, their social implications, and so forth, the reporter thanked me for a good interview, closed his notebook, and asked conversationally how Kathleen and I handled the issue of preteen romantic crushes among our own children. I guilelessly regaled him with a really funny incident that had occurred just that week when my fourth grade daughter had been "dumped" by the boy she loved. It didn't seem such a funny story when it turned up as the final two paragraphs of Newsweek's story on my research. For some time thereafter my name was Mud at my house.

On the other hand, in that same interview I learned about the power of the press in a more positive sense. At one point the reporter had asked me if I considered myself an expert on this subject. Half in jest, since, after all, the subject we were discussing was my own research, I said, "Well, I suppose on this subject I'd have to be considered the world's foremost authority." But even I was taken back at the sheer hubris of the headline in the Newsweek article: "WORLD'S FOREMOST AUTHORITY ON CHILDREN'S ROMANCES SAYS . . ." Even more surprising was my colleagues' reaction to this claim. Far from being offended, most of them saw that headline and said to themselves (and each other), "By golly, I hadn't realized that Broderick was such an authority." Before that, it had not occurred to me that professionals tend to believe what they read in Newsweek, just as others do. That headline did more for my professional reputation than an article in American Sociological Review.

I did, of course, publish articles on my findings in professional journals, but I made a mistake in agreeing to publish the comprehensive monograph on the study in a foreign press. Rovalt Verlag of Hamburg, a respected scholarly press, invited me to have the book brought out as one volume in a truly impressive series on human sexuality to which virtually every European and American scholar in the field had committed a volume. Through arrangements with other publishers, the series was to come out not only in German, but also in French, Italian, Dutch, and, of course, English. The German, French, Italian, and Dutch versions came out as promised. Negotiations on the English version broke down, however, and, alas, my first scholarly monograph never came out in the language of the great majority of my professional colleagues.

About that time, I came due for a sabbatical. I applied for a Fulbright Scholarship to go to Ghana to teach for a year at the University of Accra. The application was accepted, and both I and my family were looking forward to a truly enlarging experience in a new cultural setting. (Also, the family was not unmoved by the fact that visiting faculty were treated royally and provided with housemaids and cooks and private swimming pools.) But then we began to see disturbing reports from West Africa. There were anti-colonial uprisings in the interior. One white missionary couple was massacred less than a hundred miles from the university. There were reports of student unrest. Although we were assured that we would be perfectly safe, I simply could not bring myself to put my family at potential risk.

So instead, I applied for a postdoctoral clinical fellowship to be trained as a marriage and family therapist at the University of Minnesota. As it happened, my old friend and mentor, Harold Feldman of Cornell, replaced us in the Fulbright spot. The Feldmans had a life-enhancing, pampered year of tropical stimulation and delight. We got the coldest, longest, dreariest winter in memory in Minnesota. For the family, it was a miserable experience, and I think they never quite forgave me for the switch. A few years later I was recruited as a candidate for Reuben Hill's spot at the University of Minnesota, probably the most prestigious position in the field, at that time, if only because of the stature of the predecessor. When I shared the exciting news of the invitation with my always fully supportive wife, she smiled encouragingly and said, "I think that would be a wonderful opportunity for you, dear, and I want you to know the children and I will write to you every week."

As for me, weather aside, the year in Minnesota had been a stimulating one. I had been doing marriage counseling for a number of years without the benefit of much training or supervision. This was the norm in those days. There was no licensure anywhere and little formal training available. People just worked out their own approaches without anyone telling them what they could or couldn't, should or shouldn't do. But when I became aware of the formal training program at Minnesota with Jerry Neubeck and Dick Hay, I figured I might as well take advantage of it. The hardest part of that year was the return to the lowly status of student. One forgets that the respect freely offered professors in a university community is strictly a function of rank. Students, by contrast, are treated condescendingly by gum-chewing departmental secretaries and are ranked as unemployed bad risks by bank personnel.

The academic part of the program was old stuff for me, but I learned a lot from my clinical internship at the University Hospital and the VA Hospital outpatient clinics, and I became facile at interpreting MMPIs. Most encouraging was the discovery that the clinical style I had already developed survived the scrutiny of my more experienced supervisors.

Coincidentally, that year I was invited to a workshop sponsored by the recently formed Sex Education and Information Council of the United States, better known by its acronym, SIECUS. Mary Calderone had assembled a board of experts to help coordinate and shape the national resurgence of interest in getting better programs of sex education in the public schools. At that time most schools had a menstrual education film for the sixth grade girls, and that was about all. The purpose of this workshop was to put together a resource handbook for the new breed of sex educators. There was really nothing out there for them to draw upon. I was appalled at the stuff they had assembled for us to review for inclusion in this new source book. It was scientifically inaccurate, badly out of date, and heavily burdened with sermonizing. I'm afraid I was characteristically tactless in my outspoken negative opinion of the material and managed to alienate nearly everyone there, including the usually patient chairman, David Mace. I remember leaving the conference feeling that all I had accomplished was to make an fool of myself. "Broderick," I said to myself, "when are you ever going to learn to keep your mouth shut! These people did not really want to hear your opinion. All you managed to do was spit in their soup." No one could have been more surprised than I when a few months later Jessie Bernard, who was head of the SIECUS publication committee, called me and asked if I would be willing to be the editor of this source book. I said, "Can I throw out all the articles you have already collected and start fresh?" She said, "Yes." The result was the first book with my name on it (in English), The Individual, Sex, and Society, coedited with Jessie Bernard and published by Johns-Hopkins Press. Putting that book together was a good experience, and the advance they gave me for taking the job saved the family from an otherwise enveloping poverty that had resulted from trying to maintain two residences and live on a sabbatical income.

We returned to Penn State for three more years that turned out to be productive ones for me. In addition to continuing to publish research papers, I was invited to succeed Marvin Sussman as the editor of the Journal of Marriage and the Family. That was an exciting time to be editor of the most prestigious journal in the family field. Family scholarship was exploding in every direction during the late '60s. After a year of trying to keep up with all of the new developments, it occurred to me that it would probably be helpful to publish a review of the decade's achievements. The result was the first Decade Review in 1970, which, it pleases me to note, was imitated by later editors and so became only the first in a series of decade reviews in the Journal. Another innovation that I believe was a step forward was the establishment of an international section and editor. U.S. family scholars tended to be altogether too insular, and this was intended as a partial corrective.

By all odds my most hair-raising (actually hair-graying) experience as editor of the Journal grew out of a decision to sponsor an issue featuring the new, and at that time somewhat militant and raw, feminist family scholarship. It was a well-intended effort to expose our readers to a challenging new approach to the analysis of matters familial, and I suppose it constituted a watershed event in the history of the field, but as a personal experience it was simply horrific. I commissioned a distinguished feminist scholar to edit the special edition, gave her the page constraints, a number of copies of the JMF author's style guidelines, and a firm deadline for the edited manuscripts to be in my hands for final copyediting.

She didn't come within a month of meeting any of the deadlines, and she commissioned twice as many papers as I had authorized. The bibliographic references at the end of each article were unfinished or absent, the manuscripts were single-spaced, frequently written on both sides of the paper, and coffee-stained. They were peppered with four-letter words and—even worse, from an editor's perspective—poor grammar and sentence structure. About three-fourths of the pieces had no scholarship to them; they were just hate pieces against men and the patriarchal establishment. The remaining one-fourth I thought had some merit, although even those needed an extraordinary amount of editorial work to put them in shape for publication. I told her which ones I would agree to publish; she told me that I would publish them all, or she would pull them all. Mind you, we were already running two months late on getting out this quarterly issue and in jeopardy of losing our second-class status with the post office if we delayed much longer. It was an editor's worst nightmare—these women were not into compromise for the good of all. As far as they were concerned, the Journal (as surrogate for patriarchal society) owed women for thousands of years of injustice. From my point of view, it was blackmail, pure and simple.

In the end, I absolutely refused to publish a few of the articles and insisted on strongly editing some of the others to try to bring them into some approximation of acceptable journal style, but we finally had to give up two entire issues of the Journal to accommodate all of the pages of manuscript that were left. When the issues finally reached Journal readers they were not charmed by the unaccountable dedication of so many pages to material of such uneven quality. Reuben Hill, for one, charged me with "selling out" to the feminists.

In retrospect, I still think it was a good idea to expose our traditional readership to the winds of feminist critique that were beginning to make themselves felt in the early '70s and that have since truly reshaped the field of family scholarship. But the experience literally turned my hair white. I try to think of my snowy crown as a marker on the path of gender liberation.

At Penn State I maintained my active participation in Mormon affairs and eventually ended up presiding over the Central Pennsylvania District of the Church. I was also more active than ever, before or since, in campus politics. At various points I chaired the Graduate Faculty of the University and the Academic Standards Committee of the University Senate. This was the late '60s and early '70s and, like other campuses, we had to face a student revolt. Students occupied buildings and tried to burn down the ROTC Building. I remember sitting up all night in one of the entrances to our college office building to try to discourage students from setting it to the torch. Other faculty sat in other doorways. We were not armed; we didn't even have any way of communicating with each other, but we believed that the students would not want to hurt anyone, just to make a statement about the establishment. It was a scary night, but nobody came to torch our building (although there were fires set elsewhere). The university president fared less well. A mob of students took an ax to his front door, and, while he and his wife and eighty-year-old mother fled out the back door, entered and ransacked the house. The next day we had a full complement of state militia, armed, in white helmets and spats, guarding the campus. It was just after the Kent State tragedy in very similar circumstances, but we were lucky and no one got hurt.

Those were interesting days on many campuses. I remember the day the students shouted down the Faculty Senate and grabbed the microphone from the president. Some of the younger faculty were very sympathetic to their cause and style of pursuing it. It was necessary to disband the Senate for a period of months. The spirit of the times pervaded the classroom also. I remember one graduate seminar in which I asked the students to assume that the student revolt had fully triumphed, the establishment was overthrown, and local student soviets ruled supreme. What, if any, of the old society's norms would be worthy of preservation? After some heated debate they agreed that there would be no laws against murder or rape because in order to support such laws you would have to reinstitute the whole hated apparatus of society: police, jails, judges, governments—better to suffer a few murders and rapes. The depth of their commitment to ecological values and to the zero-population dogma was such that they would have defined only one act as a capital offense: having more than two children. The revolutionary passions and certitudes of those days are difficult to credit in these more laid-back times, but they were fiercely real then.

In 1970 I got an offer to come to the University of Southern California to head up their Ph.D. marriage and family therapy program. It was housed in the Department of Sociology, a real anomaly then and now, but that's where James Peterson had his academic appointment when he started the pioneering program in the early 1950s. When Jim moved over to help establish a new School of Gerontology in 1969, the department had to decide if they wanted to keep this clinical option as part of their offering. There were arguments on both sides, but persuasive on the plus side was the fact that, then and now, some of the best students who applied to the department were attracted by the opportunity to be trained as a marriage and family therapist while earning a respectable Ph.D. in sociology. So they decided that if they could find a bona fide sociologist who also was qualified to train clinicians, they would retain the program. In the interview, it appears that I was able to persuade them that my somewhat marginal credentials as a sociologist, or, for that matter, as a clinical trainer, were sufficient for the purpose. Perhaps it helped that I brought the Journal of Marriage and the Family with me. In any case, in the fall of 1971, I returned to the area where I had grown up, where all of my relatives still lived, as professor of sociology and executive director of the Ph.D. program in Marriage and Family Therapy at the University of Southern California.

It had not been an easy decision to leave Penn State. It would not be overstating the case to say I had it made there. I had tenure, quality colleagues, and an ongoing Ph.D. program in family relationships, which attracted excellent students and was regarded as one of the strongest in the business. Moreover, at that point in my career I was heavily involved in campus politics (for example, being a member of the President's "Kitchen Cabinet," a circle of informal advisors that had a great deal of influence on what went on at the university). State College, Pennsylvania, was a beautiful place to live and raise a family. Taking it all together, I asked myself, why would I want to move? Then it hit me. At thirty-nine years of age, I was already feeling seduced by the siren song of a serene and certain future. That settled the question; I had better move on to new challenges before hardening of the arteries set in. And besides, the children could get to know their grandparents and cousins.

The new position was a challenge. I don't suppose I had ever before in my life felt a greater need to master an unfamiliar literature in a shorter time, so as to bring myself "up to speed" as both a sociologist and a clinical trainer. Because, to be perfectly honest, although I knew a great deal about the family and about human sexuality, there were oceans of pertinent information that a competent, all-purpose sociologist might be expected to know that were not within my scope of expertise. I had a great deal of clinical material to cover, as well, before I could feel comfortable as a graduate mentor to these students. It would be only a slight exaggeration to say that the move forced me to take a second, informal graduate degree in the areas of my deficits. I liked that.

At USC I managed to keep out of local campus politics but got involved, instead, in the politics of the profession. Once my term as editor of the Journal was finished, I managed to find myself elected first, President of the Southern California Association of Marriage and Family Counselors (1974), then President of the National Council on Family Relations (1976), and finally, President of the Association of Mormon Counselors and Psychotherapists (1982).

I took particular pleasure in serving as President of NCFR because that organization had always been, and remains, my professional home base. Most of the people who have been important in my professional life are regularly attending members. I think I have missed only one annual meeting (1975—I had the flu) since 1960. There is not much that one can do of lasting significance in a one-year term of office, but I think fondly of three accomplishments of that year. First, I was able to persuade the organization to sponsor the first few years of operation of the Journal of Family History under the editorship of Tamara Hereven. To that small extent, I felt a sponsor of the then new and now thriving subdiscipline of family history. Second, I represented NCFR and American family scholars in helping the Australian Family Life Movement, under John Robison's leadership, celebrate their fiftieth anniversary. And third, I held the very first nonalcoholic president's reception. The event turned out to be a big success, but up to the last hour there were rumblings that the traditionalists and heavy drinkers would either boycott it or usurp it, bringing their own liquor to spike the punch. With the money we saved on drinks we were able to afford a very nice buffet indeed.

The '70s marked something of an intellectual watershed for me. Prior to that period, most of my scholarly work had centered on children's sociosexual development. I had always been interested in family theory, but until I assigned myself the task of reviewing the family theory literature of the 1960s for the decade review, I had never done any serious writing in this area. I believe I am correct in stating that my 1971 article, "Beyond the Five Conceptual Frameworks: A Decade of Development in Family Theory," was the first to bring the new family systems approach to the attention of mainline family scholars. Prior to that it had pretty much been confined to family therapists. Later that year Reuben Hill came out with a paper on family systems theory, comparing it to his own developmental approach, but it was published in a Belgian journal and not many American scholars saw it. Toward the end of the decade, I was one of the participants in the major theory construction project headed by Wesley Burr, Reuben Hill, Ivan Nye, and Ira Reiss, which eventuated in the two-volume handbook Contemporary Theories about the Family. I had a chapter, coauthored with a graduate student, in the first volume that attempted to summarize the family process theory of socialization. For Volume II, Jim Smith and I tried the more challenging job of attempting to present a digest of the general systems approach to family processes. Subsequently I have attempted to follow up on those initial efforts with an article on family process theory in Jetsey Sprey's 1992 book Fashioning Family Theory and finally with a book-length treatment of the subject, Understanding Family Process: The Basics of Family Systems Theory (Sage, 1993).

Besides theory, my interest turned more and more toward the clinical (The Therapeutic Triangle, Sage, 1983) and toward the history, both of the clinical branch of family scholarship ("The History of Professional Marriage and Family Therapy," with Schrader, in Gurman & Kniskern, 1984, 1991) and the nonclinical branch ("To Arrive where We Started: The Field of Family Studies in the 1930s," JMF, 1988). I also did a reasonably successful trade book (Couples, Simon & Schuster, 1979, and still in print) and a college text, Marriage and the Family, now in its 4th edition.

I've continued as an active Mormon, serving as a bishop and as a stake president (the next higher administrative level over bishops), and I even wrote a book on marriage for the Mormon audience, One Flesh, One Heart (Deseret Book, 1986).

As one of the more senior statesmen in the field, I get invited to do a fair number of workshops and keynote addresses and perspective pieces and chapters in other people's books. I even get invited to do commencement addresses, from time to time, surely one of the stiffest challenges for any speaker. I still head up the Marriage and Family Therapy Program in the Department of Sociology at USC.

As one with deep roots in the field, I am easily seduced into projecting my own view of its future (although, as a social historian I am painfully aware of how misaimed most future telling turns out to be). Perhaps the most prevalent contemporary view is that the future belongs to the feminist and conflict theorists and to the postmodern constructivists. As my publications document, I am betting that the most profitable direction for future research and theory lies in the investigation of what Hess and Handel, years ago, called the psychosocial interior of the family. The immediate challenge is to discover the metarules governing the patterning of family processes through the careful observation of families in real time (that is, over the course of seconds, minutes, and hours, rather than merely in developmental time or in cross-sectional stop-time). In my view that is the frontier that beckons. The effort to understand how families operate in real time started with the observations of family therapists, and I trust that this group of professional family observers and manipulators will continue to make important discoveries. But the future belongs to the new breed of well-tooled, eclectic, hard-headed, family research scholars. They will discover still better ways to probe the interior of families and to take advantage of the enormous laboratory provided by the variety of family forms and the high rate of family formation, dissolution, and reformation that is prevalent in this historic period. I see a generation of them just emerging from graduate school, and, as all commencement speakers, everywhere, I am encouraged that the future of the field is in good hands.
