Carlfred Broderick, My Parents Married on a Dare and Other Favorite Essays on Life ( 1996)

CHAPTER TWO

The Core of My Faith

I conceive of this piece as the complement to the first chapter. It explicitly tracks my spiritual odyssey as I moved through the career path outlined there. Necessarily there is some overlap, and I apologize in advance for telling a few of my favorite growing-up stories a second time, but I figure any faithful Latter-day Saint must have developed a substantial tolerance for repetition.

A few years ago, Philip Barlow was director of the LDS Institute of Religion at Cambridge, Massachusetts, home of Harvard and Radcliffe and MIT and a fair number of other well-established institutes of higher learning, and was working toward his Ph.D. in religion at Harvard. It was a natural setting for stirring up the inspiration to ask a group of faithful LDS scholars in various fields how they had managed to resolve the built-in tensions and challenges between the skeptical world of secular scholarship and the life of faith. The resulting collection was published as a book, Philip Barlow, ed., A Thoughtful Faith: Essays on Belief by Mormon Scholars (Centerville, Utah: Cannon Press, 1986). It contained twenty-two essays, the great majority of which, to my mind, were rather wonderfully inspiring. I was amused to discover that the first press we considered publishing with thought that some of the material in my essay might be "offensive" to refined LDS readers. For this and other reasons, Barlow went with a less protective publisher. What is provided here is the unexpurgated version of my essay. With that build-up, I fear that the reader looking for something provocative will be disappointed. On the other hand, if it is simply that I have, like so many therapists and social scientists before me, become jaded to the canons of spiritually refined writing, you are encouraged to close your eyes to the offensive parts.

Many a night as I grew up, I lay awake listening to my mother and stepfather argue in their bedroom, which was separated from mine only by a thin wall. As I remember, two topics were the major themes of their sometimes heated discussions. One was me. It was my stepfather's passionate belief that I was stupid, lazy, ill-disciplined, and would "never amount to anything." My mother's more serenely held view was that I was like cream and would rise to the top in any situation by virtue of my natural superiority. I suppose it is not overstating the case to say that I have spent most of my life attempting to prove him wrong and her right.

The other topic of contention was religion. It would be hard to imagine two less evenly matched debaters on the subject. He was a gospel scholar of the first rank who could, literally, tell you the content of any chapter in the Standard Works without looking it up. My mother, as he used to say, was not certain whether Second Nephi was in the Old Testament or the New. But though he was remarkably knowledgeable about the gospel, he believed none of it. Mother said he lost his testimony on his mission where he was appointed the personal secretary to the president the day he arrived and for three years spent his full time dealing with troubled and rebellious elders or Church politics. In all that time he never knocked on a door or bore his testimony, but he did study.

In their standard argument he would point out to my mother ( forte) the contradictions in some series of scriptures (such as the various accounts of the resurrection or the conflicting revelations on the foundation of Zion in Missouri or Zion's Camp or the United Order or polygamy). Her response (piano) was always that she didn't know much about this particular issue but she did know this . . . , and then she would bear her testimony to him and he would, likely as not, put his fist through a wall or door out of sheer frustration.

Early in my life I decided which side of that argument I was on. But I think I also must have decided that I wanted to match his scholarship with her faith. He died when I was twelve, and I inherited his extensive Church library. By the time I was fourteen I had devoured all of it, including his well-marked Standard Works. Not that I waited for him to die to begin reading scriptures or Church books. I remember once at age eleven being reprimanded by my mother for missing the afternoon session of stake conference because I was engrossed in a new book on Book of Mormon geography that was in the seventies' book display in the foyer.

It goes without saying that all of that religious precocity made me an obnoxious child, the bane of every Sunday School teacher. Once when I was ten, I was sent home for explaining to the class what "Thou shalt not commit adultery" really meant. It had seemed clear to me from her explanation that our teacher did not quite understand the concept. Indeed, Sunday School would have been totally insufferable to me if it had not been for one other smart kid in the class, Kathleen. My habit was to attack the teacher's point (whatever it might be) and Kathleen's was to defend it. Since we were evenly matched, this added some life to the otherwise tedious and repetitious material. I eventually married her (i.e., Kathleen), having become addicted to the intellectual stimulation that her independent intelligence added to my life.

From the beginning, I suppose, my life experience predisposed me to segregate matters of faith, which were based on personal experience with the Spirit (my mother being the model), and matters of doctrine, which were subject to derivation, documentation, and debate. I read every work Joseph Fielding Smith (and later, Bruce R. McConkie) ever published and honored them as among the greatest scriptorians and doctrinal expositors of the Church. Yet I was always aware of some of the alternative views of Elders Talmage and Widtsoe and President McKay. I remember as a teenager that Kathleen and I approached President McKay (who had come to dedicate the new stake center) and asked him to resolve an issue concerning evolution that we had been discussing. He looked at us and said, "The thing you need to remember about evolution is that the Lord has never revealed anything about the matter. People have their opinions, but the Lord has not revealed the details of how he created the earth."

At a less sublime level I remember the time our bishop came to talk to the priests quorum on "self abuse." This was a man whom I looked up to as a spiritual giant, who could bring tears to my eyes with his testimony. Yet I heard him explain on this occasion (with the same fervency of conviction that he evinced when bearing witness of more sacred things) that we ought not to abuse ourselves because the practice would weaken our minds—that if we spent all of our life fluids as young men we would have nothing left when we needed it later in life. I don't suppose that there was a priest in the room who believed a word of this. The disturbing thing, to me at least, was that he did not differentiate between what he knew by the Spirit and what he believed from folklore. I was grateful that my testimony was independently derived and not dependent upon his credibility as a witness. And I think I vowed to myself never to repeat his error, that is, always to differentiate the core of my faith from the extended corpus of my beliefs.

One last experience in my late teens might perhaps be cited as contributing to my differentiation between spiritual leadership and doctrinal sophistication. As a seventeen-year-old freshman at Harvard, I had the great privilege of get-ting to know my first General Authority on other than a conference-visitor basis. Elder S. Dilworth Young , one of the Presidents of the Seventy, was the mission president and would invite students over to his home for firesides once a month. I was delighted at the opportunity to get an informed opinion on many of the doctrinal imponderables that I and the little clutch of faithful LDS Harvard students debated in our weekly Sunday afternoon discussions. For starters, one evening I cornered him and asked how he had resolved the paradoxical issues around the nature of our spiritual birth as described in the early chapters of the Book of Moses. It took several minutes of confusing noncommunication before it dawned on me that this great man not only did not have an informed opinion on the matter, but he scarcely understood the issue and frankly had concerned himself very little with such obscure doctrinal points. Once more I had confirmed the lesson of my childhood—that spiritual maturity and inspirational power (which this man unquestionably had in abundance) need not be packaged together with advanced intellectual questing.

Meanwhile, my own experiences led me to pursue each half of the equation. Harvard (and later, Cornell, where I got my Ph.D.) were wonderfully challenging environments. I scarcely read a textbook in my whole educational career—always I was sent to the original source, even if it was in a different language. (I remember having to learn enough Portuguese to get through the reading assignment for a course on world exploration in the sixteenth century.) At the same time, I was constantly being given levels of ecclesiastical responsibility beyond my age or experience because I was living in the mission field. The Church's system of lay leadership has always struck me as one of the most in-genious mechanisms of socialization ever invented. I am puzzled that social analysts and commentators take so little note of it. It is sheer genius to take the very groups that in the ordinary nature of things are most likely to challenge authority and orthodoxy and put them in authority and in charge of orthodoxy. So they call nineteen-year-old males (surely the most ungovernable and intellectually rebellious group imaginable) to convert the world to believe our doctrine and follow our authorities. Similarly they choose the educated, active, competent, and critical man or woman to head up Church units and serve as the very agents of orthodoxy. I was not called on a mission, mostly because the nation was involved in the Korean War at the time and Truman had slapped a quota on the Church of one missionary per ward (being of the opinion that missionaries were merely draft-dodgers in dark suits). The other part of the reason was that at the tender age of twenty I married Kathleen and took her back to share my senior year at Harvard with me.

But if I missed the experience of a full-time mission, I was fully engaged in various leadership opportunities. In Cambridge Branch I served as Aaronic Priesthood general secretary (roughly equivalent to the Young Men president today) and in the elders quorum presidency. At Cornell I once served in five callings simultaneously: I served as Young Men president at the mission, district, and branch level; as high councilor in the district; and as elders quorum instructor. When I took my first job at the University of Georgia, Kathleen and I founded the branch and I became its first branch president. Later, when we moved to Penn State, I served in the district high council, on the mission board in various capacities, and finally as district president. When we moved to California, I eventually became a stake president. From all of these opportunities has come a rooted certainty that the work is true. The evidence is experiential and overwhelming in its depth and breadth. I have never been permitted the luxury of being a dabbler in the gospel or in the Kingdom. At every point I have been up to my elbows in prayerful application of gospel principles to the real challenges of individual lives and of the humanly textured Church organization.

As district president in State College, Pennsylvania, I was frequently confronted with Ph.D. candidates who informed me that they felt their calling was to complete their degree and that they intended to abstain from all other Church callings until they had finished. I invariably reminded them that the keys for making calls resided not in them but in their branch and district and mission presidents. Not one (of several dozen) ever escaped being given substantial opportunities to serve, and not one went sour from over-extension of their intellectual development while their spiritual selves atrophied. I believe this is the key to the resolution of intellectual and spiritual tensions: full-throttle involvement with both.

That is not to say that I have never experienced serious conflict between these two components in my life. My research efforts in the early 1960s were centered on tracing the development of normal heterosexual development among children and adolescents. In fact my first book was entitled The Individual, Sex, and Society and my second (which was translated into German, Dutch, French, and Italian) was titled Sexual Development in Childhood and Youth. The publication of these materials, plus research articles that appeared in professional journals, placed me in the forefront of research in this area for a time, and in addition to receiving a great deal of media attention, I was frequently invited as a consultant to school systems, which were beginning to awaken to their responsibility to provide information and guidance to their students in this area. I traveled all over the world in this capacity during the late '60s and eventually was invited to be a member of the Sex Information and Education Council of the United States (SIECUS), which was the informal resource center for the whole burgeoning sex education movement of that decade. I was honored to take my place among such distinguished colleagues as John Money, David Mace, Ira Reiss, Harold Christiansen, William Masters, Wardel Pomeroy, and Mary Calderone, to mention only a few of the great scholars who constituted that blue ribbon board. Moreover, I felt that the movement could use an LDS perspective to balance some of the more radical views held by some of its members. The board came under a great deal of attack from the far right, but I knew from my own involvement with SIECUS that their charges of communist allegiance and corrupted morals were baseless and irresponsible. Even when a little filmstrip put out by the John Birch Society entitled "The Rape of Innocence" singled out me and two other board members as "comrades" with red hammers and sickles superimposed on our photos and referred to us as the corrupters of youth, I was more flattered than perturbed. I knew I was no such thing and that the entire purpose of the sex education movement was to inform children about their own bodies and about the realities of the sociosexual world, which information could not corrupt them. Ignorance can corrupt, not information. Besides, I flattered myself that I was at that time anxiously engaged in good works and bringing to pass much righteousness as president of the Central Pennsylvania District of the Pennsylvania Mission, which stretched across the entire rural diagonal of the state, at various times including branches as remote as Scranton-Wilkes-Barre in the northeast and Uniontown in the southwest corner of the state. Every Sunday I was on the road in all types of weather, shoring up the Saints and helping to sustain the struggling branches throughout the area. The work was gratifying, the people were responsive, even the statistics looked good (compared to other districts of similar makeup). I knew I was guided by the Lord in my ministry, and I felt comfortable with the virtue of my work in the sex education movement, too.

As a result I was totally unprepared for what happenedÂ . . . well, no, that is not true. The Lord had actually prepared me in a fashion that I did not appreciate until later. I had received a letter from a professional colleague whom I had known for years and who, like myself, was involved in Church leadership positions and in what he used to refer to as the "forefront of the explosion of information and understanding of man's sexual nature." His interests were different from mine and, in my view, more fringy. Among other things, he had become involved in research into nudist groups and had eventually come to feel that the innocent frankness of the sunshine set was wholesome and ought to be emulated. Apparently he had discussed his activities and enthusiasms with his own stake president, who had taken a sophisticated, permissive posture on the matter. But eventually my colleague wrote a paper on his work that attracted general media attention and prompted a letter from a General Authority who suggested that the roles of priesthood leader and nudist advocate were incompatible and that he would have to choose which he wanted to be.

He was mortally offended and intellectually outraged. He was confident that the Brethren were reflecting their "Wasatch-Front" culture and not the will of the Lord, who, he pointed out, had created us naked. But he was also shaken to be put in jeopardy of losing his capacity to serve in the Church. He wrote me an agonizing letter asking for my counsel, feeling that I might be someone who could understand his plight.

I took the responsibility of replying very seriously. I began by acknowledging that it was cheap to give advice from the outside of a situation but that I had tried to put myself in his place, supposing that, for example, the Brethren had come out against sex education, which I was passionately committed to. Then I told him that I had searched my soul as deeply as I could as to how I would respond in that situation and that I could come up with only two possibilities: either 1) I would conclude that the Brethren were exercising their appointed duty to keep watch over the Church and were legitimately calling me back from a path I had wandered into that could lead me away from the goal that we all share, or 2) I would conclude that the Brethren were reacting to my work from a position of differing cultural and generational background, rather than revelation; but in that case I would consider it my duty to make the Abrahamic sacrifice and sustain them anyway, as I have, after all, covenanted to do. I could not, for myself, entertain any third alternative.

Three weeks later my family and I were watching general conference on television, and we heard President Alvin R. Dyer of the First Presidency describe SIECUS (by then, I was a member of the five-person executive committee) as an organization led by evil and conspiring men who were seeking to lead the youth of our nation astray. I felt as though I had been cleaved asunder by an ax. There were only three men on the executive committee, and two of us were Mormons. My oldest daughter got up and stomped out of the room, declaring that she didn't listen to conference to hear her father slandered. Once I recovered enough to begin to think clearly, I decided that what had surely happened was that some of the scurrilous anti-sex education material put out by the far right had been given to the Brethren. Taken at face value, it would alarm anyone. What I needed to do was write for an appointment with President Dyer to put the record straight. But before I wrote to Church headquarters, I went to my office at the university and pulled out my correspondence file to reread the letter I had written to my friend. As events transpired, he chose not to follow my counsel, but I did. I fully believe the Lord provided that opportunity for me to be able to formulate my response in a nondefensive mood so that when I needed it, I was certain what I must do.

President Dyer did agree to meet with me and the other Mormon on the SIECUS executive committee. To my surprise he brought with him a staff (for some reason it had escaped my awareness that General Authorities had staffs) who in turn brought a traveling file drawer with every article I and the other brother and the rest of the SIECUS Board had ever written—all content analyzed. Actually they did not criticize my own writing, but they did find in general that the SIECUS position was value-free and that that was exactly the opposite of the gospel position. My colleague tried to defend this as the position required of all scientists and scholars, but President Dyer kept coming back to the point that it was contrary to the gospel position to treat these matters in a value-neutral way.

The bottom line was that it would please the Brethren if we let our association with SIECUS lapse, lest we lend our reputations to a movement that ran counter to the Plan. In all honesty, my nonrenewable term was about up, so it was little sacrifice to agree to follow their counsel (it was not coercive; there were no threats). I did ask what I should do about the address urging parents to take a more active role in the sex education of their children, which I had contracted to give in New York at the American Medical Association meetings and also in San Francisco at the National School Board Association meeting that June. President Dyer suggested I submit the talk to President McKay. I did and received back a letter approving the talk "provided it was delivered with the proper spirit."

That may be the only talk on behalf of sex education ever approved by a prophet. It is also the only time in my life I gave a speech with no jokes or ad-libs, exactly as it was written.

But a hard thing happened just a week or two after my meeting with President Dyer and his staff. Someone confided to me that he had overheard a visiting General Authority tell the mission president that if he were in the president's place, he wouldn't leave a man like me in a position of authority for five minutes. The following Sunday the mission president made an unscheduled visit to our district and released me. He had a hard time explaining why he was doing it, so I helped him out: "Nothing personal, just to give various brethren a chance to serve, right?" "Oh yes! That's it!" he replied gratefully.

I was wounded. I felt I had taken counsel and done everything I had been asked to do; in fact, no one had ever accused me of doing anything wrong, yet I felt I was being punished. I loved the people of my district, and I loved the particular claim on the Spirit of the Lord that is incident to such a calling. I had plans and projects and commitments that would now fall to another to implement or ignore. For a year following that, my only calling was as a home teacher.

I will say on my own behalf that I did not withdraw from Church or from my personal prayers. I never spoke a word of complaint to anyone, including my wife and children. I do not remember taxing the Lord with the unfairness of it all, but in my heart I felt that I had been tried out of court and blackballed. At thirty-eight, I felt that my years of service to the Church had been unfairly, prematurely, and permanently ended.

Soon afterward I got a job offer from the University of Southern California. It was an exciting opportunity, and all of our relatives were in California, but I would never have left the Central Penn District if I had not been previously released from my responsibilities to it.

Our new stake president was a contractor and had never heard of me or of SIECUS. He came to like me, and within a few months of our arrival, I was the stake Sunday School president and then stake Young Men president. After about a year they split our ward. As always happens when the news of such a plan is announced, there was speculation about who the new leadership would be. I had myself participated in the process of dividing Church units and felt I knew how it worked. As it happened, on our side of the line there were a couple of older brethren who had been bishops twenty years before and a whole rash of young couples in their late twenties with small children—but in the middle, in their thirties and forties, the bracket from which bishops are usually chosen, there was an echoing emptiness—except for me. Frankly, if I had been the stake president, I would have chosen me as bishop. Nor did this possibility escape the notice of others. People started calling me "Bishop" and watched my response to get a clue if they were right. At least one such was the wife of a high councilor. I figured she might know. I got a haircut and waited for the call. It never came. The twenty-seven-year-old elders quorum president was sustained.

The scenario was plain to me. The stake president had nominated me, the high council had approved the nomination (leaked it to their wives), and sent it on to Salt Lake City—where it had been disapproved on the grounds of my work with SIECUS. I smiled grimly at the scramble there must have been to come up with the substitute candidate in time for the advertised date.

However, I continued to serve as the stake Young Men president, and when the second counselor in the stake presidency moved, the stake president started to use me informally as a counselor. Then, when stake conference came, I overheard a somewhat heated discussion between the president and the visiting General Authority in which my name was mentioned. The conference came and went, and the second counselor's chair remained empty. Once again I had no trouble imagining exactly what had happened.

However, three months later the stake was divided, and I was sustained as second counselor. I was amazed and could only conclude that the Brethren had yielded to the stake president's importunity, doubtless charging him to keep a close supervisory eye on me.

A year and a half later, when the stake presidency was reorganized, I was confident that the first counselor, an excellent, well-organized man would succeed to the post. Elder Boyd K. Packer was the visiting authority, and although I had always admired him, I knew he had the reputation of being one of the more conservative of the Brethren.

I believe many were surprised when I was chosen as the stake president, but none more than I.

In order to check my perspective, I, as president, went back in the minutes of the stake presidency to see whether I had been right about what had happened. I wasn't. I had never been nominated for bishop. When I later asked the former president why not, he answered, "Why would I do that? I was grooming you to be my replacement." He also told me that the heated exchange I had assumed was over my appointment to the counselor's spot had nothing to do with me. The president had not submitted the nomination to Salt Lake City in advance, feeling that with a General Authority scheduled to attend the conference it would not be necessary. He was told that that was not the way to proceed and that he needed to send in the paper work and wait three months until the stake division for his new counselor.

The "blackball" had been a figment of my imagination. I had suffered needlessly. Yet I suppose it does not matter very much if the trial of one's faith is based on a real or only a fancied issue. There is value in the experience.

The seven years I served as president of the Cerritos California Stake were among the most satisfying of my life. I am not certain how others would characterize my presidency but my own goals were: 1) to focus the teaching and preaching and testifying in the stake on the Savior and his mission, 2) to establish scriptural scholarship at the expense of creative theology, and 3) to govern by the handbook and to do all within my power to encourage the other leaders in the stake to do likewise.

When the letter came informing me of my imminent release (it came a year sooner than I had hoped, but this time I resisted the temptation to interpret the move), I recommended myself to the Los Angeles Temple presidency as an ordinance worker and called the brother teaching the Gospel Doctrine class in my ward to the high council. These two responsibilities, I knew, would provide the structured opportunities for spiritual feeding that I would need to deal with the withdrawal symptoms associated with no longer being the stake president.

These have been the main currents in my life as I have striven to integrate and coordinate my intellectual and my spiritual life, but of course there have been many points at which the struggle has been joined over the years. Among them are these:

The Church's Policy of Blacks Not Being Permitted to Hold the Priesthood

During the years that this policy prevailed in the Church, I had many very difficult confrontations with friends and acquaintances, both black and white, who could not understand how I could support a church that promulgated such doctrine. My only answer then and now is that the priesthood belongs to God, not to me or mankind. He is not accountable to me as to how he uses it and distributes it. His ways are just, but he has never explained, so far as I know, the basis of his former policy or of its change. I am grateful, personally, to live in the time of universal access to priesthood blessings.

Succession in the First Presidency

It has sometimes been painful for me to see the struggle that some of the General Authorities have had in performing their duties in the face of overwhelming illness, weariness, and old age. I have often wondered whether a policy that permitted members of the Twelve and the First Presidency to retire when they can no longer function would not be kinder and more effective. I confess that I am one who, at the time when President McKay was lingering beyond his ability to function, wondered aloud whether this was the Lord's means of protecting Joseph Fielding Smith from the burdens of that onerous office, and I more recently wondered also about a similar function in President Kimball's extended illness. However, when President Smith survived to take the mantle of the prophet, I was given a surging testimony that the Lord was the architect of that transition (as did everyone who was attuned to the Spirit at that time). More recently I have had a witness that President Ezra Taft Benson was elected by the Lord, not by chance. On another occasion I remember deciding that it was not kind of the Saints to keep President Kimball alive with their prayers and decided to be courageous enough to take a more enlightened approach and pray for the Lord to take him home. I experienced such a darkness of spirit on that occasion that I will never make that mistake again.

I still do not pretend to understand why the Lord uses this system rather than others I could recommend, but I have a perfect faith that at this point it is his will that is being done.

Evolution

From my youth forward, it has been clear to me that a Latter-day Saint is required to believe that Adam and Eve were real people from whom we are all descended. Beyond that I have felt that we know next to nothing about the creation of the earth or its calendar. I think it presumptuous for someone who could not repair his own TV set to think that he understands how the universe was put into operation. As I understand it, the Lord has promised to reveal more about this at some future time (see D&C 121:28-31). In the meantime I am content to have geologists and biologists put together the information available to them according to the best models they can devise. When the full truth is revealed it will encompass all that is real, not merely all that is in the understanding of a particular person or group of persons. If dinosaurs were some cruel hoax, would God have buried so many in Utah?

Homosexuality

I think that I am as knowledgeable about the condition we call homosexuality as any heterosexual in the Church. My life has brought me into close association with many fine people whom, fortunately, I had the privilege of knowing well before I knew of their sexual orientation. My professional activities have led me to be a student of the research on this condition. As a priesthood leader and as a therapist I have worked with many people over the years as they have struggled with difficulties they face in resolving the tensions between the homosexual lifestyle and the gospel path. No one knows what determines that one individual will be drawn toward members of his own sex and another to the opposite sex. There is beginning to be some evidence that there may be a biochemical factor. Perhaps certain life experiences make the opposite sex seem more dangerous and less attractive to some than to others. Whatever the origins, I have never met a homosexual who remembered choosing to be so oriented. Each experiences it as an unbidden affliction.

Given that premise, it has nevertheless been my observation that those who act on those unbidden feelings lose the Spirit and before they know it are pulled step by step into a world at complete odds with the Kingdom. Those who earnestly seek to conform to the Plan are provided small miracle after small miracle until they are able to experience every blessing of the gospel. I have yet to find an exception to this rule. This puts me at odds with both those who treat men and women with homosexual feelings as though they were voluntary perverts and also with those who insist that there can be no genuine reconciliation between such persons and the highest standards of the Kingdom.

Church History with and without Warts

I am impressed with the enormous amount of scholarship that has, in recent years, provided us with a far more textured picture of our history. I am not always equally impressed with the intellectual honesty of those writing some of that history. I have always believed that whatever is true should not be flinched from. But I am often appalled at the criterion for truth that some embrace. It is fashionable these days to portray Joseph Smith as a charismatic leader who, however, did have a certain tendency for creative thinking and sexual adventurism. When I read such historical accounts I always check the footnotes. It is not too surprising to find that the evidence for these "historical" conclusions is the testimony of those who hated him and did all in their power to destroy him. It does not seem to me to be good historical practice to present such material as though it were true rather than merely alleged. Indeed, many of these allegations were made in Joseph's lifetime. Concerning those who made them, the Lord made a number of uncomplimentary and cautionary declarations (see D&C 121:11-20). Out of my own experience with the Spirit of the Lord I know that Joseph could not have done the salacious and self-serving things they said he did with the motivations they ascribed to him because if he had, he would have been deserted by the Spirit and replaced by one who would keep a pure heart.

In a similar vein, I find any analysis of post-Manifesto polygamy suspect, which accepts the self-serving claims of those facing Church courts at face value while placing no value at all on the testimony of the men in the First Presidency. I would not mind if they cited both and let the reader make up his own mind as to whom to believe, but I object to their taking one set as the truth and the other as the lie in their presentation.

At the beginning of this article I suggested that I have attempted to achieve my mother's faith and my stepfather's scholarship. I have been richly blessed by both pursuits, but of the two, faith is at my core, rooted in my most unchallengeable experiences. Scholarship is my most valued auxiliary. Through it my mind is enriched, my relationships enlivened, my living procured, and such worldly reputation as I have, sustained. But I never forget that when the Savior greets me at the veil, it will not be my scholarship that will be examined.
