Carlfred Broderick, My Parents Married on a Dare and Other Favorite Essays on Life ( 1996)

CHAPTER FOUR

Summing It Up (Or, Why Let Somebody Else Write Your Obituary?)

It is a bit presumptuous and some would say morbid to write one's own obituary. On the other hand, I have reached the age where I am attending many more funerals than weddings, and it seems natural to me to start thinking about one's mortality and to do a sort of life review at this point. Although Kathleen and I are looking forward to our retirement from the University in a couple of years and going on the mission we missed in our youth, at the moment that I wrote this I was in the midst of a health crisis that cast some shadow on whether or not we would be permitted to fulfill that plan. Happily, the crisis passed, but the opportunity it provoked for a serious life review was valuable.

Lives have themes, and in retrospect, I could say that the most meaningful themes of my life have been these: From the beginning I was a performer and an educator; as I matured, I became a healer and a patriarch.

Performer: I think I came by this genetically. I never knew my paternal relatives (and barely remember my father, since my mother divorced him when I was only one and a half years old and he dropped out of my life altogether a very few years after that). So I have no idea of their contribution to my genetic propensities, but my mother and her father were natural performers. By the time I was six, I was already volunteering to be the "minuteman" to fill in for the children who had forgotten their assigned 2-1/2 minute talks for Sunday School opening exercises. I remember on one occasion having to be manhandled from the podium because I was telling the story of Joseph who was sold into Egypt, and I was already running ten minutes over with no end in sight. I never had the voice for serious solo work, but I was in a choir every year of my life from fifth grade through about age forty (when I got too busy with other things), and I never shrank from a solo or duet if it was musical comedy rather than inspirational music that was needed. I was in a quartet in high school—The Flapjack Four—and we did the Kiwanian circuit. But my biggest thrills were found in stage shows: The Mikado, in high school (I played Pooh Bah), and in later years in State College, Pennsylvania, where I played the father in the Amish musical Plain and Fancy and the lawyer in Mame. In still later years, in Cerritos, California, I was in almost every stake road show, some years as the music director, every year as a performer. In the '70s I was on the Tonight Show with Jonny Carson ten times, masquerading as an expert on marriage and sex, but always going for a better audience response than the host.

Educator: As a kid I thought I knew everything, and I was nothing loath to share my knowledge. Two incidents come to mind. When I was ten I was sent home from Sunday School because I had explained to the class what "Thou shalt not commit adultery" meant. (It was clear to me from her explanation that the teacher didn't have a clue.) That same year, at YMCA summer camp, I got into a scripturally documented hour-long discussion on religion with another boy, which earned me the nickname "Moses." In high school, Kathleen's affectionate nickname for me was "Professor," and at church they had me teaching the seventeen-year-olds in Sunday School while I was still that age myself. Over the years I have learned (sometimes painfully) the limits of my erudition, but I have never given up teaching or, as some would say, teaching-performing. That has been my secular profession, and whatever my Church calling, I always found some way of turning it into a teaching situation. For example, only a year or two after I became a temple worker, I was called to be a trainer, and I think most who worked closely with me while I served as stake president would agree that that was the aspect of the job that I most enjoyed (I did my best to delegate most of the rest to my counselors).

Healer: One who knew my family might argue that I came by this talent as naturally as I inherited my penchant for performing. My maternal grandmother was a nurse, and my mother was a world-class natural healer of the unlovables of this world. But, although I suppose I was generally a cheerful and prosocial person all my life, as a young person I had no particular sensitivity to others' pain nor insight into their circumstances. Whatever healing arts I ultimately may have acquired came to me through professional and Church service opportunities during my adult years. I shall be eternally grateful for the opportunities that I have been provided to assist in the healing process in the lives of a number of remarkable persons. In many cases it has been a very personal encounter. In others, it has been over the podium or through books or articles. My patriarchal blessing promised me that I would write literature that would bless, and many individuals over the years have been kind enough to let me know that in their case, that was fulfilled. Few things could be more satisfying.

Patriarch: I don't remember when it became clear to me, some time in my late thirties or early forties, that my greatest contribution on this earth would be as a father to remarkable children (within the extraordinary partnership of my quite incomparable marriage). It was never Kathleen's or my challenge to wrestle with rebellious spirits. Ours intuitively loved what was good and true and righteous from the beginning. All they required was teaching. They were eager, even demanding learners. They will be eager and demanding teachers of their own children. In proud moments, I think of Kathleen and me as founders of a dynasty of committed parents and spiritual leaders. To have been called to the office of patriarch in the Church in my mature years is the cherry on the (chocolate) patriarchal sundae.

My children know that I know and love the Lord and am committed to serve him to the end. They know that I am a witness of the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ through the instrumentality of Joseph Smith, that I love the scriptures, modern and ancient, and support the Brethren with a full heart. They know that second only to this knowledge, my greatest gift to them is their incomparable mother and the seamless love we have for each other and for them.
