Carlfred Broderick, My Parents Married on a Dare and Other Favorite Essays on Life ( 1996)

CHAPTER SIX

Marital Danger Zones

Since dealing with marital problems is what I do for a living, you probably would think that an invitation from This People magazine to "do a piece for us on avoiding marriage problems" wouldn't be much of a challenge. On the other hand, remember that I have already written a college text, Marriage and the Family, a secular trade book, Couples, and a book for Church members, One Flesh, One Heart, plus any number of articles on the subject for various magazines and books. It is not that easy to come up with a piece that says something worth reading that you haven't already addressed in one of the above. Then if you think about all of the other people in the field and the hundreds of books and thousands of articles they have written, well, fresh material isn't that easy to come by. And even if you can think of a worthwhile idea that hasn't been gone over a hundred times, try coming up with a title that is engaging and descriptive and not yet threadbare from overuse.

Happily, in this case, when the invitation from This People arrived in the mail, I had just come back from the annual meetings of the American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy where I had heard John Gottman report on his wonderfully informative longitudinal study of what makes marriages tick (or quit ticking) (John M. Gottman, What Predicts Divorce? The Relationship between Marital Processes and Marital Outcomes [Minneapolis: National Council on Family Relations], 1995). The Gottman report had stimulated my thinking about an idea that I had often found useful in counseling married couples but had never gotten around to writing up. So I had the content; but what about a title? We (the editors and I) eventually settled on "Marital Danger Zones," mainly because it was an eye-catcher and because I couldn't think of an equally good title that conveyed the idea of shifting marital gears. In any case, here it is.

The sensor taped to his palm showed that his hands were starting to sweat, his blood pressure was creeping up, and his heartbeat was beginning to reflect his rising level of stress. On the video monitor the experimenters could see that he was growing red in the face as his wife persisted:

Michael, listen to what I'm saying; this is important! The romance has gone from our marriage . . . gone . . . I don't know where, but it's going, going, gone! We never talk to each other about our feelings anymore, we never . . . Michael, are you listening to me?

According to the stress indicators, his level of discomfort is easing off a little. The observers note that his eyes have glazed over, and he appears to be focused on some fixed point just over his wife's left shoulder. The female observer turns to her male colleague and remarks, "Oh-oh! She's taken out after him, and he's retreated into never-never land."

They recognize the signs. This couple has just passed into the "Marital Danger Zone."

Five years of longitudinal research has shown that if this pattern becomes established as a regular feature of their "intimate discussions," they will find themselves in the highest-risk category for marital breakup. It is hard to say whether it is the husband's entrenched avoidance or the wife's dogged pursuit that starts the cycle. It is clear, however, that it takes both to keep it going to its final, maritally fatal end. The more he avoids engaging with her in "meaningful discussions," the more she provokes such an engagement. I have known at least one man to lock himself in the bathroom to escape, only to have his wife take the hinges off the door to get at him.

Eventually, of course, she gets disgusted with his refusing to involve himself in serious communication with her. At this point, she withdraws, "having done everything it was possible to do to make this marriage work." In this kind of deteriorating relationship, it is most often she who initiates the separation and eventual divorce.

There may actually be a biological basis for this pattern. Just as men, on the average, are bigger and stronger than their wives and will usually end up inflicting the most damage in a violent brawl, so women are advantaged in verbal-emotional exchanges and can usually get the best of their male partner in contests of this type. Some years ago, it was discovered that women, on the average, have 25 to 50 percent more neural connectors between the feeling centers of the right brain and the verbal centers of the left brain than do men. So, when a woman wants to have a deep discussion with her husband on matters of vital importance to their marriage, and, for starters, she asks him to tell her exactly how he feels about their relationship, and he says, "I feel fine about it," and she says, "No, I want you to open up and share your deepest feelings with me, your fears, your disappointments, your hopes, your dreams," and he says, "Well, it would be nice to have sex a little more often," and that's all she can get out of him, it may be more than selfish, hormonally driven, stubborn non-cooperation on his part. We may be dealing here, literally, with a deficit in his hard-wiring.

There is, of course, a certain inequity in this arrangement. In our culture, women daily use their biological advantage with society's full approval, while men who use their advantage go to jail, or at least end up in a meaningful interview with the bishop. But that's beyond the scope of this discussion.

The key, however, lies not in the biological inequality. Men can (and most men do) live together peacefully with physically smaller and weaker mates, never allowing their differences of opinion to escalate into a violent free-for-all. Women can (and most women do) live together with emotionally inarticulate mates without resorting to the kind of relentless attack to which Michael was subjected in the earlier paragraph. The key lies in an attitude, not in a difference. Every couple has differences in strengths of every kind. Every couple has differences of opinion as to how the relationship might be improved. Yet, most couples (well, about half, anyway) manage to deal with these differences in ways that do not destroy the relationship. What kills marriages is competitive contests of will. Contests where, if he wins, she loses or where she can only triumph at his expense.

In this type of marriage there is never a shared victory. And couples need shared victories. The competition needs to be between the couple and the outside world, not between team members.

Latter-day Saints with temple marriages are not immune to falling into the toxic trap of competition. In fact, it seems to me that they are particularly vulnerable to it. Both men and women in the Church are rewarded for being good competitors. Whether in volleyball or scripture chase or in the race to be touted in the mission newsletter as the "Top Baptizers of the Month," we are encouraged to put our all into beating the other guys. The Good Sportsmanship Trophy is not much coveted.

I am not suggesting that the Church abandon its systematic training of fierce competitors. Occasionally we are reminded by Church leaders that there might be better motivation for improved home teaching or temple attendance than a free steak dinner for the winning quorum and beans for the losers, or to show the First Ward that we can beat them in virtue just like we beat them in basketball. Initially, I am always encouraged by this renewed evidence of the Brethren's faith in the transtelestial quality of members' motivation to do good. But it never seems to work. At least in my observation, no sooner are the quotas and competitions banned than we see home teaching sag, temple attendance drop off, and district baptism rates hit new lows. In our culture, it may be that, telestial or not, the competitive value is too deeply embedded to be easily replaced by a finer, more celestial (or at least terrestrial) motivation.

Having admitted that, it remains true that between husband and wife, competition does not result in improved performance. All too often, it just fast-forwards the marital drama to the closing credits.

The same researchers who identified the toxic pattern of competition found that the best single-item predictor of long-term marital success among the couples they studied was "Husband voluntarily and cheerfully participates in the housework." There may be a number of reasons why this item turned out to be such a powerful predictor, but my guess is that it has to do with attitudes. The husband who pitches in to do his share without having to be cajoled is clearly a team player. His enemy is not his wife; she is his invaluable ally in the unceasing battle against the common enemy—those famous and all-too-familiar "slings and arrows of outrageous fortune."

On the surface, the dilemmas of biological inequality and misplaced competition appear to be unresolvable. Fortunately, there is a very practical solution to these and other sources of tension in marriage. This unheralded technique and its amazing effectiveness, successfully employed by countless couples who don't even know they are using it, first came to my attention in the midst of some research on a very different type of marital challenge.

Many Navy wives are faced with the necessity of adapting to the stressful duty-rotation that separates them from their husbands for six months of every year. As any single mother knows, trying to run a household without a partner can be tough. Actually, the research team was impressed with how well these temporarily single women handled the challenge. With a minimum of flailing about, virtually all of them found the means to handle the tasks that their husbands took care of when they were home. Some took over the jobs themselves; some pressed older children into service; some accepted generous offers of assistance from neighbors' husbands who were assigned to shore duty for those six months; all found a way to manage.

The far more difficult task was to move aside to make room for the husband when he came home. Suddenly, this independent woman found herself accountable to her returning warrior for how she spent her time, how she managed the family resources, whom she talked to on the phone, and how she disciplined the kids. The children found they had to deal with different (and almost always more restrictive) rules. Suddenly, they couldn't stay up as late, or stay over at their friend's place, or wear makeup. In most homes, the husband's return was anticipated with ambivalence and experienced as a period of tension and conflict.

But not in all. In a certain subset of homes, the transition was accomplished smoothly. It wasn't that the family rules didn't have to change as the husband/father reentered the family. They did. But it all happened with a minimum of resentment and contention. What was the mechanism that made it work?

One of the wives in the smooth-transition families explained it to us. "I know just what you are talking about," she said, "and it's really very simple. We have a gear shift."

"A gear shift?"

"Yes. When Daddy's away, we all operate in Sea Duty Gear, and when he's home, we all shift to Shore Duty Gear."

We checked the concept out with other members from smooth-transition families, and they agreed that was a good description of how it worked for them. Everybody recognized that there were different house rules when Dad was home. It was part of the package. As one put it, "It's like the change of seasons where I grew up. No sense in fighting it. Just put on your overcoat and boots and enjoy the good parts."

Daddy's home. Shift. Daddy's gone. Shift. Daddy's home again. Shift again. Everybody knows the rules. Everybody understands the need. Everybody shifts without even thinking much about it when the time comes.

That is a tremendously important idea. Once it is understood, one can see many applications in family living. At home you can get away with tearing around the house and pounding on the piano, but at Grandma's, Shift. New rules, and everybody knows what they are. Study after study has found that it is the flexible families, the adjustable families, the families with a built-in shift mechanism that thrive in this checkered world.

Which brings us back to how a couple can strive successfully in a competitive environment all day and leave that style behind as they approach the driveway of their own home. How can they survive among the predators in the world, living by the telestial, dog-eat-dog laws of the secular jungle, and still live in a loving, mutually supportive marriage? The answer is, learn to shift! If you don't, you will have no protection from the dread effects of spillover, which is the sociological term for bringing the world home with you.

Thoroughgoing competitors will find this difficult at first. Perhaps it has never occurred to them that there ought to be a major sphere of life where the rules of competition are set aside and the rules of cooperation apply. On the other hand, each and every one of them will have accumulated a large body of personal experience attesting to the fact that competition really doesn't work very well between marital partners.

After considering the matter soberly, many will conclude that it is in their own best interest, and entirely within their own power, to try it the other way. For the experiment to succeed, it is a great advantage if one has had some previous experience with playing by terrestrial rules, that is, practice in being honorable, honest, kind, and considerate in an ongoing relationship. Many may never have experienced these rules in operation in the homes where they grew up, but most will have encountered them somewhere. (Notice, I say nothing of celestial rules. In my experience, they are not much applied anywhere in this life, except in sermons.)

Some, on reading this, will observe that they have always understood this principle, and may with justifiable pride and gratitude, mentally pat their own well-lubricated transmission box. Others (mainly women) will be very excited about sharing this article with their husbands, even if they have to take the hinges off the bathroom door to get them to read it. Still others (mostly men) will find their palms sweating and their blood pressure rising at the very broaching of the subject. I wish each and every one the lawful consequences of their own choices in the matter.
