Carlfred Broderick, My Parents Married on a Dare and Other Favorite Essays on Life ( 1996)

CHAPTER EIGHT

Surviving (Eternal) Marriage

I had lunch once with two old friends: one a Protestant minister, who ran one of the campus religious centers, and the other a member of the faculty of the law school. The conversation drifted to the topic of of lawyer-bashing jokes. Among the more elaborate examples offered (by the minister, in this case) was the following:

A very much in love young couple were on their way to the wedding chapel to be united in holy matrimony, and only a few dozen yards from their destination, they were hit by a truck and were killed. At the Pearly Gates, St. Peter offered to grant them the standard righteous-desire-of-their-hearts. He was taken aback, however, when they insisted in a single voice that they had only one desire and that was to complete the wedding ceremony that they had been so rudely and unjustly cheated out of. St. Peter tried to explain that they were making a highly irregular—even improper—request. There was no marrying or giving in marriage in heaven . . . it just wasn't done. But they were adamant. Heaven wouldn't be heaven unless they could be together, et cetera, et cetera. Finally, St. Peter said, "Okay, okay, I'll check into it, but this may take some doing, so be patient." But they were not patient. Every day they checked two or three times to see if any progress had been made toward granting their desire. Each time, Peter said, "I'm working on it, I'm working on it." Finally, after three seemingly endless weeks of intense longing, the good news came. It had been arranged.

The ceremony was lovely, but simple—just the minister, the two of them, and St. Peter and one other angel, who served as witnesses. Afterwards they set up housekeeping in their own heavenly love nest. But things did not go well. Small disappointments and disagreements escalated into major quarrels. Major quarrels escalated into knock-down, drag-out fights. After only a few weeks they returned to St. Peter demanding a divorce. "A divorce!" he said. "After all the trouble I had to get you married!"

"Believe me," said the man, "it wouldn't be heaven if I had to live with this shrew for eternity!" "I demand my rights to personal privacy and peace," said the woman, "and I don't get a moment of either with this monster. I demand a divorce!"

St. Peter looked at them for a long moment. "You really don't know what you're asking," he said, shaking his head wearily. "It took me three weeks to find a minister up here. Do you have any idea how long it will take me to find a lawyer?"

It was a clever joke on three counts: It zinged the minister who told it; it double-zinged the lawyer; and even more slyly, it triple-zinged the third member of the group, who was known to be a Mormon and an advocate of the doctrine of eternal marriage. The point scored all too painfully. How often have I heard those very words from couples sealed for time and all eternity in the temples of our God (closer to the "Pearly Gates" than the storyteller could imagine). "It just wouldn't be the celestial kingdom if I had to be tied to this miserable person for all eternity." Secular divorce rates stabilized at an all-time high in about 1979. Divorce rates for temple marriages, historically several times lower than secular rates, have continued to climb, gradually narrowing the gap that separates the two. The current survival rate for temple marriages is not overly impressive.

Often I have asked myself why this is so. Latter-day Saints know the principles of eternal unity. I am persuaded that there is no principle of successful marital life that I could share with good LDS couples that would be new to them. In fact, any principle that purported to be true and crucial to successful living that was new to them should be immediately suspect. The laws governing marital satisfaction are but special applications of the laws of the gospel, and every good Latter-day Saint learned them in Primary (or, in the case of converts, in the six missionary discussions and the twelve Gospel Essentials classes). The problem seems to come in making the special applications from general gospel principles to the specific marital situation.

The point was vividly illustrated in a recent experience I had with a colleague. He is Jewish and one of the finest family therapists I know. I have referred close friends and relatives to him with good results. One day a woman called me to see if she could make an appointment to bring in her family for some counseling. Their problem was a rebellious teenager and an escalating power struggle between her and her parents that was getting out of hand.

Without minimizing the seriousness of this type of problem, it must be acknowledged that it is a common bread-and-butter sort of issue for family therapists. They deal with various versions of it every week. Both research and common observation have shown that when kids get into trouble, it is generally a case of too little supervision and too few consequences for breaking family rules, or, equally often, a case of too many rigid rules and overly strict and intrusive enforcement leading to rebellion. In the first case the therapist works with the family to set up a more structured home environment. In the second case the therapist works with the family to unwind the system a little.

This family who called appeared to be of the second type. As it happened, they lived on the opposite side of Los Angeles from me and quite near my good Jewish colleague. I suggested that they might wish to save themselves the long drive and trust their problem to this excellent clinician. They agreed that this was a sensible suggestion and started to work with him.

After only a couple of weeks, I got a call from my friend. "Carl, I need some help with this couple you referred to me."

"What's the problem? They probably just need to loosen up the parental iron fist a little."

"That's right. If they don't, this kid is about to run away from home or attempt suicide or do something else drastic. But, Carl, every time I suggest any movement in the direction of loosening up, they patiently explain to me that I just don't understand their religious obligation, as Mormon parents, to keep this kid in line. Frankly, I don't know how to deal with this. I don't want to attack their religious beliefs, but the situation is explosive."

I thought a moment and then said, "Here's what you do. First, tell them that during the time you have been working with them, you have developed a real curiosity about the Mormon religion. This will serve to get their attention. Then say that there is one issue that keeps coming up when you ask about it that has you mystified. You keep hearing about some 'war in heaven,' but you can never quite figure out what it is about."

"That's it? I just ask them to explain the 'war in heaven'?"

"That's it."

"Carl, what's the war in heaven?"

"It doesn't matter; just do what I said and let me know how it goes."

A few days later he called. "Carl, I can't believe it. I did what you said, and it was like magic."

"So tell me about the session."

"Well, as you suggested, I told them that since I started working with them I had gotten sort of interested in the Mormon religion. You wouldn't believe the response. Even the rebellious teenage kid promised to give me a copy of some book on the Church with the family picture in the front. Then I said there was just one thing that kind of confused me about their beliefs. I kept hearing about a war in heaven. What was this war in heaven? Well, the mom didn't as much as take a minute to collect her thoughts. In seconds she had launched into some story about a council in heaven and two plans and she gets about three minutes into it and she stops cold in her tracks and gives me a funny look and says, 'All right, Doctor, you've made your point.' From that moment on they were like putty in my hands. It was like magic. Carl, what is this war in heaven?"

Of course, there was no magic. This good LDS woman simply had the unnerving experience of explaining Satan's plan to an "investigator" and, in the midst of her explanation, recognizing it as substantially her own version of responsible Mormon parenting as she had outlined it to him the week before. She understood the gospel principle fully; she just had been blinded to its applicability to her everyday challenges as a parent.

In the remainder of this chapter, I should like to share three gospel-derived, interrelated marital survival principles that may be labeled collectively The Law of the Harvest. They apply with equal force to temple marriages or to any other kind, but my concern here is with the potential eternal union. When these principles are observed, husband-wife relationships prosper; when they are ignored, relationships wither and die and, in that process, become toxic to the souls of the participants.

PRINCIPLE I: WATER, FEED, AND FERTILIZE

The first principle related to the Law of the Harvest is this: Marital relationships, like all living things, require regular nourishment to thrive. This point is vividly illustrated by a series of studies on the impact of pregnancy and childbirth on marital morale. One set of investigators tracked marital morale among a group of couples over the first five years of their marriage. They noted that among those who had no children over the five-year span, there was a slow but steady decline in the enthusiasm the couple had for the marriage. This effect had been observed in other studies and seems to be the normal result of the disillusionment that occurs when the often unrealistic expectations many couples bring with them to marriage collide with the complexities of actual marriage experience.

Couples who had a child during this initial five-year span of marriage also experienced this expected decline, but in addition, suffered a precipitous drop-off in marital morale during the pregnancy and the early infancy of the child. After the first few months of parenthood, the marital morale recovered in some degree, but it never regained the level of those who had no child over the same span of months.

Some of the couples had not one, but two children during the period of the study. These suffered the same loss of marital morale as others during the pregnancy and the early infancy of their first child and then a similar drop with the second child. The recovery from this second dip fell short of the level achieved by those with only one child (let alone the level maintained by those with none).

You can readily appreciate that this finding might be unnerving to someone like my wife and me who have had eight children. If the pattern found in this study held for all eight pregnancies and early infancies, our marital morale should have been doomed to end up in some emotional sub-basement.

The good news is that it doesn't have to be that way. Other studies have shown that some couples manage to inoculate themselves against the loss experienced by most couples in these circumstances. Those who manage to avoid the dip are likely to have three characteristics that set them apart from others.

First, they jointly planned and wanted the baby. Studies show that about half of all babies come as the result of failed contraception. Such babies can be cherished also, but the advantage, both for the child and for the marital relationship, is with the eagerly anticipated and warmly welcomed child.

Second, in these happier couples the husband is very much more likely to have been involved in the pregnancy, the delivery, and the care of the newborn. He is the type who informs himself about fetal development at each stage of the pregnancy and proudly exhibits sonograms to his friends; he is very likely to have attended Lamaze classes and coached his wife through the challenges of the labor and delivery processes; he is available to give the baby its first postpartum bath and is active in its care from that point forward.

Third, these couples do not get so wrapped up in the process of becoming parents that they forget to be marital partners; they plan and protect time to be alone with each other. It may not be possible to achieve this as easily or as often as before the baby complicated their lives, but they manage it regularly and reliably. These occasions are the pillars that support the roof of their marital morale structure. As any architect knows, supports do not need to be placed right next to each other to do the job, but if they are spaced too far apart, the roof will surely sag.

Of course, this principle not only applies to couples coping with becoming parents but is operational also at every other point in the marital relationship. If couples hope to maintain a vital, bountiful relationship, they need to understand that they must protect and nourish it on a regular basis. Part of this is refusing to let other important life tasks (the children, the job, demanding parents, or church assignments) crowd out the prime relationship. They structure their time and energy so that significant segments of their life are shared and so that the pillars of their relationship do not stand too far apart.

PRINCIPLE II: WEED, WEED, WEED

One of the disturbing features of gardens and of relationships is that if you only take thought to nourish the crop you may yet lose the harvest because of weeds. I know many a couple who spend a great deal of time together in shared activities but the result is toxic because the nature of the interaction is noxious. Three of the most common and destructive marital weeds I observe among those with temple marriages are these: 1) well-rationalized mismanagement of anger and disappointment; 2) well-intended but toxic and erosive criticism; and 3) unacknowledged, nonverbal "metamessages" that challenge or demean the partner.

It would not be uncommon for the partner with this destructive, self-indulgent addiction to be married to a spouse who is afflicted with the equal and opposite addiction, the "slow-burning, self-pitying, resentment-hoarding" that never lets go of a hurt and sours both the relationship and the character of the hoarder. Those who have experienced either or both of these styles can testify that they are weeds, indeed, and can choke out many a loving seed that might otherwise thrive.

It should be noted that this intense young physician gave high priority to physical fitness in his own life. His food intake was meticulously monitored as to both balance and amount. He ran six miles before breakfast every morning. He would doubtless have sunk like a rock in the Great Salt Lake. His comment was well-intended. Yet some readers, at least, will not be surprised to learn that despite an enormous amount of well-intended—and knowledgeable—guidance, effort, and supervision on his part, by the time I saw them in therapy eleven years later, far from having lost the original "few pounds," this woman had ballooned up to over 300 pounds. How could this have happened? Especially, how could it have happened given the remarkable good fortune of having a bona fide M.D. weight expert in her own home who was willing to invest any amount of energy or money to help!

If this seems perplexing to you, ask your spouse to explain the dynamics of it.

I do not want to leave the impression that this pattern of toxic but well-intended criticism is a characteristic peculiar to virtuous LDS men. In fact, based on my clinical observation, I would wager that most of the world records in this event are held by faithful, loving, competent, helpful LDS women. The righteous desire of their hearts is to help their foot-dragging patriarchs become the priesthood leaders in their homes that they could and should be, but are not. Often the results of their unflagging efforts are as impressive as our young doctor's, and as disappointing and perplexing.

Studies have shown that the optimal diet for a happy marriage provides a ratio of nine positives (nondemanding touches, kind words, compliments, upbeat comments) for one negative (criticisms, complaints, reminders, accusations, requests, demanding touches). Would you care to guess the national average? Various studies put it at about seven negatives for every three positives. My guess is that this is about the average for temple marriages also, although I know of no research on this population. In any case, most would agree that there is room for improvement in the ratio of positives to negatives in most "celestial-kingdom-bound" relationships.

Because metamessages are rarely put into words they are hard to pin down. Frequently senders deny any intention of sending such messages and may not even acknowledge to themselves the feelings they reveal to the sensitive receivers. But never doubt that relationships thrive or waste away based on the impacts of these relationship-defining exchanges. Again, the findings of a long-term study of marital success and failure come to mind. In this case the investigators had newly married couples participate in a "hot debate" on some subject that they disagreed on. This debate was videotaped and the individuals were also monitored for blood pressure, pulse, and palm sweat. The exercise was repeated every year for five years in one study and nine in another. By the end of that time a certain number had already separated or divorced. The investigators were interested in seeing whether they could identify a "debate" pattern that predicted eventual failure. Surprisingly, the most damaging pattern was not the symmetrical hot debate, despite the yelling that sometimes occurred. The key to these couples' survival was that the metamessage, even in these relative free-for-alls, was "we are equals." The most damaging pattern was a vicious cycle that involved the wife trying to get the husband involved in the discussion and his stonewalling her. One can debate who was the more at fault, him for his stubborn refusal to cooperate or her for her dogged persistence and pursuit. The more relevant point is that the metamessages exchanged by these couples were, "We are competitors for control of this relationship." Independent of the content of the quarrel, the style was a power struggle. Relationships are often the losers in contests of will.

The same study also had another finding that was pertinent to our discussion. Couples were asked to fill out questionnaires before they did the "hot-debate" exercise. The single item that best predicted survival over the whole five- or nine-year course of the study was this: "Husband voluntarily and cheerfully participates in housework." I routinely ask audiences of LDS couples why on earth this item should be so remarkably predictive. Is getting the housework done expeditiously really the key to marital survival? Of course the answer is that it is the relational message in the "voluntarily and cheerfully" part of the question that is the key. The metamessage from the husband to the wife is validating, loving, and egalitarian. One woman came up after the discussion to confide that although she had been reluctant to bring it up in front of all the other couples, for her, "voluntary and cheerful participation in housework" was foreplay.

I cannot sufficiently emphasize the point that we are not typically conscious of the messages we send. My children have pointed out to me a couple of truly embarrassing defects in my own metamessage repertoire. I have always prided myself on my tolerance of other people's opinions. "Let them believe how, where, or what they may" is my motto. I have often bragged that I have encouraged my children to think through issues on their own and that I invited calm and open discussions of any alternative views. As evidence, I have pointed to the 1992 U.S. presidential elections where various members of my family passionately endorsed and voted for each of the three major candidates. But not too many months ago, I was interrupted in the midst of such a boast by one of my children who noted that it wasn't like that at all. What really happened when one of them put forth an opinion at variance to my own, was that I rolled my eyes and sighed (as much as to say, "I can't believe that my own flesh and blood could come up with such an idiotic idea"). Then, I would assume the posture of the tolerant, sponsoring mentor of individual variations of opinion. My attempt to deny any such signal was shouted down by a chorus of affirmations by other family members. "Dad," they said, "your opinions on everything are transparent. Don't you know that when you were bishop nobody ever watched the sacrament meeting speaker? Everybody watched you to see how the speaker was doing."

Even more embarrassing was their further observation (they were on something of a roll at their dad's expense) that I walk ahead of everybody whenever we go out as a group—and sometimes even when I'm on a date with their mother. Ouch! What kind of a metamessage is that? So I'm trying to raise my consciousness on these matters and change my ways. But, I figure that if I who give lectures and write books on this stuff can be so unaware of my own ungracious relational messages, others must find it challenging also. Certainly it is my observation as a therapist and as a people-watcher outside of therapy that I am not alone in this.

PRINCIPLE III: PROTECT FROM PREDATORS

In the Savior's parable of the sower some of the good seed was plucked up by fowls and never survived to fulfill its promise. In this permissive and erotically supersaturated world, we lose a lot of temple marriages to predators. Temple covenants are restrictive, oppressively so, to some who observe all around them people of their own social class and standing enjoying the pleasures of the flesh with the approval of most of their associates. We live in a consumer-oriented culture, and many feel that the "Joneses" are having more fun than they are. Haven't we worked just as hard as they? Yet we are being cheated of many of the gratifications and rewards that others demand as their right.

Others, who would never let themselves be tempted by such obvious Sodom and Gomorrah stuff, are yet led carefully away by ignoring the safety rules that ought to protect one's marital commitment. In their efforts to do good, to comfort those that mourn, to cheer up the brokenhearted, they do not guard themselves from getting first emotionally and then physically involved with needy and appreciative people who happen not to be their spouses. I do not feel the need to belabor the point. If the promise of eternal marriage and exaltation is likened to a seed and a bird eats it, there won't be any rich celestial harvest, whatever the motivation of the bird.

IN CONCLUSION

When it comes to celestial marriage, it is not a matter solely of whether the marriage itself survives, but, as suggested by the title of this piece, whether the individual partners survive with their spiritual well-being intact. One of the hazards of making such lofty promises and indulging in such elevated hopes is that when it all turns sour, as it does in too many cases, the disappointment is as extravagant as the expectation had been. Sometimes Humpty-Dumpty can be put back together again, with or without the help of wise friends, sensitive priesthood leaders, or competent therapists. Sometimes it even happens that the loss of innocence is good for the relationship, in that each partner has learned through their painful experience the importance of prin-ciples they had too cavalierly overlooked.

Sometimes there is no resuscitation possible. The wounding is too great or one's partner has stubbornly turned away from the path that leads home. There is yet survival and even celestial promise for those who endure, faithful to the end. For some, a wiser, richer marriage with a worthy second partner. For some a lonelier journey, lighted by the faith that every modern prophet has taught that our God will withhold no blessing from any of his children that they would willingly receive if the circumstances of their lives permitted it.

For the grateful majority of us, the marriage survives our mistakes, and serves, if we will permit it, as a continuing University of Advanced Gospel Application. The principles we learned in Primary; but the day-to-day applications—ah, there's the continuing challenge.
