Carlfred Broderick, My Parents Married on a Dare and Other Favorite Essays on Life ( 1996)

Part III

Three Pastoral Letters on Christmas

CHAPTER NINE

Reflections on Christmas

For a change of pace, here are three pastoral letters on Christmas.

Every year Deseret Book puts out a little Christmas volume to celebrate the season. For the 1992 version, they invited me to submit something. At first I couldn't think of what to send; then I remembered that every month while I was bishop of the Cerritos Third Ward, I had written pastoral letters to the members. I pulled out the December letters for 1989, 1990, and 1991, and thought they might do. Deseret Book was kind enough to include them in the 1992 volume The Magic of Christmas: A Collection of Stories, Poems, Essays, and Traditions by Favorite LDS Authors. I include them here, hoping that others might enjoy them also.

SYMBOLS OF THE SEASON

I know that most of the symbols associated with the Christmas season have non-Christian origins, but for me, these pagan symbols are like all of us—subject to redemption. By their long and faithful association with the Savior's birth, they have acquired sanctified meanings that transcend their origins. I do not know or care what the original significance of the Christmas tree might have been. To me the evergreens of Christmas are tokens of the hope that life and fragrance and beauty can survive the hostile surrounds of winter. Christ is the true author of eternal life. Through him, we too can survive life's storms and freezes with dignity and vitality. Though planted in a sometimes hostile environment, we too can be evergreen.

To me the lights of Christmas are the tokens of the Light of the World, whose birth we celebrate. As the colored lights of the season brighten our lives and beautify our surroundings and guide us through the chill of night to the warmth of home, so the Savior's love and sacrifice bring hope and joy, and light the way to our eternal destination.

I have heard the custom of exchanging gifts at Christmas vilified as commercialism that detracts from the significance of the day, but to me, nothing better symbolizes the spirit of giving and of sacrifice that we celebrate that day. It reminds me of him who "gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life" (John 3:16), and his promise that "If you keep my commandments and endure to the end you shall have eternal life, which gift is the greatest of all the gifts of God" (D&C 14:7).

I love the symbols of the Christmas season, all of them. They convey no pagan messages to my eye or ear. To me they shall ever speak—no, carol—the glad tidings of my Savior, and of the difference he has made in my life.

A CHILDREN'S HOLIDAY

Christmas is a children's holiday, and that is as it should be. It celebrates the coming of a baby, who when he had grown to be a man said, "Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God" (Mark 10:14). Christ's treatment of little children was truly remarkable. When he came to the Americas he also called for them to be gathered and brought to him, and he blessed them and gave them power to prophesy great and marvelous things to their parents. It is not recorded that he ever scolded a child or asked the parents of a crying baby to leave the congregation so that others might hear him more clearly. All of us know that even the best behaved of children have a naughty streak in them, but Jesus seems never to have addressed that part of them. Instead he was unfailingly appreciative of their innocence, commending it as a model for their parents' imitation. He was protective of them, declaring that if any would purposely offend one of these little ones, it were better that a millstone be hung around their necks and they be drowned in the deepest sea. To all of us who have sometimes felt less charitable toward our own or others' children, it gives food for thought.

What did the Savior see so clearly in children that we sometimes lose sight of? Perhaps he was less distracted by their misbehavior and more in touch with who they really were: angels come from the presence of God to test themselves against the often cruel challenges of earth life. Perhaps he remembered them as fellow members of the royal household of heaven, who not long since had walked and talked with him in the cool of his Father's and Mother's celestial gardens. Perhaps he foresaw and felt compassion for the pains and disappointments and mistakes that would all too soon rob them of their innocence. Perhaps he rejoiced in a divine awareness that his own sacrifice would open the door for each of them to find their way back home again. Whatever it was that he saw so plainly, and we so dimly, it persuaded him to bless and honor the children rather than correcting or chastising them.

As parents, it is, alas, our recurring duty to do both sets of things: to correct and chastise as well as to bless and honor our children. But at Christmastime it is somehow easier to bless than to correct, to honor than to chastise, to be more like him whose birth we celebrate. We rejoice in this unique Spirit of Christmas, which surely emanates from him. And while the Spirit is still upon us, it is almost possible to remember that we too, each of us, are also children in his eyes—worthy also of blessing and honor, despite our misbehaviors, because of who we are to him.

THE NOAH PERSPECTIVE

When we tell the Christmas story it is common to focus on the perspective of Mary or Joseph, of the shepherds or the wise men, of the people of Judea or those of the Americas. I should like to consider it from the viewpoint of another key participant: Noah. In the Gospel accounts of those events he is called the Angel Gabriel, but in life, as the Prophet Joseph told us, he was Noah of the Flood, Noah of the Ark.

There were doubtless many reasons why the Father of us all chose Gabriel for this particular mission rather than, say, Michael, who in life was Adam, or Raphael or one of the other heavenly messengers. It is not given to us to know any of those reasons. But I cannot help wondering if it had something to do with the parallels between the two assignments. In life, Noah's task was to warn the people to repent lest they be destroyed and to build a single ark to save the few who would listen. He faithfully performed that assignment. Was it not, then, fitting that among the faithful in the spirit world, he be the one chosen to warn the people anew and to announce the advent of the Eternal Ark, Christ Jesus, in whom alone the listener could find safety.

He was the messenger trusted to communicate to a tender young woman the news of her astonishing and unprecedented assignment. He was the comforter who assured Joseph that his intended was not only virtuous, but blessed above all women. I am confident that his was the voice that announced Christ's coming to the shepherds. In life he had been a faithful steward; in death he was given an extraordinary trust. I bear witness that all that he told men on those occasions is true. Christ was and is the Savior of mankind, just as Gabriel announced so many years ago. Noah's glorious postmortal privilege was unique, but it was also a type and shadow of the rewards and opportunities that God reserves for all who love and serve him in this life.
