Carlfred Broderick, My Parents Married on a Dare and Other Favorite Essays on Life ( 1996)

Part IV

The Most Meaningful Articles I Ever Had the Privilege of Producing

CHAPTER TEN

The Familial Relationships of Jesus

Peter certainly had the right of it when he acknowledged that we are a peculiar people. Just to cite one striking example, among what other people in the history of the world has it been considered standard operating procedure for someone (for anyone with a slip of authorization from his or her bishop) to phone an ordinary mortal and make an appointment to receive an open revelation from God? (Will eight o'clock Tuesday evening be all right?) The calling to serve as a patriarch in the Church must surely be unique in all the world. And although each of us with that responsibility must harbor, somewhere deeply buried in our imperfect souls, a primal fear that on some future day we may be called up before the Patriarchal Blessing Quality Control Board ("Broderick, what on earth could you have been thinking telling young George Anderson . . .")—still, I have a great testimony of the validity of this ordinance. For one thing, my own blessing, which I received at the tender age of nine, literally tells me everything that I will do in my life. One line in particular haunts and encourages me. I was promised that I would write literature that would bless. I think that's a gutsy thing to foresee in the life of a skinny, wiseacre, nine-year-old boy.

In this section I have included three articles that, I believe, may be a partial fulfillment of that assignment. The other two chapters I have seen bless the lives of others in a degree that is humbling and gratifying. But this chapter . . . this chapter I include here because it blesses me. It has been one of the tenderest gifts I have ever received from my Savior to be given the privilege of being the one chosen to pull together the snippets concerning his personal relationships in his family, which are scattered throughout the scriptures, into a single coherent account. I testify that I was guided through that process by the Spirit. When it was finished I wept. I wept at the personal familial pain that he bore, beyond the supreme vicarious suffering of Gethsemane. And I wept at the gift to me to be its chronicler.

My original assignment was to do a piece for the Ensign magazine on the Savior's teachings about the family. It was to be one of a series of articles in support of the Gospel Doctrine course of study that year, which was the New Testament. I took the assignment with some reluctance because although I love the scriptural account of the Lord's life, it was my impression that it was seriously lacking in any uplifting sermons on the family. There was his rather unkind treatment of his mother and brethren when they attempted to reach him while he was preaching; there was his telling the would-be disciple who wanted first to bury his father to let the dead (better translation, the village) bury the dead; there was his declaration that he had come not to bring peace but to "set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law. And [that] a man's foes shall be they of his own household" (Matthew 10:35-36). There were the tender and forgiving encounters with the three adulterous women; and there was the proclamation about there being no marriage or giving in marriage in heaven. I think I do not exaggerate when I say that this is not a promising set of proof texts for the article I am sure the Ensign wanted.

I called and talked to them about it. Perhaps, I suggested, they might want me to write about Paul's family doctrine. Although he has an antifamily reputation, actually I have found Paul to be extremely wise in his counsel. Wel-l-l-l . . . they already had several articles assigned for the second half of the year. Couldn't I do something with the Gospels? So I settled down with my yellow pad and the New Testament. Somehow, I got distracted from my mission and started culling out scattered references to the brethren of the Lord. John said they were unbelieving. In another place they taunted Jesus about not going up to Jerusalem during one of the annual feasts (knowing full well there was a price on his head). A pattern, a story began to emerge. It was poignant, it was real, it was personal. It was what I had to write about.

The Ensign accepted it. But as their letter of acceptance said, they had "heavily edited" it. Some of the deletions and rewording were, I thought, helpful, but most had the effect of reducing the drama, the feelings, and the story Ihad discovered. Much of the wonderful understanding that I had felt came from the Spirit had gotten diluted. I have no standing in the Church that gives me the right to receive inspiration for any but myself; however, since no one would mistake the present volume as scripture, I have provided here the whole of the article.

Finally, I should like in the introduction to the article and not as part of it, to indulge in a little further speculation that makes sense to me, but that goes beyond the data. It concerns the wedding at Cana. I have come to believe that this was indeed the wedding of Jesus' youngest sister. It was the custom for marriages to take place in the groom's father's home. The father was the "ruler of the feast." But it was, then as now, the parents of the bride who were in charge of the food and drink. Jesus had, I would assume, taken the duties of the senior male in the family once Joseph had died. It is conceivable to me that he had participated in the rearing of his youngest brothers and sisters. In this light, the miracle at Cana becomes not a trivial party favor to make his mother look good, but a final exercise of his surrogate paternal responsibilities toward his beloved youngest sister, a fulfillment and conclusion to his family responsibilities before turning to the full-time pursuit of his Messianic destiny. My testimony doesn't hang on that interpretation, but it is a scenario that rests easy on my spirit.

THE BROTHERS OF JESUS: LOVING THE UNBELIEVING RELATIVE

Many of us have a father or mother, husband or wife, brother or sister, son or daughter, who rejects the gospel we hold so precious. Many compassionate and helpful sermons have been given on how best to handle this situation, but I have never heard one that attempted to examine how the Savior dealt with that problem in his own family.

Certainly the scriptural record is skimpy, and doubtless Jesus addressed many gracious acts and words to his unbelieving brothers that are not recorded in the surviving accounts of his earthly ministry. Nevertheless, we can learn much from the few incidents that have been preserved and from the final outcome of Jesus' labors with his family.

Mark 6:3 tells us that Jesus had four younger brothers and at least two sisters, the children of Mary and Joseph. The sisters' names have not been preserved, but the brothers were called James (in the Hebrew, Jacob), Joses (in the Hebrew, Joseph, after his father), Simon, and Judas or Juda also known as Jude (see also Matthew 13:55).

Although there is no scriptural evidence for it, tradition claims that when Mary's husband died, her eldest son, Jesus, took over Joseph's business and supported the family until his brothers and sisters were married or independent. Even if that were not true, by the time Jesus was thirty, evidently his mother was a widow, and as the oldest male in the family, Jesus was sought out when there were important family matters to consider, even after he had given up his carpenter tools and engaged full-time in his ministry (see Matthew 12:46-47).

They were a close family. After the marriage at Cana (because of Mary's and Jesus' roles at the feast, the wedding was most likely that of a close relative), Jesus invited the whole family to accompany him and the small group of his earliest disciples on his first recorded missionary journey to nearby Capernaum. Perhaps he hoped that by being exposed to his teachings and the miracles he performed, they would be converted and come to comprehend the true nature of their elder brother and his mission.

In many ways the first weeks of his ministry were full of glorious successes. Luke says of that first missionary journey, "And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee: and there went out a fame of him through all the region round about" (Luke 4:14). Yet, when he and his little group returned to Nazareth where he had been brought up, and he declared his Messiahship to his former friends and neighbors, the response was uniformly hostile. The congregation became so angry at his claims that they attempted to cast him off a cliff. He escaped, but it is not recorded that any brother's voice or hand was raised in his defense (see Luke 4:16-30). The sad truth is that, despite their exposure to his words and his works, "neither did his brethren believe in him" (John 7:5).

Months later, during a second missionary journey through Galilee, Jesus revisited Nazareth. Although he had established himself as a prophet and a healer whose name had become well known in the land, the Nazarenes' response was so derisive that he exclaimed, "A prophet is not without honour, but in his own country, and among his own kin, and in his own house" (Mark 6:4; emphasis added).

We can only imagine the degree of Jesus' pain at this rejection by those he loved. Perhaps we get some glimpse of it on one occasion when his mother and brothers interrupted a meeting at which he was teaching the gospel. We don't know the reason for the interruption, but his family may have wanted Jesus to attend to some family matter they felt was important.

"Then came to him his mother and his brethren, and could not come at him for the press.

"And it was told him by certain which said, Thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to see thee.

"And he answered and said unto them, My mother and my brethren are these which hear the word of God, and do it" (Luke 8:19-21).

Some have considered Jesus' words to be harsh. But the Savior knew what his family did not yet fully realize—that the bonds of faith and covenant are stronger than the bonds of blood, and that his role as eldest son in the family, which they honored, was of little significance compared to his role as Savior and Redeemer.

He was, in fact, saying to them no more than what Abinadi had said almost two hundred years earlier. Speaking of the Christ who should come, Abinadi taught:

"When his soul has been made an offering for sin he shall see his seed. And now what say ye? And who shall be his seed?

"Behold I say unto you, that whosoever has heard the words of the prophets, . . . all those who have hearkened unto their words, and believed that the Lord would redeem his people, and have looked forward to that day for a remission of their sins, I say unto you, that these are his seed" (Mosiah 15:10-11).

The Savior's disappointment and pain at the faithlessness of his earthly brothers were much more poignantly revealed at Calvary. There, in the final minutes of his agony on the cross he looked down at his distraught mother, weeping together with a little cluster of brave disciples who risked their own lives to be there during his final ordeal. She had four other sons, yet none were present to comfort her. None were disciples, committed to love God and one another and to follow the way he had taught. Only his beloved John was there. With what mixed feelings he must have groaned his last will and testament: "He saith unto his mother, Woman, behold thy son! Then saith he to the disciple, Behold thy mother! And from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home (John 19:26-27).

After this, knowing that all things were now accomplished, Jesus said, "It is finished: and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost" (John 19:28, 30).

But that is not the end of the story. Before considering what we might learn from the Savior's experience, we need to follow the course of his brothers' lives after the Crucifixion.

Paul relates that after the risen Christ had appeared to Peter, then to the other Apostles, and then to five hundred of the worthy brethren, Jesus appeared also to his brother James (see 1 Corinthians 15:5-7).

The details of that reunion are not available to us, but the results are. James and his brothers responded as did Saul of Tarsus and Alma the Younger and the four sons of Mosiah. The brothers not only repented, but they became committed servants of Christ—their eldest brother—and eventually powerful leaders in the early Church.

Immediately following the ascension of Christ, the Apostles returned to Jerusalem to the home of John Mark's mother: "When they were come in, they went up into an upper room, where abode both Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, Philip, and Thomas, Bartholomew, and Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus, and Simon Zelotes, and Judas the brother of James."

Then Luke makes this revealing observation: "These all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren" (Acts 1:13-14).

At last, the brothers of the Lord had taken upon themselves his name and become, in very truth, members of his family!

James quickly rose to a position of leadership. Indeed, Paul implies that James became an Apostle. Three years after his conversion, about A.D. 38, Paul traveled to Jerusalem to meet with a few Church leaders. He wrote of that experience: "I went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days.

"But other of the apostles saw I none, save James the Lord's brother" (Galatians 1:18-19).

At another time during a period of intense persecution, Herod killed James the brother of John and imprisoned Peter (see Acts 12:1-4). When an angel came and freed the chief Apostle, he fled immediately to the home of Mary, the mother of John Mark, where some of the disciples were gathered together praying. After describing his escape, Peter instructed them to "go shew these things unto James, and to the brethren" (Acts 12:7-17).

A few years later, Paul and Barnabas attended a council at Jerusalem concerning Jewish requirements for gentile Christians. Only Peter seems to have had a more influential position at the meeting than James, and James was the one who proposed the final accepted solution (see Acts 15:6-31).

Paul, in referring to that event, wrote of "James, Cephas [i.e., Peter], and John, who seemed to be pillars" (Galatians 2:9). Quite possibly, James the brother of the Lord filled the position in the Church leadership left vacant by the death of that other James who had served with Peter and John.

Whatever his exact position in the early Church government, we treasure James's general epistle to the Church. For it was this James who wrote—one must believe out of his own painful and glorious experience with his resurrected brother—"If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him" (James 1:5).

In that epistle, he identifies himself not as the brother of the Lord, but as "James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ" (James 1:1). Though others referred to him, Jude, Simon, and Joses as "the brethren of the Lord," James himself was loath to assert his special kinship, preferring to be known as a servant of Christ.

In a similar vein, another of the four brothers opens his epistle with "Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James" (Jude 1:1). We know little about Jude except what we learn from his epistle. Most impressively, Jude demonstrates a keen perception of his elder brother as the past and future Lord—the Lord who brought Israel out of Egypt and who destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Lord who will come in the last days to execute judgment upon all (see Jude 1:5, 7, 14-15).

From his denunciation of certain kinds of apostasy, we also know that his letter was one of the later epistles in the New Testament. In his lifetime, Jude stood firm with Peter and Paul in fighting the rising tide of heresy that threatened to destroy the Church.

All four brothers, family members who had once looked at Jesus as their elder brother only, were able to accept him as the Lord and the Son of God. What great joy there must have been in heaven, and especially for the Savior, over these four brothers, each of whom repented.

It is true that the Savior's family was unique. No other family has had to come to terms with its close relative turning out to be the Redeemer of mankind. But in another sense, every converted person who deeply loves his or her unbelieving spouse or relative suffers as Jesus suffered over his faithless brothers. And, as did Jesus of Nazareth, every disciple can love truly and well, with hope and patience.

We must never lose sight of the eternal realities—the worth of each soul, the inviolability of each soul's agency, and the universality of the plan of salvation. Above all, we must never give up.

It is well to remember that those of whom it was once written "Neither did his brethren believe in him" ended by designating themselves servants "of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ." So it may be for our Jameses and our Judes, our Sauls and our Almas, and all of their female counterparts. In a personal, intimate way, Jesus himself suffered so that he is able to succor them that also suffer (see Hebrews 2:18; Alma 7:12).
