Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON EIGHTY-FIVE

The Patriarchal Priesthood

References

D.H.C. 1:443, 444; 465-467.

Topics

1.The Prophet's Reflections.

a.Comments on Sidney Rigdon. Note 1.

b.Comments on Frederick G. Williams. Note 2.

2.Restoration of the Patriarchal Priesthood.

a.The Patriarchal Priesthood in ancient times. Note 3.

b.The meeting in the Printing office and dedication of the press. Note 4.

c.Ordination of Joseph Smith, Sen., to office and keys to Patriarchal Priesthood.

d.Blessings given by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

e.The Prophet blesses members of his father's family.

f.Blessings given by Oliver Cowdery. Note 5.

Notes

"Brother Sidney is a man whom I love, but he is not capable of that pure and steadfast love for those who are his benefactors that should characterize a President of the Church of Christ. This, with some other little things, such as selfishness and independence of mind, which too often manifested destroy the confidence of those who would lay down their lives for him—these are his faults. But notwithstanding these things, he is a very great and good man; a man of great power of words, and can gain the friendship of his hearers very quickly. He is a man whom God will uphold, if he will continue faithful to his calling. O God, grant that he may, for the Lord's sake. Amen."

After saying this the Prophet uttered this blessing and prophecy: "And again, blessed be Brother Sidney: notwithstanding he shall be high and lifted up, yet he shall bow down under the yoke like unto an ass that croucheth beneath his burden, that learneth his master's will by the stroke of the rod; thus saith the Lord: yet, the Lord will have mercy on him, and he shall bring forth much fruit, even as the vine of the choice grape, when her clusters are ripe, before the time of the gleaning of the vintage; and the Lord shall make his heart merry as with sweet wine, because of Him who putteth forth His hand, and lifteth him up out of deep mire, and pointeth him out the way, and guideth his feet when he stumbles, and humbleth him in his pride. Blessed are his generations; nevertheless one shall hunt after them as a man hunteth after an ass that strayed in the wilderness, and straightway findeth him and bringeth him into the fold. Thus shall the Lord watch over his generation, that they may be saved. Even so. Amen."

(Appoint a member to give a brief sketch of Sidney Rigdon).

After giving this description the Prophet uttered the following reflections: "The man who willeth to do well, we should extol his virtues, and speak not of his faults behind his back. A man who wilfully turneth away from his friend without a cause, is not easily forgiven. The kindness of a man should never be forgotten. That person who never forsaketh his trust, should ever have the highest place of regard in our hearts, and our love should never fail, but increase more and more, and this is my disposition and these my sentiments."

It was this order of Priesthood which was conferred upon Adam and which continued from generation to generation from the day of Adam to the day of Moses. In the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord has informed us in detail how this Priesthood descended. After explaining that it is the duty of the twelve apostles to ordain "evangelical ministers," or patriarchs, in this dispensation, he declares that "the order of this Priesthood was confirmed to be handed down from father to son, and rightly belongs to the literal descendants of the chosen seed, to whom the promises were made." Then follows the order of descent of Priesthood through the generations until the time of the flood. (D. and C. 107:39-53.) Then in Section 84, vs. 6 to 16), we have the order of descent from Adam to Moses who received the Priesthood under the hands of his father-in-law, Jethro. This Priesthood holds the keys of the patriarchal blessings pronounced upon the members of the Church. Today patriarchs are ordained in each of the stakes of Zion for this purpose. Anciently it was held by the firstborn in each house where faithfulness and integrity prevailed. When the Lord took Moses and the Higher Priesthood out of Israel, he established the Aaronic Priesthood with Israel. And the Lord took the males of the tribe of Levi to be the priests to minister for the people. And the Lord said to Moses: "Number all the firstborn of the males of the children of Israel. . . . and the cattle of the Levites instead of all the firstlings among the cattle of the children of Israel. * * And the Lord spake unto Moses saying: Take the Levites instead of all the firstborn among the children of Israel * * and the Levites shall be mine." (Numbers 3:40-41; 44-45). From that time forth until the coming of our Lord, the Melchizedek Priesthood, which includes the Patriarchal Priesthood, was taken from the tribes of Israel, the one exception being that the prophets received that Priesthood, but always by special ordination. It was not given generally among the tribes as it is today.

"The following blessings by the spirit of prophecy, were pronounced by Joseph Smith, Jr., the first elder and first patriarch of the Church, for although his father laid hands upon and blessed the fatherless, thereby securing the blessings of the Lord unto them and for their posterity, he was not the first elder, because God called upon his son Joseph and ordained him to this power, and delivered to him the keys of the kingdom, that is, of authority and spiritual blessings upon the Church, and through him the Lord revealed his will to the Church, he was ministered unto by the angel, and by his direction, he obtained the records of the Nephites, and translated by the gift and power of God. He was ordained by the angel John, unto the lesser, or Aaronic, Priesthood, in company with myself, in the town of Harmony, Susquehanna County, Pennsylvania, on Friday the 15th day of May, 1829; after which we repaired to the water, even the Susquehanna River and were baptized, he first ministering unto me, and after I to him.**.

"After these blessings were given, of which I am about to write, Joseph Smith Sen'r., was ordained a president and patriarch under the hands of his son Joseph, myself, Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams, presidents of the Church. These blessings were given by vision and the spirit of prophecy, on the 18th day of December, 1833, and written by my hand at the time; and I know them to be correct and according to the mind of the Lord."

Then follows this important statement:

"Thus spake the Seer, and these are the words which fell from his lips, while the visions of the Almighty were open to his view, saying: Blessed of the Lord is my father, for he shall stand in the midst of his posterity and shall be comforted by their blessings when he is old and bowed down with years, and shall be called a prince over them, and shall be numbered among those who hold the right of Patriarchal Priesthood, even the keys of that ministry; for he shall assemble together his posterity like unto Adam; and the assembly which he called be an ensample for my father, for thus it is written of him.

"Three years previous to the death of Adam, he called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch and Methuselah who were high priests with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing. And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the Prince, the Archangel; and the Lord administered comfort unto Adam, and said unto him: I have set thee to be at the head, a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou art a prince over them forever. So shall it be with my father. He shall be called a prince over his posterity, holding the keys of the Patriarchal Priesthood over the kingdom of God on earth, even the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and he shall sit in the general assembly of patriarchs, even in council with the Ancient of Days, when he shall sit and all the patriarchs with him and shall enjoy his right and authority under the direction of the Ancient of Days."

Then follow blessings by the Prophet Joseph Smith upon his mother, his brothers and sisters and upon the brethren who were assembled with him. At the conclusion of these blessings Oliver Cowdery, the scribe, made the following record:

"The reader will remember the remarks made at the commencement of the. foregoing blessings, pronounced by the first patriarch, and first elder in this Church, Joseph Smith, Jr. I said that he had authority to bless: This is so, and it may be understood that those men whose names are mentioned in blessings by his mouth, had long been employed in the work of the Lord, and were personally known to him. I mean those besides his own family, who are myself Frederick G. Williams, Sidney Rigdon, David Whitmer, John Whitmer, John Corrill and William W. Phelps.

All of these are wonderful blessings and they were recorded in the handwriting of Oliver Cowdery. In the Documentary History we obtain excerpts from these blessings on pages 465-467, Volume one. Special attention can be given to the blessings of Oliver Cowdery and Hyrum Smith.
