Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON EIGHTY-SIX

Affairs in Zion and Kirtland—Organization of the First High Council

References

D.H.C. Vol. 2:1-35, 122, 123.

D. & C. Sec. 102.

Topics

1.Condition of Saints in Missouri. Note 1.

a.Conference of exiled saints in Missouri.

b.Messengers sent to Kirtland.

2.Mob Threats In Kirtland. Note 2.

a.Poverty of the Church.

b.Enemies show opposition.

c.Prayer of the brethren for protection. Note 3.

3.Epistle of Elders to Scattered Brethren. Note 4.

a.Epistle written to encourage brethren in their distress.

b.Points of interest in this epistle.

4.Organization of the First High Council.

a.Order in ancient councils. Note 5.

b.Responsibility of those who sit in judgment. Note 6.

c.The high council organized. Note 7.

d.Duties of members of high council.

e.First trials before the high council.

5.Organization of the Second High Council. Note 8.

a.Reason for the organization of the second council.

b.Members of the Missouri high council.

c.Misunderstanding and difficulty arising in this council.

d.High councils of today.

Notes

First. That the Lord would grant that their lives might be precious in his sight and that they might have his protecting care so they and their families might be protected and no evil might harm them.

Second. That the Lord would also hold the lives of the brethren in the United Order as sacred, and that none of them might be taken.

Three. That the Lord would grant that the Prophet might prevail over his enemies, even "Dr." Hurlburt, who had threatened his life.

Four. That the Lord, in the order of his providence, would provide the bishop in Kirtland with means sufficient to discharge every debt, in due season, that the Order owed, that they might not be brought into disrepute, and the saints be afflicted by the hands of their enemies.

Five. That the Lord would protect their printing press that they might send forth the word of the Lord "that the ears of all may hear it;" and also that they might print his Scriptures.

Sixth. That the Lord would deliver Zion and gather his scattered people to possess in peace their possessions. Moreover that the Father would, in the name of his Son, gather his elect speedily and unveil his face, that his saints might behold his face and dwell with him.

Sympathy for the Missouri saints.

The words of the Prophets are being fulfilled, and darkness covers the earth.

Men show an indifference concerning their salvation and the things of heaven.

The world not increasing in righteousness.

Free agency is a gift of God.

The laws of heaven are guaranteed to all who obey them.

Man is created with a mind capable of instruction in righteousness.

The laws of man are dissimilar to the laws of God.

Those who are not obedient to law are not entitled to privileges of the kingdom.

A rebellious government is bound to fall.

The sacred writings are given for the good of man.

Earthly governments are and must be governed by laws.

Ancient saints endured severe trials and persecution.

They endured knowing that there was a crown in store for them.

Our heavenly Father prepared a sacrifice of his Son for the salvation of man.

The Gospel was preached in ancient days.

Those who keep the commandments are the only ones who will be permitted to sit at the glorious feast when Christ comes.

The Messiah's government has many apostates because it does not admit of sin.

These are but a few of the many excellent thoughts in this extended epistle. Members holding the Priesthood would do well to read it and reflect upon it in its entirety for their spiritual benefit.

"And I continued and said, no man is capable of judging a matter, in council, unless his own heart is pure; and that we frequently are so filled with prejudice, or have a beam in our own eye, that we are not capable of passing right decisions.

"But to return to the subject of order; in ancient days councils were conducted with such strict propriety, that no one was allowed to whisper, be weary, leave the room, or get uneasy in the least, until the voice of the Lord, by revelation, or the voice of the council by the Spirit, was obtained, which has not been observed in this Church to the present time. It was understood in ancient days, that if one man could stay in council, another could; and if the president could spend his time, the members could also; but in our councils, generally, one will be uneasy, another asleep, one praying, another not; one's mind on the business of the council, and another thinking on something else."

There is no question that can be raised contrary to the fact that if councils were conducted strictly in order according to the ancient custom, more favorable conditions would prevail and better judgment be given.

"Joseph Smith, Sen., John Smith, Joseph Coe, John Johnson, Martin Harris, John S. Carter, Jared Carter, Oliver Cowdery, Samuel H. Smith, Orson Hyde, Sylvester Smith and Luke S. Johnson. Others who voted to sustain this high council were nine high priests, seventeen elders, four priests and thirteen members.

It was voted that this council could not act without a majority of the members being present. Then if there were only seven they could appoint temporarily other high priests who were considered worthy to sit in the place of absent members. It was also voted that whenever any vacancy should occur by death or removal, the vacancy should be filled by the nomination of the president or presidents, and then sanctioned by the general council of high priests. The President of the Church was appointed by revelation to preside in this council, his counselors were chosen in like manner. In the absence of the president then the counselors had power to preside, both or either of them.

The twelve councilors, when cases were brought before them, were to cast lots by numbers to ascertain which of the twelve should speak first, commencing with number one and so on in succession to number twelve. In simple cases only two would speak; if the cases were difficult then four would be appointed and in extreme cases six could speak but never more than six. The accused was entitled to one half of the council to watch his case to see that justice was given him, but every man was to speak according to equity and justice. The councilors who drew the even numbers were to stand in behalf of the accused. After the evidence was given the president would give his decision. A majority of the council was necessary to sustain a decision.

When abroad a council of high priests could be called in difficult cases to sit in judgment. Written decisions by such councils were to be forwarded to the First Presidency of the Church. In case of a person being dissatisfied with a decision he had the right to appeal. When the twelve apostles sit as a high council no appeal can be taken from their decision, except it be in cases of transgression and then the matter is to be considered, if evidence warrants it, by the general authorities of the Church.

Immediately after the organization of this council there were several cases brought before it and decisions rendered. It might be considered in this day when we have few high council trials, that many of the cases brought before this first high council were trivial in their nature. Today only major cases of transgression, seemingly, are considered by such bodies in the stakes of Zion. Perhaps in this the officers are negligent in their duties and many matters are ignored that should be brought before these bodies for trial.

In 1834, these two councils were sufficient to take care of all matters that properly belonged to and should be considered by high councils in the Church. As the Church grew and spread abroad it became necessary for high councils to be organized in each stake of Zion, over which the presidency of stakes presides, and it was not longer necessary for a general high council to sit or be organized, over which the First Presidency of the Church should preside.
