Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON EIGHTY-SEVEN

The Redemption of Zion

References

D.H.C. 2:36-45. D. & C. Sec. 103.

Topics

1.Report of Lyman Wight and Parley P. Pratt. Note 1.

a.Meeting of the high council.

b.Report of brethren from Zion.

c.The Prophet's desire to go to Zion.

d.The Prophet's mission to the East.

2.Revelation Concerning Zion. Note 2.

a.Enemies to fill measure of iniquities.

b.Members chastened for iniquities.

c.Through repentance Saints to prevail.

d.If saints do not hearken enemies will prevail.

e.Decree that those scattered should return.

f.After much tribulation cometh the blessing.

g.If inheritances are polluted members to be thrown down.

3.Redemption of Zion to Come by Power. Note 3.

a.Joseph Smith to gather young men to go up to Zion.

b.To assist exiles to obtain their possessions.

c.Whom the Prophet should curse, the Lord would curse.

d.Whoso is not willing to lay down his life, not worthy.

e.Parley P. Pratt and Lyman Wight not to return to Zion until they have assisted in obtaining companies of brethren to go to Zion.

Notes

The Prophet, after hearing the report, arose and said that he was going to Zion to assist in its redemption. He called for the voice of the council to sanction his going, which was given without a dissenting voice. He then called for volunteers to go with him, who were present in the council. The question whether they were to go by water or by land was discussed and it was decided that they would go by land. Joseph Smith was chosen to be commander-in-chief of the armies of Israel, and the leader of those who volunteered to go and assist in the redemption of Zion. Two days later the Prophet started east in compliance with the revelation given on the 24th and the action of the high council, for the purpose of preaching the Gospel and seeking for volunteers to go with him up to Zion. This mission carried him as far as Maine and through New York and other states in the east. He was accompanied on this mission by others of the brethren. Several conferences were held and public meetings, and there were some converts made to the Church. He arrived home March 28, 1834, after a successful journey in obtaining volunteers.

In the revelation given February 24, 1934 (Sec. 103), the Lord referred to this former revelation and said that Joseph Smith (Baurak Ale) was the man to whom he likened the servant "to whom the Lord of the vineyard spake in the parable which I have given unto you." (Sec. 103:21.)

This revelation commences by the Lord saying he was giving commandment, that his servants might know how to act in the discharge of their duties concerning the salvation of Zion and the redemption of their brethren in that land. He promised to pour out upon his enemies his wrath without measure in his own time. He had suffered them thus far that they might fill up the measure of their iniquities, that their cup might be full. Then also it was permitted that those who called themselves by his name might be chastened for a little season with a sore and grievous chastisement, because they did not hearken altogether unto the precepts and commandments which he had given them. The promise was then made that from that very hour the saints should commence to prevail against his enemies. This was decreed on the ground that his people would hearken to his counsels and heed them. They were commanded that by "hearkening to observe all the words which I, the Lord their God, shall speak unto them, they shall never cease to prevail until the kingdoms of the world are subdued under my feet, and the earth is given unto the saints, to possess it forever and ever."

If they would not hearken and did not observe all his words, "the kingdoms of the world shall prevail against them. For they were set to be a light unto the world, and to be saviors of men; and inasmuch as they are not the saviors of men, they are as salt that has lost its savor, and is thenceforth good for nothing but to be cast out and trodden under foot of men." (v. 8-10.) The decree was, however, that the members who had been scattered "shall return to the lands of their inheritances, and shall build up the waste places of Zion (v. 11). Yet, the Lord gave them to understand, that these things would not be accomplished without tribulation. He said, "For after much tribulation, as I have said unto you in a former commandment, cometh the blessing." (v. 12.) After their tribulations and those of their brethren, the land would be established never more to be thrown down. The redemption would be delayed if they polluted their inheritances and they, as well as their enemies, should be thrown down.

In this instruction the Lord gave them the opportunity to obtain the redemption of Zion and for the exiles to be reinstated in their possessions. Had they remained faithful he would have fulfilled his promise to them. They understood the warnings and that through their continued unfaithfulness the redemption would have to be postponed and they themselves would be thrown down. There have been some who have criticized this, and other revelations, claiming that the word of the Lord failed for He promised them that if they would gather their forces and go to Zion, he would fight their battles and they would be reinstated and the redemption would immediately come. This promise is not found in any of these revelations. To the contrary, the promise is made that they would have to be obedient in all things and keep inviolate their covenants, or these blessings would be indefinitely postponed. The fact that the Lord declared here once again, that the redemption was not to come until after much tribulation indicates that he was fully aware that the time for Zion's redemption had not come, although it could have come if the commandments were fulfilled.

Mine angels shall go up before you, and also my presence, and in time ye shall possess the goodly land." (vs. 16-20.)

It appears from this declaration that the redemption of Zion was not to come immediately, but was to be postponed to some future day. Moreover, that day would not come until the members of the Church were willing to keep their covenants and walk unitedly for until the members of the Church learn to walk in full accord and in obedience with all of the commandments, this day cannot come. It may be necessary in order to bring this to pass for the Lord to use drastic measures and cleanse the Church from everything that offends. This he has promised to do when he is ready to redeem Zion. (See Matt. 13:41.) Orson Pratt discoursing on the redemption of Zion said:

"When we go back to Jackson County, we are to go back with power. Do you suppose that God will reveal his power among an unsanctified people, who have no regard nor respect for his laws and institutions but who are filled with covetousness? No. When God shows forth his power among the Latter-day Saints, it will be because there is a union of feeling in regard to doctrine, and in regard to everything that God has placed in their hands; and not only a union, but a sanctification on their part, that there shall not be a spot or wrinkle as it were, but everything shall be as fair as the sun that shines in the heavens." (J. of D. XV:361.)

Instruction was given also that inasmuch as their enemies should come against them, and after the testimonies which they should bring against their enemies, power was to be given to the brethren to curse their enemies, and then the Lord would also curse them and be avenged of them to the third or fourth generation of them that hate him. (vs. 24-26.) Members of the Church were not to be afraid to lay down their lives for the truth, for, said the Lord, "whoso layeth down his life for my sake shall find it again. And whoso is not willing to lay down his life for my sake is not my disciple." (vs. 27-28.)

Parley P. Pratt and Lyman Wight, the messengers from the land of Zion, were commanded not to return until they had obtained companies to go up unto the land of their brethren. The companies were to be by tens, or by twenties, or by fifties, or by hundreds, until they had obtained the number of five hundred men. If they could not obtain five hundred, they were to seek diligently to get three hundred, and if they could not obtain three hundred, then they were to obtain one hundred. They were not, however, to go up to the land of Zion until they had obtained at least one hundred. The Prophet Joseph was to go up with them and preside in their midst, for, "all victory and glory is brought to pass unto you through your diligence, faithfulness and prayer of faith." Parley P. Pratt was to go with Joseph Smith the Prophet; Lyman Wight with Sidney Rigdon; Hyrum Smith with Frederick G. Williams; Orson Hyde with Orson Pratt, on this mission to raise funds and volunteers to undertake this journey to assist their exiled brethren in the land of Zion.
