Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON EIGHTY-EIGHT

The United Order—Care of the Poor

References

D.H.C. Vol. 2:46-60. D. & C. Sec. 104.

Topics

1.The Problem of the Redemption of Zion. Note 1.

a.Manifestations of the mob spirit.

b.Whipping of Ira J. Willis.

c.The case of "Dr." Philastus Hurlburt.

d.Obtaining funds for Zion.

e.If Zion is not redeemed the whole Church to suffer.

2.Commandments Concerning Properties of the United Order. Note 2.

a.The United Order.

b.Covenants broken.

c.Judgment on transgressors.

d.The Lord will not be mocked.

e.Appointment of stewardships.

f.The Purpose of the Lord to provide for saints.

3.The Earth Is Full and Enough to Spare. Note 3.

a.Men agents unto themselves.

b.Every man to impart his portion.

c.Properties apportioned in stewardships.

d.Blessings to follow faithfulness.

4.The United Order of the Stake of Zion of Kirtland. Note 4.

a.Separation of the United Order in Kirtland from that in Missouri.

b.Business to be done in names of stewards in the order.

c.All properties belong to the Lord.

d.Revelations and history to be printed.

e.A treasury and treasurer to be provided for sacred things.

f.A seal upon the treasury.

g.A second treasury and treasurer to be provided for moneys and property.

h.All things to be by common consent.

i.Transgressors to be removed.

j.Church debts to be paid.

k.Humility, faithfulness and prayer required to bring victory.

Notes

The Church being in dire distress financially, brethren had been sent out to see if they could not collect funds for its relief, both in Kirtland and for Zion. A strong appeal to Orson Hyde was issued April 7, 1834. (See D.H.C. 2:48.) In the minutes of a conference held at Norton, Medina County, Ohio, the deliverance of Zion was earnestly discussed. The Prophet Joseph Smith who was present said in the course of his remarks that "if Zion is not delivered, the time is near when all of this Church, wherever they may be found, will be persecuted and destroyed in like manner," that is in the manner in which the saints in Jackson County were destroyed. Destruction in this sense means to be persecuted, mobbed and scattered, their property being lost to them.

Who could be more unworthy before the Lord than a covenant breaker? It matters not whether it is a covenant of consecration, a covenant made in the waters of baptism, of ordination to the Priesthood, a covenant of marriage in the House of the Lord, or whatever it may be, that person who violates the covenant is worthy of the Lord's extreme contempt. We are all assured that our eternal Father will never violate a covenant and when his children receive his covenants and remain true in them to the end, the promises will be fulfilled. If these solemn pledges are broken then the covenant breaker is worthy of receiving the punishment of "a very sore and grievous curse."

"Who am I that made man, saith the Lord, that will hold him guiltless that obeys not my commandments? . . .

"I command and men obey not; I revoke and they receive not the blessing.

"Then they say in their hearts:

This is not the work of the Lord, for his promises are not fulfilled. But wo unto such for their reward lurketh beneath, and not from above." (D. & C. Sec. 58:30-33.)

Yet we find in the Church today after all these years, and the severe experiences of the past which brought so much pain and sorrow upon our people, that we still have a great many who have made the most solemn covenants in sacred places, and then have deliberately violated them. These will also receive the wrath of an offended Father, and there awaits them the reward of the transgressor—"a very sore and grievous curse." All such will have to be removed from the Father's kingdom before the law of consecration can be established.

It is the failing of many men, who, apparently, are willing to receive the covenants of the Lord, to want to modify them to suit their own fancy. We find this class in the Church today; they were in it in 1834, and they will be in it until the great day of cleansing comes. The Lord expects of his children implicit obedience and complete acceptance of his laws. We have no right or power to alter them. It is the proclivity of man from the beginning to want to change the laws of the Lord and substitute his own. For this reason we have man-made governments on the earth today and a condition of turmoil and strife which has continued from the beginning. Never can there be perfect peace and happiness until man upon the earth is willing to accept counsel and become obedient to divine law. This, today, he is not willing to do. The Lord impressed upon the Church in 1834, that this great law and covenant of consecration, or United Order, "must needs be done in mine own way; and behold this is the way that I, the Lord, have decreed to provide for my saints, that the poor shall be exalted, in that the rich are made low." (v. 16) In speaking of the exaltation of the poor, the Lord did not intend to convey, as some may think, that he was to take from the rich and make them poor, but that through this divine law there would come an equality and in humility all would be made rich in the abundance that would be gathered into the storehouse of the Lord, and every man should be provided with an abundance.

"For the earth is full, and there is enough and to spare; yea, I prepared all things, and have given unto the children of men to be agents unto themselves. (v. 17.) The abundance of the earth is so plentiful, through the mercies of the Father, that all could have "enough and to spare" if the commandments of the Lord were strictly kept. In another revelation the Lord said: "Verily I say, that inasmuch as ye do this (i.e. keep the commandments), the fulness of the earth is yours, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which climbeth upon the trees and walketh upon the earth; yea, and the herb, and the good things which come of the earth, whether for food or for raiment, or for houses, or for barns, or for orchards, or for gardens, or for vineyards; yea all things which come of the earth, in the season thereof, are made for the benefit and the use of man, both to please the eye and to gladden the heart; yea for food and for raiment, for taste and for smell, to strengthen the body and to enliven the soul." Then the Lord adds: "And it pleaseth God that he hath given all these things unto man; for unto this end were they made to be used, with judgment, not to excess, neither by extortion." (D. & C. Sec. 59:16-20.)

Thus we learn that the Lord has created all these things for the use of man to be used in judgment, in equality according to the needs of each. Greediness cannot be the case with all who enter into the covenant of consecration when it is established.

Then, in the revelation (D. & C. Sec. 104:20-42) the Lord assigns stewardships to many of the brethren. He commanded that there should be a separation of the United Order in Zion from the Order in Kirtland. Each was to act henceforth independently of the other. Distance was too great between these places for unity of purpose in all things. Each order was to be organized in the names of the brethren residing in each place, and to do business in their own names. This separation and dissolving of the former order came about also because of transgression and covetousness on the part of some. They were to understand that all the properties were the Lord's, otherwise their faith was vain, and therefore they were stewards before the Lord. All of this was to be done for the purpose of building up the Church and Kingdom of God on the earth, and to prepare the people for the time when the Lord should come to dwell upon the earth. (v. 59.)

They were to prepare a treasury and a treasurer for the sacred things of the Church. One who was wise was to be appointed to this labor. Then again they were to have another treasury and treasurer to keep the moneys and properties of the Church. These men so appointed were to be trustworthy and fitted for their callings. A seal was to be placed upon each treasury. In the first all the sacred documents, writings and all sacred things that should be preserved, should have a seal, which was to be placed upon them. In the second treasury should be placed the funds received from the people, which funds were to be used for holy and sacred purposes. (vs. 60-69.)

All these things were to be done by common consent. There were to be no dictators in the management of the Lord's business. No part of the funds or property could be taken out of the treasury without the voice of the order. If any man among them should declare, I have need of this to help me in my stewardship, if it be five talents, or ten talents (dollars) or whatever the amount his claim might be it was to be investigated and if found to be worthy the request would be granted. This had to be, however, by the common consent.

Transgressors among the stewards were to be removed after an investigation and the guilt was proved before the council of the order. When a man was faithful and wise in his stewardship he was to be rewarded. The Church being in debt, the Lord called upon the members to pay their debts. If they would humble themselves and be true and faithful in the discharge of their responsibilities, the Lord would send means for their deliverance. They were to write to those in New York unto whom they were in bondage and the Lord would soften their hearts so his people would not be afflicted. Humility, diligence, faithfulness in their stewardships, and unity of purpose, were necessary qualities in order to bring to pass the deliverance from their bondage. They were privileged also to pledge the properties in their hands which belonged to the Church "this once" and to lend moneys that might come into their hands to help them out of their bondage, but it was to be for this one time only. The Lord adds: "I give unto you this privilege, this once; and behold if you proceed to do the things which I have laid before you, according to my commandments, all these things are mine, and ye are my stewards, and the master will not suffer his house to be broken up. Even so. Amen."
