Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON EIGHTY-NINE

Zion's Camp

References

D.H.C. Vol. 2:61-134.

Topics

1.The Command to Organize Zion's Camp. Note 1.

a.Revelation calling on the Church to send aid to Missouri.

b.Elder Phelps' letter.

c.The Prophet's departure for Missouri.

d.Organization of Zion's Camp.

2.Important Events on the Way. Note 2.

a.Brethren conceal their identity.

b.The depressed spirit of the Prophet and why.

c.Spies visit the camp from time to time.

d.Incident of the rattlesnakes.

e.Luke S. Johnson as a spy.

f.Finding of the grave of Zelph.

g.Hyrum Smith and Lyman Wight join the camp.

h.Martin Harris boasts that he can handle snakes.

i.The Prophet's counsel.

3.Quarreling and Disobedience in the Camp. Note 3.

a.The Prophet's counsel disobeyed.

b.Joseph Smith's prophecy.

c.Its fulfillment.

d.Death of A. S. Gilbert.

4.Governor Dunklin's Disregard of Justice. Note 4.

a.His promise to use his office to reinstate the saints.

b.He acknowledges the justice of their cause.

c.He abandons them to the mercies of the mob.

5.Offer of the Mob to Buy or Sell Property. Note 5.

a.The mass meeting in Liberty.

b.Offer of Jackson County enemies to buy or sell.

c.Disturbance by Owens and Rev. Riley.

d.The rebuke by Chairman Turnham and Gen. Doniphan.

e.Meeting broken by rowdyism.

f.Injustice of the Jackson proposition.

6.The Camp Disbanded. Note 6.

a.The camp arrives at Rush Creek.

b.Members scatter among saints in Clay County.

c.The camp discharged.

d.What the camp accomplished.

Notes

May 1st, the first group of volunteers left Kirtland accompanied by four baggage wagons, and traveled to New Portage and there awaited the arrival of other brethren. On the 5th of that month the Prophet and the remainder of the company in Kirtland, with clothing and other necessities for the members of the Church in Missouri, and being provided with wagons and horses, commenced their journey westward and traveled twenty-seven miles that day. This was a strenuous day's journey under the conditions. Along the way other volunteers joined the camp. On the 7th the camp was fully organized according to the pattern pointed out by the Lord. Frederick G. Williams was paymaster; Zerubbabel Snow, commissary general.

The company now numbered more than one hundred and thirty men, with twenty baggage wagons. Joseph Smith the Prophet was commander-in-chief. There were in each company twelve men with two cooks, two firemen, two tent men, two watermen, one runner, two wagoners and horsemen, and one commissary. Each company selected its own captain. Every night before retiring, the sound of the trumpet called all before the Lord in their several tents, and with bowed knees they offered thank-offerings with prayer and supplication. On the 8th of May the march commenced in earnest. Each Sunday devotional services were held and the Sacrament administered. Some days they traveled upwards of forty miles. On the 14th, the first out-breaking of dissatisfaction was made manifest by Sylvester Smith, because of the shortness of bread. This feeling spread at later times to other members of the camp, which caused delay and a loss of the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord.

"Who has charge of the company?"

"Sometimes one, sometimes another."

"What name?"

"Captain Wallace, Major Bruce, Orson Hyde, James Allen."

These inquisitors usually left the camp with the idea that it was composed of six or more hundred men. Many times spies came as investigators, and when asking where they were from the members of the camp replied: "I am from Maine;" another, "I am from York state;" or "I am from Massachusetts," etc. In each case telling the truth, but not revealing their mission to the west. When they held a meeting with spies in the camp special subjects were assigned the speakers, one on faith, one on baptism, one on salvation, which confused their visitors who thought they were a group composed of members from many churches. When asked what denomination they belonged to they answered, "I was a Baptist," or "I was a Presbyterian," or "I was a Methodist," etc., but not telling them what they were at the present time.

While traveling west of Springfield, Ohio, in a wagon with his brother Hyrum, Ezra Thayer and George A. Smith, the Prophet felt depressed in his spirits and when questioned why he said, "I told them that I felt much depressed in spirit and lonesome, and that there had been a great deal of bloodshed in that place, remarking that whenever a man of God is in a place where many have been killed, he will feel lonesome and unpleasant, and his spirits will sink." When they arrived near Indianapolis they received the report that they would not be permitted to pass through the city. The Prophet told them not to fear, the Lord would protect them. When they arrived the companies divided and passed through on different streets and not in a body. In this manner they continued their journey beyond the city, while the citizens were left wondering what had become of them, and when they would arrive, when they were already passed.

The reports of mob activities reached them frequently, and enemies in disguise came into the camp. At times strangers were bold enough to threaten them and warn them to desist or they would meet with armed resistance and disaster. However they pushed on steadily towards their objective relying on the protecting hand of the Lord. While making their camp at the close of the day after crossing the Embarras River in Indiana, the brethren discovered three prairie rattlesnakes, which they were about to kill. The prophet called to them saying, "Let them alone—don't hurt them! How will the serpent ever lose his venom, while the servants of God possess the same disposition, and continue to make war upon it? Men must become harmless, before the brute creation; and when men lose their vicious dispositions and cease to destroy the animal race, the lion and the lamb can dwell together, and the suckling child can play with the serpent in safety."* The brethren took the serpents carefully on sticks and carried them across the creek. "I exhorted the brethren not to kill a serpent, bird, or an animal of any kind during our journey unless it became necessary in order to preserve ourselves from hunger. I had frequently spoken on this subject, when on a certain occasion I came up to the brethren who were watching a squirrel on a tree, and to prove them and to know if they would heed my counsel, I took one of their guns, shot the squirrel and passed on, leaving the squirrel on the ground. Brother Orson Hyde, who was just behind, picked up the squirrel, and said, 'We will cook this, that nothing may be lost.' I perceived that the brethren understood what I did it for, and in their practice gave more heed to my precept than to my example, which was right."

*This truth of the Prophet's counsel is made manifest in many places where wild animals are protected from the killers. We see this with the bears in Yellowstone Park, with squirrels in city parks. On one occasion while I, with others, was riding in the Black Hills in a protected zone watching the deer, one brave fellow came up to the automobile put his nose in the car begging for something to eat, which we gave him. He was unafraid as soon as he discovered that we were friendly. When in Copenhagen in 1939, on a canal near the heart of the city, we fed wild ducks which landed on the stream and came up and ate out of our hands. We took pictures of them showing this incident. They were not afraid. What a difference it would have made had some one shot at them. Surely it is the duty of man to set the example.—J.F.S.

As the camp drew nearer the borders of Missouri the feeling of resentment and opposition increased. One day the Prophet sent Luke S. Johnson out to spy out the land. When he returned he reported that he had fallen into the company of a priest who was very greatly agitated over the approach of the camp. This priest, a Baptist minister, went to a magistrate to see if steps could not be taken legally to stop the company. He said the company marched like an army with guns, pitched their tents by the side of the road; they set out guards, and let nobody pass into their camp in the night; and they are Mormons, and "I believe they are going to kill the people up in Jackson County, Missouri, and retake their lands." The magistrate replied, "If you were traveling, and did not wish to put up at public houses, or there were none in the country, would you not camp by the roadside in a tent? And if you were afraid that your horses and property would be stolen in a strange country, would you not watch and keep guards?" "Why yes," said the priest, "but they are Mormons!" "Well, I can't hear but they mind their own business, and if you and this stranger (meaning Luke S. Johnson) will mind your own business, everything will be right." Disappointed the Baptist priest departed, but he gave Brother Johnson his dinner and his wife washed his stockings and gave him letters of introduction in Jackson County.

When they crossed the Illinois River they came to some mounds with stones on top "like three altars, having been erected one above the other, according to the ancient order; and the remains of bones were strewn over the surface of the ground. The brethren procured a shovel and a hoe, and removing the earth to the depth of about one foot, discovered the skeleton of a man, almost entire, and between his ribs the stone point of a Lamanitish arrow, which evidently produced his death." Elder Burr Riggs took the arrow. The Prophet writes: "The contemplation of the scene before us produced peculiar sensations in our bosoms and the visions of the past being opened to my understanding by the Spirit of the Almighty, I discovered that the person whose skeleton was before us was a white Lamanite, a large thick-set man, and a man of God. He was a warrior and chieftain under the great prophet Omandagus, who was known from the Hill Cumorah, or Eastern Sea to the Rocky Mountains. His name was Zelph. The curse was taken from him, or at least, in part; one of his thigh bones was broken by a stone flung from a sling, while in battle, years before his death. He was killed in battle by the arrow found among his ribs, during the last great struggle of the Lamanites and Nephites."* (Mil. Star, Vol. 16:69.)

*This revelation to the Prophet in relation to Zelph, is something that our modern critics should consider carefully, who claim that the Nephites and Lamanites did not contend in their final struggle in these northern parts of the United States, and that their activities were confined to Central America and perhaps as far north as part of Mexico.

On Sunday, June 8, 1834, Elders Hyrum Smith and Lyman Wight, who had been sent into Michigan to organize a company to join the main body of Zion's Camp, arrived at Salt River and joined the main body. The whole company then consisted of two hundred and five men, twenty-five baggage wagons with two or three horses each. There was a small branch of the Church at this place and the camp remained there until the twelfth. Lyman Wight was appointed "general of the camp," and Hyrum Smith captain, the Prophet having the supreme command.

The camp crossed Grand River, June 16th and the brethren having suffered with thirst, and a thunder shower coming up, they caught all the water they could in their hats, and this not satisfying them they resorted to drinking water out of the horses tracks. About this time Martin Harris, who had boasted that he could handle snakes with perfect safety, was bitten on his bare foot by a black snake. This called forth a rebuke from the Prophet who told the brethren that it was "presumption for anyone to provoke a serpent to bite him, but if a man of God was accidentally bitten by a poisonous serpent, he might have faith, or his brethren might have faith for him, so that the Lord would hear his prayer and he might be healed; but when a man designedly provokes a serpent to bite him the principle is the same as when a man drinks deadly poison knowing it to be such. In that case no man has any claim on the promises of God to be healed."

*For account of this scourge, see D.H.C. Vol. 2:115-116.

"Let us be republicans; let us honor our country, and not disgrace it like Jackson County; don't disfranchise or drive away the Mormons. They are better citizens than many of the old inhabitants." General Alexander W. Doniphan arose and said: "That's a fact, and as the Mormons have armed themselves, if they don't fight they are cowards. I love to hear that they have brethren coming to their assistance. Greater love can no man show, than he who lays down his life for his brethren." At this point pistols and knives were drawn; the cry was made that a man had been stabbed, and the meeting broke up in confusion.

Of this proposition made by the Jackson County delegation, the Prophet wrote: "It may be thought, at first view, that the mob committee made a fair proposition to the saints, in offering to buy their lands at a price fixed by disinterested arbitrators, and one hundred per centum added thereto, payment to be made in thirty days, and offering theirs on the same terms; but when it is understood that the mob held possession of a much larger quantity of land than the saints, and that they only offered thirty days for the payment, having previously robbed the saints of nearly everything, it will be readily seen that they were only making a sham to cover their previous unlawful conduct." A counter proposal was made by the saints to buy out all those who were opposed to them, if given one year, but this was rejected. Then it was impossible for the saints to sell because their property had been dedicated and consecrated to the Lord. If they sold they would have broken their covenants, and the requirement of the mob was that they should forsake Jackson County forever.
