Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON NINETY

The Fishing River Revelation

References

D.H.C. Vol. 2:99-111. D. & C. 105.

Topics

1.Mob Uprising Against Zion's Camp. Note 1.

a.The Prophet's anxiety for the camp.

b.Threats of the mob.

c.James Campbell's vow.

2.A Miraculous Storm. Note 2.

a.The Lord comes to the defense of the camp.

b.The mobbers dispersed.

c.Col. Sconce and Sheriff Gillium visit the camp.

3.The Fishing River Revelation. Note 3.

a.The Lord speaks on the redemption of Zion. (D. & C. 105:1-9.)

b.Zion to be built on law of celestial kingdom.

c.Saints to be chastened until they learn obedience.

d.Redemption of Zion postponed.

4.Elders to be Endowed. Note 4.

a.The promise of the Lord to fight their battles. (Vs. 14-15.)

b."The strength of mine house have not hearkened." (Vs. 16-17.)

c.Saints commanded to be faithful and prayerful. (Vs. 18-23.)

d.The Lord will soften hearts of the people. (Vs. 25, 27.)

e.Saints commanded to continue to buy lands. (Vs. 28-29.)

f.Armies of Israel held guiltless in defense of property. (Vs. 30-31.)

5.The Kingdom of Zion. Note 5.

a.Saints subject to laws of God. (V. 32.)

b.The Kirtland Temple to be built. (V. 33.)

c.Endowment to be given in the temple.

d.A day of calling and a day of choosing. (V. 35.)

e.A proclamation of peace. Vs. 38-41.)

Notes

While camped, Saturday June 21st, Colonel Sconce and two other leading citizens of Ray County came into the camp desiring to know what our intentions were. Said Colonel Sconce, "I see that there is an Almighty power that protects this people, for I started from Richmond, Ray County, with a company of armed men, having a fixed determination to destroy you, but was kept back by the storm, and was not able to reach you." He was seized with a fit of trembling so that he had to sit. The Prophet gave him an account of the persecutions of the Latter-day Saints and said they had come to bring clothing to their brethren and to reinstate them in their rightful possessions, and not with any intention of molesting or injuring anyone. At the close of this lengthy speech, these men arose and offered their hands and said they would use their influence to allay the excitement which prevailed. When they returned they carried out their promise. The next day Sheriff Cornelius Gillium of Ray County came and gave instruction concerning the manners and customs of the people and the course the brethren should pursue. It was this same Gillium who was to play a dastardly part in the expulsion of the saints from Missouri. This sudden storm in all its fury was a miraculous intervention of divine providence, for it was fully determined by the mob to attack and entirely destroy every member of the camp on that fateful day.

In that day when branches of the Church were called upon to assist their brethren they said, "Where is their God? Behold, he will deliver them in time of trouble, otherwise we will not go up unto Zion, and will keep our moneys." There were many who refused to go with the Prophet in Zion's Camp or send money to help their afflicted brethren. Because of this lack of faith and obedience, instead of redeeming Zion at that time, the Lord declared that Zion should have to "wait for a little season." This waiting was for the purpose of preparing the members of the Church, through faith, obedience, experience in suffering if they would not repent, so that they would eventually be willing to be obedient. To this day we have failed and Zion is not redeemed. We can hasten its redemption if we will be united in purpose and keep all of the commandments the Lord has required of us. This redemption could not come until there was an endowment from on high.

The Lord called upon Joseph Smith to assemble his warriors, his young men and the middle-aged men to go forth to throw down the towers of the enemy and scatter their watchmen. What the Lord might have done if the young and the middle-aged men had responded in full force, we can only conjecture, since the Lord never did intend that the members of his Church should shed blood, but the fact remains that the strength of his house did not hearken unto his words. (vs. 16-18.) For those who did respond and were faithful the Lord had prepared an endowment for them. He had heard their prayers and had tried their faith. Many of those who were in Zion's Camp were requested to remain in Missouri; others with families in the east, were privileged to return after tarrying for a short time. The people who remained in Missouri were counseled by the Lord to be humble and wise and not reveal the things the Lord had imparted to them and thus weaken their influence among their enemies. They were told not to speak of judgments, neither boast of mighty works, but they were to gather in one region as far as consistent with the feelings of the people. One of the excuses, or causes, for the bitterness in Jackson County, was the fact that members of the Church had been unwise in declaring that the Lord had given them that land. It was their everlasting inheritance by divine right. Now they were counseled to use wisdom and not to speak of these things and they would find favor among the inhabitants, and perhaps they would assist them according to law and order in redressing their wrongs. In time, the army of Israel would become very great and in due time the Lord would soften the hearts of the people as he did the heart of Pharaoh in the days of Moses.

The saints were also commanded to continue to purchase lands in Jackson County and the surrounding country, for it was the will of the Lord that these lands should be purchased and consecrated unto him. If they continued to buy lands and then their enemies should come upon them the armies of Israel would be justified in taking possession of their lands and break down the towers of the enemy. Before this could be done, however, the army of the Lord should become very great that her "banners may be terrible unto all nations."

While thus encamped on Fishing River the Lord also in this revelation emphasized the fact that the Kirtland Temple was not to be delayed but built unto his name. He had promised the brethren an endowment, those who were faithful. This temple had to be built so that this endowment could be given. At the end of the journey of this Zion's Camp, the Lord named some of the faithful brethren whom he had appointed to receive this endowment. Among them were:

Edward Partridge, William W. Phelps, Isaac Morley, John Corrill, John and David Whitmer, who had been fighting the cause of Zion in the land of Zion. Algernon Sidney Gilbert was also called and to go forth "to proclaim the everlasting Gospel until Zion is redeemed," but he said he would rather die than preach, so the Lord took him. Peter Whitmer, Jr., Simeon Carter, Newel Knight, Parley P. Pratt, Christian Whitmer, Solomon Hancock, Thomas B. Marsh, Lyman Wight, and others were also called to receive this endowment. (D.H.C. 2:112-113.) The command was given that the commandments that had been given concerning Zion and her law were to be postponed until after her redemption.

"There has been a day of calling, but the time has come for a day of choosing; and let those be chosen that are worthy." Thus the Lord spoke concerning those to be endowed. Joseph Smith was to have discernment and to choose by the "voice of the Spirit," those who were to be endowed and if they followed the counsel which they had received they were to have power, after many days to accomplish all things pertaining to Zion. Evidently the expression "after many days," is after the Lord's manner of speaking. The saints were to lift up an ensign of peace, and make a proclamation of peace "unto the ends of the earth;" and make proposals for peace unto those who had smitten them and then all things would work together for their good. If they would do these things and be faithful, the Lord promised to be with them unto the end.
