Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON NINETY-ONE

Appeal for Redress of Wrong—Difficulties with Sylvester Smith—The Law of Tithing

References

D.H.C. Vol. 2:126-160; 174-175.

Topics

1.An Appeal to the Constituted Authorities of The United States. Note 1.

a.Statement of wrongs inflicted in Missouri.

b.Desire of saints to dwell in peace.

c.Their lands legallly purchased.

d.Saints robbed and driven from their homes.

e.Appeal to state officials fruitless.

2.The Prophet's Return to Kirtland. Note 2.

a.Incidents on the return journey.

b.False doctrines in the Hulet Branch; teachings of Lyman Wight.

c.False charges against the Prophet by Sylvester Smith. Note 3.

d.The case brought to trial.

e.Case before the special council.

3.The Law of Tithing. Note 4.

a.The covenant of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery.

b.Their earnest prayer.

Notes

Citations were made from the Bible showing that the Lord had revealed to his prophets in ancient times that such a city should be built as they contemplated building and that they had gathered for this purpose at the command of the Lord. They had established a printing plant for the purpose of proclaiming to the world these purposes and inviting the honest everywhere to come and assist in the building of a temple and the city that the word of the Lord might be fulfilled. "The inhabitants of Jackson County arrayed themselves against us because of our faith and belief, and destroyed our printing establishment to prevent the spread of the work, and drove men, women and children from their lands, houses, and homes, to perish in the approaching winter. Every blast carried the wailing of women and the shrieks of children across the widespread prairies, sufficiently horrible to draw tears from the savage or melt a heart of stone."

This sorrowful, almost desperate appeal closes with these strong, earnest words:

"For the honor of our beloved country, and the constitution of its free government, we appeal for peace, for an example of forbearance, and the diffusion of the everlasting Gospel; we appeal to the humanity of all nations, and for the glory of God, before whom we must all answer for the deeds done in life, and for the hope of holiness hereafter; we mean to remain faithful to the end, continuing to pray to the Lord to spare us and the people from whatever is evil and not calculated to humble us, and prepare us for his presence and glory; at the same time beseeching him, in the name of Jesus, to extend his blessings to whom he will, and his mercy to all; till by righteousness, the kingdoms of this world become fair as the sun and clear as the moon."

This document was signed by twelve of the brethren residing in Missouri. The entire epistle (pages 126-134) should be carefully considered.

About this time Elder Lyman Wight was tried before the high council in Zion for teaching that "all disease in the Church is of the devil, and that medicine administered to the sick is of the devil; for the sick ought to have faith." From time to time it became necessary to correct the false notions of brethren and keep them from spreading in the Church.

This is the first time in the history of the Church that a President of the Church had been brought to trial before the bishop and high priests on an accusation, according to the provision stated in the revelation as follows:

"But a literal descendant of Aaron has a legal right to the presidency of this (Aaronic) Priesthood, to the keys of this ministry, to act in the office of bishop independently, without counselors, except in a case where a President of the High Priesthood, after the order of Melchizedek, is tried, to sit as a judge in Israel. * * And inasmuch as a President of the High Priesthood shall transgress, he shall be had in remembrance before the common council of the church, who shall be assisted by twelve counselors of the High Priesthood; and their decision upon his head shall be an end of controversy concerning him." (D. and C. 107:76, 82, 83.) The calling of such a council, to try a member of the Presidency of the Church is something exceedingly rare, yet this tribunal has been called on other occasions, for instance, in the case of Oliver Cowdery.

(D.H.C. 3:16.)

August 28, 1834, charges were entered against Sylvester Smith before Bishop Newel K. Whitney, by Sidney Rigdon, because Sylvester Smith had broken his word and had continued to repeat his charges against the Prophet. This case came before the bishop because the Prophet was involved. (D.H.C. 2:150-160.) This was quite a lengthy trial. It commenced August 28th and continued each day until the afternoon of the 30th. Bishop Whitney gave his decision, to the effect that Sylvester Smith should make acknowledgment that he had wickedly and maliciously accused our President Joseph Smith, Jun., with prophesying lies in the name of the Lord, * * that in making these charges he has himself wilfully and maliciously lied * * that he has maliciously told falsehoods in saying that President Joseph Smith, Jun., has abused him with insulting and abusive language, * * * that he further acknowledge that he has abused the former councils which have sat upon this case, and wickedly and maliciously insulted their just and righteous decisions." There were a number of other charges of which he was to acknowledge his errors, or he was to be expelled from the Church.

This decision was unanimously approved by the council, whereupon Sylvester Smith issued the following:

"I hereby certify that the foregoing charges or complaints are just and true, and hereby acknowledge the same, as set forth in the decisions of this council, by signing my own proper name to their minutes, with my own hand." He then added that he signed for fear of punishment. Later, however, he made a free statement and acknowledged his wrongs. (See footnote D.H.C. 2:159-160.)

From this account published in the history we see that the Prophet was perfectly willing to have a case, where accusations were brought against him, tried before the proper tribunal of the Church.

"That if the Lord will prosper us in our business and open the way before us that we may obtain means to pay our debts; that we be not troubled nor brought into disrepute before the world, nor his people; after that, of all that he shall give unto us, we will give a tenth to be bestowed upon the poor in his Church, or as he shall command; and that we will be faithful over that which he has entrusted to our care, that we may obtain much; and that our children after us shall remember to observe this sacred and holy covenant and that our children, and our children's children, may know of the same, we have subscribed our names with our own hands."

(Signed)

"Joseph Smith, Jun."

"Oliver Cowdery."

This was, in fact, the inauguration of the law of tithing, the lesser law, to be a schoolmaster for the members of the Church, like the Law of Moses was to Israel, to prepare them for the higher law which had been taken away because of disobedience.
