Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON NINETY-TWO

The Gift of Tongues—Oliver Cowdery Assistant President—Calling of the Apostles and the First Quorum of Seventies

References

D.H.C. 2:162-208.

Topics

1.The Gift of Tongues. (D.H.C. 2:162-3.)

a.The trial of Brother Carpenter. Note 1.

b.The Prophet's instruction on gift of tongues.

2.Oliver Cowdery's Official Standing. (D.H.C. 2:176.) Note 2.

a.Called to hold keys of Priesthood in this dispensation, with Joseph Smith.

b.Ordained Assistant President.

c.Significance of this position in the Church.

d.This calling taken from Oliver and bestowed on Hyrum Smith.

3.The Call of the Twelve Apostles. (D.H.C. 2:181-200.) Note 3.

a.Minutes of meeting held February 14, 1835.

b.Meeting of members of Zion's Camp.

c.Instructions by President Smith.

d.The Three Witnesses choose the twelve.

e.Blessings of ordination given the twelve.

4.The Call of the Seventies. (D.H.C. 2:201-204.) Note 4.

a.The meeting of February 28, 1835.

b.Seven presidents chosen.

c.The first quorum of seventies organized.

d.Those who were high priests sent back to the high priests quorum.

5.Blessings given to All Who Assisted in Building the Kirtland Temple. (D.H.C. 2:205-208.)

a.The meeting of March 7, 8, 1835. Note 5.

b.Purpose for which the temple was built.

Notes

"Jesus answered and said unto them, though I bear record of myself, yet my record is true: for I know whence I came, and whither I go; but ye cannot tell whence I come, and whither I go.

"Ye judge after the flesh; I judge no man.

"And yet if I judge, my judgment is true; for I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me.

"It is also written in your law, that the testimony of two men is true.

"I am one that bear witness of myself, and the Father that sent me beareth witness of me.

"Then say they unto him, Where is thy Father? Jesus answered, Ye neither know me, nor my Father: if ye had known me, ye should have known my father also."

Here the Savior called attention to the law given from the beginning that in the mouth of two or three witnesses all things are to be established.

"Joseph Smith could not have stood alone, else his work would have failed; just as the work of the Savior required the confirmation of another witness, and who could testify for Christ other than his Father? And so the Lord called another man to stand with Joseph Smith and to hold the keys of salvation in this dispensation as a witness with him. The Prophet Joseph was alone in his first vision. He was alone when the Angel Moroni first came to him and revealed the Book of Mormon, but whenever keys were to be bestowed; when the Lord had light and information to reveal in which the power of Priesthood was to play a part, Joseph Smith and one other witness received the blessings.

"It was Oliver Cowdery who was appointed to stand with Joseph Smith to hold the keys of this dispensation. It was Oliver Cowdery who, with Joseph Smith, received the Priesthood of Aaron under the hands of John the Baptist. It was Oliver Cowdery who received the authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood with Joseph Smith from Peter, James and John. It was Oliver Cowdery who knelt with the Prophet Joseph in the Kirtland Temple in 1836, when Moses and Elias and Elijah came with the keys of their dispensations. I am convinced that if we had the full record we would discover that Oliver Cowdery was associated with Joseph Smith the Prophet when the keys of all the other dispensations were revealed and restored in this dispensation. In this manner Oliver Cowdery was appointed and ordained to stand with the Prophet Joseph Smith as an associate and witness, holding all the authority and keys of this most glorious of all dispensations—the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times."—Joseph Fielding Smith, Conference Report, April, 1930.

The Prophet records in his history (D.H.C. 2:176.) "According to the direction of the Holy Spirit, on the evening of the 5th of December, while assembled with Sidney Rigdon, Frederick G. Williams, and Oliver Cowdery, conversing upon the welfare of the Church, I laid my hands on Brother Oliver Cowdery, and ordained him an assistant-president, saying these words: 'In the name of Jesus Christ, who was crucified for the sins of the world, I lay my hands upon thee and ordain thee an assistant-president to the High and Holy Priesthood, in the Church of the Latter-day Saints." In this calling he continued as "the second Elder" of the Church, and according to the instruction of the Prophet, he outranked both of the counselors, Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams. The Prophet explained the nature of this calling in these words:

"The office of Assistant-president is to assist in presiding over the whole Church, and to officiate in the absence of the President, according to his rank and appointment, viz. President Cowdery, first; President Rigdon, second; and President Williams, third; as they were severally called. The office of this Priesthood is also to act as spokesman, taking Aaron for an example. The virtue of the above Priesthood is to hold the keys of the kingdom of heaven or the Church militant." (Manuscript History, Book "A," Chapter 1.)

Unfortunately Oliver Cowdery failed and his authority and position were taken from him and Hyrum Smith was appointed to this exalted position as the "second elder in the Church," and to stand as a witness holding the keys jointly with the Prophet for this dispensation through time and all eternity. (D. and C. 124:94-96.)

Before these brethren were called the Presidency laid their hands upon the witnesses and blessed them in this special calling. The witnesses then proceeded to lay their hands on the heads of these men and ordained them to this sacred calling. These blessings as given are recorded in the Documentary History, Vol. 2, pages 189-194. After all had been ordained Oliver Cowdery gave the twelve a general charge in relation to their duties and the importance of their call. Three of the brethren were absent at the time of this first meeting. They were Parley P. Pratt, Thomas B. Marsh and Orson Pratt, who were on missions. Elder Parley P. Pratt was ordained February 21, 1835, by President Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer. Elder Marsh returned to Kirtland, April 25th and Elder Orson Pratt on the 26th, and each received his ordination.

As we have seen in previous studies the Lord was very insistent that this temple be speedily erected. The brethren did not understand clearly the reasons for this building beyond the fact that they had been promised an endowment therein. It was not until the building was completed and dedicated that the real object for its erection was made known. It is true that the first endowment was given in this temple, but it was only a partial endowment, and it was not until the Nauvoo Temple was erected that the people were endowed with a complete endowment. According to the order of heaven, it is in the house of the Lord, where keys of Priesthood and blessings pertaining to the exaltation are to be bestowed. Only in the days of emergency, when a house of this character can not be built, are such blessings bestowed. It was, therefore, the purpose of the Lord that this house be built where he could send his messengers with the keys of their authority and bestow them in this dispensation to bring to pass the restoration of all things as spoken of by all the prophets since the world began. The coming of Moroni, John the Baptist, Peter, James and John, had to be in a grove or a wilderness, because it was essential that their authorities should be given before a temple could be built. However, later, there was to be a house erected for the purpose, where the Lord could come and send his servants with their keys and restore them in this dispensation.
