Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON NINETY-THREE

The Revelation on Priesthood

References

D.H.C. Vol. 2:209-217.

D. & C. Sec. 107.

Topics

1.The Two Grand Divisions of The Priesthood. Note 1.

a.The Melchizedek Priesthood. Why it is so called. (D. & C. Vs. 1-4.)

b.The Aaronic Priesthood including the Levitical. (Vs. 1-6.)

c.All authorities (offices) are appendages to the Melchizedek Priesthood. (V. 5.) Note 2.

2.Offices In The Melchizedek Priesthood. Note 3.

a.The Melchizedek Priesthood holds the right of presidency over all the offices and spiritual blessings. (V. 8, 9, 18, 19.)

b.The First Presidency. (Vs. 21, 22, 65, 66, 79, 91, 92.)

c.The twelve apostles. (Vs. 23, 24, 33, 35, 38, 39, 40, 58.)

d.Duties of high priests. (Vs. 10, 17.)

e.Evangelical ministers (patriarchs). (Vs. 39-57.)

f.Duties of the seventy. (Vs. 25, 26, 38, 93, 98.)

g.Duties of elders. (Vs. 11, 89, 99.)

3.Offices In The Aaronic Priesthood. Note 4.

a.Office and calling of the bishop, presiding and local. (Vs. 16, 17)

b.Presiding Bishop holds keys of Aaronic Priesthood. (Vs. 15, 20.)

c.If a literal descendant of Aaron, and the firstborn, he may claim his anointing. (Vs. 16, 17, 69-70.) (See D. and C. 68:16-22.)

d.He is to administer in temporal things. (V. 68.) (D. and C. 68:33.)

e.He is a judge in Israel. (Vs. 72-75.)

f.He has power to judge the President of the High Priesthood in case of trial. (Vs. 76, 82-83.)

4.High Councils and Decisions of Councils.

a.The traveling high council. (Vs. 36-37.)

b.Standing high councils—stake high councils. (V. 37.)

c.The first presidency as a council. (Vs. 78-80.)

d.Divisions of councils. (Vs. 77-80.)

e.No member or officer of the Church exempted from the justice and laws of God. (V. 84.)

Notes

In compliance with this humble request the Prophet Joseph made inquiry and the great revelation on Priesthood was given, which is the subject of this lesson.

Speaking of the Priesthood the Prophet Joseph Smith has said:

"The Priesthood was first given to Adam; he obtained the First Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generation.** The Priesthood is an everlasting principle, and existed with God from eternity, and will to eternity, without beginning of days or end of years. The keys have to be brought from heaven whenever the Gospel is sent. When they are revealed from heaven, it is by Adam's Authority."—(History of the Church, Vol. 3:385.)

In the Doctrine and Covenants Sec. 78, we also read:

"That you may come up unto the crown prepared for you, and be made rulers over many kingdoms, saith the Lord God, the Holy One of Zion, who hath established the foundations of Adam-ondi-Ahman; who hath appointed Michael your prince, and established his feet, and set him upon high, and given unto him the keys of salvation under the counsel and direction of the Holy One, who is without beginning of days or end of life." (Verses 15-16.)

"There are two Priesthoods spoken of in the Scriptures, viz., the Melchizedek and the Aaronic or Levitical. Although there are two Priesthoods, yet the Melchizedek Priesthood comprehends the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood, and is the grand head, and holds the highest authority which pertains to the Priesthood, and the keys of the Kingdom of God in all ages of the world to the latest posterity on the earth, and is the channel through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation, and every important matter is revealed from heaven.

"Its institutions were prior to 'the foundation of this earth, or, the morning stars sang together, or the Sons of God shouted for joy,' and is the highest and holiest Priesthood, and is after the order of the Son of God, and all other Priesthoods are only parts, ramifications, powers and blessings belonging to the same, and are held, controlled, and directed by it. It is the channel through which the Almighty commenced revealing his glory at the beginning of the creation of this earth, and through which He has continued to reveal himself to the children of men to the present time, and through which he will make known his purposes to the end of time.

"Commencing with Adam, who was the first man, who is spoken of in Daniel as being the 'Ancient of Days,' or in other words, the first and oldest of all, the great, grand progenitor of whom it is said in another place he is Michael, because he was the first and father of all, not only by progeny, but the first to hold the spiritual blessings, to whom was made known the plan of ordinances for the salvation of his posterity unto the end, and to whom Christ was first revealed, and through whom Christ has been revealed from heaven, and will continue to be revealed from henceforth. Adam holds the keys of the dispensation of the fulness of times; i.e. the dispensation of all the times that have been and will be revealed through him from the beginning to Christ, and from Christ to the end of all the dispensations that are to be revealed."—Joseph Smith, the Prophet (History of the Church 4:207-8.)

"What is the Priesthood? It is nothing more or less than the power of God delegated to man by which man can act in the earth for the salvation of the human family, in the name of Holy Ghost; and act legitimately; not assuming the authority, nor borrowing it from generations that are dead and gone, but authority that has been given in this day in which we live, by ministering angels and spirits from above, direct from the presence of Almighty God."—President Joseph Smith. (Gospel Doctrine, p. 173)

The Priesthood here discussed was called anciently "The Holy Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God." It was later called the Melchizedek Priesthood after Melchizedek, king of Salem who was a great high priest, to avoid the too frequent repetition of the name of the Lord. This Priesthood circumscribes and embraces all Priesthood, or authority in the Church. In the days of Moses the Lord bestowed upon Aaron and his sons and upon the men of the tribe of Levi, authority to officiate in temporal things and ordinances of the preparatory Gospel. Before that time all matters of a temporal nature were conducted under the Melchizedek Priesthood. (See Lesson 29.)

"There is no office growing out of this Priesthood that is or can be greater than the Priesthood itself. It is from the Priesthood that the office derives its authority and power. No office gives authority to the Priesthood. But all offices in the Church derive their power, their virtue, their authority from the Priesthood. If our brethren would get this principle thoroughly established in their minds, there would be less misunderstanding in relation to the functions of government in the Church than there is."—("Gospel Doctrine," p. 184.)

For a discussion of the various offices of the Melchizedek Priesthood and the Aaronic Priesthood, see "Outlines of Ecclesiastical History," by B. H. Roberts, pages 339-350, and 365-381; "The Compendium," Article on "The Holy Priesthood," Keeler's "Priesthood and Church Government," and "Gospel Doctrine," chapter on "Priesthood." The offices in the Priesthood and the duties of officers have been discussed by the Authorities of the Church for over one hundred years and can be found in many of the published writings. A careful reading of this section (107) also sections 20, 68 and 84, will help in the discussion of the duties and callings of the various officers of the Church. For convenience in this study the several paragraphs in the section under consideration have been grouped under the topic headings; thus, referring to the duties of the Seventies, see f. under topic II.

Three High Priests form the First Presidency, the presiding quorum in the Church. The power of presidency is vested in these three and they have authority to receive the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. The President of the Church has vested in him the fulness of the Priesthood, and all the keys of authority over the Priesthood. He alone holds the sealing power in its fulness, and he delegates the authority to others. (See Section 132:7.)

The twelve apostles form the second quorum in authority in the Church. They have delegated to them the duty and responsibility to preach the Gospel, and to see that it is taught in all the world.

The apostles constitute the traveling high council of the Church. It is their duty, under the First Presidency, to ordain patriarchs and to set in order all the other officers of the Church. (Vs. 39, 58.) They constitute the quorum of special witnesses for Jesus Christ and it is their duty to testify of him by the power of the Holy Ghost in all the world.

Evangelists are patriarchs and they hold the right to bless and pronounce by the spirit of revelation the lineage of members of the Church. Patriarchs do not hold authority by virtue of their office to perform marriages for time and for eternity. The keys of this power are vested solely in the President of the Church, and no one has authority to officiate in this ordinance except he receives the delegated authority from the one who holds the keys of this power. (Section 132:7.) This Patriarchal Priesthood was the order of Priesthood from Adam to Abraham. (See vs. 40-56.)

There is in the Church the office of patriarch to, or of, the Church, sometimes called the "presiding" patriarch. This office was first conferred upon Joseph Smith, Sen., in this dispensation, and was given to him by revelation and right of lineage. This office by divine appointment comes down by lineage and rightfully belongs to the family of Hyrum, son of Joseph Smith, Sen., and descends by the law of primogeniture. Joseph, son of Israel, because of the transgression of his older brethren, received this birthright and it was conferred upon his son Ephraim, and has continued down through that lineage.

The duty of the high priests and elders is to labor in the organized stakes of Zion. From the high priests come the presiding officers in the Church. The seventies are the missionaries of the Church, and they are to be called to this labor "instead of (i.e. in preference to) any others."

The bishop is a common judge in Israel, and members are amenable to his jurisdiction. In case of an accusation made against one of the First Presidency, the case would be tried before the presiding bishop and a council of high priests.

There are several councils in in the Church. The traveling high council has jurisdiction in all the world. The high councils in stakes have jurisdiction in a judicial way in the stakes. The First Presidency may sit as an appellate council, and their decision is final. The Church is so organized that no member or officer, from the President to the last member received, is "exempted from the justice and the laws of God." The special court, or council, presided over by the presiding bishopric has been called into existence several times. The Prophet Joseph Smith was tried before this council on charges made against him by Elder Sylvester Smith after the return of Zion's Camp. Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Frederick G. Williams were each tried by this tribunal.
