Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON NINETY-FOUR

The Book of Abraham

References

D.H.C. Vol. 2:235-238, 286, 289, 318, 320, 358.

Topics

1.The Writings of Abraham and Joseph. Note 1.

a.The coming of Michael H. Chandler to Kirtland.

b.The reason for his visit.

c.Mr. Chandler accepts the Prophet's interpretation.

d.The purchase of the mummies and papyrus.

e.The story of the Hieroglyphics.

2.The Story of the Book of Abraham. Note 2.

a.The Prophet's account of the finding and disposition of the mummies with the Egyptian writings. (D.H.C. 2:348-350.)

3.The Great Value of the Book of Abraham. Note 3.

a.Additional light on Abraham's call and Gospel perpetuity.

b.Difficulties encountered by the Prophet in translating the record.

c.Reason for Abraham's departure from Chaldea.

4.Revelation Concerning Egyptus. Note 4.

a.How and by whom Egypt was first settled.

b.The Canaanitish curse preserved in the land.

c.Descendants of Egyptus denied the Priesthood.

5.The Astronomy in the Book of Abraham. Note 5.

a.Kolob's day and place of governing power.

b.Governmental order in the universe.

c.The earth's reckoning compared with Kolob.

d.Kolob's time is celestial time.

e.Oliblish, the second great governing creation.

f.The earth's time before Adam's fall. (Ch. 8:13.)

Notes

"Kirtland, July 6, 1835."

"This is to make known to all who may be desirous, concerning the knowledge of Mr. Joseph Smith, Jun., in deciphering the ancient Egyptian hieroglyphic characters in my possession, which I have, in many eminent cities, showed to the most learned; and, from the information that I could ever learn, or meet with, I find that of Mr. Joseph Smith, Jun., to correspond in the most minute matters."

"Michael H. Chandler."

"Traveling with, and proprietor of, Egyptian mummies."

So pleased did Mr. Chandler become because of the Prophet's translation that he was easily persuaded to sell two of his manuscripts and his mummies to some members of the Church who desired to buy them. Immediately thereafter the Prophet began an examination of these two rolls, and with the help of Oliver Cowdery and William W. Phelps as scribes, commenced the translation of these records. "Much to our joy," the Prophet writes, "(we) found that one of the rolls contained the writings of Abraham, another the writings of Joseph of Egypt." From this time forth, in the spare moments which could be devoted to the work, Joseph Smith translated the record of Abraham. During the second half of the month of July he was busy preparing an Egyptian alphabet of the Book of Abraham, and "arranging a grammar of the Egyptian language as practiced by the ancients." (D.H.C. 2:238.)

This undertaking the Prophet never could have done without the revelation of the Lord. Up to that time very little knowledge had been gained of the Egyptian Hieroglyphic characters, knowledge that had been lost for many generations. From the earliest times the Egyptians used as characters in their picture writing of men, animals and other objects. In time these became modified. The key to this kind of writing was lost in the early centuries of the Christian Era so that all such writings could not be deciphered. It was not until the year 1799, when the Rosetta Stone was discovered by Mr. Boussard, an officer with Napoleon that revealed the key to these writings. This stone contained a decree written in the day of Ptolemy V. Epiphanes, king of Egypt. This message was written in demotic, the writing of the laiety in Egypt, also in Greek and in hieroglyphics, or "the writing of the priests." From the written languages that were known, the unknown writing, in time was revealed, but this was a difficult and tedious task. Akerblad of Sweden, was the first to decipher some of these characters. His work was enlarged upon by two other men, Young in 1814, who added materially to this hidden knowledge, and the French scholar Champoilion who formulated a demotic and hieroglyphic alphabet in 1822. However, this knowledge was extremely limited among men of science thirteen years later, when these rolls of papyrus came into the hand of the Prophet Joseph Smith. We may safely say that at no time had he ever come in contact with the discoveries of these men, and knew nothing of the alphabet prepared by Champollion. All the knowledge he obtained of necessity had to come by revelation from the Lord, as did the knowledge concerning the records of the Nephites. Apparently there were few if any scholars in the United States at that time who understood much about these ancient Egyptian characters.

While in the custom house he was told that there was no man in that city who could translate his roll; but he was referred, by a stranger to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Mr. Chandler was told that the Prophet had some kind of power or gift by which he had translated other characters. The Prophet continues to write: "I was then unknown to Mr. Chandler, neither did he know that such a book or work as the record of the Nephites, had been brought before the public. From New York, he took his collection on to Philadelphia, where he obtained the certificate of the learned, and from thence came on to Kirtland, as before related." (D.H.C. 2:349-350.)

In the midst of many cares, mobbings, anxiety over poverty and persecutions of the saints, the translation of this valuable record was not completed for many months, and was not published until the year 1842, when it was printed in the Times and Seasons in Nauvoo. Later it was made a part of the Pearl of Great Price, first published in England in 1851, and has since been accepted, together with the Book of Moses and some other writings appearing in the present edition of the Pearl of Great Price, as one of the standard works of the Church.

"The land of Egypt being first discovered by a woman, who was the daughter of Ham, and the daughter of Egyptus, which in the Chaldean signifies Egypt, which signifies that which is forbidden. When this woman discovered the land it was under water who afterwards settled her sons in it; and thus, from Ham, sprang the race which preserved that curse in the land." We discover also in this account that the rulers of Egypt had a patriarchal form of government which they copied after the government given to Adam and the generations before the flood. Pharaoh, the eldest son of Egyptus, was a righteous man and governed wisely, but according to the blessing of Noah he was blessed with wisdom, but cursed as pertaining to the Priesthood. In other words, the Priesthood had been denied these people and they "preserved the curse in the land."

Kolob, signifies the first creation, nearest to the celestial, or the residence of God. It is the first in government, and the last as to its reckoning of time. Its day is one thousand years according to the earth's year. Then there were other great governing bodies. Oliblish, which stands next to Kolob in point of governing power, has also the day of one thousand of our years. Kolob's time of reckoning is the Lord's time, hence celestial time. Here back more than nineteen centuries before the birth of our Lord, the Lord revealed to Abraham the perfect order existing in our universe and how the stars and planets are governed in their times and seasons by great orbs appointed to this honor by the commandment of the Lord. There are things revealed in the Book of Abraham which were not understood by the astronomers in the day of Joseph Smith, and which are not accepted with finality even to this day by the learned searchers of the heavens, although the Lord by his revelation to his ancient prophets has made them simple and plain. How grateful we should be for the knowledge thus received—by those who are willing to believe!
