Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON NINETY-FIVE

The Book of Doctrine and Covenants

References

D.H.C. Vol. 2:243-251.

D. & C. Sec. 134.

Topics

1.The General Conference of August 17, 1835. Note 1.

a.Reason for calling the conference.

b.How the conference was organized.

c.Absence of Joseph Smith and Frederick G. Williams from the conference.

2.Testimonies Given In Relation to the Revelations. Note 2.

a.The testimony of the twelve apostles.

b.The testimonies of others.

3.The Article on Marriage. Note 3.

a.By whom prepared.

b.Not a revelation to the Church.

c.Not accepted as revelation to the Church.

4.The Article on "Government and Laws In General." Note 4.

a.Reason for the article on government.

b.Not a revelation to the Church.

c.Virtue in the article.

5.Publication and Preface of the Doctrine and Covenants. Note 5.

a.Preface of this publication.

b.Number of Sections.

c.The fulfillment of ancient promises. Note 6.

d.The Lectures on Faith.

Notes

"Wherefore Oliver Cowdery and Sidney Rigdon, members of the First Presidency * * appointed Thomas Burdick, Warren Parrish and Sylvester Smith clerks, and proceeded to organize the whole assembly as follows:

"They organized the high council of the Church in Kirtland, and President W. W. Phelps and John Whitmer organized the high council of the Church in Missouri.

"Bishop Newel K. Whitney organized his counselors of the Church in Kirtland, and acting bishop, John Corrill, organized the counselors of the Church in Missouri."

In this manner the quorums of the Priesthood were also organized and made ready by quorums to consider the important matter which was before them. In the morning session, after singing and prayer, several brethren were ordained to offices in the Priesthood, and the assembly adjourned for one hour. At the appointed time the brethren reassembled in the order in which they were arranged at the beginning of the conference. The meeting was opened in the usual way by singing and prayer, and then President Oliver Cowdery arose and introduced the "Book of Doctrine and Covenants" of the Church of Latter-day Saints, in behalf of the committee. He was followed by President Rigdon, who explained the manner by which it was intended to obtain the voice of the assembly for or against the publication of the book. The brethren were then given the privilege of expressing themselves before the vote was taken.

It will be noted that at this conference, which was of great importance, the Prophet Joseph Smith and his counselor Frederick G. Williams were absent. Important business had called them away to Michigan, from which appointment they did not return until the 23rd of August. In some respects it was unfortunate that the guiding hand of the Prophet was not there at this conference. We may feel assured that some things were considered and passed upon that would not have been entertained had he been present. The great and important thing, however, for which the conference was called was accomplished, that was the acceptance by the Priesthood of the Church of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants as a standard in doctrine.

"The testimony of the Witnesses to the Book of the Lord's Commandments, which commandments he gave to his Church through Joseph Smith, Jun., who was appointed, by the voice of the Church, for this purpose.

"We therefore feel willing to bear testimony to all the world of mankind, to every creature upon the face of all the earth, that the Lord has borne record to our souls, through the Holy Ghost shed forth upon us, that these commandments were given by inspiration of God, and are profitable for all men, and are verily true. We give this testimony unto the world, the Lord being our helper; and it is through the grace of God the Father, and His Son Jesus Christ, that we are permitted to have this privilege of bearing this testimony unto the world, in the which we rejoice exceedingly, praying the Lord always that the children of men may be profited thereby."

Each of the brethren signed his name.

Others who bore testimony were, William W. Phelps and John Whitmer of the Mission Presidency; Elder John Smith, Levi Jackman, Leonard Rich, Bishop Newel K. Whitney, John Corrill, and many others. The assembly by unanimous voice accepted the work of the committee and the revelations as standards in doctrine.

Taking this article in its entirety we are willing to accept it, for it contains sound principles that are acceptable today, and will be approved by the Church until that day comes when the Rightful Ruler of the earth shall come to set up his perfect government. One statement in this article, we could modify and give a better meaning. "We believe that governments were instituted of God for the benefit of man," might be more nearly correct if stated: "A perfect government was instituted of God for the benefit of man." The statement that governments, if this is interpreted to mean all governments, were instituted of God, may be questioned. Yet it is true that he holds men accountable for their acts in relation to the governments which man has set up, and which are not approved of God.

"To the Members of the Church of the Latter-day Saints.

"Dear Brethren:—We deem it to be unnecessary to entertain you with a lengthy preface to the following volume, but merely to say that it contains in short the leading items of the religion which we have professed to believe.

"The first part of the book will be found to contain a series of lectures as delivered before a theological class in this place, and in consequence of their embracing the important doctrine of salvation, we have arranged them into the following work:

"The second part contains items or principles for the regulation of the Church as taken from the revelations which have been given since its organization, as well as from former ones.

"There may be an aversion in the minds of some against receiving anything purporting to be articles of religious faith, in consequence of there being so many now extant; but if men believe a system, and profess that it was given by inspiration, certainly the more intelligibly they can present it, the better. It does not make a principle untrue to print it, neither does it make it true not to print it.

"The Church, viewing this subject to be of importance, appointed, through their servants and delegated the High Council, your servants to select and compile this work. Several reasons might be adduced in favor of this move of the Council, but we only add a few words. They know that the Church was evil spoken of in many places, its faith and belief misrepresented, and the way of truth thus subverted. By some it was represented as disbelieving the Bible; by others as being an enemy to all good order and uprightness and by others as being injurious to the peace of all governments, civil and political.

"We have, therefore, endeavored to present, though in few words, our belief, and when we say this, humbly trust, the faith and principles of this society as a body.

"We do not present this little volume with any other expectation than that we are to be called to answer for every principle advanced, in that day when the secrets of all hearts will be revealed, and the reward of every man's labor be given him.

"With sentiments of esteem and sincere respect, we subscribe ourselves your brethren in the bonds of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

"Joseph Smith, Jun."

"Oliver Cowdery."

"Sidney Rigdon"

"Frederick G. Williams."

"Kirtland, Ohio, February 17, 1835."

"Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah:

"Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto them, saith the Lord:

"But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; After those days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people.

"And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more." (Jer. 31:31-34.)

Through Ezekiel he said:

"Moreover I will make a covenant of peace with them: it shall be an everlasting covenant with them: and I will place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore.

"My tabernacle also shall be with them, yea, I will be their God, and they shall be my people." (Ezek. 37:26-27.)

These covenants and doctrines in great part have been revealed and are here for Israel when the tribes come to receive their blessings at the hands of Ephraim. (D. and C. 133:26-35.)

These lectures on Faith which were published in the first edition and all subsequent editions up to the year 1921, were removed from the Doctrine and Covenants when that book was published in the double columns. The question is frequently asked why these lectures were taken out of the book. It was not because these lectures are unsound in principle, for they are just as valuable today as they were when presented before the school of the elders in Kirtland, under the guiding hand of the Prophet Joseph Smith. They are, in fact, too valuable in the study of the principle of faith to be lost. They were removed because they were not revelations, and it was felt that they should not be continued in the book with the revelations, but could be published separately where they would not be considered by so many as on a par with the direct revelations from the Lord. When in August 1835, the publication of the revelations was being considered and the question of including these lectures, Elder John Smith voiced the sentiment of the assembly in these words: "John Smith, taking the lead of the high council in Kirtland, bore record that the revelations in said book were true, and that the lectures were judiciously arranged and compiled, and were profitable for doctrine," but not to be received on an equality with the revelations.
