Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON NINETY-SIX

Ministry of the Prophet in Kirtland—The Solemn Assembly

References

D.H.C. 2:299-389.

Topics

1.The Prophet's Counsel to the Twelve. Note 1.

a.The close of the year 1835.

b.The rebellious spirit of William Smith. (D.H.C. 2:294, 296, 338, 343.

c.The council meetings held.

d.The Prophet instructs the apostles. D.H.C. 2:308.

2.The School of the Elders. Note 2.

a.A school of the elders appointed by revelation. D. & C. 88.

b.The commandment to seek for knowledge and faith.

c.The elders to prepare themselves for the ministry.

d.The study of Hebrew. D.H.C. 2:300, 318, 345, 355.

e.The selection of a competent teacher.

f.Value of the Hebrew Language.

3.The Prophet's Interest in the Indians. Note 3.

a.Andrew Jackson's views and policy towards the Indians. D.H.C. 2:358.

b.The Prophet's hope that this would benefit the Indians.

c.How the policy of the Government failed.

4.The Solemn Assembly. Note 4.

a.Preliminary meetings held. D.H.C. 366, 370, 379-383.

b.Blessings and ordinations.

c.The Prophet's vision of the celestial kingdom. D.H.C. 2:380.

d.The doctrine of salvation for the dead.

e.Salvation of all little children who die. D.H.C. 2:381.

f.Mercy and justice of this doctrine.

Notes

The endowment the brethren were anxious about, they could not fully comprehend at the present time. They would have to prepare their hearts and be faithful in all things so that when they met in the solemn assembly, those whom the Lord should call of the authorities of the Church, must be clean every whit. Manifestations that might be given they were to keep to themselves and not boast of them. They would have to be prayerful and watchful and blessings would be given beyond their expectations." Do not watch for iniquity in each other, if you do you will not get an endowment, for God will not bestow it on such. But if we are faithful, and live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God, I shall venture to prophesy that we will get a blessing that will be worth remembering, if we should live as long as John the Revelator; our blessings will be such as we have not realized before, nor received in this generation. The order of the house of God has been, and ever will be, the same, even after Christ comes; and after the termination of the thousand years it will be the same; and we shall finally enter into the celestial kingdom of God, and enjoy it forever."

He said, further, that they needed the endowment that they might be prepared and able to overcome all things; and those who reject their testimony should be damned. The blessings of the Gospel would be poured out upon them, and they would be prepared to preach the gospel to all nations.

It was because of this commandment that this school was held. Various studies, including grammar, history, geography and language, were presented, in order that the brethren might be prepared to go forth to teach the world. The brethren considered that the study of Hebrew was one of the important courses which they should undertake. They sent forth, therefore, to find a man skilled in Hebrew to be their teacher. On the fourth of January, 1836, they met and organized their Hebrew school. They had engaged Doctor Piexotto to teach them and they made arrangements with him, but he failed to meet his appointment promptly so he was dismissed and Dr. Joshua Seixas of Hudson, Ohio, was chosen to be their teacher. His terms were that he would teach a course of seven weeks for three hundred and twenty dollars. Text books in Hebrew were obtained and rapid progress was made by the members of the class in that language. As the class progressed the Prophet prayed: "May the Lord help us to obtain this language, that we may read the Scriptures in the language in which they were given." So pleased were they with their teacher that arrangements were made for him to continue on with his teaching and his family removed from Hudson to Kirtland. During the period in which this language was taught Dr. Seixas declared that he had never had a class that made such rapid progress. The Lord certainly blessed them for some of these brethren continued their studies and became proficient in Hebrew which was very useful to them in years to come.

No doubt the Prophet was happy in this disposition of these Lamanites, for he evidently felt that with the moving of these "aboriginal peoples" they would possess these lands unmolested by the whites and there would be an opportunity to carry the message of the gospel among them. In this, however, he was to be deceived. It may have been the sincere policy of President Andrew Jackson to give this territory to the Indians with a perpetual right of inheritance, and this was based largely on the thought that this territory would not be occupied by the white population. In this however he was wrong. The treaty with the Indians, like other treaties pertaining to their rights, was rudely broken. The stronger peoples surged forth and took possession of these Indian lands and eventually the government policy was to place them on restricted "reservations" and they were denied the lands which by treaty, or decree, had been assigned to them. The treatment of the Indian by the peoples of the United States, has been anything but a happy and just chapter in the history of our country.

"The heavens were opened upon us, and I beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof, whether in the body or out I cannot tell. I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of that kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire; also the blazing throne of God, whereon was seated the Father and the Son. I saw the beautiful streets of that kingdom, which had the appearance of being paved with gold. I saw Father Adam and Abraham, and my father and mother, my brother, Alvin, that has long since slept, and marveled how it was that he had obtained an inheritance in that kingdom, seeing that he had departed this life before the Lord had set his hand to gather Israel the second time, and had not been baptized for the remission of sins.

Some members of the Church have wondered how it was he could see his brother Alvin in the celestial kingdom, when he died without baptism before the Church was organized. The Prophet was seeing a vision of the future, for he also saw his father and mother there, and they were both living in the flesh at that time, and his father was present with him in this solemn assembly in the Temple.

As the Prophet marveled over this himself, the Lord gave him a very important revelation which is one of the first indications pointing to the salvation of the dead. It is as follows:

"All who have died without a knowledge of this Gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom, for I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts."

While the Lord did not at this time point out the procedure by which the ordinances would be performed for these worthy dead, he did indicate that provision was made so that all who would have received the Gospel if it had reached them when they were living, shall receive the blessings of that kingdom. This indicates clearly that those who would not receive the Gospel when it was offered to them in this life, may not receive these blessings after they are dead.

His knowledge concerning salvation was also enlarged for it was also revealed to him that "All children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability, are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven." We frequently hear members of the Church say that if these little children who die before the days of accountability are saved in the celestial kingdom and are never subjected to the temptations and ills of the flesh whereby they can be tried, then the Lord is a partial being, granting salvation to some without these trials and forcing others to pass through them. They say:

"How do we know that many of these had they been privileged to tarry would not have entered paths of wickedness and been rebellious?" I suppose that this is verily true that many would have failed, but are they to be punished for something which they did not do? They were deprived of all the blessings of this mortal life as well as its temptations and surely the Lord does nothing but that which is just and right. The Lord has said: "For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts." (Isa. 55:8-9)

Again it is written:

"Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the weakness of God is stronger than men." (I Cor. 1:25.)

He has also said that during the thousand years of peace the people of the Church "shall multiply and wax strong, and their children shall grow up without sin unto salvation." (D. & C. 45:58.)
