Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON NINETY-SEVEN

Dedication of the Kirtland Temple

References

D.H.C. Vol. 2:410-433.

D. & C. Section 109.

Topics

1.Preparation For the Dedication. Note 1.

a.Completion of the Temple.

b.By sacrifice of the people.

c.Description of the Temple.

2.The Opening Exercises. Note 2.

a.Gathering of the people.

b.Arrangement of the assembly.

c.President Rigdon's discourse.

3.The Sustaining of Church Authorities. Note 3.

a.Joseph Smith sustained.

b.Other authorities sustained.

4.The Prayer of Dedication. Note 4.

a.The prayer given by revelation.

b.The dedication approved by the people.

c.Heavenly manifestations.

d.Special ordinances performed.

Notes

The dimensions of the building are eighty-by fifty-nine feet with walls fifty feet high and a tower rising one hundred and ten feet. It has been marveled at by noted architects for its beauty of design and finish. In the attic story were class rooms where the quorums of the Priesthood met, and where classes held forth in their studies in the school of the elders. The main assembly room in the temple, or inner court, had four tiers of pulpits at each end. The earlier temples built in Utah, at St. George, Manti, Logan and Salt Lake City, followed this design, as did also the temple built in Nauvoo. In some of the more recent temples this assembly room does not appear. The Kirtland Temple was not constructed on the plan which has been followed in all the other temples which have been erected. This temple contained no baptismal font and was not arranged for the ordinance work as we understand it today. It was built before the doctrine of salvation for the dead had been revealed, and before the endowment also had been revealed fully. The main purpose for such a temple was to have a house where the Lord could come and where he could send his servants with the keys of their dispensations. While we have the record of three of these ancient prophets coming on such missions, it is possible that there may have been others whose coming was not recorded. Whether this is so or not, we know, for the Lord has decreed it, that all the prophets came with their keys and authorities and restored them in this dispensation. Unfortunately it was not long after the dedication of this temple when apostasy entered the Church and this sacred building was desecrated and from that time forth ceased to be a temple recognized by the Lord; his Holy Spirit and influence had departed. The Lord had declared that if such a time should come it would cease to be his house. In January 1841, when the commandment was given to build the Nauvoo Temple, the Lord declared that there was not a place to be found on the earth where he could come and restore that which had been lost, even the fulness of the Priesthood, and therefore he commanded that the Nauvoo Temple be built that this restoration could be brought to pass. Be it remembered that it is only in a temple built to the name of the Lord and accepted by him that the fulness of the Priesthood can be obtained. This is the chief purpose of a temple, that the fulness of blessings pertaining to the exaltation may be given to those who are worthy, both the living and the dead.

When the congregation re-assembled the services were renewed by singing, "Adam-ondi-Ahman," by Elder William W. Phelps, and the Prophet then arose and addressed the assembly after which he called upon the quorums, severally, to acknowledge the twelve apostles "as prophets, seers, revelators, and special witnesses to all the nations of the earth, holding the keys of the kingdom, to unlock it, or cause it to be done, among them, and to uphold them by their prayers." Each quorum did this by rising. Then in like manner the seventies were presented, and all the other quorums of the Priesthood down to and including the quorum of deacons in the Church, and likewise in each case the vote was taken by the entire congregation. After this presentation of the authorities the hymn, "How Pleased and Blessed Was I," by Watts, was sung.

At the conclusion of the prayer the choir sang "The Spirit of God Like a Fire is Burning!" which was written for this dedication, and was in keeping with the services, for the Spirit of the Lord had been made manifest in great abundance and was burning in the hearts of the people. After the singing the same form of presentation was conducted and each quorum in turn was asked if it accepted the prayer of dedication, and then the question was placed before the congregation, and was accepted unanimously.

Then the sacrament was administered, and the Prophet spoke of his mission and the ministration of angels. Others then were given the privilege of bearing testimony. Oliver Cowdery testified to the coming forth of the Book of Mormon; David Whitmer and Frederick G. Williams declared that they had seen angels present, as had several others. The Hosanna Shout was given, and after prayer, the proceedings of the day were sealed and came to a close. While Elder George A. Smith was speaking there came a noise like the rushing of a mighty wind which filled the house, and on the outside people saw a pillar of light which rested on the building. Brigham Young spoke in tongues and the interpretation was given by Elder David W. Patten. The number of official members present was four hundred and sixteen, being the greatest number ever assembled up to that time. The total attendance is not given for this gathering, but on a subsequent occasion over one thousand were present.

On subsequent days the dedicatory proceedings were continued so that others who could not attend on the first day could be present. The ordinance of washing of feet was given at the meeting held on the 29th. This session, as far as the brethren were concerned, continued through the night. On the 30th these ordinances were continued. The Prophet made remarks in which he said that the time was to be fulfilled in a few days allotted to them for the endowment and then the elders were to go forth and each stand for himself, to proclaim the message of the Gospel. They were instructed not to contend with others over their systems of faith or religion, but to pursue a steady course. By commandment he said all who observed this would be blessed and should any not observe it they would pull down persecution upon their heads. The seventies were not called to serve tables, or to preside over churches or to settle difficulties, but to preach the Gospel and build up branches and have others not of the seventies to preside over them. The apostles also were not to serve tables but to bear the keys of the kingdom to all nations and unlock the door of the Gospel to them. The Prophet then said he had completed all the quorums of the Church and said, "we had passed through all the necessary ceremonies, that I had given them all the instruction they needed, and that they now were at liberty, after obtaining their licenses, to go forth and build up the kingdom of God." As they had spent the night as well as the day in meeting, they retired to assemble once more on the 31st of March, to continue the dedicatory service. On Thursday, March 31st, the meetings in the temple continued and were conducted in the same manner as when first conducted. This made a very strenuous week, but one filled with joy because of the outpouring of the Spirit of the Lord during the meetings of the dedication.
