Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON NINETY-EIGHT

The Restoration of Keys of Priesthood

References

D.H.C. Vol. 2:434-436.

D. & C. Sec. 110.

Topics

1.The Appearing of The Savior. Note 1.

a.The acceptance of the house of the Lord.

b.Keys of all dispensations to be restored.

c.The prophecy of Malachi.

2.The Appearing of Moses. Note 2.

a.Nature of keys held by Moses.

b.Prophecies of the gathering fulfilled.

3.The Appearing of Elias. Note 3.

a.The keys held by Elias.

b.Meaning of the title "Elias."

4.The Appearing of Elijah. Note 4.

a.The keys held by Elijah.

b.Turning of hearts of fathers and children.

c.The earth to be smitten unless keys are restored.

d.Evidence that these keys have been restored. Note 5.

e.Edersheim's comment. Note 6.

Notes

"The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened.

"We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us, and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold in color like amber.

"His eyes were as a flame of fire, the hair of his head was white like the pure snow. His countenance shone above the brightness of the sun, and his voice was as the sound of rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying—

"I am the first and the last, I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain, I am your advocate with the Father.

"Behold, your sins are forgiven you, you are clean before me; therefore lift up your heads and rejoice.

"Let the hearts of your brethren rejoice, and let the hearts of all my people rejoice, who have, with their might, built this house to my name.

"For behold, I have accepted this house, and my name shall be here, and I will manifest myself to my people in mercy in this house.

Yea, I will appear unto my servants, and speak unto them with mine own voice, if my people will keep my commandments, and do not pollute this holy house.

"Yea the hearts of thousands and tens of thousands shall greatly rejoice in consequence of the blessings which shall be poured out, and the endowment with which my servants have been endowed in this house;

"And the fame of this house shall spread to foreign lands, and this is the beginning of the blessing which shall be poured out upon the heads of my people. Even so. Amen."

In this manner the Lord appeared to these brethren and accepted this house. As we have stated before, it is the decree of the Lord that all the dispensations should be joined with, or flow into, the Dispensation of The Fullness of Times. Peter declared that all the holy prophets since the world began have testified of this thing. (Acts 3:21.), and the keys of these dispensations were to be restored in the last dispensation. Moreover, it is decreed, that a house built to the name of the Lord is the place for such ordinances and the restoration of ancient keys of authority.

Malachi predicted that the Savior would come suddenly to his temple with power and authority. It is customary in the Church for the members to still look forward for the coming of this great day, thinking that it is to be fulfilled when the great temple in the city Zion shall be built; but may it not be the case that this predicted coming has already taken place in this wonderful manifestation in the Kirtland Temple? The Savior came suddenly to this temple. He accepted the house and made promises of great blessings through faithfulness of the people. He prepared the way on this occasion for the coming of other messengers with their keys, thus revealing the authorities which make it possible to bring to pass the complete salvation and exaltation of all who are willing to obey the gospel. Today, through the restoration of these keys every ordinance and power has been given to the Church which is essential to the fulness of celestial exaltation. Without any question when the temple in Zion and the temple in Jerusalem are built the Lord will come to them, but his coming to the Kirtland Temple carries great weight and is far more significant than some among us have thought it to be.

This is also the dispensation of the gathering. In it Israel is to be reestablished in the land given to Abraham. Moses predicted both the scattering and the gathering of Israel. Before the children of Israel were privileged to cross the Jordan and receive their inheritances, Moses gave them ample warning regarding the destructions, punishments and scattering, that would overtake them if they failed to keep the commandments of the Lord when they entered the promised land. He said unto them: "Take heed unto yourselves, lest ye forget the covenant of the Lord your God, which he made with you, and make you a graven image, or the likeness of anything, which the Lord thy God hath forbidden thee. For the Lord thy God is a consuming fire, even a jealous God. * * I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that ye shall soon utterly perish from off the land whereunto ye go over Jordan to possess it; ye shall not prolong your days upon it, but shall utterly be destroyed. And the Lord shall scatter you among the nations, and ye shall be left few in number among the heathen, whither the Lord shall lead you. * * But if from thence thou shalt seek the Lord thy God, thou shalt find him, if thou seek him with all thy heart and with all thy soul. When thou art in tribulation, and all these things are come upon thee, even in the latter days, if thou turn to the Lord thy God, and shalt be obedient unto his voice; (For the Lord thy God is a merciful God;) he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget the covenant of thy fathers which he sware unto them." (Deut. 4th chapter.)

All of the prophets in ancient days predicted the scattering; they also predicted the gathering again which was to take place in the latter days, and when the Jews had been sufficiently punished for their transgressions they were to return to Palestine. Moses held the keys of the gathering of Israel. He led Israel out of Egypt into the land of Canaan. It was his appointment in this dispensation to come and restore those keys for the modern gathering. The Lord, shortly after the restoration of the gospel, gave commandment to the Church that Israel should be gathered. In September 1830, he said: "And ye are called to bring to pass the gathering of mine elect; for mine elect hear my voice and harden not their hearts; wherefore the decree hath gone forth from the Father that they shall be gathered in unto one place upon the face of this land, to prepare their hearts and be prepared in all things against the day when tribulation and desolation are sent forth upon the wicked." (D. & C. 29:7-8.) Again, in November 1831, the Lord directed by revelation that all those not of Judah should flee from among the nations of Zion, and those of Judah should flee unto Jerusalem (Palestine), preparatory to the restoration of blessings to the tribes by the children of Ephraim, before the Savior should come.

After the restoration of these keys and after the gospel message was carried forth among the people of Europe and other countries, got the spirit of gathering and could not be denied. Immediately they commenced plans for joining the body of the Church. After the saints came to Utah, the Church instituted the Perpetual Emigration Fund to assist the poor members in Europe to come to America. This continued for a number of years. Today the Government has restricted immigration so that only a certain quota from foreign countries may enter the United States each year. If the Indians had been strong enough to enforce such a law, we white people would not be in this country today, and we could not have taken the Indians' country from them, and placed them on reservations.

The prediction by Malachi has been, and still is, a mystery to the so-called Christian world. Commentators dealing with this passage have presented some very strange notions as to its meaning. It required an opening of the heavens and the revealing of additional knowledge to make this matter plain. From the Prophet Joseph Smith we have learned, for the Lord made it known to him, that Elijah was the last of the old prophets, before the coming of our Lord, who held the fulness of the sealing power. Others before him held it, but it was a special blessing bestowed upon him, the last of the prophets to hold it, because of his faithfulness and the importance of his calling in Israel. He had conferred upon him the power to seal on earth and in heaven. He could by his word close the heavens that it should not rain. He had power to control the elements; but beyond this, he had the power to bless and to confer upon the faithful great blessings pertaining to their salvation. In his day he was called on to turn the hearts of the children of Israel back to the true worship of the Lord and away from idolatry. Some members of the Church have the idea that because Elijah was sent to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery with the sealing power, and to turn the hearts of the children to their fathers, therefore Elijah performed ordinance work for the dead in the day of his ministry. This view is erroneous. There was no ordinance work performed for the dead in any dispensation before the Savior opened the door to the souls in the spirit world after his crucifixion. Until that day they were in darkness. This truth he revealed to Enoch (Book of Moses 7:39.) and to Isaiah (Isa. 42:6-8 and 61:1-2.) and in the story of Lazarus. (Luke 16:26.)

President Brigham Young has said: "Jesus was the first man that ever went to preach to the spirits in prison, holding the keys of the Gospel of salvation to them. Those keys were delivered to him in the day and hour that he went into the spirit world, and with them he opened the door of salvation to the spirits in prison." ("Discourses," p. 579.)

Then how is it that he held keys which, when restored, enable us to perform baptisms and sealings for the dead? The reason is that the sealing power since the Savior's visit to the spirit world, loosed the restrictions on the dead, and now the ordinances are applied in behalf of the dead just as they are for the living. It is the exercise of the sealing power which Elijah held, that makes it possible for all the sealings, or binding on earth and in heaven. Answering the question, "Why send Elijah," the Prophet Joseph Smith said: "Because he holds the keys of the authority to administer in all the ordinances of the Priesthood; and without the authority is given, the ordinances could not be administered in righteousness." (D.H.C. 4:211.)

Malachi declared that if the authority held by Elijah was not restored that "the whole earth" would be "smitten with a curse." When the great and dreadful day of the Lord comes, if there had not been restored the sealing power by which the ordinances in the House of the Lord could be performed for both the living and the dead, then the work of the Lord in relation to the salvation of man would fail. The great and dreadful day of the Lord is the day when judgments are poured out upon the wicked and the earth is cleansed of its iniquity. It is not to be a dreadful day to the righteous, but it certainly will be to all that do wickedly, for they will be as stubble and will be burned when the Lord comes in his glory, and they shall be left with "neither root nor branch." (Malachi 4:1.) This sealing power by which family ties are made secure and by which baptism for the dead becomes effective, is absolutely essential and must be exercised, for all those who died without the knowledge of the Gospel and who would have received it if it had been offered them while they were living on the earth before the end of the earth can come. If these keys were not here, then the dreadful day when Christ shall come would be a day of utter confusion, but the Lord, who knows the end from the beginning, revealed this Priesthood so that all who will, whether living or dead, may escape through the ordinances of the Gospel.

"The significance of the restoration of the keys held by Elijah, embracing the turning of the hearts of the children to their fathers, is clearly defined and readily observable in the work that is being done today for the dead. Not only have the hearts of members of the Church turned to their dead fathers, but this same influence has taken hold of the hearts of people in various parts of the world. There are today thousands of individuals who are working in the preparation of their family genealogical records. This has come to pass since Elijah came, and is one of the most significant signs of the times. The Prophet Joseph Smith could not by any power vested in himself, force the people everywhere to take an interest in their dead and compile their records at great expense. Before the restoration of these keys April 3, 1836, there was no great interest in any part of the world among the professed believers in Christianity, in the compiling of genealogical records. A brief statement in relation to what has been done since is in order here.

"The year following the coming of Elijah, Great Britain passed laws requiring the proper recording of vital records and filing them in a central place. In the year 1844, the New England Historical and Genealogical Society was organized in Boston, although some steps had been taken a short time previously in this direction. In 1869 the New York Genealogical and Biographical Society was incorporated in New York. Since that day many other societies have been organized in many of the other cities and states, principally in the older settlements along the Atlantic where the people first settled when they came to this country. In more recent years societies for the research and compilation of genealogical information have come into existence in most of the states from Maine to California. It is but natural that the first societies of this kind in this country would be formed in the New England and Atlantic states, for there is where the oldest settlements are found and the beginning of family history in this country. There have been also in several parts of the country special bequests provided in wills for the purpose of genealogical research. Some of the older states have also set aside funds by legislative enactment for the gathering, compiling and publishing of vital records of their several towns. In the past fifty years [before 1915] organizations of this nature have been formed in most of the counties of Great Britain and the spirit of this work has crossed to the continent into all lands from whence have been gathered the scattered sheep of the house of Israel. Thousands of genealogical records have been compiled at enormous expense by individuals and family organizations. The compilers do not seem to know what force it is that impels them onward in this work. They think they are doing it as a matter of family pride and the desire to have some record of their ancestors, but back of it all is the inspiration which comes from the restoration of the keys of this turning of the hearts of children to parents and parents to their children." ("Signs of the Times," J.F.S., pages 161-163.)

"Jewish tradition has this curious conceit: that the most important events in Israel's history were connected with the Paschal season. Thus it is said to have been on the present Paschal night that, after his sacrifice, 'horror of great darkness,' fell upon Abraham when God revealed to him the future of his race. Similarly, it is supposed to have been at Passover time that the patriarch entertained his heavenly guests, that Sodom was destroyed and Lot escaped, and that the walls of Jericho fell before the Lord. More than that—the 'cake of barley bread' seen in the dream, which led to the destruction of Midian's host, had been prepared from the Omer, presented on the second day of the feast of unleavened bread; just as at a later period alike the captains of Sennacherib and the king of Assyria, who tarried at Nob, were overtaken by the hand of God at the Passover season. It was at the Paschal time also that the mysterious handwriting appeared on the wall to declare Babylon's doom, and again at the Passover that Esther and the Jews fasted, and that wicked Haman perished. And so also in the last days it would be the Paschal night when the final judgment should come upon 'Edom' and the glorious deliverance of Israel take place. Hence to this day, in every Jewish home, at a certain part of the Paschal service—just after the 'third cup,' or the 'cup of blessing,' has been drunk—the door is opened to admit Elijah the prophet as forerunner of the Messiah, while appropriate passages are at the same time read which foretell the destruction of all heathen nations." (The Temple, pp. 196-197.)

It is interesting to know that on the third day of April, 1836, the Jews were celebrating the feast of the Passover, and were leaving the doors of their homes open for the coming of Elijah. On that day Elijah came, but not to the Jewish homes, but to the Temple in the village of Kirtland near the banks of Lake Erie, to two humble servants of the Lord who were appointed by divine decree to receive him.
