Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON NINETY-NINE

Clay County Citizens Reject the Saints

References

D.H.C. Vol. 2:448-462.

Topics

1.Perfidy of Governor Dunklin. Note 1.

a.The governor declares that cause of saints is just.

b.He promises to give them protection.

c.He reverses his attitude and favors the mob.

2.The Convention of Clay County Citizens. Note 2.

a.Effects of constant opposition from Jackson County.

b.The saints sojourn in Clay County a temporary one.

c.Request of the citizens that the saints leave Clay County.

d.Citizens admit the injustice of their action.

e.False charges against the saints.

3.Reply of the Saints to the Clay County Convention. Note 3.

a.Saints state their case.

b.Express willingness to comply with the request.

c.First Presidency endorse this position.

4.Organization of Caldwell County. Note 4.

a.Saints move from Clay County.

b.Their petition for a county organization.

c.Their hope to live unmolested and in peace shattered.

Notes

The Clay County citizens, however, were more honorable in their dealings and called a mass meeting to be held June 29, 1836, for the purpose of presenting, with united front, a petition to the Latter-day Saint exiles, kindly requesting them to move to some other part of the country where they could be entirely by themselves. They suggested that they move to the unsettled territory of Wisconsin. They called attention to the fact that when the members of the Church came among them it was with the understanding that they would not attempt to make permanent homes. In this convention the leading citizens took charge. Among them were the following: Colonel William T. Wood, John Bird, who acted as chairman, John F. Doherty, Peter Rogers, Andrew Robertson, David R. Atchison and Alexander W. Doniphan. Some of these had shown some spirit of kindness towards the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brethren. A committee composed of nine of the leading citizens, among them David R. Atchison and Alexander W. Doniphan, was appointed to draw up resolutions which was done and reported by the chairman, Colonel John Thornton.

In the report it was stated that the Latter-day Saints were devoid of "one spark of gratitude" if they refused to accept the suggestion offered them to depart in peace to a more congenial part of the country. They frankly admitted that they did not contend that they had the least right to expel the saints by force, but they were sure that if they did not go it would lead to civil war, "bearing ruin, war, and desolation, in its course." In calling attention to the pledge made by the members of the Church that they would not seek permanent homes in Clay County, they said: "The period has now arrived. Duty to ourselves, to our families, and to the best interests of our country, requires at our hands, to demand the fulfillment of that pledge. They are charged by those who are opposed to them with an unfriendly determination to violate that pledge. Their rapid emigration, their large purchase, and offers to purchase lands, the remarks of the ignorant and imprudent portion of them, that this country is destined by heaven to be theirs are received and looked upon by a large portion of this community, as strong and convincing proofs that they intend to make this country their permanent home, the center and general rendezvous of their people."

It can hardly be doubted that some members were unwise enough to arouse the opposition of these inhabitants by foolishly telling them that the Lord had given this part of Missouri unto his saints as an everlasting inheritance. While the revelations to the Church declared that this is the land of Zion and the City Zion will be built there, it was unwise to flaunt this doctrine before the older settlers. Other reasons given for the deep hatred against the saints was the fact that they were eastern men, whose manners, habits, dialect and customs were different from theirs. They were non-slave holders and opposed to slavery. "In addition to all this, they are charged, as they have hitherto been, with keeping up a constant communication with our Indian tribes on our frontiers, with declaring, even from the pulpit, that the Indians are part of God's chosen people and are destined by heaven to inherit this land, in common with themselves. We do not vouch for correctness of these statements; but whether they are true or false, their effect has been the same in exciting our community. In times of greater tranquility, such ridiculous remarks might well be regarded as the offspring of frenzied fanaticism; but at this time, our defenseless situation on the frontier, the bloody disasters of the frontier, the bloody disasters our fellow citizens in Florida, and other parts of the South, all tend to make a portion of our citizens regard such sentiments with horror, if not alarm. These and many other causes have combined to raise a prejudice against them; and a feeling of hostility, that the first spark may, and we deeply fear will, ignite into all the horrors and desolations of a civil war, the worst evil that can befall any country."

In this manner, because of constant agitations coming out of Jackson County, the citizens of Clay County turned away from their doors the very people who brought to them the everlasting Gospel and the means of salvation in the kingdom of God.

They stated that they had taken no part either for or against slavery, but were opposed to abolitionists, and consider that men have a right to hold slaves or not, according to law. They also denied holding communications with the Indians. When the first brethren went to Jackson County it was on a mission to the Lamanites, but there was so much opposition on the part of the ministers and others that difficulties were encountered with government agents and the missionaries had to withdraw from Indian lands. They maintained their right to preach the gospel to the nations of the earth "and warn the righteous to save themselves from the corruptions of the world; but we do not believe it right to interfere with bond-servants, nor preach the gospel to them, nor meddle with nor influence them in the least to cause them to be dissatisfied with their situation in this life, thereby jeopardizing the lives of men." Such interference they believed to be unlawful and unjust, and dangerous to the peace of every government allowing human beings to be held in servitude.

Notwithstanding the great loss of property, for the sake of a covenant of peace with the citizens of Clay County, and have them in covenant with the saints in peace, "we comply with the requisitions of their resolutions in leaving Clay County."

"Resolved: That we accept the friendly offer verbally tendered to us by the committee yesterday, to assist us in selecting a location, and removing to it.

"Resolved, unanimously: That this meeting accept and adopt the above preamble and resolutions, which are here presented by the committee.

"Resolved: That Thomas B. Marsh, Lyman Wight, and Samuel Bent, be a committee to carry the minutes of these proceedings to the meeting of the citizens of Clay County, to be held tomorrow at Liberty. The foregoing resolutions were unanimously adopted by the meeting."

As soon as possible the action of the brethren in Clay County was forwarded to the First Presidency who fully endorsed the action taken by the Missouri saints and in a communication to the Clay County committee, the First Presidency notified them of this fact. They also took occasion to inform the citizens committee of many other things, in humility, which should have appealed to their sense of justice and appealed to their sympathy.

In full faith and determination to keep their promise, the members of the Church immediately took steps to move from Clay County as soon as their circumstances would permit. Some of them located on Shoal Creek, in an uninhabited section in the northern part of Ray County. The property of a few settlers living there, they purchased, and commenced to build their homes. By December 1836, a large number had taken up their residence there and had petitioned the governor of Missouri for a county organization where they would be free from interference or contact with those who had opposed them. Their petition was granted with prospects for a peaceful habitation which gave encouragement to other members of the Church. The result was that saints from Kirtland and other parts commenced to gather in this place. The county was named Caldwell, and it is written that the settlement "grew like Jonah's gourd." The willingness of the citizens of Missouri to permit the Latter-day Saints to locate and have a county organization was due to the fact that it was thought that the part where they were locating was of little value. Much like Jonah's gourd it truly was; not through any fault of the members of the Church, but due to the fact that their enemies, as soon as they found that the saints were prospering through their industry, refused to permit them to dwell there in peace.
