Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED

The Kirtland Safety Society—Apostasy and Sorrow

References

D.H.C. Vol. 2:467, 470-473, 487-489, 493, 497, 528.

Topics

1.Organization of the Kirtland Safety Society. Note 1.

a.Endeavor to obtain state charter for the society.

b.Refusal of the state to issue charter.

c.Other steps taken and organization effected.

d.Dishonest actions of Warren Parrish.

e.The Prophet's warning.

f.He withdraws from the society.

2.The Financial Depression of 1837. Note 2.

a.Failure of banks in the United States.

b.The Kirtland Safety Society fails.

3.Apostasy of Leading Elders of the Church. Note 3.

a.Leading elders become disaffected.

b.They blame their losses upon the Prophet.

c.They attempt to depose him.

d.Integrity of Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, John Taylor and others.

e.Statement of Heber C. Kimball.

Notes

The Prophet writes: "There are many cases of embarrassment of a pecuniary nature now pressing upon the heads of the Church. They began por; were needy, destitute, and were truly afflicted by their enemies; yet the Lord commanded them to go forth and preach the gospel, to sacrifice their time, their talents, their good name, and jeopardize their lives; and in addition to this, they were to build a house for the Lord, and prepare for the gathering of the saints. Thus it is easy to see this must have involved them in financial difficulties. They had no temporal means in the beginning commensurate with such an undertaking; but this work must be done; this place [Kirtland] had to be built up. Large contracts have been entered into for lands on all sides, where our enemies have signed away their rights. We are indebted to them, but our brethren from abroad have only to come with their money, take these contracts, relieve their brethren from the pecuniary embarrassments under which they now labor, and procure for themselves a peaceable place of rest among us." (D.H.C., 2:478-479.)

When the national crash came most of the brethren were swept into the financial vortex. Many of those who lost their means in this panic, and who had subscribed for stock in the Kirtland Society, laid the blame for their loss at the door of the Prophet Joseph Smith. The fact is that he had warned them of these dangers, but they had turned a deaf ear to all his pleadings. Now that the crash had come they became bitter in their souls and we find men who had stood in the councils of the Church, who had witnessed the visions of angels and had in apparent humility pledged themselves to give all to the building up of the kingdom of God, now turning away in bitterness and their love for the Prophet and those who loyally stood by him, turned to hate. The Prophet said it seemed "as though all the powers of earth and hell were combining their influence in an especial manner to overthrow the Church at once, and make a final end." Enemies not in the Church aided these apostates and united with them in various schemes to overthrow the Prophet looking upon him as the cause of all the evils that had come upon them. This apostasy found its way into all of the councils of the Church.

During these trials, the Prophet was taken ill, for the strain upon him was intense. To see so many of his former brethren who had stood in former times loyally at his side now filled with the spirit of wickedness, some of whom had expressed a willingness to assist in bringing about his death, weighed heavily upon his soul. Through administration he was raised up from a bed of excruciating suffering. "While I was thus afflicted, the enemy of all righteousness was suggesting, apostates reporting, and the doubtful believing that my afflictions were sent upon me, because I was in transgression, and had taught the Church things contrary to godliness; but of this the Lord judge between me and them, while I pray my Father to forgive them the wrong they do." (D.H.C. 2:493.)

Elder Heber C. Kimball's story of these conditions in 1837, is given by Elder Orson F. Whitney, in his "Life of Heber C. Kimball," as follows:

"We were very much grieved on our arrival in Kirtland, to see the spirit of speculation that was prevailing in the Church. Trade and traffic seemed to engross the time and attention of the saints. When we left Kirtland a city lot was worth about $150; but on our return, to our astonishment, the same lot was said to be worth from $500 to $1,000. according to location; and some men, who, when I left, could hardly get food to eat, I found on my return to be men of supposed great wealth; in fact everything in the place seemed to be moving in great prosperity, and all seemed determined to become rich; in my feelings they were artificial or imaginary riches. This appearance of prosperity led many of the saints to believe that the time had arrived for the Lord to enrich them with the treasures of the earth, and believing so, it stimulated them to great exertions, so much so that two of the twelve, Lyman E. Johnson and John F. Boynton, went to New York and purchased the amount of $20,000 worth of goods, and entered into the mercantile business, borrowing considerable money from Polly Voce and other saints in Boston and the regions around about, and which they have never repaid.***

"During this period the Kirtland Safety Society was organized, with a view to controlling the prevailing sentiment and directing it in legitimate channels. The ablest and staunchest men in Israel, including the Prophet and most of the Apostles, were made officers and members of the association.

"Then came the financial crash of 1837, by which so many of the banking and business houses of the country were prostrated. Nearly all the banks, one after another, suspended specie payment, 'and gold and silver rose in value in direct ratio with the depreciation of paper currency.' The Kirtland Bank shared a similar fate to many others, and went down in the whirlpool of financial ruin. One of the causes alleged for its failure was the misfeasance of some of those who were entrusted with the funds of the bank. Heber says that Warren Parrish, one of the clerks, 'afterwards acknowledged that he took $20,000, and there was strong evidence that he took more. Those of integrity in the Church replaced the stolen money at the expense of all they had.' " (Life of Heber C. Kimball, pp. 99-100.)
