Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED ONE

Opening of the British Mission

References

D.H.C. Vol. 2:489, 490, 492-495, 502-506.

Topics

1.The Prophet's Revelation to Open the British Mission. Note 1.

a.Why the revelation was given.

b.The call of Heber C. Kimball.

c.Others appointed to that mission.

d.Departure of the missionaries.

2.Progress of the Work in England. Note 2.

a.The auspicious landing of the missionaries.

b.Why the missionaries went to Preston.

c.Vauxhall Chapel.

d.The first converts.

e.Attitude of Rev. James Fielding.

f.Spread of the work in England.

3.Encounter with Evil Spirits. Note 3.

a.Satan's endeavor to stop the work.

b.The missionaries encounter evil spirits.

c.The evil spirits rebuked.

Notes

Some of these men had undergone persecution and hardship when the Spirit of the Lord was upon them. Now, when they had yielded to temptation and sin, they raged against him in their bitterness. The thing that was "new" to be done for the salvation of the Church, was the opening of the door for the preaching of the Gospel in Great Britain. This responsibility was placed upon the shoulders of Elder Heber C. Kimball. Elder Kimball's account of his call is as follows:

"Sunday, the 4th day of June, 1837, the Prophet came to me, while I was seated in front of the stand, above the sacrament table, on the Melchizedek side of the temple in Kirtland, and whispering to me, said: 'Brother Heber, the Spirit of the Lord has whispered to me: Let my servant Heber go to England and proclaim my Gospel, and open the door of salvation to that nation.' "

Elder Kimball wondered how he would ever be able to accomplish such a work, which seemed to him to be overwhelming. He writes: "Feeling my weakness to go upon such an errand, I asked the Prophet if Brother Brigham might go with me. He replied that he wanted Brother Brigham to stay with him, for he had something else for him to do. The idea of such a mission was almost more than I could bear up under. I was almost ready to sink under the burden which was placed upon me. However, all these considerations did not deter me from the path of duty; the moment I understood the will of my heavenly Father, I felt a determination to go at all hazards, believing that he would support me by his almighty power, and endow me with every qualification that I needed; and although my family was dear to me, and I should have to leave them almost destitute, I felt that the cause of truth, the Gospel of Christ, outweighed every other consideration.

"At this time many faltered in their faith; even some of the Twelve were in rebellion against the Prophet of God. John F. Boynton said to me, 'If you are such a fool as to go at the call of the fallen prophet, Joseph Smith, I will not help you a dime, and if you are cast on Van Dieman's land, I will not make an effort to help you.' Lyman E. Johnson said he did not want me to go on my mission, but if I was determined to go, he would help me all he could; he took his cloak from off his back and put it on mine; which was the first cloak I ever had.

"Brothers Sidney Rigdon, Joseph Smith, Sen., Brigham Young, Newel K. Whitney and others said, 'Go and do as the Prophet has told you, and you shall prosper and be blessed with power to do a glorious work.' Hyrum [Smith] seeing the condition of the Church, when he talked about my mission, wept like a little child; he was continually blessing and encouraging me, and pouring out his soul in prophecies upon my head; he said: 'Go, and you shall prosper as not many have prospered.' " (Life of Heber C. Kimball, pp. 103-105.)

While the Presidency were preparing to set Elder Kimball apart, Elder Orson Hyde came into the room and listened to the instruction and what was happening, the Prophet said., "His heart melted within him, (for he had begun to drink of the cup filled with the overflowing of speculation), he acknowledged all his faults, asked forgiveness, and offered to accompany President Kimball on his mission to England." This offer was accepted, and he was set apart for that purpose. In the meantime several other brethren volunteered or were appointed to accompany Elder Kimball on this mission. These were Elders Willard Richards, Isaac Russell, John Goodson and priests John Snyder and Joseph Fielding. Elders Kimball, Hyde, Richards and Priest Joseph Fielding, who was from Honeydon, England, left Kirtland, Tuesday, January 13, 1837, accompanied by Brigham Young, John P. Greene, Levi Richards, Sisters Vilate Kimball, Rhoda Greene, Mary and Mercy R. Fielding, as far as Fairport. "Mary Fielding," said Elder Kimball, "gave me five dollars, with which I paid my passage and Brother Hyde's to Buffalo." This was out of a meagre purse, for these sisters were not well to do. After arriving in New York the brethren endeavored to raise means for their passage to England. Elders Kimball and Richards continued on to Richmond, Massachusetts, where they obtained means to assist the company on their way to England. The brethren found only one member of the Church in the city of New York, Elder Elijah Fordham. The father of Elder Fordham, who was a wealthy man, permitted the group of missionaries to occupy an unfurnished storehouse, but made no effort in any other way to help them on their journey. The brethren slept on the floor in this storehouse and ate bread and drank water until they were ready to sail for England.

June 23, 1837, the missionaries engaged passage in the second cabin on board the merchant ship, "Garrick," for Liverpool. Sunday, June 25, 1837, they remained in their lodgings fasting, praying and counseling for the success of the mission and had a joyful time. In the afternoon they were visited by two sectarian priests who came to argue and find fault, but who soon departed much confounded. The brethren placed in the post office copies of Orson Hyde's tract, "Timely Warnings," for each of the ministers in New York, amounting to hundreds of copies. On the 29th they went on board the "Garrick" and at 7:30 on the first day of July, they were towed out of the harbor by a steamer and by 4:30 P.M. were out of sight of land on one of the most important missions ever undertaken by members of the Church, and which was to lay a foundation for the conversion of thousands of sincere souls, waiting to receive the everlasting Gospel.

While the other passengers were going on board a steamer to land at Liverpool, Elders Kimball, Hyde, Richards and Goodson jumped into a small boat and were rowed to the Liverpool shore. When within leaping distance Elder Kimball sprang from the boat as if impelled by some superior power and alighted on the steps of the dock. Elders Hyde and Richards followed him. When they landed not one of them had as much as a farthing at his command, but Elder Goodson who had a heavy purse of silver in his hand, decided to wait until the boat touched shore. Joseph Fielding who had been ordained an elder, had a brother, Rev. James Fielding, residing in Preston, and he persuaded the brethren to go to Preston to begin their ministry. When the brethren arrived in Preston it was election day. Queen Victoria had just ascended the throne three days before the missionaries landed. A general election had been called for members of Parliament and Elder Kimball describes their coming to Preston as follows: "I never witnessed anything like it in my life. Bands of music playing. Flags flying in all directions. Thousands of men, women and children parading the streets, decked with ribbons characteristic of the politics of the several candidates. Anyone accustomed to the peaceable and quiet manner in which the elections in America are conducted, can scarcely have any idea of an election as carried on in England. One of the flags was unrolled before us, nearly over our heads, the moment the coach reached its destination, having on it the following motto: 'TRUTH WILL PREVAIL!' in large gilt letters. It being so very seasonable, and the sentiment being so very appropriate to us in our situation we cried aloud. 'Amen! Thanks be to God, TRUTH WILL PREVAIL!' " (Life of Heber C. Kimball, pp. 121-122.)

Elder Joseph Fielding introduced the brethren to his brother, Rev. James Fielding and the following Sunday, July 23, 1837, they attended Mr. Fielding's Church, Vauxhall Chapel, and heard him preach. At the services the minister unexpectedly to the brethren announced that there were present ministers from America and they would occupy his pulpit in the afternoon. The invitation was joyfully accepted and in the afternoon President Kimball and Elder Hyde gave brief addresses. They were invited to occupy the time in the evening service, and Elders Goodson and Fielding preached. Thus the door was opened for the preaching of the Gospel in the British Isles. The following Wednesday (July 26th) another meeting was held in Vauxhall Chapel, Elders Richards and Hyde preached and much interest was manifested by the congregation. Many were convinced and applied for baptism.

Rev. James Fielding fearing that he would lose his entire congregation, closed the doors of his church against the elders and commenced to oppose the work with all his might. However, the seed had been sown, the best part of his flock had asked to be baptized; a foothold had been gained and from this time forth the brethren received many invitations to preach and converse with the people. The work began to spread to other parts of England, branches were organized. When churches closed their doors the people opened their private houses for the preaching of the Gospel.

It was not long after the arrival in Preston that Elders Goodson and Richards were sent to Bedford where they had a letter of introduction from Elder Joseph Fielding to Rev. Timothy R. Matthews his brother-in-law. Elder Kimball baptized Miss Jennetta Richards in Preston, Friday, August 1, 1837; she was the daughter of Rev. John Richards, and the first person confirmed after baptism in the British Isles. The first person baptized was James D. Watt. From this time forth branches grew and were increased in various parts of England. (D.H.C. 2:504.)

"I had been sleeping on the back of the bed. I immediately arose, slipped off at the foot of the bed, and passed around to where he [Elder Russell] was. Elder Hyde threw his feet out, and sat up in the bed, and we laid hands on him, I being mouth, and prayed that the Lord would have mercy on him, and rebuke the devil.

"While thus engaged, I was struck with great force by some invisible power, and fell senseless on the floor. The first thing I recollected was being supported by Elders Hyde and Richards, who were praying for me; Elder Richards having followed Russell up to my room. Elders Hyde and Richards then assisted me to get on the bed, but my agony was so great I could not endure it, and I arose, bowed my knees and prayed. I then arose and sat up on the bed, when a vision was opened to our minds, and we could distinctly see the evil spirits, who foamed and gnashed their teeth at us. We gazed upon them about an hour and a half (by Willard's watch). We were not looking towards the window, but towards the wall. Space appeared before us, and we saw the devils coming in legions, with their leaders, who came within a few feet of us. They came towards us like armies rushing to battle. They appeared to be men of full stature, possessing every form and feature of men in the flesh, who were angry and desperate; and I shall never forget the vindictive malignity depicted on their countenances as they looked me in the eye; and any attempt to paint the scene which then presented itself, or portray their malice and enmity, would be vain. I perspired exceedingly, my clothes becoming as wet as if I had been taken out of the river. I felt excessive pain, and was in the greatest distress for sometime. I cannot even look back on the scene without feelings of horror; yet by it I learned the power of the adversary, his enmity against the servants of God, and got some understanding of the invisible world. We distinctly heard these spirits talk and express their wrath and hellish designs against us. However, the Lord delivered us from them, and blessed us exceedingly that day."

Elder Hyde supplemented this description as follows:

"Every circumstance that occurred at that scene of devils is just as fresh in my recollection at this moment as it was at the moment of its occurrence, and will ever remain so. After you were overcome by them and had fallen, their awful rush upon me with knives, threats, imprecations and hellish grins, amply convinced me that they were no friends of mine. While you were apparently senseless and lifeless on the floor and upon the bed (after we had laid you there), I stood between you and the devils and fought them and contended with them face to face, until they began to diminish in number and to retreat from the room. The last imp that left turned around to me as he was going out and said, as if to apologize, and appease my determined opposition to them, 'I never said anything against you!' I replied to him thus: 'It matters not to me whether you have or have not; you are a liar from the beginning! In the name of Jesus Christ depart!' He immediately left, and the room was clear. That closed the scene of devils for the time."—D.H.C. 2:503. "Life of Heber C. Kimball," pp. 130-131.)

When Elder Kimball reported this incident to the Prophet after his return from England, the Prophet answered:

"Brother Heber, at that time you were nigh unto the Lord; there was only a veil between you and him, but you could not see him. When I heard of it, it gave me great joy, for I then knew that the work of God had taken root in that land. It was this that caused the devil to make a struggle to kill you. * * The nearer a person approaches the Lord, a greater power will be manifested by the adversary to prevent the accomplishment of his purposes." ("Life of Heber C. Kimball," pp. 131-132.)
