Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED TWO

Revelation to Thomas B. Marsh

References

D.H.C. Vol. 2:449-501.

D. & C. Section 112.

Topics

1.Duty of the Twelve Apostles Stated. Note 1.

a.A revelation concerning the Twelve.

b.Why the revelation was given.

c.A call to the twelve to magnify their office.

2.The Keys of the Priesthood. Note 2.

a.The twelve to act under direction of First Presidency.

b.Keys of Priesthood vested in Joseph Smith.

c.Not to be taken from him.

d.Authority of First Presidency and apostles.

e.Uniting of authority of dispensations.

3.Darkness Covers the Earth. Note 3.

a.All flesh corrupt before the Lord.

b.A day of wrath and burning coming.

c.Prophecies concerning the day of wrath and burning.

d.Judgment to begin at house of the Lord.

e.The twelve commanded to be faithful in performance of duty.

Notes

The Lord declared that even Elder Marsh had strayed somewhat, but had repented and therefore he was forgiven. "Verily I say unto you, there have been some few things in thine heart and with thee with which I, the Lord, was not well pleased. Nevertheless, inasmuch as thou has abased thyself thou shalt be exalted; therefore, all thy sins are forgiven thee. Let thy heart be of good cheer before my face; and thou shalt bear record of my name, not only unto the Gentiles, but also unto the Jews; and thou shalt send forth my word unto the ends of the earth." (vs. 2-4, Sec. 112.) He was called upon to raise his warning voice and when night should come he was not to let the inhabitants of the earth slumber without the warning. If he would be faithful, many high ones would be brought low, and by his word many low ones would be exalted. "Thy voice shall be a rebuke unto the transgressor; and at thy rebuke let the tongue of the slanderer cease its perverseness. Be thou humble; and the Lord thy God shall lead thee by the hand, and give thee answer to thy prayers." The Lord told him that he knew his heart, which verily was true, and that his prayers in behalf of his brethren had been heard. He was to show no partiality towards any of them, but his love for them was to be as the love for himself. There is no question that Thomas B. Marsh was not in that day a man of force and character. Had he remained true the Lord would have used him and his ability would have shown forth, for the Lord would have magnified him.

Thomas B. Marsh was called upon to see that the members of the council magnified their office. He was to admonish them sharply in the name of the Lord for all their sins, and in it all he was to be true himself to the cause of righteousness. The Lord called attention to the temptations that had confronted and still were before members of the council of the apostles, and said they would have to pass through much tribulation, but the Lord would feel after them, and if they hardened not their hearts, and stiffened not their necks against the Lord, they should be converted, and the Lord would heal them. "Now, I say unto you," said the Lord to Thomas B. Marsh, "and what I say unto you, I say unto all the twelve: Arise and gird up your loins, take up your cross, follow me, and feed my sheep. Exalt not yourselves; rebel not against my servant Joseph; for verily I say unto you, I am with him, and my hand shall be over him; and the keys which I have given unto him, and also to youward, shall not be taken from him till I come."

Thomas B. Marsh was informed and instructed, that he and the apostles were to go forth into all the world wheresoever the First Presidency should send them to proclaim the message of eternal life. He was also promised that if the brethren would go forth in faith and humility that in whatsoever place they should proclaim the Gospel an effectual door would be opened. It will be remembered that Elders Kimball and Hyde of the council of the apostles were at this time just landing in England, and we have learned of their remarkable success. So it would be, the Lord declared, with the other brethren in opening the door in other fields if they would humble themselves and go forth determined to do the will of the Lord.

The First Presidency, the Lord said, were to be counselors to the twelve. By this is meant that the twelve should not go forth without the counsel and direction of the First Presidency. "And again, I say unto you, that whosoever ye shall send in my name, by the voice of your brethren, the twelve, duly recommended and authorized by you, shall have power to open the door of my kingdom unto any nation whithersoever ye shall send them—Inasmuch as they shall humble themselves before me, and abide in my word, and hearken to the voice of the Spirit."

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, darkness covereth the earth, and gross darkness the minds of the people, and all flesh has become corrupt before my face.

"Behold, vengeance cometh speedily upon the inhabitants of the earth, a day of wrath, a day of burning, a day of desolation, of weeping, of mourning, and of lamentation; and as a whirlwind it shall come upon all the face of the earth, saith the Lord.

"And upon my house shall it begin, and from my house shall it go forth, saith the Lord.

"First among those among you, saith the Lord, who have professed to know my name and have not known me, and have blasphemed against me in the midst of my house, saith the Lord." (vs. 22-26)

This proclamation should cause us even in this day serious reflection. If darkness covered the earth in 1837, surely it has deepened in its blackness since that day. If that was a day of wickedness, and the Lord in several revelations testified to this fact, then it is even more so today. We are called upon to remember that the day would come when peace would be taken from the earth and the devil have power over his own dominions. (D. and C. 1:35.) Surely that day has come. We have seen days of weeping and mourning, a day of wrath and of vengeance upon the inhabitants of the earth, and yet they will not repent. We have seen this day come speedily as the whirlwind, and yet we know that we have not seen the end. There will yet be plagues, bloodshed and weeping until eventually the earth shall be cleansed of all iniquity. To Enoch who plead with the Lord for the time to come when the earth should rest and be cleansed from all the filthiness that had gone forth out of her, heard the earth cry, saying:

"Wo, wo is me, the mother of men; I am pained, I am weary, because of the wickedness of my children. When shall I rest, and be cleansed from the filthiness which is gone forth out of me? When will my Creator sanctify me, that I may rest, and righteousness for a season abide upon my face?" (Moses 7:48)

And the Lord answered:

"As I live, even so will I come in the last days, in the days of wickedness and vengeance, to fulfill the oath which I have made unto you, concerning the children of Noah;

"And the day shall come that the earth shall rest, but before that day the heavens shall be darkened, and a veil of darkness shall cover the earth; and the heavens shall shake, and also the earth; and great tribulations shall be among the children of men, but my people will I preserve." (Moses 7:60-61)

The Lord said to Isaiah also speaking of this day: "The land shall be utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled: for the Lord hath spoken this word. The earth mourneth and fadeth away, the world languisheth and fadeth away, the haughty people of the earth do languish. The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant. Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left." (Isa. 24:3-6.)

In this spirit have the prophets of old spoken of these the last days and throughout the revelations to the Church through the Prophet Joseph Smith, similar warnings and information are given. The Lord in this revelation (Sec. 112.) declares that "upon my house shall it begin, and from my house shall it go forth, saith the Lord; First among those among you, saith the Lord, who have professed to know my name and have not known me, and have blasphemed against me in the midst of my house, saith the Lord." The Latter-day Saints were called on to suffer in the early days of the Church and they were punished for their transgressions. Those who turned away in the spirit of bitterness and became enemies of the Church did not prosper and the judgments of the Lord were upon them in fulfillment of this promise.

All flesh was corrupt before the Lord because of the turning away from his commandments and substituting the commandments of men. This is the truth declared by the Savior to Joseph Smith in his great vision. There were then, and are now many honest, devout and sincere people in the world who are living clean lives and doing the best they know, but they partake of the corruptions in doctrines and traditions which for centuries have plagued the world, and are covered by this great spiritual darkness. The apostles under the charge given to Thomas B. Marsh were to go forth in the power of their Priesthood to lift this great cloud of darkness from the minds of the people and redeem them from corruption in doctrine and practice.

The Lord also calls attention to the fact that the apostles were not at that time to trouble themselves with the affairs of the Church in Kirtland, but to go forth to teach the message of truth.

"For unto you, the twelve, and those, the First Presidency, who are appointed with you to be your counselors and your leaders, is the power of this Priesthood given, for the last days and for the last time, in the which is the dispensation of the fulness of times." (v. 30.)
