Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED THREE

The Saints Gather in Missouri—Apostasy and Excommunication

References

D.H.C. Vol. 2:407, 518, 521. Vol. 3:1-31.

Topics

1.The Gathering of the Saints in Caldwell County. Note 1.

a.The location and settlement of Far West.

b.Exiled saints in Missouri gather there.

c.Saints in Kirtland move to Caldwell County.

2.The Flight of Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon from Kirtland to Missouri. Note 2.

a.The Prophet's visit to Missouri.

b.Troubles in Kirtland in his absence.

c.President Smith and Sidney Rigdon flee from Kirtland from their enemies.

d.Conditions in Missouri.

e.Difficulties with brethren before the high council.

3.Excommunication of Oliver Cowdery. Note 3.

a.First transgression of Oliver Cowdery.

b.The Prophet's pleading for him.

c.He moves to Missouri.

d.His excommunication.

4.Excommunication of David Whitmer. Note 4.

a.His case before the high council.

b.His belief that he was one of the presidents over the whole Church.

c.His contempt for the High Council.

5.Transgression and Apostasy of Other Brethren. Note 5.

a.John Whitmer's rebellion.

b.The case of Lyman E. Johnson.

c.The case of William E. M'Lellin.

d.Some concluding reflections.

Notes

Presidents Smith and Rigdon with some of the other brethren returned to Kirtland and arrived there December 10, 1837. Before they left the spirit of disaffection and bitterness was developing and with some of the members of the Priesthood had reached alarming proportions. Now, however, they discovered that during their absence, Warren Parrish who had been the Prophet's secretary and close associate, John F. Boynton, Luke S. Johnson, Joseph Coe, Sylvester Smith and others out of the leading councils of the Church, had united in their opposition and were endeavoring to overthrow the Church. Some of these men, earlier in the year had shown a marked spirit of opposition and faultfinding, and professing a spirit of repentance, however, they had not driven out the evil that was in their hearts. Warren Parrish held the office of a seventy. Attention has previously been called to his dishonest acts as an officer in the Kirtland Safety Society. He manifested the most bitter spirit and became the leader of the disgruntled group. It was the intention of these men to depose the Prophet and support David Whitmer in his stead. Private and secret meetings had been held even in the temple, which they now claimed as their own and they showed a spirit of violence in maintaining their stand.

This spirit of hate had become so strong against Elder Brigham Young, who had boldly defended the Prophet, that he was forced to leave Kirtland and seek safety in Missouri, to thwart their vengeance. The spirit of evil towards the Prophet Joseph Smith was of course, at extreme height. His life and that of Sidney Rigdon were in danger and for their safety they departed from Kirtland quietly January 12, 1838, going on horseback. There had been planted against them malicious and unjust lawsuits by their enemies. Several times the Prophet had been cited to appear before the courts on some trivial charge, and in each instance was cleared. This only riled the opposition the more. At Norton, sixty miles west of Kirtland, they tarried and were joined by their families who had taken another route. On the 16th, the journey resumed, and Elder Brigham Young had joined them. At Dublin, Indiana, the Prophet obtained employment cutting and sawing wood. At this place a Brother Tomlinson with the aid of Brigham Young sold some property and gave the Prophet three hundred dollars to help him on his way.

In the extreme winter weather these brethren were forced to secrete themselves in wagons without sufficient means to keep warm, to keep from their enemies, who followed them for more than two hundred miles from Kirtland, with guns and knives, seeking their lives. The Prophet said, "They frequently crossed our track; twice they were in the house where we stopped, and once we tarried all night in the same house with them, with only a partition between us and them; and we heard their oaths and imprecations, and threats concerning us, if they could catch us; and late in the evening they came into our room and examined us, but decided we were not the men. At the other times we passed them in the streets, and gazed on them, and they on us, but they knew us not." (D.H.C. 3:1-3.) When the brethren arrived within two hundred and twenty miles of Far West, they were met by a number of brethren who assisted them with teams to Far West. Elder Rigdon who could not continue the journey in the cold of winter did not arrive until April 4, 1838.

When they arrived at Far West the Prophet and his companions did not find things free from the spirit of evil. The influence of the enemies in Kirtland had been instilled into the hearts of those in Missouri, so that there was not the spirit of peace and harmony which the brethren might have expected. Members of the presidency in Missouri, William W. Phelps and John Whitmer, had been called in question before the high council in Missouri, although they were the presiding officers of that council. It appears that they had entered into a conspiracy to take advantage of new settlers who came there to make their homes. It was on the 14th of March when the Prophet arrived in Far West. He found that on the 5th of February a committee of the whole Church in Zion had called the Missouri presidency for trial. Thomas B. Marsh of the apostles council was moderator and John Cleminson, clerk. This committee continued its labors after holding the first meeting in Far West, on the 6th at Carter's settlement, on the 7th at Durphy's settlement, on the eighth at Curtis' Dwelling-house, and on the 9th at Haun's Mill. At the close of the trial on the 6th the presiding officer put the question and called for a vote, first for all who favored the Missouri presidency, and the vote was against them. He then called for the vote in the negative and all voted against these brethren, except a very few who wished to postpone action until Presidents Smith and Rigdon arrived. These three brethren, having an erroneous understanding of their position, and feeling themselves presidents of the Church with authority in Zion equal to the authority of the Prophet and his counselors in all the Church, took the ground that this was not the proper council to try them. They signed the following:

"Far West, March 10, 1838.

Sir: It is contrary to the principles of the revelations of Jesus Christ and his Gospel, and the laws of the land, to try a person for an offense by an illegal tribunal, or by men prejudiced against him, or by authority that has given an opinion or decision beforehand, or in his absence.

"Very respectfully we have the honor to be, "David Whitmer, "William W. Phelps, "John Whitmer. "Presidents of the Church of Christ in Missouri. "To Thomas B. Marsh, one of the Traveling Councilors." "Attested: Oliver Cowdery Clerk of the High Council of the Church of Christ in Missouri. "I certify the foregoing to be a true copy from the original. "Oliver Cowdery, "Clerk of the High Council."

Elders Thomas B. Marsh and David W. Patten as presidents of the high council and Ebenezer Robinson, as clerk, then issued a statement, in which they said: "All the effect of the above letter had upon the Council, was to convince them still more of the wickedness of those men, by endeavoring to palm themselves off upon the Church, as her presidents, after the Church had by a united voice, removed them from their presidential office, for their ungodly conduct; and the letter was considered no more nor less than a direct insult or contempt cast upon the authorities of God, and the Church of Jesus Christ; therefore the council proceeded to business." (D.H.C. 3:5-8.)

Oliver Cowdery answered by letter written to Bishop Edward Partridge, who presided at the trial, some of the charges made against him, but did not feel it necessary to be present at the trial. In his letter he took the ground that the judgment against him had been passed and his presence was needless. He therefore volunteered "to withdraw from a society assuming they have such right." There seemed to be no other course open for the brethren than to take action and excommunicate Oliver Cowdery, although it evidently was a difficult thing to do. Unfortunately he had partaken of the spirit of speculation which led him into a spirit of darkness and a partaker of the evil influence Satan had exerted on so many of the officers of the Church.

One overwhelming thought, however, comes to our attention when we consider the action of these men and the boldness of the Prophet and the Church to take such drastic action against them. Had they entered into collusion with Joseph Smith with intent to deceive and practice a fraud, the first thing they would have done when the bitter spirit was upon them would be to denounce Joseph Smith and reveal the fraud. This is human nature and it never fails. Let it be said to their credit that the day never came when they denied the testimonies they had borne. Oliver Cowdery declared consistently even when out of the Church that the truth of his witness to the Book of Mormon and to every other gift and blessing coming by heavenly manifestation. He never wavered in this testimony. Years later, when his spirit had been given time to cool, and in the very darkest hour of the history of the Church, when almost all men thought that the Church had gone to its destruction, Oliver Cowdery came back repentant, sorrowful, and asked to be reinstated as a member of the Church. This was not the act of one guilty of fraud. David Whitmer, although he never asked to come back to the Church, organized one of his own and continued to his dying day before great and small, to bear record to his testimony as a Witness of this work. Again, I repeat, men do not take this course if they are guilty of evil practices and it stands forth and makes their testimony as given in the Book of Mormon even stronger than it would have done had they remained true to their covenants and obligations as members of the Church.
