Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED FOUR

Return of Elders Kimball and Hyde—The Name of the Church

References

D.H.C. Vol. 3:2-25, 36, 43, 48. D. & C. Sections 114, 115.

Topics

1.The Return of Elders Kimball and Hyde from England. Note 1.

a.Progress of the work in England.

b.Choosing a presidency for the British Isles.

c.Prophecy concerning Thomas Webster.

d.Slanders from America reach England.

2.Revelations to David W. Patten and Brigham Young. Note 2.

a.David W. Patten called to take a mission.

b.Brigham Young to provide a home and prepare "to go hence."

3.The Proper Name of the Church. Note 3.

a.Word of the Lord to the Presidency.

b.Hyrum Smith in the Presidency.

c.Word to Bishop Partridge and others.

d.The name of the Church.

4.The City of Far West to be Consecrated. Note 4.

a.The City to be made holy.

b.A House of the Lord to be built.

c.The House to be according to the Lord's plan.

d.The foundation to be commenced July 4, 1838.

e.The Presidency to keep out of debt.

f.Stakes of Zion to be appointed.

Notes

From the 1st to the 8th of April, Elders Kimball and Hyde spent their time in visiting the branches of the Church in and near Preston. On Sunday, April 8th, a conference was held. The members of the Church assembled early and by nine o'clock there were between six and seven hundred present from various parts of the country. There were representatives from the following branches: Preston, Penworthan, Walkerfold, Thornley, Ribchester, Chatburn, Glithero, Eccleston, Hunter's Hill, Euxton, Whittle, Dauber's Lane, Barshe Lees, Waddington, Leyland Moss, Leyland Lane, Bamber Bridge, Longton, Southport, Downham, Burnley, Bedford, Alston, Brampton, Bolton, Chorley. The total membership of the Church represented was about two thousand. When we consider that these missionaries arrived in England July 20, 1837, and were now preparing to depart for home the forepart of April, 1838, a period of eight months, and they had baptized upwards of two thousand souls, organized numerous branches, established four conferences, (Districts), we must conclude that this was a miraculous work. The harvest was great, the laborers few, but they went forth in their might and laid a foundation in Great Britain which fulfilled the Lord's requirement that something "new" must be done for the salvation of the Church.

On Tuesday, April 10, 1838 Elders Kimball and Hyde left Preston by coach for Liverpool and on the 20th of April, they took leave of Elders Richards and Fielding who had gone to Liverpool to see them sail. It was in Liverpool where the brethren sealed the prophecy and left it with Elders Fielding and Richards. They sailed on the same ship which took them to England, the "Garrick," and arrived in New York, May 12, 1838, and returned to Kirtland where they found the faithful brethren had fled to Missouri. They immediately wrote to the Prophet and reported their return and their mission.

Another revelation was given through the Prophet concerning Brigham Young instructing him to take care of his property on Mill Creek, and there provide for his family until an effectual door could be opened for the support of his family, and then the Lord would command him "to go hence," and not to leave his family until they were amply provided for. (D.H.C. 3:23.)

The word of the Lord was also to Bishop Partridge and those of the high council who had remained true, that from this time forth they should call the Church by its right name—The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, "for thus shall my church be called in the last days." The brethren at times called it the Church of Christ and at other times the Church of the Latter-day Saints, and this was becoming a fixed custom throughout the Church. On this occasion the Lord called the attention of all the councils to the fact that he had given the Church its name and by that name it should be called. It is a very easy matter for us to adopt some other title, apparently for convenience, as the correct name is rather lengthy. For instance we have, in these later days, fallen into the habit of speaking of the Church as the "Mormon Church," or as "the Restored Church," setting aside the correct title. It is true that even back in the days of the Prophet the Church was at times called the "Mormon Church," but this was rare, although we were quite generally referred to as "Mormons," and we answered to that title. Since the Lord felt it important to remind the councils of the Church of its correct name and inform them that by that name it should be known in the last days, we should endeavor to carry out this commandment more nearly than it is the custom for many of us to do.

We are reminded of the quandry in which the disciples of our Lord found themselves upon this continent shortly after his visit. We read that as the disciples were journeying and were preaching and baptizing in the name of Jesus, they met and engaged in mighty prayer and fasting, and so great was their faith, that Jesus manifested himself to them again and stood in their midst and said unto them "What will ye that I shall give unto you?" And they said unto him: Lord, we will that thou wouldst tell us the name whereby we shall call the church; for there are disputations among the people concerning this matter, and the Lord said unto them: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, why is it that the people should murmur and dispute because of this thing? Have they not read the scriptures, which say ye must take upon you the name of Christ, which is my name? For by this name shall ye be called at the last day; and whoso taketh upon him my name, and endureth to the end, the same shall be saved at the last day. Therefore, whatsoever ye shall do, ye shall do it in my name; therefore ye shall call the church in my name; and ye shall call upon the Father in my name that he will bless the church for my sake. And how be it my church save it be called in my name? For if a church be called in Moses' name then it be Moses' church; or if it be called in the name of a man then it be the church of a man; but if it be called in my name then it is my church, if it so be that they are built upon my gospel." (3 Nephi 27:4-8.)

In times past, and because of no fault of their own, the First Presidency had been greatly troubled because of debts. Now the Lord gives to them, in making this new start, a commandment that they were to keep out of debt, and put forth their energies to build up settlements in Caldwell County and to send forth the word of the Lord into all the world. If this temple at Far West were not built according to the Lord's plan, he said he would not receive it. We have good reason to believe that his plan contemplated many changes not found in the house in Kirtland. The keys for the sealing of both the living and the dead had been revealed since the Kirtland Temple was built. The doctrine of salvation for the dead had been hinted at, but not yet clearly revealed. The Lord certainly intended to place in this new temple if it should be built according to his plan, the provisions which were found in the Nauvoo Temple and all the other temples erected since that day so that the ordinance of baptism for the dead, and all the ordinances of the gospel could be given to both the living and the dead, as outlined by the Lord to the Prophet, January 19, 1841.

Another commandment was given, that the saints should be gathered to Far West and the settlements in adjacent territory. The Lord said it was his purpose, when the saints gathered, to appoint other stakes of Zion as it should be manifested to Joseph Smith from time to time, for, said the Lord, "I will be with him, and I will sanctify him before the people; for unto him have I given the keys of this kingdom and ministry," (See also D. & C. 112:15.)
