Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED FIVE

Adam-ondi-Ahman—The Law of Tithing

References

D.H.C. Vol. 3:34-39, 44.

D. & C. Sections 119-120.

Topics

1.Selection of Lands for Stakes of Zion.

a.Tower Hill. Note 1.

b.Adam-ondi-Ahman. Note 2.

c.Lyman Wight's home.

d.Council held to determine location of settlements. Note 3.

e.A stake proposed at Adam-ondi-Ahman.

f.Description of Adam-ondi-Ahman.

2.The Law of Tithing.

a.The revelation of July 8, 1838. Note 4.

b.Individual responsibility regarding law of tithing. Note 5.

c.The ancient law of tithing. Note 6.

d.Revelation on the regulation of tithing. Note 7.

e.Relationship of tithing to the law of consecration.

3.Comments on the Law of Tithing.

a.Brigham Young.

b.Joseph F. Smith.

c.Lorenzo Snow.

Notes

There has been some confusion in the minds of many because the Prophet speaks of Tower Hill, and later after traveling some half mile and coming to Wight's Ferry, and marking off territory for a township he speaks of Spring Hill near said ferry. It has been thought that "Tower Hill" and "Spring Hill" are two separate places some half mile or so apart, but the place called by these two names is the same. Some hundred yards or more from the crest of the hill, was Lyman Wight's home, and on or near the top of the hill was the ruins of an ancient altar or tower, which the Prophet states was built by the Nephites. In later years this spot and the stones thereon have been looked upon as the place where Adam offered sacrifice, and that the stones were the remains of Adam's altar, but the Prophet said it was a Nephite altar or tower. Lyman Wight lived at this place which the Prophet named Adam-ondi-Ahman. In the year 1904, President Lewis W. Shurtliff and Elder Joseph Fielding Smith visited this place and Lyman Wight's house was still standing but in a dilapidated state. His name engraved on a copper plate was still hanging on the door, this these brethren took.

The name, Adam-ondi-Ahman, was revealed some years before this visit, whether or not Joseph Smith knew definitely of its location we do not know. In a revelation given in March 1832, the Lord refers to Adam-ondi-Ahman (Sec. 78.) wherein he speaks of the authority of Adam and the establishing of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and declares that Adam holds the keys of salvation under the direction of the Holy One, "who is without beginning of days or end of life," who is Jesus Christ. (See Lesson 58, 1938, note 7.) One of the hymns sung at the Dedication of the Kirtland Temple was by Elder William W. Phelps, known as "Adam-ondi-Ahman." The name, therefore was well known before this visit to Tower Hill, and before the Prophet had pointed out this place as the one where Adam visited his posterity, and where he will come at the grand council. (See "The Gathering at Adam-ondi-Ahman," Chapter 40, "The Way to Perfection.")

During the following week the brethren continued their labors selecting and endeavoring to secure the best lands according to their previous decision. The 28th the company started back to Far West. June 16, 1838, a council meeting was held and steps taken to organize a stake of Zion to be known as Adam-ondi-Ahman. John Smith was appointed president, and Reynolds Cahoon and Lyman Wight selected to be his counselors. A high council was also appointed for this stake. (D.H.C. 3:38.) "Adam-ondi-Ahman is located immediately on the north side of Grand River, in Daviess County, Missouri, about twenty-five miles north of Far West. It is situated on an elevated spot of ground, which renders the place as healthful as any part of the United States, and overlooking the river and the country round about, it is certainly a beautiful location." (For a full description, see D.H.C. 3:39-40.)

The people failed in the law of consecration. The Lord commanded them not to fail in this lesser law for the building up of Zion. Unfortunately we cannot boast very loudly of our faithfulness in the observance of this law. We have good reason to believe that the anger of the Lord will be kindled against all those who violate it, as his anger was kindled against those who broke the higher law. We may not receive the punishment in this life, but surely it will come to all who wilfully break it. (D. & C. 64:23-24.)

The same day, July 8, 1838, the Prophet inquired again, and received the following commandment in relation to the distributing of the tithing:

"Verily, thus saith the Lord, the time is now come that it shall be disposed of by a council composed of the First Presidency of my Church, and of the bishop and his council, and by my high council (the apostles) and by mine own voice unto them, saith the Lord. Even so. Amen."

The tithes and offerings of the Church today are disposed of by this council as it was appointed by the Lord.

The following comments are of interest and should be stimulating to all the members of the Church who are under the obligation of tithing.

"When a man wishes to give anything, let him give the best he has got. The Lord has given to me all I possess; I have nothing in reality, not a single dime of it is mine. You may ask, 'Do you feel as you say?' Yes, I actually do. The coat I have on my back is not mine, and never was; the Lord put it in my possession honorably, and I wear it; but if he wishes for it, and all there is under it, he is welcome to the whole. I do not own a house, or a single farm of land, a horse, mule, carriage, or wagon, or wife, nor child, but what the Lord gave me, and if he wants them, he can take them at his pleasure, whether he speaks for them, or takes them without speaking." (President Brigham Young)—Discourses, pages 271-272.

"We are not our own, we are bought with a price, we are the Lord's; our time, our talents, our gold and silver, our wheat and fine flour, our wine and our oil, our cattle, and all there is on this earth that we have in our possession is the Lord's and he requires one-tenth of this for the building up of his Kingdom. Whether we have much or little, one-tenth should be paid in for tithing."—Discourses, p. 273.

"They say we cut people off the Church for not paying tithing; we never have yet, but they ought to be. God does not fellowship them. The law of tithing is an eternal law." (President Brigham Young)—Discourses, page 274.

"By this principle (tithing) the loyalty of the people of this Church shall be put to the test. By this principle it shall be known who is for the kingdom of God and who is against it. By this principle it shall be seen whose hearts are set on doing the will of God and keeping his commandments, thereby sanctifying the land of Zion unto God, and who are opposed to this principle and have cut themselves off from the blessings of Zion. There is a great deal of importance connected with this principle, for by it shall be known whether we are faithful or unfaithful. In this respect it is as essential as faith in God, as repentance of sin, as baptism for the remission of sin, or as the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. For if a man keep all the laws save in one point, and he offend in that, he is a transgressor of the law, and he is not entitled to the fulness of the blessings of the Gospel of Jesus Christ (James 2:10.) But when a man keeps all the laws that are revealed, according to his strength, his substance, and his ability, though what he does may be little, it is just as acceptable in the sight of God as if he were able to do a thousand times more." (President Joseph F. Smith—Gospel Doctrine, pages 282-283.)

"Teach the children to pay tithing, so that it may be perpetually observed. If we observe this law, no matter what our enemies may do, the Lord will preserve us.

"Because we are sons and daughters he loves us, and he has forgiven our forgetfulness of this holy law in the past, but he will not forgive you and me any longer. I say in the name of the Lord he will not forgive this people any longer! Should we continue in this dilatory way of paying tithing we will be scattered just as the people of Jackson County were. This is true as God is true.

"The Lord has blessed us wonderfully and preserved us in the land, and yet we have refused to pay our honest debt to him. A great many people have not paid one cent of tithing, and yet they have gone into the temples of the Lord. How do you feel when you (bishops) give a recommend to a person to go into our temples who pays no tithing, who only pays half a tithing? How will you feel after this? You will feel that you are taking a sacred responsibility in doing that which God does not approve. He has said that the man who fails to pay his tithing shall have no place among the people of God. Yet here are these temples, erected by the sacrifice of the poor, and to give recommends to parties who pay little or no tithing, how can you feel to take this responsibility? I could not.

"A part of a tithing is no tithing at all in the eyes of the law that the Lord has revealed."—President Lorenzo Snow.
