Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED SIX

Olaha Shinehah—The Land Where Adam Dwelt—Revelations to the Twelve and Others

References

D.H.C. Vol. 3:45-49.

D. & C. Sections 116, 117, 118.

Topics:

1.Revelation to William Marks, Newel K. Whitney, Oliver Granger. Note 1.

a.Elders Marks and Whitney called to move to Missouri.

b.To depart before snow flies.

c.To forsake covetousness and their sins.

d.Properties in Kirtland to be turned for debts.

e.The Lord holds destinies of armies. Note 2.

f.Olaha Shinehah, the land where Adam dwelt. Note 3.

g.Bishop Whitney instructed to overcome his littleness and be bishop. Note 4.

h.Word of the Lord to Oliver Granger.

i.He is called to be a merchant in Zion.

2.Revelation to the Apostles. Note 5.

a.The council of the twelve to be organized.

b.The calling of men to replace those who had fallen.

c.The call of the twelve to Great Britain.

d.Date set for their departure.

e.Minutes of meeting of the apostles.

3.Revelation to William W. Phelps and Frederick G. Williams. Note 6.

a.Estrangement of Elders Phelps and Williams from the Church.

b.High honors bestowed upon them.

c.These positions of honor taken from them.

d.The call of the Lord to them to humble themselves.

e.Expense of the Presidency to be defrayed.

f.Duties given to the bishop.

g.William W. Phelps called to draw petition for county seat.

Notes

William Marks, a new convert to the Church, and Bishop Newel K. Whitney were instructed to leave Ohio, settle up their business there speedily and, the Lord said, "journey from the land of Kirtland, before I, the Lord, send again the snows upon the earth;" this was a command to them, and they were warned not to tarry. They were also called upon to repent of all their sins and all their covetous desires, and not set their hearts upon property, "for what is property unto me? saith the Lord." The Lord had declared that the earth was his and all the fulness thereof and men were merely stewards with properties in their hands for a season. Nothing that pertains to this world can any of us take with us when we are called to go beyond. Yet men labor and accumulate and spend their lives in the selfish desire to possess worldly wealth and call it their own; and the great majority of men forsake the treasures where moth and rust do not corrupt and thieves do not break through and steal. It is quite evident that these two brethren had fallen under the spell of speculation and temptation so rife in Kirtland in 1837, and which was the downfall of so many of the leading brethren of the Church. However, they had not lost their faith and when the Lord gave them this call, they proceeded to obey the command.

The Lord also gave direction as to the properties still held by the Church in Kirtland. So bitter had become the spirit there that it was wisdom for the members of the Church to seek homes elsewhere. "Let the properties of Kirtland be turned out for debts, saith the Lord. Let them go, saith the Lord, and whatsoever remaineth, let it remain in your hands, saith the Lord." It is also true that the Lord desired that the saints should possess lands in Missouri. If they could not maintain their possessions in Jackson County, then let them locate in Caldwell and adjacent territory and make their homes. These brethren were not to spend their time fretting over the things they were to leave behind. "For have I not the fowls of heaven, and also the fish of the sea, and the beasts of the mountains? Have I not made the earth? Do I not hold the destinies of all the armies of the nations of the earth?"

The plains of Olaha Shinehah, or the place where Adam dwelt, must be a part of, or in the vicinity of Adam-ondi-Ahman. This name Olaha Shinehah, may be, and in all probability is, from the language of Adam. We may without great controversy believe that this is the name which Adam gave to this place, at least we may venture this as a probable guess. Shinehah, according to the Book of Abraham, is the name given to the sun. (Abraham 3:13.) It is the name applied to Kirtland when the Lord desired in a revelation to hide its identity. (Sec. 82.) Elder Janne M. Sjodahl commenting on the name, Olaha Shinehah, has said: "Shinehah means sun, and Olaha is possibly, a variant of the word Olea, which is 'the moon.' (Abraham 3:13.) If so the plains of Olaha Shinehah would be the Plains of the Moon and the Sun, so called, perhaps because of astronomical observations there made." We learn from the writings of Moses that the Lord revealed to the ancients great knowledge concerning the stars, and Abraham by revelations and through the Urim and Thummim received wonderful information concerning the heavens and the governing planets, or stars. It was also revealed by the Prophet Joseph Smith that Methuselah was acquainted with the stars as were others of the ante diluvian prophets including Adam. So it may be reasonable that here in this valley important information was made known anciently in relation to the stars of our universe.

"Show us thy will, O Lord, concerning the twelve," the Lord commanded that a conference be held immediately to fill the places vacated by those who had fallen. Thomas B. Marsh was told it was his duty to remain for a season in Zion, to publish the word of the Lord. The residue were to continue to preach in lowliness of heart, in meekness and humility, and long-suffering. The Lord promised if they would do this that he would provide for their families, and an effectual door for the proclamation of the Gospel would be opened for them from henceforth. The command was given that the apostles were to take their leave next spring and cross the "great waters" and there take up the work commenced by Elders Kimball, Hyde and others in 1837. The Lord said: "Let them take leave of my saints in the city of Far West, on the twenty-sixth day of April next, on the building-spot of my house, saith the Lord." Men were selected to fill the vacancies caused by the excommunication of William E. M'Lellin, Luke S. Johnson, John F. Boynton, and Lyman E. Johnson. The men appointed by revelation were: John Taylor, John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff and Willard Richards, the latter serving as a counselor in the British Mission at the time. These four brethren were to be officially notified of their appointment.

According to this commandment a council meeting was called and convened July 9, 1838. There were present at this meeting, President of the council, Thomas B. Marsh and Elders David W. Patten, Brigham Young, Parley P. Pratt, and William Smith; President Marsh, presiding. President Marsh was appointed to notify Wilford Woodruff, Parley P. Pratt to notify Orson Pratt, President Sidney Rigdon to notify Willard Richards. The information concerning the call of these brethren and their appointment to meet was to be published in the "Elders' Journal." Some instructions were given by President Rigdon who advised the converts to move without delay to the places of gathering.

"Verily, thus saith the Lord, in consequence of their transgressions their former standing has been taken away from them, and now, if they will be saved, let them be ordained as elders in my Church to preach my Gospel and travel abroad from land to land and from place to place, to gather mine elect unto me, saith the Lord, and let this be their labors from henceforth. Amen."

Both of these men had been ordained to the office of high priest, one holding with the prophet as a counselor the keys of the kingdom, the other acting as a president over the saints in Missouri. These offices they were not to receive again; they had been taken from them and if now they would humble themselves they were to receive the ordination to the office of Elder. Later William W. Phelps was called at a meeting of the Presidency, high council and bishop's court at Far West to draw up a petition to locate the county seat at Far West. (D.H.C. 3:48.) However, neither of these men showed at this particular time the real spirit of repentance. At a conference meeting held in Quincy, Illinois, Sunday, March 17, 1839, both of them and a number of others, were excommunicated from the Church. (D.H.C. 3:284.) At the general conference held in April 1840, Frederick G. Williams came to the stand and asked forgiveness and to be received back into the Church, which was granted. He remained true until the time of his death, October 10, 1842. His descendants are today trusted and valuable members of the Church. In the following June, William W. Phelps wrote to the Prophet from Dayton, Ohio, confessing his sins and begging to be reinstated in the Church. "I am," he said, "as the prodigal son, though I never doubted or disbelieved the fulness of the Gospel. I have been greatly abused and humbled, and I blessed the God of Israel when I lately read your (Joseph Smith's) prophetic blessing on my head: 'The Lord will chasten him because he taketh honor to himself, and when his soul is greatly humbled he will forsake the evil. Then shall the light of the Lord break upon him as at noonday and in him shall be no darkness." He was received back and came to Utah where he was active all the rest of his life. He died March 7, 1872, in Salt Lake City.
