Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED SEVEN

The Journey of Kirtland Camp

References:

D.H.C. Volume 3:55-56 and 87-149.

Topics:

1.The Moving of the Saints From Kirtland. Note 1.

a.The meeting of the seventies.

b.Decision of the presidents of the seventies.

c.Constitution and government of the camp.

2.Hyrum Smith's Address. Note 2.

a.Instruction regarding travels of the camp.

b.Number in the camp.

c.Departure of the camp.

d.First death in the camp.

e.Difficulties encountered.

3.Opposition Encountered On the Way. Note 3.

a.Derision of citizens in town along the way.

b.Arrest of brethren.

c.Expulsion from the camp for broken rules.

4.Prayer for Rain. Note 4.

a.Miraculous healing of son of Martin H. Peck.

b.Drought and heat retard progress of the camp.

c.Prayer for rain answered.

d.Brethren obtain labor to help the camp on their journey.

e.Observance of the Sabbath day.

f.The journey's end.

Notes

The provisions of the constitution for the government of the camp are as follows in substance:

(1.) That the presidents of seventies shall be the councilors of the camp. There should be one appointed as treasurer, to keep a just and accurate account and be governed by the councilors.

(2.) That one man should be appointed to preside over each tent, and from time to time the tent-men were to make all necessary arrangements for providing teams for the journey, and to see that cleanliness and decency be observed in all cases, that there be no tobacco, tea, coffee, snuff, and that the word of wisdom be strictly heeded on the journey of the camp. This is one of the first references to the non-use of tea and coffee as a requirement in the provisions of the word of wisdom. Nor were any ardent spirits of any kind to be taken.

(3.) That every man shall be the head of his own family, and shall see that they are brought into subjection to the regulations of the camp.

(4.) That all those who subscribe to the resolutions, rules and regulations shall endeavor to provide for themselves and their families, and for the use and benefit of the camp and to place their moneys in the hands of the seven councilors, or presidents before the camp should start.

(5.) That the money shall be retained in the hands of the presidents and be divided proportionately among them for safety and to be paid to the treasurer as circumstances required.

(6.) That any faithful brethren wishing to journey in the camp can do so by subscribing to the rules and observing them.

(7.) That every individual shall at the end of the journey, when a settlement is made and circumstances will permit, pay his proportion of the expense of the journey. By expense was meant, the use of wagons, teams, cows, etc.

(8.) That these rules and laws shall be strictly observed, and every person who shall be disorderly and not willing to conform to the rules shall be disfellowshipped by the camp and left by the wayside.

(9.) That this shall be the law of the camp in journeying to Zion, and that it may be added unto or amended as circumstances may require by the voice of those who shall subscribe to it.

July 5, 1838, the assembling of the camp commenced. Between four and five hundred camped on the ground that night. Early the next morning people assembled to see the departure of the camp.

At that time there were in the camp 529 souls, with some absent who had joined and intended to go. There were 256 males, and 273 females and 105 families, a few families had not yet reached the ground. On the journey others joined along the way. July 7, they started early in the morning. Sunday, July 8th, they camped for worship. Monday, 9th, at seven A.M. the camp moved again. Difficulties, naturally, were encountered along the way, but they were wonderfully blessed. They described the nature of the country through which they passed. July 10th, further resolutions were adopted (See D.H.C. 3:102-103.) The weather was hot; the roads were dusty. They left some of their substance to be conveyed by the canal. July 11th, the first death in the camp occurred, this was the little son of Brother and Sister Wilbur. A number of the small children were taken ill but he was the only one to die. July 12th, they had difficulties on the way. Some of the wagons had broken down because of the heat and dry weather. That day it rained a little which was a relief.

People along the way came out of curiosity to see the camp pass. Many remarks were made about the "deluded" saints, and they laughed at "Joe Smith's prophecies," and expressed their pity for people who believed in modern revelation.

Saturday, July 14th, they camped and prepared for the Sabbath. That day in their traveling William Perry turned his wagon over and his wife and children were severely hurt. A young woman, a daughter of Elder John Vanleuven, Jr., was nearly killed when a wagon ran over her, but she was miraculously healed. The brethren reported that this was the first day since they departed that one or more wagons had not broken down. They camped that day at 2 P.M. near the town of Petersburg. This day complaints were made against a member of the camp, Abraham Bond, for murmuring and other unchristian-like conduct. After hearing the complaint and the defense, the case was referred to the company in his own tent to settle. This was the second complaint that had been made since leaving Kirtland.

Sunday, July 15th. Meeting was held at eleven A.M., Elder Jonathan Dunham delivered a discourse, and Elders Josiah Butterfield and Joseph Young had charge of the exercises of the day. Brother Butterfield was followed by other brethren with remarks.

The court for Richland County was in session and the brethren who had been arrested were brought before it for trial. Their case was called the evening of their arrest and then the court adjourned until the next morning. Just what the procedure in the court was is not stated, but the brethren were discharged and rejoined the camp. It seems that the people in the lands through which they passed habitually charged the camp for the privilege of camping. On reaching the Sandusky they camped on the edge of a prairie and the recorder states that this was the first time the camp had had the privilege of camping without having to pay. A great deal of time was consumed in their travels by having to stop to repair wagons and some days they only traveled a distance of about seven miles. July 20th, Abraham Bond, for murmuring, was again brought up for trial. Elder Zera A. Pulsipher gave him a severe reprimand for abusing others and he was told that he would be left by the wayside if he did not reform. As they passed through Rush Creek they camped for the Sabbath day, July 22nd, on the farm of Mr. Partial. It is recorded that here they had the sacrament for the first time since leaving Kirtland, the reason being on other Sabbath days that the crowds of curious people who attended their meeting precluded this ordinance. As they passed along the road in the morning some of the citizens threw eggs at members of the company, but when the brethren showed a spirit of defending themselves this action ceased. That night as they were camped a luminous body about the size of a cannon ball fell near the encampment and after whirling some forty or fifty times moved off and passed out of sight.

Always on the Sabbath day the camp observed strictly that day and meetings of worship were held. Some of their difficulties were laid at the door of the rebellious and murmurings of some of the members of the camp. These difficulties continued throughout the journey of the camp. It is written (D.H.C. 3:137-138.) that considerable anxiety was manifested by some concerning the advice of the council, and "some complained, like ancient Israel, and said that they did not thank the council for bringing them so far, and had rather been left in Kirtland." Yet they had desired to go and had subscribed to the rules governing the journey. There was considerable sickness in the camp. Many of the members stopped behind to continue the remainder of the journey by themselves because of sickness. Wednesday, Sept. 19th, they received tidings from Far West. When they reached Missouri they ran into bad storms, mud and difficulties. Summer had passed and the frosts had commenced. September 24th, the camp was reorganized as many had fallen behind and some had been dismissed from camp. They also learned of difficulties arising because of the opposition of the Missourians and the evil attitude of Lilburn W. Boggs, who had become the governor of the state of Missouri, and who was to play an important, but evil part in the history of the Latter-day Saints in Missouri. Wednesday, Sept. 26th, there was a proposition to disband the camp, but this was rejected. Wednesday, Oct. 3rd, the camp traveled to Ambrosial Creek where they were visited by the Prophet his counselors Sidney Rigdon and Hyrum Smith and Elder Brigham Young. That evening one of the brethren said, by the Spirit of the Lord:

"Brethren, your long and tedious journey is now ended; you are now on the public square of Adam-ondi-Ahman. This is the place where Adam blessed his posterity, when they rose up and called him Michael, the Prince, the Archangel, and he being full of the Holy Ghost predicted what should befall his posterity to the latest generations." (See D. & C. 107:53-55.)
