Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED EIGHT

Mob Activities in Caldwell and Daviess Counties

References:

D.H.C. Vol. 3:55-69.

Topics:

1.Election Day in Gallatin. Note 1.

a.Attempt to prevent members of the Church from voting.

b.Col. William Peniston's harrangue.

c.Attack made on Samuel Brown.

d.Brethren come to his defense.

e.Gathering of the mob.

f.Brethren remove their families for safety.

2.Report of Gallatin Difficulty Reaches Far West. Note 2.

a.The Prophet leaves for Gallatin.

b.Interview with Adam Black.

c.A covenant of peace.

3.False Affidavits by William Peniston and Others. Note 3.

a.They accuse the saints of arming to drive settlers from their homes.

b.Effect of the falsehoods.

c.Arrest of the Prophet and Lyman Wight.

d.They volunteer to go to for trial.

e.They are bound over on false charges.

4.Governor Boggs Calls Out the Militia. Note 4.

a.Proclamation to generals of the militia.

b.Brethren intercept arms and ammunition in possession of the mob.

c.Excitement and false rumors.

d.The Prophet's comment. Note 5.

e.Seeking a site for a city.

f.Interview with General Atchison.

Notes

The mob bully, Richard Welding, full of liquor, made an attack on Samuel Brown saying: "The Mormons were not allowed to vote in Clay County no more than the negroes," and that they should not vote now. Perry Durphy sought to suppress the difficulty and defend Brother Brown. This aroused other members of the opposition who began to cry "Kill him, kill him," and this may have happened if Riley Stewart had not struck Welding on the head and brought him to the ground. John L. Butler then sprang into the fray and knocked the mobbers down as fast as they came within his reach. The mob then dispersed threatening to obtain guns. Brother Butler called the brethren together and addressed them on their just rights and liberty, saying "we will maintain the same principles." Peaceable citizens then came and persuaded the brethren to withdraw, saying that this attack was a premeditated thing intended to prevent the Mormons from voting. The Mormons were only twelve in number. The brethren held a council about a quarter of a mile from the polls where they saw the mob gathering, cursing and swearing and armed with clubs, pistols, guns and other weapons. The brethren having no arms thought it wisdom to return to their homes, gather their families and hide them in a thicket of hazel brush and then stand guard through the night.

"I, Adam Black, a Justice of the Peace of Daviess County, do hereby Sertify to the people coled Mormin, that he is bound to suport the Constitution of this State, and of the United State, and he is not attached to any mob, nor will not attach himself to any such people, and so long as they will not molest me, I will not molest them. This the 8th day of August, 1838. "Adam Black."

Thursday, August 9th, a committee met according to appointment composed of citizens not of the Church and some church members among them were Joseph Morin, senator elect; John Williams, representative elect; James B. Turner, clerk of the circuit court, and some others; the members of the Church were Lyman Wight, Vinson Knight, John Smith, Reynolds Cahoon, and others. These parties agreed in a covenant of peace, to preserve each other's rights, and stand in each other's defense and if men did wrong, neither party would uphold them or endeavor to screen them from justice, but deliver up all offenders to be dealt with according to law and justice. On these friendly terms the meeting came to an end. The members of the mob, however, did not cease their threats and preparations for trouble.

These evil minded men knew the effect of their falsehoods, and that many Missourians needed very little provocation, or excuse even if not based on facts, to commit acts of violence against the Latter-day Saints. They also sought the sympathy of Governor Boggs, who had always shown a bitter spirit towards the Church and its members, and who assisted in their expulsion from Jackson County, while serving as lieutenant-governor in 1833.

These evil reports soon spread through the surrounding counties. Other rumors were sent out to the effect that the "Mormons" were arming and preparing to commit acts of violence against the non-Mormon citizens. Every wicked scheme that these evil-minded men could think of was put into use to stir up the opposition against the saints, and at the same time the endeavor was made to provoke the members of the Church to the point where they would commit some act of violence and thus be the aggressors. This failed, however, for the Lord revealed their plans.

Thursday, August 16th, the sheriff of Daviess County, accompanied by Judge Morin, called on the Prophet and notified him, that he, the sheriff, had a writ to take the Prophet to Daviess County for trial, for visiting that county on the seventh instant—just as if it were a crime for a man to visit a county in which he did not reside. The report had been circulated that the Prophet would resist this process and would not submit. He told the sheriff that he intended to obey the laws of the country always, but he wished to be tried in his own county, as the citizens of Daviess County were highly exasperated at him, and that the laws of the country gave him this privilege. The sheriff, hearing this declined to serve the writ, and said he would go to Richmond and see Judge King on the subject. The Prophet told him he would remain at home until he returned. When the sheriff returned he found the Prophet at home, and informed him very gravely, that he was out of the sheriff's jurisdiction, and that he could not act in Caldwell County.

After consulting with attorneys Atchison and Doniphan, the Prophet and Lyman Wight volunteered to go to Daviess county notwithstanding the hatred on the part of the people there against him. The trial was held, Adam Black was the only witness who appeared against them, and William P. Peniston was the prosecutor. Several witnesses, both non-members and members testified in their defense. The judge, however, who had shown forth a bitter spirit, bound them over in the sum of five hundred dollars and at the close of the trial he said to some of his friends and the witnesses that there was no evidence presented that would warrant his action, but the people had demanded it.

"Headquarters of Militia, Adjutant General's Office. August 30, 1838.

"General David R. Atchison, 3rd Division, Missouri Militia.

"Sir—Indications of Indian disturbances on our immediate frontier, and the recent civil disturbances in the counties of Caldwell, Daviess and Carroll, render it necessary, as a precautionary measure, that an effective force of the militia be held in readiness to meet either contingency. The Commander-in-Chief therefore orders that you cause to be raised immediately, within the limits of your division, to be held in readiness, and subject to further orders, four hundred mounted men, armed and equipped as infantry or riflemen, and formed into companies according to law, under officers already in commission. The Commander-in-Chief suggests the propriety of your causing the above to be carried into effect, in a manner calculated to produce as little excitement as possible, and report your proceedings to him through the adjutant General.

"By order of the Commander-in-Chief,

"B. M. Lisle, Adjutant-General." Similar letters were also addressed to major generals John B. Clark, Samuel D. Lucas, David Willock, Lewis Bolton, Henry W. Crawther, and Thomas D. Grant. This force was to consist of four hundred men from each of the seven divisions, making a total number of men under arms of 2,800. The rumor of an uprising of Indians was without sufficient foundation, and that of the saints likewise was without any resemblance of truth. There was, nevertheless, an uprising going on which was winked at by these state officials. Armed forces of the mob were collecting at different points and making open threats against the Latter-day Saints. Some of the brethren who were members of the state militia, under direction of the civil authorities intercepted a wagon load of arms and ammunition on the way to the mobber's camp. These brethren took the guns and supplies and carried them to Far West. The men who had them were taken before Albert Petty, justice of the peace and held in bail to appear at the next term of court. Judge King was then informed of the action that had been taken and he replied that the prisoners should be turned loose and treated kindly. He did not know what disposition to make of the guns and ammunition, so the brethren retained them until under orders from General Alexander Doniphan they were delivered into his care.

"There is great excitement at present among the Missourians, who are seeking if possible an occasion against us. They are continually chafing us, and provoking us to anger if possible, one sign of threatening after another, but we do not fear them, for the Lord God, the Eternal Father is our God, and Jesus the Mediator is our Savior, and in the great I Am is our strength and confidence.

"We have been driven time after time, and that without cause; and smitten again and again, and that without provocation; until we have proved the world with kindness, and the world has proved us, that we have no designs against any man or set of men, that we injure no man, that we are peaceable with all men, minding our own business, and our business only. We have suffered our rights and our liberties to be taken from us; we have not avenged ourselves of those wrongs; we have appealed to magistrates, to sheriffs, to judges, to government and to the President of the United States, all in vain; yet we have yielded peaceably to all these things. We have not complained at the Great God, we murmured not, but peaceably left all, and retired into the back country, in the broad and wild prairies, in the barren and desolate plains, and there commenced anew; we made the desolate places to bud and blossom as the rose; and now the fiend-like race is disposed to give us no rest. Their father the devil, is hourly calling upon them to be up and doing, and they, like willing and obedient children, need not the second admonition; but in the name of Jesus Christ the Son of the living God, we will endure it no longer, if the great God will arm us with courage, with strength and with power to resist them in their persecutions. We will not act on the offensive, but always on the defensive; our rights and our liberties shall not be taken from us, and we peaceably submit to it, as we have done heretofore; but we will avenge ourselves of our enemies, inasmuch as they will not let us alone." (D.H.C. Vol. 3:67-68)

While all of this was going on, September 1st, the Prophet with some of the brethren including his counselors and Judge Higbee as surveyor traveled some fifteen miles north of Far West for the purpose of appointing a city for the gathering of the saints in a place of safety, and, he said, "from the storm which will soon come upon this generation, and that the brethren may be together, and that they may receive instructions to prepare them for that great day which will come upon this generation as a thief in the night."

They located a suitable site and then returned home by a new and shorter route, arriving at the close of day. The following day was Sunday. The prophet requested General Atchison to come to Far West and counsel with the brethren and see if there could not be a stop put to the false rumors circulated by the enemies of the Church. A gentleman from Livingstone called on the Prophet in great excitement and stated that people were collecting from some eleven counties to take Joseph Smith and Lyman Wight by force, because they had resisted the officers who had endeavored to take them for trial. We have seen that these brethren had appeared before the court and had not resisted arrest, although it was a pretext without foundation on which they had been taken before the court. Commenting on this the Prophet said: "This looks a little too much like mobocracy, it fortells some evil intentions. The whole of upper Missouri is in an uproar and confusion."

Monday, September 3rd. General Atchison came to Far West and the Prophet with some of the brethren met in counsel with him the following day. He promised to do all in his power to disperse the mob. Alexander W. Doniphan was asked to act as counsel for the Prophet.
