Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED NINE

Continued Mob Opposition against the Saints

References:

D.H.C. Vol. 3:67-86 and 149-166.

Topics:

1.Circulation of Falsehoods Against the Saints. Note 1.

a.The Prophet's affidavit answering Adam Black.

b.Gathering of mob forces under Dr. Austin.

c.Gen. Doniphan orders them to disperse.

d.They move to DeWitt.

e.Atchison's report to the Governor.

f.Governor's willingness that saints and mob fight it out.

2.Austin's Siege of DeWitt. Note 2.

a.Dr. Austin lays siege to DeWitt.

b.Saints petition governor for relief.

c.Their petition ignored.

d.Gen. Park's report to Governor Boggs.

e.Mob threatens to drive saints with "powder and lead."

3.Proposition of the Mob to Buy or Sell. Note 3.

a.Insincere offer by the mob to buy or sell.

b.Proposition accepted by the saints.

c.The Prophet's visit to DeWitt.

d.The fall of DeWitt.

4.The Prophet's Comment on Gen. Lucas' statement. Note 4.

a."Base and Degraded Beings."

b.Church duties conducted without interruption.

c.Gen. Doniphan's orders for saints to defend themselves.

d.Wicked action of Ray County citizens.

Notes

The false reports of the enemies continued to spread causing great excitement. The militia according to the order of the governor was called into service. In the ranks were many of the most bitter enemies of our people. A large mob force gathered near Diahman under the command of Dr. Austin. General Doniphan of the militia ordered them to disperse. They claimed that they had gathered in self defense. Lyman Wight had also gathered a small company of brethren for their protection. When Gen. Doniphan ordered Austin and his forces to disperse, they refused. Thereupon Doniphan took up his station between Austin's mob and the small settlement. Thereupon Austin moved his force to the small settlement of DeWitt, in Carroll County. The citizens there attempted to defend themselves and Austin laid siege to the town, firing upon the inhabitants and threatening their extermination if they did not move from the state. Generals Atchison and Doniphan reported to the governor, as did citizens from Chariton County, that the Mormons were very much alarmed and entirely on the defensive in an unequal conflict. Gen. Atchison said to the governor: "Things are not so bad in that country as represented by rumor, and in fact, from affidavits I have no doubt your Excellency has been deceived by the exaggerated statements of designing or half crazy men. I have found there is no cause of alarm on account of the Mormons, they are not to be feared; they are very much alarmed." When the governor received this report it seemed to please him, not so much that the members of the Church were trying to live in peace and were alarmed because of their enemies, but because he thought they were too weak to defend themselves. Thereupon he declared "The quarrel is between the Mormons and the mob, and they can fight it out." When he discovered that the Mormons, weak as they were, were determined to take him at his word and fight it out and maintain their legal rights, he was incensed and soon manifested his true character.

General Parks did, however, write the governor and said to him: "Whatever may have been the disposition of the people called Mormons, before our arrival here, since we have made our appearance they have shown no disposition to resist the laws, or of hostile intentions. There has been so much prejudice and exaggeration concerned in this matter, that I found things entirely different from what I was prepared to expect. When we arrived here, we found a large body of men from the counties adjoining, armed and in the field, for the purpose, as I learned, of assisting the people of this county against the Mormons, without being called out by the proper authorities.

"P.S.—Since writing the above, I received information that if the committee do not agree, the determination of the Daviess County men is to drive the Mormons with powder and lead."

Of course the proposition to buy or sell, was not made in good faith, however a committee met and the brethren agreed to buy out all those who wished to sell and move to some other part of the state.

When the Prophet learned of the trouble at DeWitt and the distress that the saints there were in, he paid the place a visit, notwithstanding it was under siege by a mob. He risked his life and slipped passed the guards. He found the saints in dire straits; their provisions were gone and they could not obtain more. Their cattle had been driven off and consumed by their enemies. Again they made an appeal to the governor through the services of disinterested parties not members of the Church. This appeal like the first went unheeded. This is a sad reflection upon the integrity of a sovereign state of the United States, when the officers who had sworn to protect the citizens and see that justice is enforced, could sit by and encourage mob violence. It is sad to consider that the armed militia would stand by and permit a mob force to besiege a city until the inhabitants were exhausted and starved into submission. It is a disgrace that the governor of this state, when he learned of the weakness of the saints, and the strength of the mob, would withdraw the troops which should have been ordered to their protection, and who, seemingly, was elated when he learned that the saints were weak and their enemies strong and under those conditions ordered that the contending parties could fight it out, feeling that the result would be the utter defeat and likely the extermination of the weaker party. On the 11th of October the inhabitants of DeWitt were forced to accept the edict of the mob to vacate their homes and city, with the understanding that they were to be recompensed for the loss of their property. This, of course, the mob, while making the promise, never intended to do. That afternoon the citizens started for Far West, in their weakened condition, hungry and cold. Many had died from the enforced abuse and several others died on the march to Far West, a distance of fifty miles. This, be it known, was done with troops appointed by the governor in the vicinity of De Witt and the governor permitting it to be done! Moreover, the condition of the siege was well known. Henry Root notified General Parks in an affidavit, which General Parks forwarded to General Atchison, that the mob were firing upon the citizens in DeWitt, and when the Mormons dared to raise arms and defend themselves in their inherent rights, they were condemned.

October 4, 1838, General Samuel D. Lucas, one of the most bitter enemies of the Church, wrote to Governor Boggs, in which he declared that it was rumored that a fight had taken place between the Mormons and their enemies and that several persons had been killed. In this communication he said: "If a fight has actually taken place, of which I have no doubt, it will create excitement in the whole of upper Missouri, and those base and degraded beings will be exterminated from the face of the earth. If one of the citizens of Carroll should be killed, before five days I believe that there will be from four to five thousand volunteers in the field against the Mormons, and nothing but their blood will satisfy them." He then stated that his troops that had been disbanded could be called into the field at an hour's warning.

The next day a committee from Chariton reported the conditions at DeWitt and said that the Mormons were merely trying to defend themselves against their enemies and were crying for peace. Their enemies were waging a war against them of extermination. This kind of report was not what the governor was seeking.

" 'Base and degraded beings' " Whoever heard before of high-minded and honorable men condescending to sacrifice their honor, by stooping to wage war, without cause or provocation against 'base and degraded beings?' But General Lucas is ready with his whole Division, at 'an hour's warning,' to enter the field of battle on such degraded terms, if his own statement is true. But General Lucas knew better. He knew the saints were an innocent, unoffending people, and would not fight, only in self defense, and why write such a letter to the governor to influence his mind? Why not keep to the truth and justice? Poor Lucas! The annals of eternity will unfold to you who are the 'base beings,' and what it will take to 'satisfy' for the shedding of 'Mormon blood.' " (D.H.C. 3:150-151.)

During all of these troubles matters pertaining to the welfare of the Church went on without much interruption. A quarterly conference was held in Far West October 6, 1838, and all necessary business was attended to. Missionaries were appointed to go out into the world. Elder John Taylor who had arrived from Canada was present and stated that he was willing to do any thing and accept any appointment the Lord gave to him. He was thereupon sustained as one to fill a vacancy in the council of the twelve. The same day, seven persons who received the Gospel in England, had to be cut off from the Church.

While the conference was being held in Far West the mob camped near DeWitt, and wrote an inflamatory letter to the citizens of Howard County asking them to come to their assistance and rescue them from the Mormons, as "the 'Mormons' were then firing upon them and they would have to act on the defensive until they could procure more assistance. A. C. Woods, a citizen of Howard County, made a certificate to the same lies, which he gathered in the mob camp, he did not go into DeWitt, or take any trouble to learn the truth of what he certified. While the people will lie and the authorities will uphold them, what justice can honest men expect?" (D.H.C. 3:156-157.) General Clark wrote to the governor endorsing the men who issued these falsehoods, and expressing his bitterness towards the saints. With design the mob leaders were also taken into the militia and made officers therein.

Having driven the saints out of DeWitt, the mob took steps to continue their evil deeds. Rev. Sashiel Woods, a Presbyterian, called the mob together and informed them that the land sales were coming on, and if they could get the Mormons driven out, they could get all the lands entitled to preemptions, and that they should hasten to Daviess County where they could accomplish this object. Thus the lands purchased by the Mormons and their money would come into their hands. Many of the homes of the members of the Church were burned and their inhabitants driven out in the midst of snow and ice, October 17th and 18th, 1838. Agnes M. Smith, wife of Don Carlos Smith, he being in the mission field, was forced to wade Grand River carrying her two small children in the midst of this inclement winter weather.

Knowing full well that these actions were unjustifiable, General Doniphan ordered a part of his troops to make a forced march to Adam-ondi-Ahman for the protection of the saints. These troops were in sympathy with the mob, and so were sent back by General Doniphan who said in disgust that they were "damned rotten hearted." He then commanded Col. George M. Hinkle, who was a member of the Church, to organize a force at Far West, and march them to Diahman, while he, Doniphan, would raise a force in Clay and other counties for the same purpose. General Parks also commanded Col. Lyman Wight, who held a commission in the 59th regiment, to collect his force at Diahman. When the mobbers learned of this action they broke camp and fled. Then, seeing they were defeated in the use of force at that time, they resorted to trickery. They moved their goods from several log huts at Millport and Gallatin and set fire to them, then spread the report that the "Mormons" did it. They said the Mormons had "riz" and were burning all before them. The fact is that the houses which they burned belonged to members of the Church who had purchased them, but had not taken possession of them. This brought recruits to the mob forces. Samuel Bogart, William P. Peniston, Dr. Samuel Venable and others who had taken a hand in the expulsion of the saints from Jackson County, circulated inflamatory circulars and affidavits accusing the saints of all kinds of wicked deeds which had been committed by the mob. This increased opposition and hatred forced many of the members in other settlements to flee to Far West.

Fourteen citizens of Ray County, one the postmaster, Mr. Hudgins, wrote the governor malicious and accusing letters against the saints. The citizens of Ray County in a public meeting, appealed to the governor to give the people of "Upper Missouri" protection from the fearful body of "thieves and robbers," while the fact is, said the Prophet, "the saints were minding their own business, only as they were driven from it by those who were crying thieves and robbers." (Vol. 3:166.) Austin A. King and Adam Black, judges, who were under oath to uphold the law were adding their voices and used their pens to aid in the hue and cry for the expulsion of the Latter-day Saints.
