Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED TEN

The Apostasy of Thomas B. Marsh

References:

D.H.C. Vol. 3:166-168.

Topics:

1.Thomas B. Marsh Forsakes the Church. Note 1.

a.His departure from Far West.

b.Seeks friends among enemies in Richmond.

c.His Affidavit of falsehoods.

d.Accusations against Joseph Smith.

e.Orson Hyde's endorsement of the falsehoods.

f.Sampson Avard.

2.President John Taylor's Remarks on Apostasy of Thomas B. Marsh. Note 2.

a.The Prophet's comment. (D.H.C. 3:166-167.)

b.His acquaintance with Thomas B. Marsh.

c.His estimate of the character of Thomas B. Marsh.

d.Excuse for attitude of Orson Hyde.

e.The Prophet's warning to members of the Church. (Teachings, p. 156; Gospel Kingdom, p. 186.)

3.Return of Orson Hyde and Thomas B. Marsh to the Church. Note 3.

a.Orson Hyde's repentance.

b.He is re-instated in the council of the twelve.

c.His mission to Palestine.

d.His faithfulness after his return.

e.The return of Thomas B. Marsh.

f.His remarks in relation to apostasy.

4.Dangers Confronting Us Which cause Loss of the Spirit of the Lord. Note 4.

a.Neglect of duty a cause of loss of the Spirit.

b.Transgression of gospel principles.

c.Alma's counsel.

d.The Prophet's comment on apostasy.

Notes

"They (the Latter-day Saints) have among them a company, considered true 'Mormons,' called the 'Danites,' who have taken an oath to support the heads of the Church in all things that they say or do, whether right or wrong. Many, however, of this band are much dissatisfied with this oath, as being against moral and religious principles. On Saturday last, I am informed by the Mormons, that they had a meeting at Far West at which they appointed a company of twelve, by the name of the 'Destruction Company,' for the purpose of burning and destroying, and that if the people of Buncombe came to do mischief upon the people of Caldwell, and committed depredations upon the Mormons, they were to burn Buncombe; and if the people of Clay and Ray made any movement against them, this destroying company were to burn Liberty and Richmond. * * * The Prophet inculcates the notion, and it is believed by every true Mormon, that Smith's prophecies are superior to the laws of the land. I have heard the Prophet say that he would yet tread down his enemies, and walk over their dead bodies; and if he was not let alone, he would be a second Mohammed to this generation, and that he would make it one gore of blood from the Rocky Mountains to the Atlantic Ocean; that like Mohammed, whose motto in treating for peace was, 'the Alcoran or the Sword.' So should it be eventually with us, 'Joseph Smith or the Sword.' These last statements were made during the last summer. The number of armed men at Adam-ondi-Ahman was between three and four hundred.

"Thomas B. Marsh.

"Sworn to and subscribed before me, the day herein written.

"Henry Jacobs,

"J.P. Ray County, Missouri.

"Richmond, Missouri, October 24, 1838.

To this affidavit Orson Hyde added the following:

"The most of the statements in the foregoing disclosure I know to be true; the remainder I believe to be true.

"Orson Hyde."

"Richmond, October 24, 1838.

"Sworn to and subscribed before me, on the day above written."

(D.H.C. Vol. 3:167)

The only shadow to give color to the report made by Thomas B. Marsh and Orson Hyde was in the fact that Sampson Avard, who but a short time before this sad event had joined the Church, did organize a band which he called "Danites." The members of the band did subscribe to some manner of oath of vengeance on their enemies. This action was unbeknown to the Prophet and when he discovered what was being done, he put a stop to it and Sampson Avard was excommunicated. Thomas B. Marsh and Orson Hyde must have been fully aware of the Prophet's action and indignation when this evil was discovered, and there was no warrant for the charges which Thomas B. Marsh made, and which Orson Hyde, who so recently had performed an excellent work in England and had but a short time before returned to the United States, said he believed to be true. These men, for some cause had partaken of a spirit of darkness during the persecutions which were breaking forth on the Church.

"Testimonies from these sources are not always reliable, and it is to be hoped, for the sake of the two brethren, that some things were added by our enemies that they did not assert, but enough was said to make this default and apostasy very terrible.

"I will here state that I was in Far West at the time these affidavits were made, and was mixed up with all prominent church affairs. I was there when Thomas B. Marsh and Orson Hyde left there; and there are others present who were there at the same time. And I know that these things, referred to in the affidavits, are not true. I have heard a good deal about Danites but I never heard of them among the Latter-day Saints. If there was such an organization, I never was made acquainted with it. The fact of a president of the twelve, who ought to be true to his trust, apostleship, and calling, and the guardian and protector of the people, making such statements, is truly infamous and is to be deplored by all correct feeling people. It is not unusual for lawyers to say, when speaking of any crime, that such a man, instigated by the devil, did so and so. Thomas B. Marsh was unquestionably 'instigated by the devil,' when he made this statement which has been read in your hearing. The consequence was, he was cut off from the Church. When he was cut off, he seemed to have lost all the spirit and power and manhood that he once enjoyed. I was acquainted with him before this. I was acquainted with him soon after I came into the Church. With the Prophet Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon, he visited Upper Canada at the time I was presiding there, in the year 1837. I was with them for some time. I procured from a sister, a carriage, which was a very good one, and Brother Joseph Horne, who may be present, supplied the team, and I think, acted as teamster. In it we visited the churches. I rode with them in the same carriage. They were with us for sometime, visiting the various churches and holding meetings and conferences. Thomas B. Marsh many of you knew as he was here in the valleys, and some of you perhaps knew him at that time. At that earlier period, he was a pretty fair average man in regard to intelligence, speech, good sound reason, etc. I have heard some people say he was a fool, but I did not so understand it. (Brother Woodruff said: "I did not, either.") Until the time of his apostasy, he was a fair average man in regard to intelligence. But when he took the step he did, it was a shocking course for a man to pursue, occupying the position that he did. I remember a circumstance that occurred. A number of us had been out to a place called Di-Ahman. Its proper name was Adam-ondi-Ahman. In coming into Far West, I heard about him and Orson Hyde having left. It would be here proper to state, however, that Orson Hyde had been sick with a violent fever for some time, and had not yet fully recovered therefrom, which, with the circumstances with which we were surrounded and the influence of Thomas B. Marsh, may be offered as a slight palliation for his default. Brother Heber C. Kimball and I were together, and I said to him: 'I have a notion to take a team and follow after these brethren, and see if I cannot persuade them to come back,' speaking particularly of Brother Marsh. 'Well,' said he, 'if you knew him as well as I do, you would know if he had made up his mind to go, you could not turn him.' With that I gave up the idea, knowing that Brother Kimball was better acquainted with him than I was, and I did not go. The result was that he did this deed. I am here reminded of the words of Joseph in exhorting the twelve. He said:

" 'O ye twelve, and all saints, profit by this important key, that in all your trials, troubles, and temptations, afflictions, bonds, imprisonment and death, see to it that you do not betray heaven, that you do not betray Jesus Christ, that you do not betray your brethren, and that you do not betray the revelations of God, whether in the Bible, Book of Mormon, or Doctrine and Covenants, or any of the word of God. Yes, in all your kicking and floundering see to it that you do not this thing, lest innocent blood be found on your skirts, and you go down to hell. We may ever know by this sign that there is danger of our being led to a fall and apostasy, when we give way to the devil so as to neglect the first known duty. But whatever you do, do not betray your friends.' " (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 156; The Gospel Kingdom, p. 188.)

Orson Hyde returned to the Church in June 1839, at Commerce, now Nauvoo, Illinois, and was reinstated in the council of the twelve. He was sorely repentant, and in tears of humility begged forgiveness from his brethren for the unfortunate part he had taken in this lying report with Thomas B. Marsh. He had been overcome by the spirit of darkness to the extent that he bore false witness against his brethren while under that influence. After his return to the Church, he faithfully performed his part to the end. He was sent in the lifetime of the Prophet to dedicate the Land of Palestine for the return of Israel. The consciousness of his guilt in this unfortunate act in Missouri, prayed upon his mind all his life, and many were the days he shed bitter tears because that chapter in his history could not be blotted out.

Thomas B. Marsh, at a later day (1857), returned to the Church. September 4, 1857, he arrived in Salt Lake City. He had crossed the plains from Harrison County, Missouri. Two days after his arrival he addressed a congregation in the tabernacle and in his remarks said: "I can say, in reference to the quorum of the twelve, to which I belonged, that I did not consider myself a whit behind any of them, and I suppose that others had the same opinion; but let no one feel too secure; for before you think of it, your steps will slide. You will not then think nor feel for a moment as you did before you lost the Spirit of Christ; for when men apostatize, they are left to grovel in the dark. ** But let me tell you, my brethren and friends, if you do not want to suffer in body and mind, as I have done; if there are any of you that have the seeds of apostasy in you, do not let them make their appearance, but nip that spirit in the bud; for it is misery and affliction in this world, and destruction in the world to come." (Deseret News, Sept. 16, 1857.) He was a broken man in health and spirit, and showed that the hand of affliction had been over him. "If you want to see the fruits of apostasy," he would say, "Look at me!"

How does apostasy come about? By neglect of duty, failing to keep in our souls the spirit of prayer, of obedience to the principles of the Gospel; by failure to pay an honest tithing, or to observe the word of wisdom, and to absent one's self from sacrament meetings where we have been commanded to go and renew our covenants. Apostasy comes through the sins of omission as well as through the sins of commission. Immorality is a deadly sin and those who are guilty, if they do not repent, will lose the spirit and deny the faith. Apostasy does not come upon an individual suddenly, but it is a gradual growth in which darkness through sin crowds out the spirit of light from the soul. When a man who was once enlightened loses the Spirit of truth, the darkness which takes its place is overwhelming. Alma gives us a good example of this in teaching Zeezrom. (Alma 12:9-11.)

"Strange as it may appear at first thought, yet it is no less strange than true, that notwithstanding all the professed determination to live godly, apostates after turning from the faith of Christ, unless they have speedily repented, have sooner or later fallen into the snares of the wicked one, and have been left destitute of the Spirit of God, to manifest their wickedness in the eyes of multitudes. From apostates the faithful have received the severest persecutions. Judas was rebuked and immediately betrayed his Lord into the hands of his enemies, because Satan entered into him. There is a superior intelligence bestowed upon such as obey the Gospel with full purpose of heart, which, if sinned against, the apostate is left naked and destitute of the Spirit of God, and he is, in truth, nigh unto cursing, and his end is to be burned. When once that light which was in them is taken from them, they become as much darkened as they were previously enlightened, and then, no marvel, if all their power should be enlisted against the truth, and they, Judas like, seek the destruction of those who were their greatest benefactors." ("Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith," p. 67.)
