Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED ELEVEN

Battle of Crooked River—Governor Bogg's Order of Extermination

References:

D.H.C. Vol. 3:168-177.

Topics:

1.The Battle at Crooked River. Note 1.

a.Lying report of Sashiel Woods and Joseph Dickson.

b.The Prophet's account of the battle.

c.Captain Bogart and his band.

d.Nathan Pinkham and others taken prisoners.

e.Judge Higbee orders out volunteers for defense.

f.Account of the battle.

g.Death of David W. Patten and Patrick O'Banion.

2.Anger of the Mob Aroused. Note 2.

a.Bogart's wicked report.

bJudge E. M. Ryland's letter to Rees and Williams.

c.He advocates extermination or driving of Mormons from the state.

3.Governor Boggs' Extermination order. Note 3.

a.Governor Boggs' Order to General Lisle.

b.Rees and Williams reiterate the false reports.

c.The governor's extermination order to Gen. Clark.

d.David R. Atchison's perfidy.

e.The Prophet's comment.

Notes

"Sir:—We were informed last night, by an express from Ray County, that Captain Bogart and all his company, amounting to between fifty and sixty men were massacred by the Mormons at Buncombe, twelve miles north of Richmond, except three. This statement you may rely on as being true, and last night they expected Richmond to be laid in ashes this morning. We could distinctly hear cannon, and we know the Mormons had one in their possession. Richmond is about twenty-five miles west of this place, on a straight line. We know not the hour or minute we will be laid in ashes—our country is ruined—For God's sake give us assistance as quick as possible."

"Yours, etc.,

"Sashiel Woods,

"Joseph Dickson." This report based on a "rumor" was prepared with the knowledge that no such thing had taken place. No men were in a better position to know than Woods and Dickson that the Latter-day Saints would not, and could not, commit such an offense. These men also knew that there were under arms many times any number that the Mormons could raise against those who were in arms against them. This these scoundrels knew. The Prophet said of this wicked falsehood:

"These mobbers must have had very accute ears to hear cannon, (a six pounder) thirty-seven miles! So much for the lies of a priest of this world. Now for the truth of the case. This day about noon, Captain Bogart, with some thirty or forty men called on Brother Thoret Parsons, at the head of the east branch of Log Creek, where he was living, and warned him to be gone before next day at ten in the morning, declaring also that he would give Far West thunder and lightning before next day at noon, if he had good luck in meetin Neil Gillum (Cornelius Gilliam) who would camp about six miles west of Far West that night, and that he should camp on Crooked Creek. He then departed towards Crooked Creek.

Brother Parsons dispatched a messenger with this news to Far West, and followed after Bogart to watch his movements. Brothers Joseph Holbrook and David Juda, who went out this morning to watch the movements of the enemy, saw eight armed mobbers call at the house of Brother Pinkham, where they took three prisoners, Nathan Pinkham, Brother William Seely and Addison Green, and four horses, arms, etc. When departing they threatened Father Pinkham that if he did not leave the state immediately they 'would have his damned old scalp.' Having learned of Bogart's movements the brethren returned to Far West near midnight, and reported their proceedings and those of the mob.

"On hearing the report, Judge Elias Higbee, the first judge of the county, ordered Lieutenant Colonel Hinkle, the highest officer in command in Far West, to send out a company to disperse the mob and retake their prisoners, whom, it was reported, they intended to murder that night. The trumpet sounded, and the brethren were assembled on the public square about midnight, when the facts were stated, and about seventy-five volunteered to obey the judge's order, under command of Captain David W. Patten, who immediately commenced their march on horseback, hoping without the loss of blood to surprise and scatter the camp, retake the prisoners and prevent the attack threatening Far West.

"Thursday, 25th.—Fifteen of the company were detached from the main body while sixty continued their march till they arrived near the ford of Crooked River (or creek) where they dismounted, tied their horses, and leaving four or five men to guard them, proceeded towards the ford, not knowing the location of the encampment. It was just at the dawning of light in the east, when they were marching quietly along the road, and near the top of the hill which descends to the river that the report of a gun was heard, and young Patrick O'Banion reeled out of the ranks and fell mortally wounded. Thus the work of death commenced when Captain Patten ordered a charge and rushed down the hill on a fast trot, and when within about fifty yards of the camp formed a line. The mob formed a line under the bank of the river, below their tents. It was yet so dark that little could be seen by looking at the west, while the mob looking towards the dawning light, could see Patten and his men, when they fired a broadside, and three or four of the brethren fell.

Captain Patten ordered the fire returned, which was instantly obeyed, to great disadvantage in the darkness which yet continued. The fire was repeated by the mob, and returned by Captain Patten's company, who gave the watchword, 'God and Liberty.' Captain Patten then ordered a charge, which was instantly obeyed. The parties immediately came in contact, with their swords, and the mob were soon put to flight, crossing the river at the ford and such places as they could get a chance. In the pursuit, one of the mob fled from behind a tree, wheeled, and shot Captain Patten, who instantly fell, mortally wounded, having received a large ball in his bowels.

"The ground was soon cleared, and the brethren gathered up a wagon or two, and making beds therein of tents, etc., took their wounded and retreated towards Far West. Three brethren were wounded in the bowels, one in the neck, one in the shoulder, one through the hips, one through the thighs, one in the arms, all by musket shot. One had his arm broken by a sword. Brother Gideon Carter was shot in the head, and left dead on the ground so defaced that the brethren did not know him. Bogart reported that he had lost one man. The three prisoners were released and returned with the brethren to Far West. Captain Patten was carried some of the way in a litter, but it caused so much distress that he begged to be left by the wayside. He was carried into Brother Winchester's, three miles from the city of Far West, where he died that night. Patrick O'Banion died soon after, and Brother Carter's body was also brought from Crooked River, when it was discovered who he was."

The Prophet went to see Brother Patten before he died, and he said of him: "Brother David Patten was a very worthy man, beloved by all good men who knew him. He was one of the twelve apostles, and died as he had lived, a man of God, and strong in the faith of a glorious resurrection, in a world where mobs will have no power or place. One of his last expressions to his wife was—'Whatever you do else, O! do not deny the faith.' "

"How different his fate to that of the apostate, Thomas B. Marsh, who this day vented all the lying spleen and malice of his heart towards the work of God, in a letter to Brother and Sister Abbott, to which was annexed an addenda by Orson Hyde." (D.H.C. 3:168-172.) The funeral for Elder Patten was held in Far West, Saturday, October 27, 1838. As the Prophet looked upon the lifeless body he said: "There lies a man that has done just as he said he would—he has laid down his life for his friends."

The following day Governor Boggs sent an order, by the Adjutant-general, B. M. Lisle, to General John B. Clark, first division, Missouri Militia, and a mobber at heart, a command to raise companies out of the 1st, 4th, 5th, 6th and 12th divisions of the state militia, four hundred men each, mounted and armed as infantry and riflemen, and each man to be furnished at least fifty pounds of ammunition, and at least fifteen days provisions. He declared that the Mormons had expelled the inhabitants of Daviess County from their homes, had pillaged and burnt their dwellings, driven off their stock, and were destroying crops. They had burnt to ashes the towns of Gallatin and Millport, the former being the county seat, and had destroyed the records in the clerk's office and all the public records of that county and there was not a civil officer left within the county. These troops when raised were to be stationed at given points, and formed "according to law." Volunteer companies, which meant companies of the mob, were to elect their own officers. All this was by order of the "commander-in-chief," of the militia.

It appears on the accumulative evidence that this action was a concerted effort on the part of state officials, to abet and give state support to the mob enemies of the Church, and cause them to be driven from the state. No one had better opportunity to know that these were false and malicious reports than did the governor of the state and the judges and attorneys who engaged in these wicked rumors and charges. It is a difficult thing to believe that the governor who had shown his bitter opposition toward the Church from the earliest days of the settlement of members of the Church in Missouri, did not have complete information as to the weakness of the Latter-day Saints and how they were overwhelmingly outnumbered by their enemies who battled against them. Moreover, that these stricken people were trying manfully and peacefully to maintain their homes and build up their communities without being molested by enemies, and that they were not at any time the aggressors in any conflict which had arisen. The governor knew, for he had been informed by his own sworn servants, that the Mormon people were crying for peace and were constantly acting on the defensive endeavoring to maintain their homes, goods and chattels. He knew that they had been driven from Daviess County, that DeWitt had been deserted because it was besieged by armed mobs who acted in the presence of state troops who failed, or refused to interfere. Yet he would accept these false reports and make it appear that he believed them. Judge Ryland knew that what he had written was false.

Without waiting to receive correct information and to receive the word that these reports were not true, this contemptible governor hastily issued one of the most despicable and villainous decrees ever issued by a governor or ruler against any people. It is known as Governor Boggs' order of extermination of the Mormon people. This was issued October 27, 1838, and for its base he relied on the malicious reports from these lying sources. The full text is as follows:

"Headquarters Militia,

City of Jefferson,

October 27, 1838.

"Sir:—Since the order of the morning to you, directing you to cause four hundred mounted men to be raised within your division, I have received by Amos Rees, Esq., and Wily C. Williams, Esq., one of my aids, information of the most appalling character, which changes the whole face of things, and places the Mormons in the attitude of open and avowed defiance of the laws, and of having made open war upon the people of this state. Your orders are, therefore, to hasten your operations and endeavor to reach Richmond, in Ray County, with all possible speed. The Mormons must be treated as enemies and must be exterminated or driven from the state, if necessary for the public good. Their outrages are beyond all description. If you can increase your force, you are authorized to do so, to any extent you may think necessary. I have just issued orders to Major-General Wallock, of Marion County, to raise five hundred men, and to march them to the northern part of Daviess and there to unite with General Doniphan, of Clay, who has been ordered with five hundred men to proceed to the same point for the purpose of intercepting the retreat of the Mormons to the north. They have been directed to communicate with you by express; and you can also communicate with them if you find it necessary. Instead, therefore, of proceeding as at first directed, to reinstate the citizens of Daviess in their homes, you will proceed immediately to Richmond, and there operate against the Mormons. Brigadier-General Parks, of Ray, has been ordered to have four hundred men of his brigade in readiness to join you at Richmond. The whole force will be placed under your command.

"L. W. Boggs,

"Governor and Commander-in-Chief.

"To General Clark." (D.H.C. 3:175.)

The Prophet wrote: "Great excitement now prevailed, and mobs were heard of in every direction, who seemed determined on our destruction. They burned the houses in the country, and took off all of the cattie they could find. houses in the country and took off many prisoners, and threatened death to all the Mormons." (D.H.C. 3:176.)

It seems a little strange that Gen. David R. Atchison, who had been one of the Prophet's attorneys, and who had reported previously that the Mormons sought for peace and were on the defensive, should join in this hue and cry. He joined with Gen. Samuel D. Lucas, a bitter enemy of the Church, in the following communication to the governor.

"To the Commander-in-Chief, Missouri Militia:

"Sir:—From late outrages committed by the Mormons, civil war is inevitable. They have set the laws of the country at defiance, and are in open rebellion. We have about two thousand men under arms to keep them in check. The presence of the commander-in-chief is deemed absolutely necessary, and we most respectfully urge that your excellency be at the seat of war as soon as possible.

"Your most obedient servants,

"David R. Atchison,

M.G., 3rd Div.

"Samuel D. Lucas,

M.G. 4th Div. "
