Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED TWELVE

The Haun's Mill Massacre

References:

D.H.C. Vol. 3:178-187.

Topics:

1.General John B. Clark's Commission. Note 1.

a.Clark appointed to exterminate or drive out Mormons.

b.Gen. Lucas to assist him.

c.Reason for their appointment.

d.Gathering of mobocrats at Richmond. (D.H.C. 3:173-178.)

e.Gen. Atchison dismounted, and why.

2.Sampson Avard's "Danites." Note 2.

a.Avard organizes secret band.

b.Their wicked oath.

c.Leaders desert him when oath is required.

d.He is excommunicated.

e.The Church harmed because of his wickedness.

3.The Haun's Mill Massacre. Note 3.

a.Col. William O. Jennings makes covenant with Saints for peace.

b.He treacherously breaks his covenant.

c.Reason for the breaking of the covenant.

d.The sudden attack on the settlement.

e.Brethren slaughtered in cold blood.

f.Brutal murder of Sardius Smith and Thomas McBride.

g.Names of those martyred.

h.Published account and comment of Missouri papers.

Notes

"Clark, although not the ranking officer, was selected by Governor Boggs as the most fit instrument to carry out his murderous designs; for bad as they were in Missouri, very few commanding officers were yet sufficiently hardened to go all lengths with Boggs in this contemplated inhuman butchery, and expulsion from one of the should-be free and independent states of the Republic of North America, where the Constitution declares, that 'every man shall have the privilege of worshiping God according to the dictates of his own conscience.' "

Some of the generals holding commissions in the militia could not stoop to the level required of them by the governor's order, although most of them held a dislike for the Mormon people. General Atchison, who was caught in their net to the extent that he raised his voice in drastic measures against the saints, found the going too severe for him, and thereupon was demoted by the Commander-in-Chief. Clark who received the command and Lucas his right-hand man were the most fitted to carry out this diabolical deed. Following the governor's order to Clark, the mob began to encamp near Richmond to the number of some two thousand men eager to carry out the exterminating order. On Oct. 26, 1838, they took up their march for Far West, traveling part way and camping for the night. Tuesday, October 30th, the advance guard of the mob was patrolling the country and taking many prisoners. Among these prisoners were Stephen Winchester and Brother Carey whose skull they laid open with a blow from a rifle barrel. In his desperate condition the mob laid him in a wagon and went on their way denying him every comfort.

When they heard this all of his officers revolted, and said it would not do, and they refused to go into any such measures for that "would be in open violation of the laws of our country; would be robbing our fellow citizens of their rights, and are not according to the language and doctrine of Christ, or of the Church of Latter-day Saints." When this attempt to bind these brethren by such a wicked oath became known, and his rascality came to the Presidency of the Church, he was immediately cut off from the Church, and his influence came to an abrupt end. However, the enemies of the Church all down the years have made this a sweet story upon which to build their attacks upon the Church.

Monday, October 29th, was a peaceful day. The sun shone brightly. Tuesday the 30th was also clear and pleasant, an Indian summer day. In the afternoon, the saints were engaged in their daily pursuits, the men in the fields and the shops; the women attending to domestic duties, and the children playing on the banks of the creek. Suddenly Jennings and his force approached at full speed, riding upon the settlement. A brother David Evans perceiving their evil intentions, raised his hands as a sign of peace; but they heeded him not. These Militia men continued their advance and commenced to fire. The stricken people tried to flee, endeavoring to escape as best they could. Some reached the thickets near their homes, and by this means escaped. For lack of time and want of better shelter, several of the brethren and boys rushed into the blacksmith shop, and thus sealed their doom. The cracks between the logs of the shop were so wide that the fiends on the outside could see their victims within. Surrounding the shop, they poured volley after volley through the cracks with deadly effect. Several intended victims attempted to rush from this deathtrap, in the midst of the fire from the mob; some escaped to the thicket, the others were shot. Miss Mary Steadwell while fleeing, was shot in the hand and fainted, falling over a log she remained protected by it. More than twenty musket balls were later discovered in the log. Yet the executioners were seeking for the men and permitted women to escape. After completing all of the murder they could on the outside of the shop, these devils rushed through the door and finished their bloody work. The terrible scene enacted was of the utmost depravity and brutality. In the "History of Caldwell County" is a garbled and unfair account of what the authors are pleased to call the "Mormon War," in which the attempt is made to justify the Missourians in their attacks on the Latter-day Saints as far as they can, and in referring to this massacre they speak of it as a "battle." However, on page 149, is written the following taken from the boastful account by those who took part in the mob:

"Esq. Thomas McBride was an old soldier of the Revolution. He was lying wounded and helpless, his gun by his side. A militiaman named Rogers came up to him and demanded it. 'Take it,' said McBride. Rogers picked up the weapon, and finding that it was loaded, deliberately discharged it into the old man's breast. He then cut and hacked the old veteran's body with a rude sword, or 'corn-knife,' until it was frightfully mangled. Wm. Reynolds, a Livingstone Countyman, killed the little boy Sardius Smith, 10 years of age. The lad had run into the blacksmith shop and crawled under the bellows for safety upon entering the shop the cruel militiaman discovered the cowering, trembling little fellow, and without even demanding his surrender, fired upon and killed him, and afterwards boasted of the atrocious deed to Chas. R. Ross and others. He described, with fiendish glee, how the poor boy struggled in his dying agony, and justified his savage and inhuman conduct in killing a mere child by saying, 'Nits will make lice, and if he had lived he would have been a Mormon.' "

After accomplishing this diabolical slaughter, the militia-mob proceeded to rob the houses, wagons, tents and left the widows and children who escaped destitute of the necessities of life. They even stripped the bodies of the slain, and carried off their booty, shouting in fiendish glee and boasting of their deeds of blood as though they were deeds of valor, worthy of the greatest praise and honor.

The names of those killed are; Thomas McBride, Levi N. Merrick, Elias Benner, Josiah Fuller, Benjamin Lewis, Alexander Campbell, Warren Smith, George S. Richards, William Napier, Augustine Harmer, Simon Cox, Hiram Abbott, John York, John Lee, John Byers, Sardius Smith and Charles Merrick. Some of these were mere children. Many others were severely wounded but managed to escape with their lives among them a boy, Alma Smith, who had the flesh of his hip shot away. He had the presence of mind to lie perfectly still and the fiends thought he was dead. Alma was miraculously healed through prayer and faith and lived to come to Utah.

Garbled accounts of this tragedy were reported to other parts of the state and evidently did not meet with universal approval. The "St. Louis Gazette" of December 10, 1838, published the following:

"Further from the Mormons.—

The account of a bloody butchery of thirty-two Mormons, on Splawn's Creek, is fully confirmed. Two children were killed, we presume by accident. Considerable plunder—such as beds, hats, etc., were taken from the slaughtered. Not one of the assailants was killed or hurt.

"About the time of the surrender, several Mormon houses were burnt in Chariton; and one Mormon who refused to leave, killed.

"At Far West, after the surrender, a Mormon had his brains dashed out, by a man who accused the Mormons of burning his house in Daviess."

The "Missouri Republican," published at Providence, Mo., after quoting the above from the Gazette, published the following in the issue of December 1, 1838.

"We copy the above paragraph from the Gazette of Saturday evening. We are sorry to say, that our own information corroborates the details. For the honor of the State, we could have wished that such savage enormities had not attended a controversy in itself disgraceful enough. We understand that the company engaged in the attack at Splawn's Creek was not attached to any division of the army, but was fighting on its own hook. The men were principally from Chariton County, and amongst the number was at least one member of the Legislature. The enemy had approached within eighty yards of the Mormons before they were appraised of their approach.

"The Mormons had their families with them, and, to preserve their lives, the men separated from them and took refuge in a blacksmith's shop. Here they were murdered! It is said that the Mormons had arms; but it is a little singular that they should have used them so ineffectually as not to have touched one of the assailants. The latter in some instances placed their guns between the logs of the house, and deliberately fired at the victims within. These reports are founded upon statements of persons engaged in the attack; and, bad as they are, are not likely to be overcharged. Will the actors in this tragedy be suffered by the courts of that district to go unpunished?"

Not only did they go unpunished but continued their brutal attacks as part of the militia of the state, and with the approval of the sworn officials of the state, in the endeavor to carry out the edict of the wicked governor, Lilburn W. Boggs.
