Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED THIRTEEN

Persecutions of the Saints

References:

D.H.C. Vol. 3:187-199.

Topics:

1.Gathering of Mob-Militia at Far West. Note 1.

a.General Lucas and his two thousand men.

b.False report as to reason for the gathering of the militia.

c.Their flag of truce sent to the city.

d.Saints desire to know reason for this mob gathering.

e.Their horror when the truth is revealed.

f.Far West militia prepare fortifications.

g.General Atchison dismounted for sympathy for Mormons.

h.Adam Lightner and the Clemensons refuse to leave Far West.

i.Captain Rich fired upon by Bogart.

2.Treachery of Col. George M. Hinkle. Note 2.

a.The second flag of truce sent to Far West.

h.Col. George M. Hinkle's agreement with the mob-militia.

c.The Prophet and others to be surrendered.

d.Property to be confiscated to pay debts of the mob.

e.The saints not taken prisoners to leave the state.

f.The saints to surrender all their arms.

g.The Prophet and brethren under false statement of Hinkle meet Gen. Clark and aids.

h.They are taken prisoners.

i.They are insulted by their guards.

j.Statement of the Prophet regarding abuse.

k.Statement of Parley P. Pratt (See D.H.C. 3:189.)

l.Hyrum Smith taken into the enemy camp.

3.A Mock Court Martial Held. Note 3.

a.Statement in Caldwell County History.

b.General Doniphan given charge of prisoners.

c.Council of field officers demand that brethren be shot.

d.General Doniphan opposes the plan.

e.He is given command to execute the order of this "court."

f.Doniphan's insubordination and boldness.

g.Efficacy of the prisoners' prayers.

h.Bogart's "Delawares" and Odell's "Tigers."

4.Governor Boggs' Second Command to Lucas. Note 4.

a.Boggs reiterates his command of extermination.

b.General Wilson's wish to have the Prophet killed.

c.The governor's second order, and false charges.

d.Caldwell militia surrendered their arms.

e.Fiendish action of the state troops.

f.Touching departure of the Prophet and brethren from their families.

g.Comstock's assignment to watch widows and orphans at Haun's Mill.

h.Ravages of his troops, as reported in Caldwell County History.

Notes

That night the militia of brethren at Far West arranged a temporary fortification of wagons, timber and such other materials available on the south. The sisters were busy gathering up their most valued effects, fearing a terrible battle in the morning. The enemy under arms numbered five to one over the brethren composing the defense. Captain Charles C. Rich was dispatched with a flag of truce towards the camp of the militia to have an interview with Generals Doniphan and Atchison, who had shown some sympathy for the saints. On his way he was fired at by Captain Bogart, but refused to return the fire. He held his interview with Doniphan who informed him that General David R. Atchison had been "dismounted" a few miles back by order of the governor, for being too merciful for and sympathetic with the Mormons. Captain Rich pleaded with Gen. Doniphan to use his influence to protect the city from the attacks, at least until the following morning. Doniphan replied that the governor had ordered the extermination of the Mormons, but this order had not arrived, and until it did there would be no attack upon the saints. He said he could not vouch for the actions of Cornelius Gilliam and his company, which had just arrived, painted and decorated as Indians; their commander styling himself the "Delaware Chief." Gilliam's savages spent the night in making hideous yells and creating other disturbances. Charles C. Rich then returned to Far West and reported to Col. George M. Hinkle, the commander of the defending militia at Far West, who commanded that another messenger go to the mob-militia and plead for the lives of the people. This second appeal was fruitless and it was reported that several members of the Church had been captured and brutally murdered without a sign of protest. Recruits were constantly joining the state forces and since the case of the saints seemed hopeless they resolved to fight as dearly as they could against these overwhelming odds and sell their lives as dearly as circumstances would permit against these legalized ruffians. Among those joining the enemy came Col. Jennings and his band fresh from their conquest and great victory of the massacre of the settlers at Haun's Mill.

New forces of the enemies of the Church were hourly joining the ranks of this state militia. Towards the evening of the 31st the Prophet waited on Col. Hinkle who stated that the officers of the militia desired to have an interview with the Prophet Joseph Smith and some others, hoping that the difficulties might be settled without having occasion to carry into effect the exterminating order which had just been received from the governor. "I immediately complied with the request," said the Prophet, "and in company with Elders Sidney Rigdon and Parley P. Pratt, Colonel Wight and George W. Robinson, went unto the camp of the militia. But judge of my surprise, when, instead of being treated with that respect which is due from one citizen to another, we were taken as prisoners of war, and treated with utmost contempt. The officers would not converse with us, and the soldiers, almost to a man, insulted us as much as they felt disposed, breathing out threats against me and my companions. I cannot begin to tell the scene which I there witnessed. The loud cries and yells of more than one thousand voices, which rent the air and could be heard for miles, and the horrid and blasphemous threats and curses which were poured upon us in torrents, were enough to appall the stoutest heart. In the evening we had to lie down on the cold ground, surrounded by a strong guard, who were only kept back by the power of God from depriving us of life. We petitioned the officers to know why we were thus treated, but they utterly refused to give us any answer, or to converse with us. After we arrived in the camp. Brother Stephen Winchester and eleven other brethren who were prisoners, volunteered, with permission of the officers, to carry Brother Carey into the city to his family, he having lain exposed to the weather for a show to the inhuman wretches, without having his wound dressed or being nourished in any manner. He died soon after he reached home."

Previously we told the story of Brother Carey's brutal treatment. For a vivid description of this treacherous event the story by Elder Parley P. Pratt appearing on page 189, D.H.C. Vol. Three, should be read.

November 1, 1838, Hyrum Smith and Amasa Lyman were brought as prisoners into the camp. The prisoners were placed under a strong guard which blasphemed, mocked the Savior, demanded miracles and said: "Come Mr. Smith, show us an angel; give us one of your revelations; show us a miracle; come, there is one of your brethren in camp whom we took prisoner yesterday in his own house, and knocked his brains out with his own rifle, which we found hanging over his fire place; he lies speechless and dying; speak the word and heal him, and then we will all believe; or if you are apostles or men of God, deliver yourselves and then we will be Mormons." So records Elder Parley P. Pratt. The poor helpless, suffering man referred to by these fiends, was Brother Carey, previously mentioned.

"That night while the prisoners were in Gen. Doniphan's camp, numerous militia officers exclaimed in their hearing that they ought to be killed. It is said that a council of the principal field officers declared that they should be shot the next morning. Of these threats the prisoners had full knowledge, and were not a little uneasy; indeed some of them were much alarmed. The threats were in earnest, too. The militia officers were not trifling; they really wished and intended to kill Smith and his companions in cold blood; and there were many threats and symptoms, that if they were not formally executed they would be assassinated.

"Yielding to the pressure upon him, it is alleged that Gen. Lucas, at about midnight, issued the following order to Gen. Doniphan, in whose keeping the hostages were:—

" 'Brigadier-General Doniphan.—Sir: You will take Joseph Smith and the other prisoners into the public square of Far West, and shoot them at 9 o'clock tomorrow morning.

" 'Samuel D. Lucas

Major-General Commanding.'

"But Gen. Doniphan, in great and righteous indignation, promptly returned the following reply to his superior:—

"It is cold-blooded murder. I will not obey your order. My brigade shall march for Liberty tomorrow morning, at 8 o'clock; and if you execute these men, I will hold you responsible before an earthly tribunal, so help me God!'

"A. W. Doniphan, Brigadier-General."

"The prisoners somehow heard of the order, and kneeled in prayer, and prayed fervently that it might not be executed. And it was not. Flagrantly insubordinate as was Gen Doniphan's refusal, he was never called to account for it. The Mormons have always remembered Gen. Doniphan's humanity on this occasion as well as on others, and when, in 1873, he went to Salt Lake City, he was received with much feeling, and shown every regard and attention by Brigham Young and the other authorities of the Church and city, and even by the masses of the people." (History of Caldwell County, p. 137.)

This history then declares that it was better for the Prophet and his fellow prisoners to submit, or "surrender" to Gen. Lucas than it would have been for them to fall into the hands of "Bogart's and Odell's 'Tigers,' Neil Gilham's 'Delaware Amarugins,' and the Jackson County 'rangers,' " three groups viciously bitter towards the Church.

"The case is now a very plain one—the 'Mormons' must be subdued; and peace restored to the community; you will therefore proceed without delay to execute the former orders. Full confidence is reposed in your ability to do so; your force will be amply sufficient to accomplish the object. Should you need the aid of artillery, I would suggest that an application be made to the commanding officer of Fort Leavenworth, for such as you may need. You are authorized to request the loan of it in the name of the state of Missouri. The ringleaders of this rebellion should be made an example of; and if it should become necessary for the public peace, the 'Mormons' should be exterminated, or expelled from the state." (D.H.C. 3:192.)

This fiend knew perfectly well that the "Mormons" were never in rebellion. They had, however, endeavored, on several occasions, to protect themselves against the savage and brutal attacks which had been made upon them by mob forces. Here he repeats his exterminating order when he knew that the Latter-day Saints were helplessly within the clutches of their bitter enemies who sought their destruction.

The Prophet writes: "This morning (Nov. 1st.) General Lucas ordered the Caldwell militia to give up their arms. Hinkle, having made a treaty with the mob on his own responsibility, to carry out his treachery, marched the troops out of the city, and the brethren gave up their arms, their own property, which no government on earth had a right to require." As soon as this was done the troops, or the Governor's mob, then marched into town, and under pretense of searching for arms, tore up floors, upset haystacks, plundered the most valuable effects they could lay their hands on and destroyed property which they could not carry away. Some of the brethren in the city at the point of the bayonet were forced to sign away their property and to pay the expenses of the mob. But this was not the worst that they did, they desecrated the chastity of women, and took some eighty men prisoners, ordering that all others leave the state and forbidding them to assemble more than three at any one place. The prisoners were taken to the public square, and after much pleading were privileged to see their families under the attention of a strong guard. "I found my wife and children in tears," said the Prophet, "who feared we had been shot by those who had sworn to take our lives, and that they would see me no more. When I entered my house, they clung to my garments, their eyes streaming with tears, while mingled emotions of joy and sorrow were manifest in their countenances. I requested to have a private interview with them for a few minutes, but this privilege was denied me by the guard. I was then obliged to take my departure. Who can realize the feelings which I experienced at that time, to be thus torn from my companion, and leave her surrounded with monsters in the shape of men, and my children, too, not knowing how their wants would be supplied; while I was to be taken far from them in order that my enemies might destroy me when they thought proper to do so. My partner wept, my children clung to me, until they were thrust from me by the swords of the guards. I felt overwhelmed while I witnessed the scene, and could only recommend them to the care of that God whose kindness had followed me to the present time, and who alone could protect them, and deliver me from the hands of my enemies, and restore me to my family." (D.H.C. 3:193.)

Similar scenes were enacted in the homes of the other prisoners. Elder Parley P. Pratt has given an account of his experiences in his "Autobiography," (See also D.H.C. 3:193-4.) and by Lucy Smith in her short history.

In the home of Hyrum Smith were similar scenes. Hyrum Smith was robbed as were the others leaving his family destitute.

Twelve days later, after the prisoners had been taken to Richmond and on the way to Independence, Hyrum's wife Mary Fielding Smith, gave birth to her son Joseph F. While she was confined to her bed the notorious Methodist preacher and mobocrat, Bogart, and his band entered her home seeking for valuables. They broke open a trunk and took important papers, ransacked the house and plundered it. In their search they took a bed that was on the floor and threw it upon another bed upon which the infant lay, thus smothering him until to all appearances he was dead. He wrote of this years later:

"When thought of, and discovered, my existence was supposed to have come to an end; but subsequent events have proved their supposition erroneous, however well founded!" ("Life of Joseph F. Smith," p. 123-124.) There was not one spark of mercy in the souls of these inhuman fiends.

While these dreadful deeds were being enacted, Captain Comstock, one of the commanding officers in the massacre at Haun's Mill, was sent back to that place where, writes the historian of Caldwell County, his company remained in camp "some weeks, watching the widows and orphans of those slain in the massacre, and taking care that no outbreak should occur. While in camp at the mill, according to the statements to the writer of two members of the company (Robt. White and James Trosper), the militia lived off the country, and 'lived fat too.' The Mormon cattle and hogs had been turned into the fields and were fat and fine, the mill furnished plenty of bread-stuffs, and there were other articles of provisions to be had for the asking. The company remained at the mill until peace was entirely restored." (Hist. of Caldwell County, p. 159.)

Of course "peace" was restored when the Latter-day Saints had been driven from the state and their property destroyed or confiscated by their greedy enemies. This kind of treatment was given the members of the Church in all of their settlements. Their cattle were driven off and consumed, their goods confiscated and they were left destitute. It is not to the credit of Missouri that this band of cutthroats should be sent back to the scene of their diabolical butchery to prey upon the widows and the fatherless.
