Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED FOURTEEN

Arrest and Imprisonment of Joseph Smith and Companions

References:

D.H.C. Vol. 3:194-216.

Topics:

1.Prisoners Taken to Independence. Note 1.

a.Brutal treatment given prisoners.

b.The Prophet's revelation assuring protection.

c.Rivalry between Lucas and Clark. (See D.H.C. 3:200. "Life of Joseph Smith"—Cannon, pp. 258-267.)

2.General Wilson's Confessions of Mob Iniquity. Note 2.

a.Wilson talks to prisoners.

b.Boasts of his wicked acts.

c.Acknowledges justice of cause of saints.

3.The Fulfillment of Prophecy. Note 3.

a.Visit to prisoner's camp of curious persons.

b.A lady's questions.

c.The Prophet's answer.

d.He preaches to visitors and guards.

e.Fulfills his prediction.

4.General Clark at Far West. Note 4.

a.He assembles all the brethren.

b.He takes fifty-six prisoners.

c.His diabolical harrangue.

d.He invokes "spirit of unknown God."

e.His threat to exterminate saints.

f.Comments from Caldwell History

g.The governor's instruction to Clark.

5.Ridiculous Charges Against Prisoners. Note 5.

a.Prisoners taken to Richmond by Col. Sterling Price.

b.Prisoners take charge of drunken guards.

c.Prisoners chained together.

d.Charged with treason, murder, arson, etc.

e.Prisoners in Daviess County acquitted by Adam Black.

f.They are ordered from their homes.

Notes

"It was the common talk, and even the boast in the camp, that individuals lay here and there unburied, where they had shot them down for sport. The females they had ravished; the plunder they had taken; the houses they had burned; the horses they had stolen; the fields of grain they had laid waste, were common topics; and were dwelt on for mere amusement, or, as if these deeds were a stepstone to office; and it is a fact that such deeds were so considered. No pen need undertake to describe our feelings during the terrible night, while there confined—not knowing the fate of our wives and children, or of our fellow saints, and seeing no way for our lives to be saved except by the miraculous power of God. But, notwithstanding all earthly hopes were gone, still we felt a calmness indescribable. A secret whispering to our inmost soul seemed to say: 'Peace, my sons, be of good cheer, your work is not yet done; therefore I will restrain your enemies, that they shall not have power to take your lives.' " (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, p. 188.)

The prisoners were under the guard commanded by Lucas and Wilson, two of the most bloodthirsty of the mobbers. Saturday morning, November 3rd, they continued their march, and the Prophet said to the fellow prisoners: "Be of good cheer, brethren; the word of the Lord came to me last night that our lives should be given us, and that whatever we may suffer during this captivity, not one of our lives should be taken." That day they arrived at the Missouri River and were ferried across before all of the troops had crossed. The reason being that there was a rivalry between Generals Clark and Lucas, each wishing to have the prisoners in his hands to exhibit in triumph among the people. The Prophet said: "Clark wanted the privilege of putting us to death himself, and Lucas and his troops were desirous of exhibiting us in the streets of Independence."

"We Jackson County boys know how it is; and, therefore, have not the extremes of hatred and prejudice which characterize the rest of the troops. We know perfectly that from the beginning the Mormons have not been the aggressors at all. As it began in '33 in Jackson County, so it has been ever since. You Mormons were crowded to the last extreme, and compelled to self-defense; and this has been construed into treason, murder and plunder. We mob you without law; the authorities refuse to protect you according to law; you then are compelled to protect yourselves, and we act upon the prejudices of the public, who join our forces, and the whole is legalized for your destruction and our gain. Is not this a shrewd and cunning policy on our part, gentlemen?'

" 'When we drove you from Jackson County, we burned two hundred and three of your houses; plundered your goods; destroyed your press, type, paper, books, office and all—tarred and feathered old Bishop Partridge, as exemplary an old man as you can find anywhere. We shot down some of your men, and, if any of you returned the fire, we imprisoned you, on your trial for murder, etc. Damn'd shrewdly done, gentlemen; and I came damn'd near kicking the bucket myself; for, on one occasion, while we were tearing down houses, driving families, and destroying and plundering goods, some of your good folks put a ball through my son's body, another through the arm of my clerk, and a third pierced my shirt collar and marked my neck. No blame, gentlemen; we deserved it. And let a set of men serve me as your community have been served, and I'll be damn'd if I would not fight till I died.' " (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, pp. 190-1.)

"Gentlemen: You whose names are not attached to this list of names, will now have the privilege of going to your fields to obtain corn for your families, wood, etc. Those that are now taken will go from thence to prison, be tried, and receive the due demerit of their crimes; but you are now at liberty, all but such charges as may be hereafter preferred against. It now devolves upon you to fulfill the treaty that you have entered into, the leading items of which I now lay before you. The first of these you have already complied with, which is, that you deliver up your leading men to be tried according to law. Second, that you deliver up your arms—this had been attended to. The third is, that you sign over your properties to defray the expenses of the war—this you have also done. Another thing yet remains for you to comply with—that is, that you leave the State forthwith; and whatever your feelings concerning this affair, whatever your innocence, it is nothing to me. Gen. Lucas, who is equal in authority with me, has made this treaty with you. I am determined to see it executed. The orders of the Governor to me were, that you should be EXTERMINATED, and not allowed to continue in the State; and had your leaders not been given up, and the treaty complied with, before this, you and YOUR FAMILIES would have been destroyed, and your houses in ashes.

"There is a discretionary power vested in my hands, which I shall try to exercise for a season. I do not say that you shall go now; but you must not think of staying here another season, or of putting in crops; for the moment you do, the citizens will be upon you. I am determined to see the Governor's message fulfilled, but shall not come upon you immediately. Do not think that I shall act as I have done any more—but if I have to come again, because the treaty which you have made here shall be broken, you need not expect any mercy, but extermination, for I am determined the Governor's order shall be executed. As for your leaders, do not once think—do not imagine for a moment—do not let it enter your minds—that they will be delivered, or that you will see their faces again; for their fate is fixed, their die is cast, their doom is sealed.

"I am sorry, gentlemen, to see so great a number of apparently intelligent men found in the situation that you are; and, oh! that I could invoke the spirit of the unknown God to rest upon you, and deliver you from the awful chain of superstition, and liberate you from those fetters of fanaticism with which you are bound. I would advise you to scatter abroad, and never again organize with bishops, presidents, etc., lest you excite the jealousies of the people, and subject yourselves to the same calamities that have now come down upon you. You have always been the aggressors, you have brought upon yourselves these difficulties by being disaffected, and not being subject to rule—and my advice is, that you become as other citizens, lest by a recurrence of these events, you bring upon yourselves irretrievable ruin." ("History of Caldwell County," pp. 140-141. Also D.H.C. 3:200-202-203.)

The writer of this "History of Caldwell County," further says:

"Guards were stationed all about Far West, and none of the inhabitants were allowed to go out on any errand whatever. There was considerable suffering among them on account of the scarcity of wood, corn, and provisions. Many who had abandoned their farms and homes and fled to Far West when the troubles began were in a sad plight. The militia [mob] was foraging liberally upon their crops and likewise upon their flocks and herds, and destroying their property, while they themselves were suffering with hunger and cold. The De Witt refugees had arrived, to the number of some hundreds, and as they were nearly all in want they had to be cared for by their brethren. "(p. 40.)

What a generous thing it was for Gen. Clark to grant them the privilege of going to their fields to obtain corn and to gather wood for their families! And this under guard! This history adds:

"In the consummation of the 'treaty' with Gen. Lucas, and by the orders of Gov. Boggs, when, as a Mormon poet says:—

'The people of Missouri, Like a whirlwind in its fury, And without judge or jury, Drove the saints and spilled their blood.'

there were many distressing scenes. Having been banished from the state they concluded to settle in Illinois, on the Upper Mississippi * * *. In the midst of an inclement winter, in December, 1838, and in January 1839, many of the Mormon men, women and children, the sick and the aged, as well as the young and the strong, were turned out of their homes in this county and Daviess, into the prairies and forests, without food, or sufficient protection from the weather. In some instances in Daviess, their homes were burnt before their eyes and they turned out into the deep snow. Only a few cabins in the southwestern part of Caldwell were burned at this time." (History of Caldwell County, pp.141-142.)

This is the testimony of those who were unfriendly to the saints and who attempted to minimize the evils and condone the offenses of these brutal mobbers as far as it possibly could be done.

The governor also wrote to Gen. Clark and said:

"It will also be necessary that you hold a military court of inquiry in Daviess county, and arrest the Mormons who have been guilty of the late outrages, committed towards the inhabitants of said county. My instructions to you are to settle this whole matter completely, if possible, before you disband your forces; if the Mormons are disposed voluntarily to leave the state, of course it would be advisable in you to promote that object, in any way deemed proper. The ringleaders of this rebellion, though, ought by no means to be permitted to escape the punishment they merit." (D.H.C. 3:204.)

After arriving in Richmond the prisoners had an interview with Gen. Clark. They asked him to tell them the reason why they had been carried from their homes, and what were the charges made against them. He replied that he was not able at that time to determine the charges, but would let them know in a short time. While they awaited some action, Gen. Clark who was an attorney, searched through the laws trying to find some authority by which the brethren could be tried. He also wrote to the attorney-general for aid. Finally he reached his conclusion and sent a very strange legal message to Governor Boggs in which he said:

"Detained General White and his field offices here a day or two for the purpose of holding a court martial, if necessary. I this day made out charges against the prisoners, and called on Judge King to try them as a committing court; and I am now busily engaged in procuring witnesses and submitting facts. There being no civil officers in Caldwell, I have to use the military to get witnesses from there, which I do without reserve. The most of the prisoners here I consider guilty of treason; and I believe will be convicted; and the only difficulty in law is, can they be tried in any county but Caldwell? If not, they cannot be there indicted, until a change of population. In the event the latter view is taken by the civil courts, I suggest the propriety of trying Jo Smith and those leaders taken by Gen. Lucas by a court martial, for mutiny. This I am in favor of only as dernier resort. I would have taken this course with Smith at any rate; but it being doubtful whether a court martial has jurisdiction or not in the present case—that is, whether these people are to be treated as in time of war, and the mutineers as having mutinied, in time of war—and I would here ask you to forward to me the attorney-general's opinion on this point. It will not do to allow these leaders to return to their treasonable work again, on account of their not being indicted in Caldwell. They have committed treason, murder, arson, burglary, robbery, larceny and perjury." (D.H.C. 3:206-7.)

'While all of this was going on, the brethren residing at Adam-ondi-Ahman were taken to trial before Adam Black, and all were acquitted. However, General Wilson ordered every family out of the settlement in ten days, with permission to tarry in Caldwell until spring, and then leave the state under the extermination edict. In order to comply with Wilson's orders, these destitute people had to forsake what was left of their crops, their houses and much of their substance, and live in tents in the severe inclement winter weather. "As for their flocks and herds, the mob had relieved them from the trouble of taking care of them, or from the pain of seeing them starve to death—by stealing them." (D.H.C. 3:207.) This brutal treatment is admitted by the compilers of the Missouri history. After the removal the very kind and considerate general, who had admitted murdering members of the Church, robbing them and driving them from their homes, granted that a committee of twelve might go from Far West to Daviess County, for the term of four weeks, for the purpose of conveying their crops from Daviess to Caldwell. The members of this committee were to wear white badges on their hats as a means of protection against mob abuse.
