Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED FIFTEEN

The Mock Trial in Richmond—The Prophet in Liberty Jail

References:

D.H.C. Vol. 3:200-216.

Topics:

1.Majesty In Chains.

a.Prisoners in Richmond prison. Note 1.

b.They are insulted and abused by their guards.

c.The filthy boasting of the guards.

d.The Prophet's rebuke.

e.Its effect on the guards.

2.Clark's Decision to Try Prisoners by Civil Court. Note 2.

a.They are taken before mobocrat Judge Austin A. King.

b.False testimony of apostates.

c.Leaders of the mob forces testify.

d.Defense witnesses thrown into jail.

e.Defense witnesses who testified to flee their enemies.

3.Daniel's Prophecy Used Against the Church. Note 3.

a.A court of inquisition.

b.To believe that God will set up a kingdom construed as treason.

c.The lawyer's comment.

d.Parley P. Pratt's comments.

4.Joseph Smith and Companions Committed to Liberty Jail. Note 4.

a.Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon and others taken to Liberty.

b.Parley P. Pratt, Morris Phelps, and others confined in Richmond.

c.Pleading of Mr. Arthur for justice for the saints.

d.The order of commitment.

e.Saints forced to leave Daviess County.

Notes

"During this time Elder Rigdon was taken very sick, from hardship and exposure, and finally lost his reason; but still he was kept in a miserable, noisy and cold room, and compelled to sleep on the floor with a chain and padlock around his ankle, and fastened to six others. Here he endured the constant noise and confusion of an unruly guard, the officer of which was Colonel Sterling Price, since governor of the state.

"These guards were composed generally of the most noisy, foul-mouthed, vulgar, disgraceful rabble that ever defiled the earth.**. In one of these tedious nights we had lain as if in sleep till the hour of midnight had passed, and our ears and hearts had been pained, while we had listened for hours to the obscene jests, the horrid oaths, the dreadful blasphemies and filthy language of our guards, Colonel Price at their head, as they recounted to each other their deeds of rapine, murder, robbery, etc., which they had committed among the 'Mormons' while at Far West and vicinity. They even boasted of defiling by force wives, daughters and virgins, and of shooting or dashing out the brains of men, women and children.

"I had listened till I became so disgusted, shocked, horrified, and so filled with the spirit of indignant justice that I could scarcely refrain from rising upon my feet and rebuking the guards; but had said nothing to Joseph, or to any one else, although I lay next to him and knew he was awake. On a sudden he arose to his feet, and spoke in a voice of thunder, or as the roaring lion, uttering, as near as I can recollect, the following words:

"SILENCE, ye fiends of the infernal pit. In the name of Jesus Christ I rebuke you, and command you to be still; I will not live another minute and hear such language. Cease such talk, or you or I die THIS INSTANT!

"He ceased to speak. He stood erect in terrible majesty. Chained, and without a weapon; calm, unruffled and dignified as an angel, he looked upon the quailing guards, whose weapons were lowered or dropped to the ground; whose knees smote together, and who, shrinking into a corner, or crouching at his feet, begged his pardon, and remained quiet till a change of guards.

"I have seen the ministers of justice, clothed in magisterial robes, and criminals arraigned before them, while life was suspended on a breath, in the courts of England; I have witnessed a Congress in solemn session to give laws to nations; I have tried to conceive of kings, of royal courts, of thrones and crowns; and of emperors assembled to decide the fate of kingdoms; but dignity and majesty have I seen but once, as it stood in chains, at midnight, in a dungeon in an obscure village of Missouri." ("Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt," pp. 210-11.)

"This Court of Inquisition inquired diligently into our belief of the seventh chapter of Daniel concerning the kingdom of God, which should subdue all other kingdoms and stand forever. And when told that we believed in that prophecy, the Court turned to the clerk and said: 'Write that down; it is a strong point for treason.' Our lawyer observed as follows:

'Judge, you had better make the Bible treason.' The Court made no reply.

"These texts and many others were inquired into with all the eagerness and apparent alarm which characterized a Herod of old in relation to the babe of Bethlehem, the King of the Jews.

"The ancient Herod, fearing a rival in the person of Jesus, issued his exterminating order for the murder of all the children of Bethlehem from two years old and under, with a view to hinder the fulfillment of a prophecy which he himself believed to be true. The modern Herod (Boggs) fearing a rival kingdom in 'the people of the Saints of the Most High,' issued his exterminating order for the murder of the young children of an entire people, and of their mothers as well as fathers, while this Court of Inquisition inquired as diligently into the one prophecy as his predecessor did into the other.' ("Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, pp.)

November 29, 1838, Mr. M. Arthur of Liberty, wrote to the representatives from Clay County in the Missouri Legislature, pleading the cause of the Latter-day Saints and calling upon these members of the legislature to stand for the right and endeavor to re-instate the Mormons on their lands. The full text of this communication is found in the history, volume 3, pages 213-214. In part Mr. Arthur said:

"RESPECTED FRIENDS:—Humanity to an injured people prompts me at present to address you thus: You were aware of the treatment (to some extent before you left home) received by that unfortunate race of beings called the Mormons, from Daviess, in the form of human beings inhabiting Daviess, Livingston, and part of Ray counties; not being satisfied with relinquishment of all their rights as citizens and human beings, in the treaty forced upon them by General Lucas, by giving up their arms, and throwing themselves upon the mercy of the state, and their fellow citizens generally, hoping thereby protection of their lives and property, they are now receiving treatment from those demons, that makes humanity shudder, and the cold chills run over any man, not entirely destitute of the feelings of humanity. These demons are now constantly strolling up and down Caldwell County, in small companies armed, insulting the women in any way and every way, and plundering the poor devils of all the means of subsistence (scanty as it was) left them, and driving off their horses, cattle, hogs, etc., and rifling their houses and farms of everything therein, taking beds, bedding, wardrobes, and such things as they see they want, leaving the poor Mormons in a starving and naked condition.

"These are facts I have from authority that cannot be questioned, and can be maintained and substantiated at any time. There is now a petition afloat in our town, signed by the citizens of all parties and grades, which will be sent you in a few days, praying the legislature to make some speedy enactment applicable to their case. They are entirely willing to leave our state, so soon as this inclement season is over; and a number have already left, and are leaving daily, scattering themselves to the four winds of the earth."

Mr. Arthur closes his article with a recommendation that steps be taken to restore the arms taken from the stricken people so that they might protect themselves against this savage thievery and abuse.

The attested copy of the mittimus, under which Joseph Smith and companions were sent to the jailer at Liberty is as follows:

"State of Missouri) Ray County ) "To the Keeper of the Jail of Clay County:

"GREETINGS: Whereas, Joseph Smith, Jun., Hyrum Smith, Lyman Wight, Alexander McRae, and Caleb Baldwin, as also Sidney Rigdon, have been brought before me, Austin A. King, judge of the fifth Judicial circuit in the state of Missouri, and charged with the offense of treason against the state of Missouri, and the said defendants, on their examination before me being held to answer further to said charge, the said Joseph Smith, Jun., Hyrum Smith, Lyman Wight, Alexander McRae, and Caleb Baldwin, to answer in the county of Daviess, and the said Sidney Rigdon to answer further in the county of Caldwell, for said charge of treason, and there being no jail in said counties; these are therefore to command that you receive the said Joseph Smith, Jun., Hyrum Smith, Lyman Wight, Alexander McRae, Caleb Baldwin, and Sidney Rigdon into your custody in the jail of the said county of Clay, there to remain until they be delivered therefrom by due course of law.

"Given under my hand and seal the 29th day of November, 1838.

"Austin A. King."

"State of Missouri, County of Clay.

"I, Samuel Hadley, sheriff of Clay county, do hereby certify that the above is a true copy of the mittimus to me, directed in the cases therein named.

Samuel Hadley, Jailer. "By Samuel Tillery, Deputy Jailer." "Clay County, Missouri."

December 1, 1838, a committee of members of the Church and citizens of Daviess County, met at Adam-ondi-Ahman, where the following proposition was made and accepted.

"First—That the Mormon committee be allowed to employ, say twenty teamsters for the purpose of hauling off their property.

"Second—That the Mormon committee collect whatever stock they may have in Daviess County at some point, and some two or three of the Daviess County committee be notified to attend for the purpose of examining said stock, and convey or attend the Mormon committee out of the limits of the county; and it is further understood, that the Mormon committee is not to drive or take from this county any stock of any description, at any other time, nor under any other circumstances, than these mentioned.

"As witness our hands. "William P.Peniston "Dr. K. Kerr "Adam Black, Committee

"The above propositions were made and agreed to by the undersigned committee on the part of the Mormons."

"Wm. Huntington, "B. S. Wilbur, "J. H. Hale, "Henry Herriman, "Z. Wilson."

Thus the members of the Church, under pressure from mobs, assisted by the sworn officials of the state of Missouri, were forced to sign such a document, and abandon their homes in a land dedicated to liberty and the inherent rights of every individual.
