Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED SIXTEEN

The Case of the Saints before the Missouri Legislature

References:

D.H.C. Vol. 3:217-247.

Topics:

1.The Case of the Saints Before the Legislature. Note 1.

a.Governor Boggs' report to the legislature.

b.Petition of Brigham Young and others.

c.Mr. Turner's committee report.

2.Action of the Legislature on the Petition. Note 2.

a.Petition presented by John Corrill.

b.John Corrill's departure from the Church.

c.Vicious opposition raised against the petition.

d.The voice of defense.

3.The Two Thousand Dollar "Gift." Note 3.

a.A Hypocritical show of generosity.

b.How the funds were distributed.

c.John Taylor's comment.

d.Two hundred thousand dollars for the mob.

e.Comments from state newspapers.

4.The Loss Sustained by the Church. Note 4.

a.The estimated amount of the loss.

b.The appeal to congress.

c.Added expense for legal aid.

d.No remuneration offered for the loss.

5.Bill for Investigation Presented to the Legislature. Note 5.

a.Mr. Campbell's resolution.

b.Mr. Turner's bill for an investigation.

c.Injustice of this measure.

d.The Prophet's comment on this injustice.

e.The Prophet's petition to the legislature.

Notes

The committee recommended, therefore, to each house for adoption the following resolutions:

"Resolved, That it is inexpedient at this time, to prosecute further the inquiry into the causes of the late disturbances and the conduct of the military operations in suppressing them.

"Resolved, That it is inexpedient to publish at this time, any of the documents accompanying the governor's message in relation to the late disturbances.

"Resolved, That it is expedient to appoint a joint committee, composed of— senators,—and,—representatives, to investigate the cause of said disturbances, and the conduct of the military operations in suppressing them, to meet at such time, and to be invested with such powers as may be prescribed by law." (D.H.C., p. 238.)

Mr. Ashley, from Livingston, said the petition was false from beginning to end, and that himself and the Mormons could not live together, for he would always be found fighting against them, and one or the other must leave the state. He said he was present at the Haun's Mill massacre, and boasted that he saw Jack Rogers cut up McBride with a corn-cutter. It seems rather strange that this man would deny the veracity of the brethren making this report and then boast of his own misdeeds in a mob massacre of innocent men and of seeing and approving the cutting up of a helpless old man with a corn-cutter, and not being rebuked by his fellow legislators.

John Corrill presented facts with which he was acquainted, contradicting statements by Mr. Childs, and said that there could not be established one single crime against the Mormons while in Jackson County. Representative Young of Lafayette, spoke very bitterly against the petition of our brethren. One aged member from St. Charles, moved that the petition and other matters pertaining to this question be referred to a select committee. He said in answer to Mr. Childs and Mr. Young that they were opposed to this petition being considered because they were afraid that their evil deeds would be brought to light, and their attitude proved to him that the petition was true. Mr. Redman of Howard County, spoke at length in favor of a speedy investigation of the whole matter and added, "The governor's order has gone forth, and the Mormons are leaving; hundreds are waiting to cross the Mississippi River, and by and by they are gone, and our state is blasted; her character is gone; we gave them no chance for a fair investigation. The state demands of us that we give them a speedy investigation."

Mr. Gyer, from St. Louis, agreed with remarks of Mr. Redman and said the committee should have power to call witnesses from any part of the state, and defend them; and unless the governor's order was rescinded, he for one would leave the state. There were other gentlemen who expressed their indignation in similar manner. The testimony to be considered by the committee of investigation, was the governor's orders, General Clark's reports, the report of the ex parte trial at Richmond, and "a lot of papers signed by nobody, given to nobody, and directed to nobody, containing anything our enemies were disposed to write."

The petition of our brethren, which appears on pages 217-224, volume three of the History, and the Turner Committee Report, found on pages 235-238, of the same History, should be carefully read. After a long and continuous session of angry disputation, and because the papers were circulating the actions of the legislature, and, no doubt thinking it the easiest way out, a motion was taken that the petition be laid on the table "until the 4th day of July next,"—Independence day, which, of course meant that it would never be considered as that was a day when the legislature would not meet. In the senate January 16, 1839, Mr. Turner introduced a measure "to provide for the investigation of the late disturbances in this state." This bill passed the Senate, but when it came to the House, February 4th, it received the same kind of treatment that the petition received in the House, and it was moved and carried that it be laid on the table to be taken up July 4, 1839. In this way the investigation of the wrongs of our people met its fate. This was done, however, over the vigorous protest of David R. Atchison and some others who felt that a great injustice had been committed by the state against the Latter-day Saints. This motion prevailed with a majority of eleven votes.

Elder John Taylor, speaking of this outrageous action has said:

"The legislature of Missouri, to cover their infamy, appropriated the munificent (?) sum of $2000, to help the suffering 'Mormons.' Their agent took a few miserable traps, the sweepings of an old store; for the balance of the patrimony he sent into Daviess county and killed our hogs, which we were then prevented from doing, and brought them to feed the poor 'Mormons' as part of the legislative appropriation. This I saw." (D.H.C. p. 243.)

We are grateful to know that there were some honorable men in that legislature. These were the members from St. Louis and Boon, Messrs Rollins and Gorden, and David R. Atchison of Clay and a few others from other counties removed from the seat of the trouble. To add to the insult heaped upon our people, this same legislature appropriated two hundred thousand dollars to pay the mob-militia for their part in murdering and driving the Latter-day Saints from their homes and destroying their homes and other property, and then driving them from the borders of the state.

The history states: "Many of the state journals tried to hide the iniquity of the state by throwing a covering of lies over her atrocious deeds. But can they hide the governor's cruel order of banishment or extermination? Can they conceal the facts of the disgraceful treaty of the generals with their own officers and men at the city of Far West? Can they conceal the fact that twelve or fifteen thousand men, women and children, have been banished from the state without trial or condemnation? And this at an expense of two hundred thousand dollars—and this sum appropriated by the state legislature, in order to pay the troops for this act of lawless outrage? Can they conceal the fact that we have been imprisoned for many months, while our families, friends and witnesses have been driven away? Can they conceal the blood of the murdered husband and fathers, or stifle the cries of the widows and the fatherless? Nay! The rocks and mountains may cover them in unknown depths, the awful abyss of the fathomless deep may swallow them up, and still their horrid deeds will stand forth in the broad light of day, for the wondering gaze of angels and of men! They cannot be hid." (D.H.C. 3:244.)

The Prophet and his brethren paid in addition to all of this in lawyers fees, for the defense of the people and themselves, against these malicious and unhallowed persecutions about fifty thousand dollars; without receiving any substantial benefit. For all of this evil inflicted the generous (?) state of Missouri as a pretense and to advertise to the world their charity and kindness towards the Latter-day Saints whom they had unmercifully robbed, beaten and killed, appropriated the munificent (?) sum of two thousand dollars! And this was received back into the coffers of the brutal human beasts for furnishing to the Saints meat from their own animals and a scanty supply of their own spoiled goods for which the Saints were charged double prices. This generous act, of course was heralded to the world, but it was without the blaring of trumpets that they put forth the sum of two hundred thousand dollars to pay the "troops" who carried out the orders of the governor to drive all the "Mormons" from the state or exterminate them.

"Resolved by the Senate, the House of Representatives concurring therein, that the three resolutions of the 18th of December be referred to a joint committee of the two Houses, heretofore raised, on the subject of the Mormon difficulties, with the instructions to report a bill in conformity thereto, as soon as they can conveniently prepare the same; which was agreed to." (D.H.C. p. 246.)

Wednesday, January 16, 1839, Mr. Turner, from the joint committee, introduced "A bill to provide for the investigation of the late disturbances in this state." This bill contained twenty three sections. This investigating committee was to be composed of two senators and three representatives. They were to meet in Richmond, Ray County, the first Monday in May, and thereafter at such times and places as they should appoint. They were to choose a chairman, clerk, sergeant-at-arms and assistants; issue subpoenas and other processes; administer oaths, keep a record; furnish rooms; pay witnesses one dollar and fifty cents per day out of the treasury; receive their pay as members of' the legislature; clerk four dollars per day, and one dollar and fifty cents for each arrest.

The Prophet's comment on this action is significant, as follows."

"In short, all parties concerned were to be paid the highest price—and this committee were to be clothed with all the powers of the highest courts of record. This bill did not concern the 'Mormons,' as the exterminating order of Governor Boggs, and the action of General Clark thereon, would compel all the saints to be out of the state before the court would sit, so that they would have no testimony but from mobbers and worse, apostates; and this was evidently their object in postponing the time so long." (D.H.C. p. 247.)

These honorable gentlemen well knew that the Latter-day Saints at that particular time had been driven from their homes; many of them had reached the state of Illinois and those who remained were eagerly—because they were forced—striving in their poverty to reach more friendly borders.

January 14th, the Prophet petitioned the legislature, writing from Liberty Jail, in which he endeavored to bring to the attention of this official body, other matters not included in the petition of his brethren. He mentioned the fact that he and others were then in prison awaiting trial on these serious charges. He asked for a fair trial, not the sympathy of anyone, but justice and a fair trial they merited. He said he well knew that the people of the state were not prejudiced in their favor. They had not received impartial justice at the court of Austin A. King, who had aided in the excitement against them. This petition was extremely mild in its tone, considering all that the Prophet and his fellows had suffered at the hands of these wicked men. This letter was directed to James M. Hughs of the house of representatives, with the request: "Will you be so kind as to present this to the House. The community here would, I believe, have no objection for the trial of these men being transferred to St. Louis."—P.H.B."

We do not know what these initials stand for, perhaps from secret friends of the Prophet well known by Mr. Hughes. A careful reading of the Prophet's petition will be profitable. (See D.H.C. 3:247.)
