Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEEN

Suffering in Liberty Prison

References:

D.H.C., Vol. 3:234, 256, 263, 264, 308, 310, 317, 319, 321, 404-424.

Topics:

1.Ill-Treatment of Prisoners on Way to Independence. Note 1.

a.Brethren forced to sleep on ground.

b.They are exhibited to curious people.

c.Intention of guards to slay them on way to Richmond.

d.They are saved by vanity of Gen. Clark.

2.Clark Selects Men to Murder the Prisoners. Note 2.

a.Preparations for murder of the prisoners.

b.Jedediah M. Grant's influence and intervention.

c.Brutal treatment in Liberty jail.

d.Release of Sidney Rigdon.

3.A "Concocted Scheme." Note 3.

a.Statement of Jailer Tillery.

b.Plot prepared by governor and state officers to drive saints from Missouri.

c.The governor's fear and wish for escape of prisoners.

d.Prisoners taken to Daviess County for mock trial.

e.Depravity of judge and jurors.

4.A Change of Venue. Note 4.

a.Prisoners given change of venue for Boon County.

b.The Sheriff notifies prisoners that they may escape.

c.The drunken Guards.

d.The prisoners "escape."

e.Why they were released.

f.They arrive in Illinois.

g.A chapter without a parallel. Note 5.

Notes

The second day they were permitted to go to the tavern to eat and remain for two days when word came from General Clark that they should be taken back to Richmond, where Clark with his army awaited their arrival. The prisoners were informed by General Wilson, that it was understood by the soldiers that the prisoners would be hung on the road to that place, but this demand by Clark who held seniority—prevented that, and that it was Clark's prerogative to execute them himself, and Wilson would give them up into Clark's hands and he might do with them as he pleased. The prisoners started for Richmond with new officers, Col. Sterling Price in command and they arrived Friday evening, November 9th and were thrust into an old log house with a strong guard placed over them. Thirty minutes after their arrival a man came in with chains and padlocks and put the brethren in chains, and they were chained together. General Clark came in but refused to answer their questions as to why they were being so badly treated. The food served them was unfit and they had to eat it with their fingers and teeth.

The young man who performed this service was Jedediah M. Grant, father of President Heber J. Grant, and brother-in-law to William Smith. Fortunately these mobbers did not know him. After the trial in Richmond, Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Lyman Wight, Alexander McRae and Caleb Baldwin, were ordered by the mobber-judge King to be taken and confined in Liberty jail to await trial on the trumped up charges. On the way they were again exhibited to the inhabitants as though they were some kind of strange beasts going to a menagerie. At Liberty they were thrust in jail again where they spent some six months undergoing the most cruel and inhuman treatment. Poison was administered to them in their food on several occasions, but the promise of the Lord was fulfilled. The effect the poison had upon their bodies was that they would be forced to vomit severely and then they would be left in a torpid state, "not even caring or wishing for life," the poison was administered in too large a dose, or it could have proved fatal but that they had the help of the Lord. They were sure, also, that they had been furnished human flesh on several occasions, for the space of five days, or go without food, except that they had some corn bread. The brethren refused to partake of this flesh having the inspiration to know what it was, and they heard the guards state that they had fed their prisoners on "Mormon beef." Hyrum Smith in his affidavit before the court in Nauvoo in June 1843, said: "I have described the appearance of this flesh to several experienced physicians and they have decided that it was human flesh. We learned afterwards, by one of the guards, that it was supposed that this act of savage cannibalism in feeding us with human flesh would be considered a popular deed of notoriety; but the people, on learning that it would not take, tried to keep it secret; but the fact was noised abroad before they took the precaution."

This treatment was so severe on Sidney Rigdon, who was a much older man, that he temporarily lost his reason and became so ill that the fiends considered it better to release him. Therefore an order was issued by Judge Turnham, admitting Sidney Rigdon to bail, but the feeling was so high that he had to do this at night and unknown to any of the citizens or they would have killed him. As for the rest of the prisoners he dared not let them go for if he did his own life would have been taken by the anger of the mob. "He said it was damned hard to be confined under such circumstances, for he knew we were innocent men and he said the people also knew it; and that it was only a persecution, and treachery, and the scene of Jackson County acted over again, for fear that we should become too numerous in that upper country. He said that the plan was concocted from the governor down to the lowest judge and that damned Baptist priest, Riley, who was riding into town every day to watch the people, stirring up the minds of the people against us all he could, exciting them and stirring up their religious prejudices against us, for fear they would let us go." (Affidavit of Hyrum Smith.) President Rigdon got no bail; but was assisted out of the jail by the guard and told to get out as fast as he could. He was met by friends who were waiting for him and after carefully working his way arrived safely in Illinois, where he was joined by his family.

These same men sat as the jury in the day and were the guards at night. They tantalized their prisoners by relating their great deeds at Haun's Mill, and their murders and rapes at other places during what the governor and some of his general aids were pleased to call "the Mormon War." These devils told how many houses they had burned, how many sheep, cattle and hogs they had driven off belonging to the "Mormons." They boasted of the rapes they had committed going into details in relation to their filthy deeds. These things related by them are too horrible to relate, and I leave them to the imagination. For days these filthy acts and wicked deeds were repeated in the ears of the brethren. This grand jury also celebrated their achievements by drinking grog and in singing filthy songs and damning all religions, doubly so the Mormons, and cursing our Savior in the most hellish language. They would slap their hands and shout, "Hosanna! Hosanna! Glory to God!" and then fall down on their backs and kick with their feet a few moments and then would pretend to have swooned into a glorious trance, after the fashion of some camp meetings. Then they would pretend to come out of the trance and would shout again and slap their hands and jump up, while one would take a bottle of whisky and pour it down the other's necks, crying, "Damn it, take it: you must take it." If one refused to drink they would force it down him and "what did not go down on the inside went down on the outside." This was the nature of the actions of this grand jury in Daviess County, and all of this in the presence of Judge Birch. These filthy men tiring of this condition, eventually, after ten days of this drunken wickedness, informed the brethren they were accused of the same "treason, murder, arson, larceny, theft, and stealing."

Three of the other guards also drank freely of the whiskey sweetened with honey, then they went to bed, and were soon asleep, and the other guard went with the brethren and helped them to saddle their horses. Two of the brethren mounted the horses, and the other three went on foot, and instead of going to Boone County they turned their course towards the state of Illinois. Nine days later they arrived safe at Quincy, Adams County, where they found their families in a state of poverty but in good health, they having been driven from Missouri by the murderous mob-militia under the orders of the chief executive of the state of Missouri.

It was not until after these Missourian bandits and murderers had sought for every excuse available for the condemnation and murder of these prisoners; and not until the question of their illegal imprisonment, and the wicked treatment of the Latter-day Saints began to be circulated throughout the land, that there came an effort to release them; not honorably with a fair trial, but with cunning plans to make it appear that they had broken jail and had fled from justice. It was because these conspirators became alarmed that they took the course they did. It was not because of repentance, for in their hearts they were as bitter as ever. It was the fear of public sentiment setting in when the truth became sufficiently known.

One thing that hastened this action was the fact that the governor of Iowa, Robert Lucas, wrote and spoke in a vehement manner against the treatment of the saints, and he invited them to find refuge within the borders of his state. Others likewise condemned the authorities in Missouri for their inhuman actions, and other invitations were extended the downtrodden people to make settlements in more peaceful and christian parts of the land.

Parley P. Pratt and the brethren in prison with him in Richmond, also escaped, having suffered the same indignities and persecutions. April 24, 1839, after six months in prison awaiting trial for crimes they did not commit, they were again taken before the same notorious judge, Austin A. King. Norman Shearer and Darwin Chase, who were but boys, were released, and King Follett, an aged man, was added to the list of prisoners. A change of venue having been granted them, they were taken to Columbia, Boone County, and again cast into prison. In the meantime one of their number, Luman Gibbs had apostatized, hoping to gain his liberty, but the cunning enemies kept him in prison after that to spy on his former companions. July 4, 1839, Elders Pratt, Phelps and Follett, assisted on the outside by Orson Pratt and a young man named John W. Clark, brother-in-law to Brother Phelps, escaped in a very thrilling manner. Elder Follett was captured, but the other brethren made good their escape and after many difficulties made their way to Illinois and the presence of their families. Elder Follett was taken back and put in chains, but in the course of a month or more the charges against him were dismissed, and he was set free.

This is a chapter in the history of the United States which has no parallel. Not only were the appeals made by the Prophet and his brethren to the state for justice ignored, but likewise their appeals to the government of the United States for protection went unheeded and were ignored. We know that there is one court of justice which one day will be convened, where the innocent will be the accusers and the guilty will receive the merits of their wicked deeds. There is an eternal law of retribution. It appears at times to be very slow of action; but it is sure. Justice cannot be robbed of her balances and they will measure accurately the deeds of all men, and every man will receive his just reward.
