Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEEN

Prayer and Prophecies in Prison

References:

D.H.C. Vol. 3:285-296.

D. & C. Section 121.

Topics:

1.An Appeal to the Lord for Deliverance. Note 1.

a.Correspondence to and from the Prophet while in Liberty prison.

b.Extreme suffering of the prisoners.

c.The Prophet seeks to know how long they are to suffer.

2.The Answer of the Lord. Note 2.

a.The Prophet's suffering but a "small moment."

b.Patient suffering will bring exaltation and triumph over foes.

c.His suffering not like Job's, because friends did not forsake him.

d.His enemies to be blasted.

e.All who "lift the heel" against the anointed to be despised.

f.A time appointed for the judgment.

3.Knowledge to be Given to the Righteous. Note 3.

a.All things to be revealed.

b.According to the decree in the councils of the Eternal God of all other Gods.

4.Many are Called but Few are Chosen. Note 4.

a.Why many are not chosen.

b.Rights of Priesthood inseparably connected with heaven.

c.Most men disposed to abuse authority.

d.No power or influence can be maintained except by virtue of Priesthood and love.

5.Charity Towards All Men Required. Note 5.

a.Love even in reproof necessary.

b.Charity towards all men.

c."Let virtue garnish thy thoughts."

d.The Holy Ghost the constant companion of the faithful.

Notes

In his anguish the Savior cried unto his Father while on the cross. In his anguish yet pleading not so much for himself as for his afflicted brethren, the Prophet also cried in earnest pleading: "O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place?" Did he feel that he had been forsaken? This he alone can answer. Yet his trust was in the Lord for all other help had failed him. Earnestly he pleaded: "How long shall thy hand be stayed, and thine eye, yea thy pure eye, behold from the eternal heavens the wrongs of thy people and of thy servants, and thine ear be penetrated with their cries?" It was his people for whom he plead, more than for himself. "Yea, O Lord, how long shall they suffer these wrongs and unlawful oppressions, before thine heart shall be softened toward them, and thy bowels be moved with Compassion toward them?" Remember thy suffering saints, O our God; and thy servants will rejoice in thy name forever."

"Wo unto all those that discomfort my people, and drive, and murder, and testify against them, saith the Lord of Hosts; a generation of vipers shall not escape the damnation of hell." The eyes of the Lord were upon them and their works, and for them there was reserved a swift judgment, "For there is a time appointed for every man, according as his works shall be."

From the very beginning Satan through his emissaries, has endeavored to destroy this work and to stop the Church from receiving revelation. The Lord has given to the Church knowledge and guidance constantly suited to their advancement. There is much that is still held in store, many great and important truths, when we are prepared to receive them. The Lord has promised to give revelation "and commandments not a few," to the faithful who are diligent before the Lord. (D. & C. 59:4.)

There are many who are called to serve in the kingdom of God. The Priesthood has been conferred upon a multitude of brethren, but out of this multitude only those will be chosen who endure in faith to the end. The Lord has never promised to those who are unfaithful, who have received the call and appointment but have not endured, that they shall receive the blessing. While there are many who seemingly feel this to be the case, only those who serve and are faithful shall be chosen. The reason why so many fall away is explained to be, "because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and aspire to the honors of men, that they do not learn this one lesson.—

"That the rights of the Priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness.

"That they may be conferred upon us, it is true; but when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, our vain ambition, or exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness, behold the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man."

Most men are inclined to abuse authority, especially those who wield it who are the least prepared to hold positions of trust. It has been the characteristic of men in power to use that power to gratify their own pride and vain ambitions. More misery has come to the inhabitants of this world through the exercise of authority by those who least deserved it, than from almost any other cause. Rulers of kingdoms in the past have oppressed their subjects and where they had the power they have sought to increase their dominions. We have had some horrible examples of mis-placed ambition which, in recent years, placed the very existence of humanity in peril. These conditions still prevail in high places bringing fear and consternation to the troubled world.

There should not, however, be any of this unrighteous ambition within the Church, but everything should be done in the spirit of love and humility. When writing this epistle the Prophet called attention by prophetic words to this as follows:

"We have learned by sad experience that it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion.

"Hence many are called, but few are chosen.

"No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the Priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned; by kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile.

"Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou has reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy.

"That he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death." (vs. 39-44.)

Men must learn to possess humility, brotherly kindness, patience and godliness, in order to exercise properly the powers of the Priesthood.

"Let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household of faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distill upon thy soul as the dews from heaven.

"The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever."
