Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 3 ( 1948)

LESSON ONE HUNDRED NINETEEN

Prayer and Prophecy in Prison (2)

References:

D.H.C. Vol. 3:296-305.

D. & C. Sections 122-123.

Topics:

1.Ends of the Earth to Inquire after Name of Joseph Smith.

a.Pure in heart and the wise to seek counsel. Note 1.

b.Saints never to be turned against him by testimony of traitors. Note 2.

c.His voice to be more terrible than the voice of the fierce lion.

d.The trials and accusations were to give him experience.

2.The Son of Man Suffered and Descended Below Them All. Note 3.

a.The suffering of our Lord far greater than the suffering of any other.

b.Priesthood to remain with Joseph Smith.

c.His days numbered.

3.Saints Called on to Gather Facts of Sufferings. Note 4.

a.Information concerning all the facts of suffering to be gathered.

b.Also an account of all damage and loss of property.

c.Also the names of all oppressors of the saints.

d.Also libelous articles in magazines, histories and other publications.

e.Reason for this action. (D. & C. 123:6-7.)

f.Much which pertains to futurity regarding the saints depends on the history of these things.

g.All things to be done cheerfully and with assurance of the salvation of the just.

h.What has been accomplished and is being accomplished in gathering all evil and scurrilous reports.

Notes

The influence of traitors caused him great trouble and cast him "into bars and walls" and to his death, yet his voice speaks through his works and is more terrible and disconcerting to his enemies than the roaring of the fierce lion, and even in his death he was not forsaken by the Lord. His people remained true and the Lord has blessed them.

Few men have been called on to suffer more than did Joseph Smith. His entire life was spent in the midst of persecution by the hands of his enemies. No doubt he wondered many times why this had to be. In this revelation the Lord tells him, he was to remember that even though he was called to pass through tribulation, the perils among false brethren, robbers, or in peril by land or sea, or if the very jaws of hell should open against him, he should remember that all these things were to give him experience and would prove to be for his good. It is written:

"For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. (Heb. 12:6.) Moreover, those who stand before the throne dressed in white are they who have "come out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb." There is great experience in tribulation that brings to pass much good. The person who goes through life without pain or sorrow, and who is not called upon to sacrifice comforts and partake of hardships, never receives the full value of life. We came here for experience, the benefits of which are not to be limited to this mortal life, but to be of value to those who receive the exaltation in the Kingdom of God.

We should not forget the great love of our Father and his Son Jesus Christ, that the Father was willing to see his Son a sacrifice for the sins of the world, and to redeem mankind from death, and to pass through suffering, "how sore you know not, how exquisite you know not, yea, how hard to bear you know not." Yet it was all done that we might receive immortal life and the redemption from our sins on condition of our repentance and faithfulness to the Gospel. Since we were bought with a price, surely all men should be willing to serve him.

The Prophet was admonished to hold on and be faithful, and the Priesthood would remain with him and his blessings would be eternal. The Lord said that the bounds were set, his enemies could not pass. His days were known to the Lord, and notwithstanding his tribulation and persecutions and the hatred of the world, they should not be less. He was, therefore, not to fear what man can do, for through his faithfulness God would be with him for ever and ever. In this was the promise which comforted him, that suffering and the hatred of his enemies were not to shorten his life before the time appointed. There appears in this a foreshadowing of his martyrdom when his work should be finished.

This gathering of information was not to be confined to the deeds committed in Missouri, but should reach out to embrace the wickedness, falsehoods and deeds of those who fought the truth throughout all time. Magazine articles, writings in encyclopedias, all libelous histories, and other writings and "the whole concatenation of diabolical rascality and nefarious and murderous impositions that have been practiced upon this people," were to be gathered that they might be published to the world, sent to the heads of government "in all the dark and hellish hue, as the last effort which is enjoined on us by our Heavenly Father, before we can fully and completely claim that promise which shall call him forth from his hiding place; and also that the whole nation may be left without excuse before he can send forth the power of his mighty arm."

This duty, it is written, "we owe to God, to angels, with whom we shall be brought to stand, and also to ourselves, to our wives and children, who have been made to bow down with grief, sorrow, and care, under the most damning hand of murder, tyranny, and oppression, supported and urged on and upheld by the influence of that spirit which hath so strongly riveted the creeds of the fathers, who have inherited lies, upon the hearts of the children, and filled the world with confusion, and has been growing stronger and stronger, and is now the very mainspring of all corruption, and the whole earth groans under the weight of its iniquity."

In the closing paragraphs of the third section of this revelation (Sec. 123.) We are informed that there are yet on the earth, "sects, parties, and denominations, who are blinded by the subtle craftiness of men, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, and who are only kept from the truth because they know not where to find it."

The work of gathering the libelous articles from magazines, books, newspapers, and all other sources, still goes on. In the library of the Historian's Office there are on file today upwards of 2,000 books, encyclopedias, magazines, histories, pamphlets, communications, etc., sent forth by Satan and his emissaries, and still this flood of wicked and malicious falsehoods goes on and evidently will go on until the Lord comes to cleanse the earth of all its filthiness.
