“We belong to this great and marvelous organization which is established on principles which the Lord Himself laid down when He walked the dusty roads of Palestine—the Son of God, who condescended to come to earth, born in a lowly manger in Bethlehem. … The miracle of His life is beyond description. He gave that life for each of us on Calvary’s hill in an act of Atonement greater than we can ever really understand. He alone shed His blood for the sins of which we are guilty, that we might have the opportunity of repenting and expecting forgiveness” (meeting, Jerusalem Center, 21 March 1999).

“Faith in the Lord, Jesus Christ—I hope there is no one here today who isn’t constantly cultivating that faith through reading the scriptures, the New Testament, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and building the faith which he or she carries in his heart or her heart concerning the Son of God, our Redeemer and our Lord” (meeting, Columbus, Ohio, USA, 25 April 1998).

“I know as surely as anything in this world that someday I shall die as to the life of this world. But I have an absolute certainty in my heart that I shall go on living and doing good and having the association of my beloved companion and my children” (meeting, Guayaquil, Ecuador, 31 July 1999).

“This life is a part of eternity. This is one stage of our eternal lives. When we die, we will go on to purposeful, active, challenging living. The life on the other side of the veil will be somewhat like the life here. If we have been clean and decent and good here, we will go on in that same spirit. If we have been rascals, we will go in that same spirit. I believe that. I believe in the eternity of life. It is as much a part of my belief as anything that I know of that this is not the end, that there will be another life, that we will be accountable to God our Father and to our Lord Jesus Christ, that we will have work to do, and that sometime we will all participate in the resurrection. That is my hope, my faith, my testimony” (interview with Ignacio Carrión, El País newspaper, 7 November 1997).

“When you are 12 years of age, you may go to the Lord’s house and there stand as a living proxy in behalf of someone who is dead. What a marvelous thing that is that you, an ordinary boy or girl, can stand in the place of some great man or woman who at one time lived upon the earth but who is now powerless to move forward without the blessing that you can give to him or her. … There is no greater blessing that you can have than to stand as a proxy in a great service to those who have gone beyond. And it will be your privilege and your opportunity and your responsibility to live worthy to go to the temple of the Lord and there be baptized in behalf of someone else” (meeting, Guayaquil, Ecuador, 31 July 1999).

“Live worthy to hold a temple recommend. There is nothing more precious than a temple recommend. … Whether you can go there frequently or not, qualify for a temple recommend and keep a recommend in your pocket. It will be a reminder to you of what is expected of you as a Latter-day Saint” (meeting, Guam, 31 January 2000).

“We are a church, a church in whose name is the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. We bear witness of Him, and it is His example and His teachings we try to follow. We give love. We bring peace. We do not seek to tear down any other church. We recognize the good they do. We have worked with them on many undertakings. We will continue to do so. We stand as the servants of the Lord. We acknowledge that we could not accomplish what we do without the help of the Almighty. We look to Him as our Father and our God and our ever-present helper as we seek to improve the world by changing the hearts of individuals” (remarks to National Press Club, 8 March 2000).

“As you go forward with your vocations, as you assume responsibilities of leadership, may you continue to carry in your hearts … a quiet and solemn faith, a faith that will carry you through every storm and difficulty and bring peace to your hearts.

“I hope the lessons of the second mile, of the prodigal son, of the good Samaritan, of the Son of God, who gave His life in a great offering of Atonement, will continue to motivate you” (devotional, Brigham Young University alumni, 12 September 2000).

“Stand a little taller and work a little harder and value a little greater the marvelous blessing which you have as a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That membership will bring with it a strong and moving testimony of the divinity of the Son of God, the Savior of the world, the Lord Jesus Christ.

“You and I are sons and daughters of God, with something of divinity within us. Let us stand tall, my brothers and sisters. Let us live the gospel. Let us be busy in the Church. Let us learn of its doctrine. Let us feed upon its teachings. Let us grow in faith and faithfulness before the world” (meeting, Cairns, Australia, 26 January 2000).

“The true gospel of Jesus Christ never led to bigotry. It never led to self-righteousness. It never led to arrogance. The true gospel of Jesus Christ leads to brotherhood, to friendship, to appreciation of others, to respect and kindness and love” (devotional, Brigham Young University alumni, 12 September 2000).

“I know that you know that this gospel is true. I have a testimony of this work. But that isn’t as important as that you have a testimony of this work. I believe that as surely as I know it’s true, you know it’s true. I believe that you know as I know that God, our Eternal Father, lives. I know that you know as I know that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God, who came to earth and took upon Himself a mortal body and in a great sacrifice for each of us died on the cross of Calvary and that He rose the third day. As surely as He rose, we shall rise” (meeting, Bangkok, Thailand, 13 June 2000).

“May the sunlight of faith ever warm your hearts. May you grow in strength and capacity as the years pass. May your outreach to others be as that of the good Samaritan. May the service which you render be fruitful for good in the lives of others. May prayer be a part of your daily activity. May reading enhance your knowledge and increase your understanding. May you be true and faithful one to another, and may the years bring to you that peace which passeth all understanding, the peace which comes of following the precepts of the Master” (devotional, Brigham Young University alumni, 12 September 2000).

1.  “Whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost … ,” the Lord said of that which His servants speak, “shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation” (D&C 68:4).

2.  Select excerpts printed here to share with the individuals and families you teach.
