Jesus Christ is a God; He is Jehovah of the Old Testament; He is the Savior of the New Testament.

Jesus Christ dwelt in the heavens with His Father, and we dwelt with Them as spirit children of God the Father.

Jesus Christ presented His Father’s eternal plan, that plan of which we are all part. We come to this earth to undergo testing for a probationary period and to have opposition in all things. Through the eternal principle of agency, we are free to choose liberty and eternal life and return with honor to God’s presence if we live righteous lives or to choose captivity and spiritual death.

Jesus Christ is the Creator of all things on earth, under the direction of His Father.

Jesus Christ came to this earth, born of Mary, a mortal mother. His Father was Almighty God.

Jesus Christ was baptized by immersion by John the Baptist, and the Holy Ghost was manifest in “the Spirit like a dove descending upon him” (Mark 1:10). And His Father spoke: “Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased” (Mark 1:11).

Jesus Christ organized His Church and selected twelve apostles, also prophets, seventies, and evangelists (patriarchs).

Jesus Christ’s message is unique. He stands between us and His Father; He is the Mediator. Through Him shall all mankind be saved, and by Him shall all mankind be saved.

Jesus Christ is the Redeemer, our Savior; only He with a mortal mother and an immortal Father could fulfill the Atonement and die to save all mankind. He did so of His own free will and choice.

Jesus Christ was resurrected and appeared to many after His Resurrection. He taught us the physical characteristics of a resurrected being and told us that we could follow His example and that we would be able to progress and be like Him.

Jesus Christ’s Ascension into heaven before the eyes of His disciples was accompanied by the promise that in like manner He would come again.

Jesus Christ appeared with His Father and restored, through Joseph Smith the Prophet in these latter days, the same organization He had established during His ministry on earth. In addition to the Bible, the Book of Mormon was revealed to the world as another witness to testify of His divine calling and ministry.

Jesus Christ leads and guides His Church today through revelation to a prophet, his counselors in the First Presidency, and the Twelve Apostles—the same organization He established when He was here on earth.

Jesus Christ’s admonition to “come … follow me” is the challenge that He gave to each of us (see Matt. 19:21). He is the Son, Jesus Christ.
