The following are additional ideas Primary leaders may use with the Sharing Time printed in the December 2008 Liahona. For the lesson, instructions, and activity that correspond with these ideas, see “Stories of Jesus, Tell Them to Me” on pages F4 and F5 of the children’s section in this issue.

1.  Place pictures of Joseph Smith’s life on the chalkboard. (From the Primary 5 picture packet, use 5-1 [Joseph Smith], 5-3 [Joseph Smith’s family], 5-4 [Joseph Smith reading the Bible], 5-5 [the Sacred Grove], 5-6 [the First Vision], and 5-8 [visit of the angel Moroni].) Use the pictures to tell the story of the Restoration of the gospel. (For older children: Find verses in Joseph Smith—History that relate to the pictures. Invite several children or classes to find a reference and read Joseph Smith’s own words to learn about the Restoration of the gospel.)

    Invite two children to hold Gospel Art Picture Kit 240 (Jesus the Christ) and 400 (Joseph Smith). Repeat the weekly gospel principle together as a Primary: “Jesus Christ restored His gospel through the Prophet Joseph Smith.” Place the two pictures on the chalkboard. Read 3 Nephi 27:13–16. Help the children understand that the word gospel means “good news,” and the good news is the birth, life, and mission of the Savior Jesus Christ. Write the word gospel on the chalkboard.

    Play a musical guessing game to discover six of the many blessings we receive because of the gospel of Jesus Christ (priesthood, scriptures, baptism, Holy Ghost, prophets, and temples). Choose Primary songs or hymns that are familiar to the children and that describe these blessings. Ask the pianist to play the first few notes of the song. Have the children guess the song, adding more notes as needed. When the children have guessed the song and the blessing, sing the song together.

    If time allows, provide paper and pencils or crayons for the children to draw a blessing they receive because of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

    Conclude by bearing testimony of the Prophet Joseph Smith and of the Savior.

2.  Before sharing time, create several case studies to help children practice making good choices (see “Case Studies,” Teaching, No Greater Call [1999], 161–62).

    Begin sharing time by helping the children find 3 Nephi 27:21 and reading it together. Emphasize the phrase “For that which ye have seen me do even that shall ye do,” and discuss why it is important to try to be like Jesus. Sing “The Church of Jesus Christ” (Children’s Songbook, 77). Share several examples of children who are trying to be like Jesus (see “Trying to Be Like Jesus” articles from The Friend, or share examples of children from your Primary making good choices). Sing the last line of “The Church of Jesus Christ” between each example.

    Place a picture of a child and a picture of the Savior on the chalkboard, and repeat the weekly gospel principle: “Because I know that I am a child of God and that Jesus Christ is my Savior, I will …” Give each class a case study. Invite each class to read the case study and decide how to solve the problem by making good choices. Provide time for each class to share its case study and solutions with the Primary.

    Conclude by singing “The Church of Jesus Christ.” Bear testimony of how knowing that you are a child of God and that Jesus Christ is your Savior helps you make good choices every day.
