Truman G. Madsen, Eternal Man ( 1966)

Introduction

In June, 1963, the first article of a memorable series was published in The Instructor magazine. As editors we were deeply concerned that our college-student readers might find orientation to basic philosophical problems through the insight of a scholar who knows the gospel as well as philosophy. We invited Truman G. Madsen. who holds his doctorate from Harvard University and who was serving as president of the New England Mission, to fill the role of author. Our first thought was a single article. Dr. Madsen submitted what is the first chapter of this book, entitled, "Whence Cometh Man???" Footnotes were not included, but they were made available by special request. Reader interest was intense and requests outstripped our limited supply. We then invited Brother Madsen to contribute six subsequent articles, one on each basic question raised in the original statement. We published complete notes for these in the magazine and received many letters from readers expressing appreciation.

The Instructor is pleased to encourage this reprint in book form for the same reasons that it published the original articles. Those reasons were set forth in the introduction which is reproduced here as follows:

President Truman G. Madsen writes both in the language of the churchman and of the philosopher. Some readers may prefer that the two viewpoints be kept separate; others may feel that the questions are beyond our adequate consideration. We grant that space is limited and that these "imponderables" have provoked volumes of argument. Yet, many serious students are reading widely today and are meeting the ideas of serious thinkers from antiquity to the present. They ask their Church leaders, "How do the arguments and positions of the various 'schools' of thought compare with the teachings of Joseph Smith and of the Restored Gospel?"

Brother Madsen answers this question, at least in part; and he does so with considerable penetration. He brings to this assignment a thorough scholarship of Church doctrine, plus an erudite schooling in philosophy, plus a deep inner conviction regarding the truthfulness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. From this vantage point he directs the reader's attention to six basic "puzzles in philosophy and theology." He invites thinking and further study of these questions, and he challenges those whose reading may have missed the import of what some call "the long conversation." Leaders of youth need to know the ideas and language which their students meet in secular education. They need to study the arguments on basic philosophical issues. They need to understand the Gospel so that they can interpret it to these students and help them see things "of good report" in perspective.

It is to assist this serious study that we present this [introductory] article—one which we consider a notable milestone in our 97 years of publishing The Instructor.

LORIN F. WHEELWRIGHT

Associate Editor of The Instructor,

Published by the

Deseret Sunday School Union Board
