Truman G. Madsen, Eternal Man ( 1966)

Preface

The story behind these essays is still a matter of wonder in me. To a topic and title—"Whence Cometh Man???"—The Instructor editors added a hope. "It has been suggested," their letter said, "that you explain the meaning of premortality for some of the ultimate issues of human existence." Their intent was that I sketch in outline form the singular Mormon theme of pre-existence on the canvas of present-day philosophical approaches to man. So the effort was made.

The response was, to me at least, quite unforeseen. Not just teachers, whom we had expected to nudge toward wider application of their topics, but a variety of persons wrote for sources and further comparisons. Soon the editors asked that this article be the introduction to six others, around the issues barely broached within it: personal identity, creation, embodiment, freedom, suffering, and self-awareness. The query followed: "Will these be published in book form?" Till now I have answered, "No," convinced that interest would diminish. Instead it has increased.

Here, then, is the series, written as a kind of "midrash," a commentary on a theme. It can justly be said that they are not more than this, but not, I hope, that they are less. Letters of praise for their "objectivity" (which usually means that I have named and highlighted some of the live alternatives) miss my feeling that such merit as they have is in their subjectivity. Their primary gesture is toward inner echoes, toward, as it were, the nerve-endings of the spirit. For this reason, likewise, I am surprised at comments which assume I have proved or refuted this or that. The goal has been to clarify rather than to verify, with little room for argument, except an implicit appeal to introspection.

The concept of eternal man, with its refinements in the prophets of this new era, has an immense philosophical and theological strength which is only beginning to be recognized. But this, when presented adequately, will sponsor a tome which is not pressed for abbreviation.

It has been said more than once that the essays are hard to understand. If this reflects a struggle with the terms and the heavily packed style, my own children prove that these yield to repeated exposure. But another anxiety is involved here. Those who believe, as I do, in the magnificence of simplicity and the hazards of speculation wonder whether the statement of contrasts should be reduced or simply avoided.

Now it goes without saying that though the master writings of the Prophet are authoritative, my commentary is not. Concern for absolute fidelity to his intent has pushed me to original sources and to all the checking procedures I know. But if there is distortion I am not only open, but eager, for correction. Similarly, I must be alone responsible for interpretations of the other materials alluded to throughout.

But nothing here is willfully obscure. And it should be recognized that simplicity is not superficiality. The idea of a forever forward is not more or less simple than that of a forever backward. Yet, in our culture, one idea is commonplace, the other startling, even "unthinkable." (This retreat, it seems to me, is unavailable to those who say they understand the idea when it is applied to God.) My point is that there are deeps in man, and in the attempt to plumb him, depths which tax the most disciplined of minds, as also, which is much more, the most enlightened souls. I am with those who wish for a larger cup to grasp the ocean. But the Prophet, who was superb in making "the broad expanse of eternity" intelligible, warned that we do not enlarge the cup by a snap of the finger nor by a "fanciful, flowery and heated imagination;" only, he said, "by careful and ponderous and solemn thoughts." "By contrarieties," he added, "truth is made manifest."

A related kind of authority is needed in this realm. It is what, in the vernacular, is called "room to talk." It is hard come by. Academies help some, but life helps more.

The difference was all too graphic when I sat in the surgical chair of a Cambridge oculist. He asked me searching questions about the article on evil and suffering while he scraped at my eye. The pain was sharper than his instruments, and as I concentrated, or tried to, the thought recurred (familiar to most of us?) that I could stand both kinds of thrusts anywhere but there and then.

Personally, I think that any view of man that does not make a difference in such an ordeal, or in those compared to which this was a fleeting pin prick, is worthless. But it is only a rootless prejudice of our time that morbidity is profundity, and that any insight that seems consoling is bound to be a wishful and vagrant bromide. (The crutch of the immoralist is often his wishful disbelief.) It doesn't matter that I have had enough experience to be safe from confusing the Garden of Eden and the Garden of Gethsemane. What matters is that Christ and his prophets are, in all history, those most immersed in these realities and therefore in ours. If I had not known that self-understanding on the scale Christ had it, and through Him others, can endow life—all of it—with glorious meaning, these articles would never have been begun.

TRUMAN G. MADSEN
