Truman G. Madsen, Eternal Man ( 1966)

CHAPTER III

Creation and Procreation

The immortal spirit. Where did it come from? All learned men and doctors of divinity say that God created it in the beginning; but it is not so: the very idea lessens man in my estimation. I do not believe the doctrine; I know better. Hear it, all ye ends of the world; for God has told me so; and if you don't believe me, it will not make the truth without effect. . . . I am going to tell of things more noble. —Joseph Smith, King Follet Discourse. [^1]

In his poetic rewriting of one of the sublime visions of all time, the Prophet Joseph records:

And I heard a great voice bearing record from Heav'n, He's the Saviour, and Only Begotten of God— By him, of him, and through him, the worlds were all made, Even all that career in the heavens so broad. Whose inhabitants, too, from the first to the last, Are sav'd by the very same Saviour of ours; And, of course, are begotten God's daughters and sons, By the very same truths, and the very same pow'rs. [^2]

Eternity is here sketched in eight lines. We select two marvelous themes: First, the worlds, world-systems, and galaxies, dazzling in brightness and dizzying in number, move under the creative mastery of Jesus Christ. Second, all spirits of the inhabitants of these worlds, including the spirit of Jesus Christ Himself, were not gotten from nothing but begotten of God; not created but procreated, sired by the supreme personality of our universe, God the Father. [^3]

In a world of glory that could not be endured by mortal man; in realms, indeed, that ". . . surpass all understanding in glory, and in might, and in dominion, . . ." [^4] the eternal intelligence of man was merged with eternal spirit-elements and began its enlargement in the presence of the Divine.

The Familiar and Familial

But is Divine fatherhood in any sense similar to human fatherhood?

The analogues are more profound than any Christian writer since the first century has dared to examine. [^5] For our purpose one all-important likeness must be named. It is unequivocally taught by the Prophet.

In mortal birth, inherent physical and personality traits of the father and mother are transmitted to their son or daughter. (A thimbleful of chromosomes accounts for the physical makeup and qualities of the billions who have so far inhabited this globe.) More, one's bodily inheritance and then his environment mold him and largely condition his destiny.

It is exactly so with man's spirit. Long before mortality, in a process of actual transmission, there were forged into man's spirit the embryonic traits, attributes, and powers of God Himself! And in the surroundings of that realm man was nurtured in the Divine image. [^6]

Before we trace the transcendent religious power of this truth, let us consider it from the center of critical theological analysis. There are two entrenched objections to it. Rarely have they had such an array of influential advocates. Both of them have been impressed upon most of us.

First, anthropomorphism. The idea of fatherhood is objectionable because of its primitive and naive approach to biblical language. Phrases like Jesus' "My father" and "your father," or Paul's "offspring of God" and "Father of our spirits" must not be interpreted as literal. [^7] To apply such manlike qualities to the Divine, and Godlike qualities to man, is to abase and abuse the message. Since the time of Maimonides in Judaism and Dionysius in Christianity it has been a commonplace that we must not ascribe finite categories to Deity. [^8] "Fatherhood" connotes materiality, subjection to space and time, and other absurdities. It destroys the dignity, majesty, and unconditioned ultimacy of God. [^9]

Second, psychologism. The idea of fatherhood is objectionable because, as Freud tells us, all men tend to project (invent rather than discover) their "father-image." [^10] "God the Father" is a paternal pie that is a lie in the sky. Adler says our inferiority feelings; Feuerbacb, our childish wishes; Marx, our economic frustrations, are at the root of the projection. [^11] We thus "personify" our subjective hopes to avoid reality.

Now quite apart from Joseph Smith and the modern prophets, there are telling rebuttals to these anxieties.

Milton saw the real issue. He was aware of the subtleties of language. And though he could not escape a whole canopy of now discredited assumptions in the 17th century, he claimed to be inspired in his poetry. The Bible, he says, is seriously literal in what it says about the fatherhood of God. There is no radical distinction between spirit and matter, and there is a point-by-point analogy between heaven and earth. [^12] God is the actual sire of the souls of men. Why, he asks, should we be afraid to ascribe to God what He ascribes to Himself? [^13]

Why indeed? The fear is especially inept in Christendom, which, by its most central thesis, is committed to the idea of Divine fatherhood. Every orthodox theologian must maintain that God was the immortal Father of Jesus. Jesus' actual Sonship accounts for the fact that He was, or became, "the express image of His (the Father's) person ." [^14] Mary, a human being, was the mother of the body of Christ. [^15] Why should not God, a Divine being, be the father of the spirit of man? If one is unthinkable, so is the other. In principle it is absurd to maintain that God could, without losing His dignity, majesty, or ultimacy transmit a divine nature through a mortal being, and then say that He could not transmit spirit traits, in His likeness, to immortal spirits. [^16]

The Conquest of Paradox

But the problem of the theologian is complex.

Behold the paradoxes that he presents as an alternative concept of creation:

The immaterial Trinity elicited from nothing both material and immaterial substance. The unchanging and unchangeable Deity yet changed and changes the whole of reality. A nontemporal and nonspatial being, literally nowhere and "nowhen," yet created and infused everywhere and "everywhen." The All-powerful and All-good simultaneously and yet continuously brought into being not only mankind, but the angels, the demons, and Satan. Moreover, like did not create like. Between the Divine and all other natures there was and is and always will be an absolute gulf. [^17] Because man is utterly other than the Divine, his creation required mediators. Thus, through emanation or through angels who are "pure form" (bodiless and more than man yet less than God) or by the speaking of a cosmic word, man came into being. [^18]

It is in vain to protest that these are radical contradictions. The creed-upholding Christian will reply, "Of course they are." They belong to the mysteries of the Divine, and obviously the finite intellect cannot understand. Thus it is often held that to be mystified is to be edified, and that intellectual confusion is a religious virtue. [^19]

The teachings of Joseph Smith, like those of the ancient prophets, are involved in none of these paradoxes.

Reverence or Irreverence

But what is the religious appeal of this outlook?

Significantly, the doctrine of an utterly transcendent God usually flourishes most in an era when humanity is shocked at its own demonic or depraved conduct. We live in such a time. Anything so tinctured with corruption, it is said, cannot be Divine. True enough. But almost without exception Western theologians have taken this insight and pushed it to conclusions not only mistaken, but contrary to their original intent. Weighed down by the fact of degenerate parenthood, they are unable to conceive of Divine parenthood. Inveighing against the corruptions of mortal personality, they are unable to conceive of Divine personality. Hence, they conclude that God is neither a parent nor a person.

What is left? "Being-itself"; what Buber, Marcel, Barth, Niebuhr, and Tillich, representing the Jewish, Catholic, and Protestant traditions call "The Transcendent." [^20]

But nothing in the universe is loftier than personality. All who look outside of it in quest of the Divine will find something lower. Calling it the "Unconditioned" in capital letters fails to deify, though it does idolize. Only by covertly ignoring these theological restrictions and investing the concept with personal meaning can the words dignity, majesty, and holiness even begin to be appropriate. [^21]

The charge of projection now arises anew. What is projected in this notion of Divine Being which, by definition, can never intersect finite experience? Guilt in the wretchedness of humanity? But that is the worst form of anthropomorphism. Traits that exalt the ground or power of the cosmos by debasing personality? But that is blasphemy. Worship of a Something instead of a Someone? But that is idolatry.

Whatever the motives of the theologian, let every person ask himself: When Jesus says, ". . . I ascend unto my Father, and your Father. . ." (John 20:17), what does He mean? And if there is revulsion at His meaning, does the revulsion come out of reverence based on the revelation of God? Or is it really irreverence based on tradition and guilt which one cannot but project to "God"? The sword of anthropomorphism and psychologism cuts two ways. Which way? [^22]

"Things More Noble"

Now let us abandon this mode of analysis and turn to an entirely different question, using the language of the heart.

What is the religious power of this idea? What are its effects as it moves along the threads of the inner life? Let us mark only one of the needs of man and gesture, at least, toward its glowing realization.

There is in all of us an apparently infinite, and certainly, ultimate, need for a rich, abiding, undergirding, trustworthy love. This is a love that reaches in and through the self, outward to others, and upward to the highest in the universe. In the ordinary world, even the world of religion, this craving finds extremely rare fulfillment, though it is talked about ceaselessly. But a dawning understanding is the key to its creative source and the beginning of its increase and transformation: that man was known and loved profoundly even prior to mortal birth; that love, indeed, drew him and his Eternal Father together in a sphere of perfected light and glory; that he, distinct from all other beings, animate or inanimate, in the universe, is a chosen and begotten spirit of the Divine; that this sonship, as well as the "second birth" through Jesus Christ, is at the core of any question about the meaning of life.

Of this sweeping awareness the Prophet Joseph spoke to a multitude of 20,000 enthralled under his voice:

This is good doctrine. It tastes good. I can taste the principles of eternal life, and so can you. They are given to me by the revelations of Jesus Christ. . . . and when I tell you of these things which were given me by inspiration of the Holy Spirit, you are bound to receive them as sweet, and rejoice more and more. [^23]

Man has always believed that somehow God could be in his heart. Now he realizes that godliness is veritably engrained in him through a divine lineage. And the whole of his soul lights up.

A child orphaned and cuffed about in a hostile world craves the lifting power of a person who radiates every cherished aspiration. Now comes the recognition that this is inspiration, that a real, living parent is here announcing, arms outstretched, "I am yours! And you are mine!"

A mother and father look down at their sleeping infant, in communing touch with what is sacred to both. Parental love, they see in this illumined moment, is not a shadow but a light of divine love in which splendor we became spirit children and by which we were enveloped.

These, with a wealth of poignant insights that follow in their wake, reveal meaning in human existence. In relationship to the divine they replace the grosser emotions of fear, distant awe, dread, bitter solitude, and even despair, with the subtler and finer feelings: gratitude, virtue akin to virtue, lightness of spirit, embracing sympathy, peace of soul, and motivation to share. They uncover layer after layer of worldly facade. They electrify, inspire, and ennoble. They are, in truth, the source and power of love.

To the degree that Christendom denies the genuine fatherhood of God and the genuine sonship of man's spirit (and both Christendom and the major world religions do deny them) they have lost the image of man's real origin and therefore the image of his real destiny. They deny the "power of godliness."

All the rapturous things that are said about the love or agape of God who sent His Only Begotten in the flesh are hollow when coupled with the dogma that He did not so love us that He distinguished us from the rest of creation by implanting in us the potential of His own likeness. The dogma "lessens man." But, as any reference to a contemporary book on theology will show, it also lessens God, even while claiming to dignify Him. Shall we reject the shining truth because it is so shining?

Many of us in the modern world are prodigal sons. We have not only left home, we have forgotten it and the Father who still waits to unfold to us not only "all that I have" but also, "all that I am."

But only our actual sonship can account for this miracle: that an inner flame apprehends and affirms what the creeds and our own darkened thoughts solemnly deny. This flame is not quickened, but neither is it quenched when, asking for the bread of the living Father, we are given the stone of dead "being-itself."

This is the flame that is rekindled when a Prophet testifies in the 20th century as Jesus Christ did in the first, "God is our Father." An intuitive flash dissipates theological and psychological speculation. A luminous nostalgia arises in us. And as if from a far-off center, the glow of an evanescent past reawakens responses of awesome love we find it impossible to describe. And that is why, from the millions who listen to the strains of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir annually, a frequent request is for the music and words of a simple Mormon hymn. This is a hymn that expresses the heart of "Latter-day Saintliness." It is "O My Father." [^24]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Joseph Fielding Smith (editor), Deseret News Press, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1938; pages 352, 181.
[^2] For a dualistic approach to eastern religion see Walter T. Stace's Time and Eternity, University Press, Princeton, 1952. For a summary of the dualism in Christian thought of our time see The Search for Meaning in Life, Robert F. Davidson (editor); Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York, 1962; Section 5.
[^3] The work of St. Thomas and the Scholastics revolved around this issue, with Platonic and Aristotelian premises - the relegating of the "heavenly" to immateriality, (the angels, for example, are "pure species") and of the "earthly" to materiality or corporeality. The "double truth" concept grew in this area as well as the distinction, still basic to Roman Catholic theology, between metaphysics and physics.
[^4] The tendency to call the body evil was manifest most sharply in the Manichees and this, in turn, is supposedly derived from Persian dualism. Common distinctions still lead, and mislead, our thought in religion; e.g. sacred vs. secular, spiritual vs. temporal. Modern revelation dissolves the distinction. See Doctrine and Covenants 29:31-35.
[^5] See, e.g., Alston and Nakhnikian, editors, Readings in Twentieth-Century Philosophy, Free Press of Glencol, New York, 1963; parts VII and VIII.
[^6] See Gilbert Ryle, Concept of Mind; Hutchinson, London, 1949.
[^7] It is, of course, impossible to live "as if" there were no body. Yet the view of absolute idealists, Christian Scientists, and certain mystics is that all materiality is illusion. The view tends to quietism, asceticism, and "other-worldliness." Physicalism is a scientific approach and is compatible with various ethical outlooks or ways of life. But typically it leads to hedonism, to an attempt to maximize the natural satisfactions of the body. See Bertrand Russell's Why I Am Not a Christian; Simon & Schuster, New York, 1957.
[^8] The word "ascendancy" is the Prophet's. He taught repeatedly that it is punishment to be denied a body. See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith; pages 297, 306, 312.
[^9] The mind-body problem and a variety of solutions is sketched in Albury Castell's An Introduction to Modern Philosophy; Macmillan Company, New York, 1953; topic 2.
[^10] The Prophet taught that the spiritual creation preceded and was in the likeness of the physical creation. See the Pearl of Great Price, Moses 3:5; and Doctrine and Covenants 77:2; 131:7, 8.
[^11] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pages 255, 381, 296, 297.
[^12] See St. John of the Cross, Poems (Introduction by M. C. D'Arcy) in Penguin Classics, Baltimore, 1960. See also Ghandi's Autobiography, Washington Public Affairs Press, Washington, 1960.
[^13] The controversy of "quantitative vs. qualitative hedonism" carries over into religion under different labels. The issue is this: are there satisfactions of the self that are more intensive and inclusive as one approaches the likeness of God? And do thy involve withdrawal from the senses? The Prophet answered "yes" to the first question and "no" to the second.
[^14] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 181.
[^15] This point is put in a near-classic form by Parley P. Pratt who, after conversion to Mormonism, wrote an essay (almost unknown to our generation) entitled, "Intelligence and Affection." See Parker Robison (editor), Writings of Parley P. Pratt.
[^16] Indeed the Prophet records in Doctrine and Covenants 93 that the "spirit and the body are the soul of man." The soul of man is the whole of man.
[^17] See Nietzsche, Modern Library Giant; Random House, New York.
[^18] This statement was made in response to a question by Orson Pratt. Recent biology suggests that it is almost as if our own "identification tag" is on each constituent cell of our bodies.
[^19] See Jacob Boehme, Personal Christianity; Atlantic Paperbacks, Ungar Publishing House, New York. "That which is of the earth and must return to it is not merely the visible physical body, but also the carnal mind and the astral man with his earthly desires. There is nothing immortal in man, except that which is divine in him." Like-minded writers deny that there can be anything divine about the physical. (page 265.)
[^20] See Meister Eckhart, (Raymond B. Blakney, trans.); Harper Torchbook, New York, 1957. Compare F. C. Happold's Mysticism; Pelican Books, Baltimore, Maryland, 1963; chapter 24, the "Coinherence of Spirit and Matter."
[^21] "Nirvana" is thought by Western Minds to be a kind of heaven. But many Oriental writers speak of absolute extinction and certainly mean the loss of all consciousness.
[^22] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 296.
[^23] The Prophet taught that man was fallen and in need of the "second birth." But he did not teach "total depravity"; he did not teach "original sin" if that means we participated in Adam's fall metaphysically or symbolically; he did not teach that corporeality was a curse. Man may be not only unfulfilled; but a rebel, shot through with tendencies that lead to further corruption. But the degenerate can become regenerate. For Joseph Smith the problem is worse (it includes mind and spirit in the fall) and regeneration better (it leads to a condition exactly akin to that of the Divine), than traditional views.
[^24] See Paul in Galatians 6. Paul has been credited (or blamed) with a flesh-spirit dualism. But this is a moot question. He clearly saw the difference between corrupt flesh and godly flesh. But he did not teach a doctrine of escape.
