Truman G. Madsen, Eternal Man ( 1966)

CHAPTER IV

The Spirit and the Body

Nor hath God designed to show Himself elsewhere more clearly than in human form sublime; which, since they image Him, alone I love. (from "Heaven-born Beauty"—Michelangelo.)

We came into this world that we might receive a body and present it pure before God in the celestial kingdom.

The great principle of happiness consists in having a body.

All beings who have bodies have power over those who have not. [^1]

The Spirit and the Body

One of the all-time bafflements of life is this: Why is man embodied? Has the body a lasting purpose in nature or in the plan of God?

The question and typical answers have been badly blurred, due in great measure to the dogma of immaterialism. This assumption born in Greece now dominates both Judaism and Christianity and infiltrates the thought of the entire Western world. [^2] The assumption is that there are two utterly different divisions of reality, one immaterial and the other material. Mind or soul or spirit are immaterial. Body is material. [^3]

The dualisms that result tend to become radical: the soul has none of the qualities of the body and vice versa. Mind or soul is really real, the body is unreal or less real. The soul is eternal; the body temporal. The soul is good; the body is evil. [^4]

In our time the focus shifts to the dualism of "finite reality" and "infinite reality," or of particular beings and being-itself, or of the objective-experimental and the Transcendent-existential. But in some form the old disjunction remains. And the mortal body is deemed inferior or demonic.

And thus arise a vast array of puzzles. How can two entities that have nothing in common, not even existence in space and time, be conjoined in any sense? How can one influence the other? Why would an unembodied God create an embodied man to achieve a disembodied immortality?

In reaction to the dogmas of a "ghost in the machine," modern naturalistic and scientific outlooks take the position of physicalism. [^5] Physicalism denies that there is evidence for the shadowy entities, "mind" or "soul," of traditional definition. Whatever the body is, it is all there is. Man is "nothing but" nucleic acids, cell structures, nerve nets, and the complicated phenomena called "mental." [^6]

Thus immaterialists try to live as if there were no body, and physicalists try to live as if there were no soul or spirit. [^7]

Almost universally today it is assumed that only if immaterialism or Transcendence be defended can God and religion be salvaged, and that if it be rejected both are disposed of. Over this issue major Catholic, Protestant, and Jewish faiths contend with Marxists, humanists, and many natural scientists.

The Elements of Selfhood

Here again Joseph Smith faces a confusing colossus. And with revelatory insight he replaces it. It turns out that deception is on both sides of the controversy. Without full awareness of its philosophical undercurrent, modern man is caught in a riptide. Forced by his environment to favor one side or the other of a traditional "either-or" he rarely recognizes that neither side is a safe guide to the nature of man.

The revolution, which brings a sunburst of self-understanding, is this:

Mind, spirit, and body are all material, in varying degrees of refinement. They have equal status in spatio-temporal existence and are, in their perfected state, of equal worth. Spirit and body are dissimilar enough to require each other in full selfhood. But they are similar enough that when our bodies are purified we shall see that "all spirit is matter." Embodied spirits always "have an ascendancy" over unembodied spirits. [^8]

Thus the immaterialist is wrong in what he affirms (immaterial entities), and the physicalist is wrong in what he denies (spirit entities). And thus a thousand dualistic puzzles and dilemmas collapse. [^9]

This is not, as some may suppose, just an issue of word usage. It leads to a revision of attitudes and aspirations that affect the very breath of mankind. To illustrate, here is a cross-sectional comparison of the Prophet's teaching and dominant alternatives.

Immaterialists, e.g., Plotinus, Thomas, Calvin, teach that man was created in a body to prepare for a nontemporal eternity. The Prophet taught that we are living in a temporal eternity. Our co-eternal intelligences were first given spirit bodies and now, as a climax of our development, physical bodies which will have permanence in the resurrection.

Physicalists, e.g. Ryle, Morris, Lamont, teach that there is no "spirit" in combination with body. The body, including its so-called personality traits, reduces to physical genes. [^10] The Prophet taught that the spirit-personality was developed long before our physical embodiment and profoundly affects it and that there are real and unmistakable spirit needs as there are body needs. [^11]

Extreme immaterialists, e.g. mystics like St. John of the Cross and ascetics like Ghandi, despise "body, parts, and passions"and define God as lacking them. [^12] They tend not only to disparage the body but to torment and renounce it. Extreme physicalists, on the other hand (e.g. Russell), teach that since the body is all, it is the sole source of happiness. They tend to define happiness without regard for quality, at least without spiritual modes. [^13] A pig satisfied at the trough is better than a Socrates unsatisfied at the trial.

Joseph Smith taught that man's body is the marvelously perfectible instrument of his likewise perfectible mind and spirit. "That which is without body, parts and passions is nothing." [^14] There are levels of consciousness, powers of expression, ways of fulfillment in thought, feeling, and action that come only when the threefold nature of man is harmoniously combined. [^15] To cultivate the soul is to cultivate both body and spirit. [^16]

Nietzsche, speaking for physicalists, maintains that "we are what we eat" and that the body has a total "turnover" every seven years. [^17] The Prophet taught that our identity is not simply a thread of memory or a bundle of impressions. None of the eternal elements of our person (even during the temporary disorganization of the body) becomes an essential part of another body. [^18]

Boehme, speaking for immaterialists, teaches that our mental and spiritual powers and our communion with God are impaired by the body. [^19] The Prophet taught that our mental and spiritual powers will ultimately be enhanced by the body. Thus:

And if your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things. (Doctrine and Covenants 88:67.)

Immaterialists tend to believe that the body is the product of sin or error. (In the Orient it is the evil aftermath of "Karma.") Flesh is utterly depraved, and man's ills began with the body and will end with it. [^20] Some, like Buddha, long for annihilation. [^21]

The Prophet taught that the body is the product of righteousness. We will look upon the temporary absence of our spirits from our bodies as bondage, not as freedom. (See Doctrine and Covenants 45:17.) "Even here," he taught, "we may begin to enjoy that which shall be in full hereafter." [^22] But only when the spirit and body are "inseparably connected" or resurrected, in a celestial condition, will we receive a fullness of glory and thus a fullness of joy. (See Doctrine and Covenants 84, 88,93.)

Of the Fallen and the Failing

What is good and what is evil about the body?

The three modes of man's makeup, the Prophet taught, are related so intimately that they delimit or exalt each other together. One cannot say to the other, "I have no need of thee." There is not just parallelism but interaction and fusion through the life-giving power of Jesus the Christ.

Is the failure to complete one's nature an evil? Then mind and spirit may be evil as well as the body. Is refinement in knowledge, power, and glory a good? Then the body may be good as well as mind and spirit. In this sense heaven is as secular as earth and the body as sacred as the spirit.

But is not mortal man "fallen" and "carnal, sensual, devilish"? [^23] Did not the ancient apostle say to "crucify the flesh with its affections and lusts"? [^24] Yes and yes.

But the way of sanctification is in the body not out of it. And to a marked degree the effects of the purifying process or "new birth" are visible. The inspired way of Christ is not utter renunciation but regeneration, not emasculation but inspired expression, not the way of death but the way of life, not to nurture the poisons of corruption but to replace them with the powers of godliness.

The nearer a man approaches perfection the clearer are his views and the greater his enjoyments till he has overcome the evils of his life and lost every desire for sin. [^25]

The joy that accompanies wholeness is a rich and inclusive joy, of a quality that resounds through the total being. Thus, for Joseph Smith, even the processes of purification are life-giving. They are not, as ironically named, "mortifying." One meaning of fasting and prayer, for example, is "rejoicing and prayer." (See Doctrine and Covenants 59.) The body is sensitized to deeper awareness of the subtler realities of God and His Spirit. But the experience of rejoicing includes, as it were, the sense-spectrums of both spirit and body.

The Price of Anguish

Today an avalanche of case books on psychotherapy chronicles the miseries of what Menninger calls "Man Against Himself." [^26] There are pathetic victims, worshipping in vain one or the other of the two omnipresent gods, immaterialism and physicalism. In anguish millions still refuse to believe that negation is futile, dissipation is futile, and escape is impossible.

The attitudes surrounding these religions distill like plasma into the veins of all of us. It is no surprise that Gabriel Marcel says with horror, "I am my body," [^27] and that we walk the streets aware of the body's degenerate dirge unbelieving that anyone really achieves its transformed symphony.

Psychologists, committed only to the superiority of sanity, go on telling us that we must learn to "live with ourselves," sometimes in radical disagreement as to the nature of self. They have the almost desperate hope that there is something meaningful, wholesome, spiritual, sublime about the body at its best, and that somehow self-unity is within reach. (We can vision this when a lovely being shines through the face of a child, when what the Prophet called his "glory, bloom, and beauty" is vividly forecast.) [^28] But how long can we hold to this when our pulse thunders with opposite ideals—that the flesh is a "nasty, brutish" shack, or that it is a supersensual castle? Where in heaven or earth is the power to make the body what an ancient disciple of Christ said it was: a living Temple of the Spirit of God?

This is the Truth and Power re-revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith. And it is the restoration of wholeness.

Modern man is not imprisoned in his body but imprisoned in a set of distortions of it. Man, not God, has turned his body into a perpetual torture chamber.

The feeling truth is that the body is the crowning stage of progressive unfoldment toward celestial personality.

The redeeming truth is that Jesus Christ lived and died not only to heal, lift, and fulfill all men but all of man—intelligence, spirit, and body. And He exemplified magnificently the possible final outcome.

The glorifying truth is that the transformation of the Spirit of God that emanates through Christ in His perfected condition reaches to the very cell structure and bloodstream, to the very affections and tendencies of our composite nature. The only lasting sorrow will be in the measure we fail to receive the power of His promise: that some day we may be fashioned like unto Him!

This philosophy of embodiment is destined not only to conquer the world, but to redeem and sanctify it under the feet of radiant sons and daughters of God. These, in the likeness of God and through the power of Christ, will be embodied light and enlightened bodies—forever.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants 122:7, 8. These words were received and written after the Prophet had languished four months in the darkness of Liberty Jail.
[^2] That evil is "privation," absence of good, not a positive reality, is the official view of Roman Catholicism. That evil is in our "perspective" but disappears under the eternal perspective is the view of Leibniz, Spinoza and Josiah Royce. That evil is illusory is the view of Christian Science, Buddhism, and some forms of spiritualism.
[^3] This is the approach of "crisis theology" and existentialism. Instead of minimizing evil their ruthless portrayal of its modes maximizes it. So desperate is the plight of man that futility dominates. Religion reduces to stoical endurance and/or despair.
[^4] Rarely, if ever, has so much of relentless trial and soul struggle been crowded into one life as in Joseph Smith's.
[^5] The dialogue is imaginary, but the ideas are not. The "Mother" poses questions that have been raised numberless times. For every sentence in the Prophet's "replies" there is a first-hand counterpart in his writings or sermons.
[^6] This is only an outline of the Prophet's teachings, some ways in which the backward look to premortal life affects the question.
[^7] See the 38th chapter of Job where, the Prophet taught, there is a display of the human tendency to conclude that suffering is always the wrath of an angry God. This is an "unhallowed principle." See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, edited by Joseph Fielding Smith, Deseret News Press, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1938, page 162.
[^8] If, for example, evil be defined as delimitation in growth, conflict of wills, refusal to receive the love and power of God, seeking to become a law unto oneself, then evil is eternal. For always there will be intelligences, spirits, and resurrected beings in these conditions.
[^9] See Henry D. Aiken's latest treatment of the classic argument that evil proves God does not exist: "God and Evil" in Reason and Conduct; Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 1962.
[^10] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pages 158, 181, 350, 351, 354.
[^11] See the "King Follett Discourse," and footnotes by B. H. Roberts, Ibid., page 342. The rare notion that God is in a sense finite, limited by the nature of His environment, has been taught in some form by such men as William James, A. N. Whitehead, Charles Hartshorne, E. S. Brightman, and A. C. Garnett. See also Twentieth Century Religious Thought, Harper and Row, New York, 1963; Chapter XVII.
[^12] Traditional theology has taught that God's "all-powerfulness" is limited only by the laws of contradiction. Yet, theologians continue to maintain that it is impossible for God, being infinite, to manifiest Himself to man in literal revelation, and likewise impossible for God to transform man into His literal likeness. It turns out, therefore, that in these and other ways, the living God of modern revelation is more powerful than the "god" of the classical creeds.
[^13] See Pearl of Great Price, Abraham 3:18, 19, 22, 23. See also B. H. Roberts, Seventys' Year Book, Volume IV; Skelton Publishing Company, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1912; Lesson IV.
[^14] "The organization of the spiritual and heavenly worlds, and of spiritual and heavenly beings, was agreeable to the most perfect order and harmony: their limits and bounds were fixed irrevocably, and voluntarily subscribed to in their heavenly estate by themselves, and were by our first parents subscribed to upon the earth. Hence the importance of embracing and subscribing to principles of eternal truth by all men upon the earth that expect eternal life." Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 325.
[^15] Latter-day Saints tend to ignore the context of the oft-quoted passage of Lehi's: ". . . Men are, that they might have joy." (2 Nephi 2:25.) Lehi teaches that joy could not arise except through contrasts of mortality. Mortal life is sweet, but it is bittersweet.
[^16] "The Father called all spirits before Him at the creation of man, and organized them." "At the first organization in heaven we were all present, and saw the Saviour chosen and appointed and the plan of salvation made, and we sanctioned it." Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pages 158, 181.
[^17] C. S. Lewis argues in his Problem of Pain, New York, Macmillan Company, 1962, that God is Omnipotent, yet insists that God cannot make us susceptible to His grace without pain, and adds that some are incapable even then. The Prophet taught that experience itself is invaluable, and that our individual callings involve suffering in the service of humanity. The widest experience in trial is the most desirable. (See Roberts' comment on "Sweet are the uses of adversity," The Gospel, Deseret Book Company, Salt Lake City, 1950; page 290.)
[^18] "For intelligence cleaveth unto intelligence; wisdom receiveth wisdom; truth embraceth truth; virtue loveth virtue; light cleaveth unto light; mercy hath compassion on mercy and claimeth her own . . ." (Doctrine and Covenants 88:40.)
[^19] We need not suffer further for our sinfulness, for through Him we may be redeemed. We need not suffer further from false expectations, for as we increase in righteousness, His revelations replace error with truth. Eventually, we need not suffer in the threat of final failure and condemnation. For as we prove that we are "determined to serve the Lord at all hazards" we can receive the assurance of eternal life, "an anchor to the soul, sure and steadfast." "Though the thunders might roll and lightnings flash, and earthquakes bellow, and war gather thick around, yet this hope and knowledge would support the soul in every hour of trial, trouble and tribulation. Then knowledge through our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ is the grand key that unlocks the glories and mysteries of the kingdom of heaven." Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 298.
[^20] "I assure the Saints that truth, in reference to these matters, can and may be known through the revelations of God in the way of His ordinances, and in answer to prayer." Ibid., page 325.
[^21] The Prophet was counseled in his youth, "Be patient in afflictions for thou shalt have many." (Doctrine and Covenants 24:8.) "If I obtain the glory which I have in view, I expect to wade through much tribulation." (Juvenile Instructor, Volume 27, page 173.) And toward the end he said, "Every wave of adversity has only wafted me that much closer to Deity." Brigham Young observed that the Prophet was more perfected in 38 years with severe trials than he could have been in a thousand years without them.
[^22] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 296.
[^23] The Prophet taught that man was fallen and in need of the "second birth." But he did not teach "total depravity"; he did not teach "original sin" if that means we participated in Adam's fall metaphysically or symbolically; he did not teach that corporeality was a curse. Man may be not only unfulfilled; but a rebel, shot through with tendencies that lead to further corruption. But the degenerate can become regenerate. For Joseph Smith the problem is worse (it includes mind and spirit in the fall) and regeneration better (it leads to a condition exactly akin to that of the Divine), than traditional views.
[^24] See Paul in Galatians 6. Paul has been credited (or blamed) with a flesh-spirit dualism. But this is a moot question. He clearly saw the difference between corrupt flesh and godly flesh. But he did not teach a doctrine of escape.
[^25] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 51.
[^26] See Menninger and Hillner (editors), Constructive Aspects of Anxiety; Abingdon Press, New York, 1963.
[^27] See Marcel on the "limit situation" the body imposes in John Wild, The Challenge of Existentialism; Bloomington, Indiana, 1955.
[^28] Speaking of the resurrection, the Prophet says "they glory in bloom and beauty. No man can describe it to you, no man can write it." Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 368.
