Truman G. Madsen, Eternal Man ( 1966)

CHAPTER V

Evil and Suffering

. . . Know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good.

The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he? [^1]

The most staggering objection to belief in a personal God is the ugly, tragic, overwhelming fact of human inequality and suffering.

Dare we uncover this stark reality, not as an academic toy, but at its worst?

As a beginning, let us walk into a hospital.

Here. This newborn infant with the lovely face. She could not have had worthier parents. But she was born in total paralysis and is blind. The doctors do not know whether she will survive. And if she does. . . .

This bed is empty. Its occupant, a quivering psychotic with a wild stare, is upstairs undergoing shock treatment. He collapsed when his wife and two children were maimed in a fire, one beyond recognition.

Over here is a surgeon who had a rare brain disease and asked his closest friend to operate. The operation failed; and he has been, for nearly three years, a human vegetable. His friend has since committed suicide.

Somewhere tonight the families of these souls are crying themselves to sleep.

Now, if your arm will hold out, write as many zeros after a "1" as will portray similar reenactments of these scenes that are, or have been, or may be, on this planet. And that will be one thread in the tapestry of human misery.

Come next to the roof of the hospital and gaze up at the order and design of the stars. Do they prove that God is there? What, then, is proved by the utter disorder, the cruel indifference, the fantastic meaninglessness of life below us? Does God care more about the stars than about His children?

Traditionally, the last resort (if not the first) of the believer in God, under this twisting knife, is: "Strange and inscrutable are the ways of the Divine."

But this retreat to mystery, even for its advocates, leaves gnawing anxieties. So have arisen two major efforts at reconciliation. One approach says that evil is not really real. It is privative, or perspectival, or illusory. [^2] The other approach says that evil is really real, worse, even, than the enemies of religion have said. [^3] The one supposes to exonerate God by denying evil. The other supposes strangely to placate man by exaggerating it. The one says there is no problem, the other implies that there is no hope. Both are mistaken.

Let us summon, now, a prophet-son of modern times.

We will require that he know, in the very marrow of his bones, the excruciating anguish of mortal life. [^4] For nothing is more barren, to one in agony, than pat answers which seem the unfeeling evasions of a distant spectator who "never felt a wound."

Let us introduce the Prophet Joseph Smith to the mother of a blind baby. Listen to the queries of her heart in this imaginary dialogue. [^5] And mark how these, the merest kernels of his prophetic grasp of man's origins, radically alter typical reflections on suffering. [^6]

MOTHER: Is what I am going through "illusion"? Is it "all in my mind"?

THE PROPHET: Suffering often results from illusions. But whether or not we face reality as it is, suffering is still real and none escape it. Christ did not.

MOTHER: But why did not God prevent what has happened to me? Why should I or my child be the victims? What have we done to deserve this?

THE PROPHET: You assume suffering is always a form of Divine punishment. It is not. You are convinced by Job's "friends" instead of by Job. [^7] But let us go further back. It is true that God can prevent (as He can induce) some kinds of suffering. But not all. [^8]

MOTHER: What do you mean? Is not God all powerful? Are not all things possible with Him? How can we have faith in a limited God?

THE PROPHET: The question is rather how we can have faith in the "unconditioned" God of the Creeds. The Creeds say that God, being Absolute in power, could have created the universe and its creatures in a utopia of happiness and without pain. They say that with Absolute foreknowledge our "freedom" would be hopelessly abused. He elected not to return this mass of humanity to nothing, but to thrust it into a worse, and endless, torment. [^9]

Non-Christians call such a God "Monstrous." Many Christians call Him (or "It") "inscrutable" and live, for all their talk of love, in terror. Thank God the living God has revealed that no such god exists.

MOTHER: But if God is not behind all our suffering, what is? Are you saying there is some other ultimate explanation?

THE PROPHET: Yes. You have been taught that God is the total cause of everything. The truth is that He is not the total cause of anything. [^10]

MOTHER: What, then?

THE PROPHET: God is forever surrounded by us, by co-eternal intelligences, and by the self-existent elements and principles of reality. These are as unoriginated as He is.

Now the Creeds say that God has always been God. But this well-motivated expression of reverence is a solemn travesty. The truth is infinitely more inspiring: that God Himself became God (whose power now extends in and through all things) by the mastery of the same ultimate and unchanging conditions to which you and I are subject. So, likewise, did His Firstborn Son, Jesus the Christ. [^11]

In His relationship to us, "all things are possible" that are possible. But some things are impossible. We cannot have crucial experience without having it. We cannot unfold into His fulness except in His way. We cannot develop without stress nor be perfected without suffering. The belief that we can write "God" in front of these statements and thus remove the "nots" is an illusion that will only end in disillusion. [^12]

MOTHER: But why do some suffer so much more than others? Are we not created equal?

THE PROPHET: We are equal as far as the concern, and the pure, glorious, fatherly love of God are concerned; for we are all spiritually begotten of Him. And no superlative in our present language can describe this love. We are also equal before the law, eternal law.

But in our original natures we are uncreated and unequal. Individual differences (and therefore needs) predate mortality and even our beginnings as spirits. They are "gnolaum" or eternal. [^13] God did not create them so. Thus, no waving of a Divine wand can transform a Satan into a Christ nor a Christ into a Satan. In nobility, and in response to the sanctifying powers that emanate from God the Father, they differ. And so do all the spirit sons and daughters of God.

MOTHER: But what has this to do with me? Why has God thrown us into this world with these horrible handicaps? Why? Why?

THE PROPHET: Again, you assume that God alone accounts for your being here and that handicaps are all necessarily final and horrible. Instead, you and the child of your bosom counseled intimately with God the Father. Freely, fully, and with a courage that astonishes mortal imagination, you elected and prepared for this estate. The contrasts of the flesh, its risks, its terrific trials were known to you. More than that, you comprehended your actual appointed mission in this world, designed to meet your individual needs, and those who would depend upon you. Perhaps you anticipated these exact circumstances. [^14]

Why did you make an irrevocable covenant to enter the flesh? You recognized that, whatever the price, the increasing glory, light, and power of the Divine was in every way worth it!

MOTHER: But that seems so cruel. Did not Christ come to relieve suffering? Are not His disciples to be blessed?

THE PROPHET: Christ came that suffering might result not only in good, but in its perfect work, which is perfection. He did not live to end all suffering, but to end all needless suffering and to turn suffering into joy, even in this world. [^15]

Let me explain.

In our own inner experience we can trace the opposite products of pain. At this hour life seems blinding, devastating. Yet it is a measure of our discipleship of Christ that even sorely grievous hours have yielded enlightenment, a budding knowledge of self and others, and ennoblement. When we search ourselves, it is no mystery that good, the purifying force of godliness, may arise out of affliction. (Looking back we may wonder whether anything we really prize comes without it.)

This should caution us in judging what is and what is not a blessing in this life.

MOTHER: Yes. I recognize that precious things of mind and spirit cannot come from ease, nor from evasion of struggle. But such suffering as this, so meaningless, so destructive, often leads to worse suffering, and that, in turn, to worse. Why so vast a sum in the world?

THE PROPHET: We are on the threshold now of a sum you may rarely have contemplated. The premortal relationship we had with Jesus Christ was a prevision of our descent and ascent. [^16] Then, as now, we shrank from innocent suffering. For this is of the essence of love.

But what is left to the Tender Parent who cannot (not simply, will not) force His spirit-child into the path of self-realization? What lifting power exceeds all others in our stages of deficiency, ignorance, and then a corrupt nature? [^17] It is the completely voluntary, and completely undeserved, suffering of "the Lamb slain from before the foundation of the world." Somehow that is infinite. The innate mercy of our spirits was heightened in the presence of His compassion. [^18] And in this world, often through pain, we are reawakened in our spirit to the Christ who really was and is. Only the most darkened soul can flout the profound inner craving that His suffering, and all else, even the tremors of your infant, may yield power and purity, and not finally be in vain.

MOTHER: Was His sacrifice necessary to enable us to rise into a life like His?

THE PROPHET: Yes. But the warm and overwhelming miracle is this: the more we approach Him and His likeness, the more we come to love as He loves, and the less we suffer needlessly. [^19]

These physical losses and tribulations, if endured in His name, have their limits and are refining. The apparently, but not really, limitless mental and spiritual anguish that arises from life's buffetings takes on meaning. Pain becomes a laboratory of soul-nurture, and we may "count it all joy."

The darkest abyss has its own revelations, its own chrysalis of higher promise. This is not myth! I testify it is the deepest secret of life.

MOTHER: It is all so hard, so hard.

THE PROPHET: Yes. Yet strangely beautiful. In your present nightmare a voice whips you with why, and if only, and how long, and what might have been. All that I have said may seem empty. But that fever will pass.

And as it does, you will be newly sensitive to the flashes of revelation that are your privilege in the quiet soundings of your soul. They alone can give you individual testimony of this hour's actual meaning for you. They alone can convincingly witness what seems now so utterly unbelievable. You are in the very hollow of the hand of God, a hand that will not, by your premortal request, remove you from the furnace; but will see you through it. [^20]

Whatever the Lord's individual word to you may be, there are two abiding certainties.

The awful tragedy of this life, as of the next, is not suffering. It is "suffering in vain." Or worse, it is suffering that could have been the elixir of nobility, transforming us into a godliness beyond description which, instead, has become the poison of bitterness and alienation. [^21]

But this is equally certain: from the smoldering rubble of our lives, stricken and agonized though they be, there can arise, through Christ, an incredible shining joy, a joy in the image of Christ who is the image of God who overcame all things.

"All your losses will be made up to you in the resurrection provided you continue faithful. By the vision of the Almighty I have seen it." [^22] For you, your child, as for the Father and Christ, there was, there is no other way.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] On the side of determinism. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 187.
[^2] On the side of indeterminism. Some sentence definitions: The determinist says all events are caused. The indeterminist says some events, namely acts of free will, are uncaused. The fatalist says some or all events are predetermined or "fated" by forces beyond man. The predestinarian says that man's salvation, and/or damnation, was unconditionally decided by God's from eternity. The behaviorist says all behavior is due to man's reaction with environment. The mechanist says the world, and man, are machines moving like a computer. Mormonism fits in none of these pigeon-holes. (See Note 9.) (See for a discussion of the controversy: Free Will, Morgenbesser and Walsh (eds.); Englewood Cliffs, N. J., Prentice-Hall, Spectrum Books, 1962.)
[^3] Then there is existential analysis. See discussion on this issue in Readings in Ethical Theory, Hospers and Sellars (eds.); New York, Appleton, 1952; Section, "Guilt and Responsibility."
[^4] See Arthur S. Eddington, Nature of the Physical World, Cambridge University Press, 1953. An answer to this argument from the point of view of a determinist is in Determinism and Freedom in the Age of Modern Science, ed. by Sidney Hook; New York, Collier Books, 1961; "The Case for Determinism," by Brand Blanshard, pages 19-30.
[^5] For a contrast of the scientific and existential approaches to freedom see my article, "The Contribution of Existentialism," BYU Studies, Vol. 1, No. 1, Winter, 1959.
[^6] Doctrine and Covenants 93:29. Compare the Prophet's statement, "Intelligence is eternal and exists upon a self-existing principle. It is a spirit from age to age and there is no creation about it." Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, edited by Joseph Fielding Smith; Deseret News Press, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1958; page 354.
[^7] This, at least, was the Prophet's understanding of uncreate intelligence. See the relevant quotations and comments of B. H. Roberts in the Seventy's Year Book, Volume 4, The Atonement, Lessons I and II. Roberts concludes from scriptural statements, and the later discourses of the Prophet, that reason, imagination, and volition are among the innate qualities of intelligence.
[^8] The view that freedom is only explicable if we assume man's premortal existence is defended by John Wisdom in Philosophy and Psycho Analysis; Oxford, Blackwell, 1953. The difficulties of reconciling the evidence both for causation and freedom are outlined in Foundations of Ethics, W. D. Ross; Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1939; chapter, "Determinism and Indeterminism."
[^9] The decision to enter mortality in a physical body, for example, is final. Not just in the sense that consequences will extend forever. But in the sense that the embodied condition will be everlasting.
[^10] There are puzzles, for example, such as Augustine's-what God was doing before He created man and how man can be blameworthy for acts which follow inevitably from the nature which God created. Another is how the indeterminist can establish responsibility when he says that "free will" events "just happen." The "Gordian knot" is cut not by indeterminism, but by self-determination. Cause-effect relationships, apparently, are universal. But man is, and always has been, one of the unmoved movers, one of the originating causes in the network.
[^11] See Man's Search for Meaning, Viktor E. Frankl; New York, Washington Square Press; pages 206-210. Frankl survived two years in the most incredibly loathsome conditions in the death camps of Auschwitz. His approach to freedom is unusual on the present scene.
[^12] There are, to every kingdom, certain "bounds and conditions." All beings who "abide not" those conditions are not justified. Law enables us to be perfected and sanctified. Doctrine and Covenants 88:34-61; 130:20, 21.
[^13] Indeed, some writers on freedom are convinced that most doctrines of causal necessity have been invented subjectively by men to cover up their needling sense of responsibility. Determinism is an intellectual tranquilizer. But William James says lucidly why another part of us finds determinism intolerable, though he does not prove the existence of free will. See his essay, "Dilemma of Determinism," available in many paperback collections.
[^14] "There are three independent principles: the spirit of God, the spirit of man, and the spirit of the devil. All men have power to resist the devil." Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 189.
[^15] This is the true version of predestination, namely, that the means of our redemption were predetermined in harmony with eternal law and as sanctioned voluntarily by us. But our own agency was not "predetermined" except as its exercise carries over into our present tendencies. "God did predestinate that all who were saved would be saved through Jesus Christ, but unconditional election was not taught by the ancient apostles." Ibid., page 189.
[^16] Ibid., page 191.
[^17] This is the difference between choosing between separate acts, and choosing between whole ways of life. In this realm none of us can act, without blindness, except by revelation. The Prophet said, "A man can do nothing for himself unless God directs him in the right way and the priesthood is for that purpose." Ibid., page 364.
[^18] According to the Prophet we already have made such a covenant "before the foundations of the earth were laid." Now, as we mature in the flesh, this "new and everlasting covenant" is "renewed and confirmed" upon us "for the sake of the whole world." Doctrine and Covenants 84:33-40, 48; 86: 8-11.
[^19] "The Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your good, and his name's glory." Ibid., 21:4-6.
[^20] This is a "cannot" that reduces to an eternal "will not." It is impossible because He has so chosen, not because external forces prevent it. Another remarkable power of freedom.
[^21] "Everlasting covenant was made between three personages before the organization of this earth, and relates to their dispensation of things to men on the earth; these personages, according to Abraham's record, are called God the first, the Creator; God the second, the Redeemer; and God the third, the witness or Testator." Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 190.
[^22] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 296.
