Truman G. Madsen, Eternal Man ( 1966)

CHAPTER VI

Freedom and Fulfillment

All is voluntary. . . . God will not exert any compulsory means and the Devil cannot. [^1]

Any approach to the nature of man leads to the question of freedom. In what sense, if at all, is man free?

Paradoxically, this is a question we are not free to ignore. We agonize over it daily. The impact of life upon us, or, if we prefer, our impact on life compels us to ask ourselves—What is "within my power" and what is not? Did I have to happen? Does anything or everything have to happen? Given the same conditions could I have been or done otherwise?

The central issue, put loosely, is whether or not man can upset the causal chain? The determinist answers, "No." The indeterminist answers, "Yes." [^2] In our time there is a certain freshness to the stalemate as three developments have given birth to new searches and researches.

Some forms of psychology and psychoanalysis point to the immense domination of man's subconscious which, in turn, is fueled by traceable stimuli. These, apparently, are in no way separable from prior causation. Hypnotized, to illustrate, a person may be told that on awakening he will take off his shirt and stand on his head, but that he will forget the instruction. He does so, then invents the most ingenious but clearly false "reasons" for his behavior. Question: Is not all our conduct thus controlled and is not "freedom" just a name for our ignorance of hidden causes? [^3]

The so-called Heisenberg principle in quantum physics affirms that inanimate particles at the sub-atomic level behave in unpredictable ways. Neither their position nor velocity can be charted accurately. Explanation, therefore, must be statistical. By analogy, we can predict the approximate number, but not the exact identity, of persons who will be killed or injured on a Labor Day weekend. The logic of the point, at least for Eddington and Born, is that being indeterminate, the particles are therefore undetermined, therefore "free." [^4] Question: If inanimate matter behaves "freely," why reject the belief that man does?

Writers on man's depth awareness, from Nietzsche to Sartre, from Berdyaev to Heidegger, find freedom an invincible datum in our inner consciousness. They uncover an inferno of guilt toward the past—what I might have done; another inferno of anxiety (not just suspense) toward the future what I might yet be. In dramatic ways they show that no one, not even the most hardheaded determinist, is able to relieve himself of the sense of personal, and admittedly dreadful, freedom. If we could really believe in a thoroughgoing way that what we are and do is unavoidable, we could not consistently feel guilt for we could not sincerely feel responsible. Question: Why not acknowledge on the surface what we all profoundly encounter in the depths? [^5]

In the Beginning

In classical and contemporary debate, one supposition passes unquestioned. Determinists and indeterminists alike suppose that man had a beginning over which he had no control. There are different versions, e.g., "First Cause," "Nature," "Chance," and "God." But, in any case, the view maintains that self-awareness and freedom, whatever they are, came with or after this creation.

Modern revelation not only undercuts this assumption but in an all-important way reverses it. To say that "Man was also in the beginning with God," and that "All intelligence is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it to act for itself," is to say that man never has been totally a product. [^6] His uncreated intelligence is active and self-propelling. [^7] The process of generation and combination of elements that developed spirit and physical bodies followed, instead of preceding, his independent existence. [^8] In this sense man is an eternal co-cause through all stages and all sequences of existence.

Man's Destiny

But with this doctrine of freedom is a doctrine of destiny. Man's nature includes not only the innate possibilities of prime intelligence, but also the embryonic nature of his Eternal Father. In the unfolding process he has already made decisions that are irrevocable and eternal in scope. These, with an everlasting environment, condition him. And from these conditions there is no retreat. [^9]

To outline the extensive philosophical implications of this view and its bearing on a hornet's nest of puzzles is impossible here. [^10] I turn instead to a close look at some of our everyday reflections on freedom. For when these views are accepted as true, some of our most common and cherished notions are immediately revised.

What Is Freedom?

We ordinarily define and defend freedom as the yearning to breathe free, free from pushy parents, blustery policemen, the fetters of red tape, etc. We are so defensive that often we refuse to do what we had decided to do when someone tells us that we "must" do it. (The suspicion may haunt us that we are not really upholding our freedom but exhibiting our slavery to pride.) Many have died for the "four freedoms," for rights of "freedom from." But more precious still is "freedom for," freedom for turning external pressures into internal gains, freedom for becoming what we have it in us to become, the emergence of our authentic selves. Such freedom can flourish or flounder independent of the "inalienable rights." It is the kind of liberty Joseph Smith could not be denied, even in the darkened squalor of Liberty Jail. [^11]

Freedom and Law

We talk as if freedom were opposed to law when we say, "There ought to be a law against that"; or when we speak in timid lament about "the long right arm of the law."

But whatever may be said of the laws of men, in the eternal scheme, law is the guarantor of freedom. The continuities of our existence, the exceptionless conditions of life, give freedom its lasting power. If, when we flip a coin, it can be both (or neither) heads or tails, if anything can really happen following any action, then the freedom of both coins and men is meaningless. The power of man's agency, because of the greater power of God's, can turn the "bounds and conditions" of action into good. And when we seek to become "a law unto ourselves," we are not masters of law, but victims of it, forced to remain unfulfilled. [^12] We do not chortle about "getting away with murder" when we recognize that what we are killing is our own potential.

Freedom and Responsibility Are Brothers

We talk as if freedom is incompatible with foreknowledge, as when we say of a spontaneous act that it was "just on impulse" or "just for the dickens of it." But is it not apparent that the fullest exercise of freedom requires foreknowledge, knowledge of our actual possibilities, of reachable ends and effective means? Lacking it, we are at best moles in a maze in pointless quest of survival, for what? The disillusion of our time is largely the effect of lost moorings and the terrible suspense of the unforeseen. "Men's hearts fail them" thus. And hence arise a dozen forms of fatalism invoked because it is apparently more bearable to believe the future is all fixed, than to believe it still depends—on us. Thus religions of grace-alone and psychologies of adjustment-alone perpetuate imprisonment. They encourage us to accept our soul-sicknesses in the conviction that there is nothing we can do. [^13]

We often recite glibly the chain of blame, making excuses in a way that does not separate the sheep from the scapegoats. Everyone can blame everyone else, who, happily, can blame others still. Even the devil comes in for his undue share. [^14] But the logic, or rather psychologic, of the position is that since the devil shows signs of being a compulsive sadist he should not be held responsible, certainly not punished. He no doubt had delinquent parents!

The truth is that any chain-tracing will eventually lead us to ourselves, and some sovereign decision. Addictions of character, for example, may justify the cry, "I can't help it." But it can always be said truly, "You could have helped it."

We Are Free to Change

On the other hand we talk at times as if freedom were a constant, available whenever we want to use it. "I could do it (or stop doing it) if I wanted to." When praise is in order, it is customary to claim to be "self-made," as if, for example, according to our own fancy, we can live without breathing and breathe without air.

Actually, the most frightening power of freedom is to freely give itself up to forces that stunt it. An acorn can become an oak or less than an oak, but not something else. So with us. In an acorn there are indispensable elements of nurture. So with us. Unlike the acorn, we have intelligent initiative that can go astray. In this realm the role of Christ is to break the bonds of our diminishing freedom and reenthrone our becoming. In crucial ways only He can do this. [^15] But here again, He cannot if we will not. We must will and seek and apply His powers with the measure of control that remains to us. The measure is always more than zero. "There is never a time when the spirit is too old to approach God." [^16]

Freedom Involves Commitment

We talk as if freedom consisted in having the greatest variety of options and that a "once-and-for-all" decision coerces our initiative. But is freedom increased by every new flavor of ice cream?

Actually, it is only when we rise above trivial options and ask ourselves in the depths, "What do I want to be?" that we emerge from the bondage of a flitting and faceless mode of life." [^17] The most majestic wonder of our freedom is that we can make all-time binding decisions, eternal covenants. [^18] Once made, once "renewed and confirmed," they free us from the life-wasting torment of "bringing it all up" over and over. The decisions, as it were, reverberate through the whole galaxy. [^19] And even the lesser roles of life, its distractions and setbacks, take on color and creativity as instruments of the larger "becoming."

Why is it, we may ask, that the Father and the Son "cannot" break their eternal compacts? [^20] Because they are "unfree" in attitude? Just the opposite. Because they have made everlasting covenant that they will express freedom in the fullest way, to the resounding blessing of the whole human family. [^21] For us, such a decision requires incalculably more intelligent use of individual talent than does shrinking postponement of decision. Made in imitation of the Divine, man's free agency is the boldest, most powerful, most sweeping, and most exciting commitment possible.

Freely we must face it. Out of the eternities we chose and were chosen for light and Divine sonship. Only if we become determined against such a glorious destiny will we avoid the over-arching decisions of direction that bring total freedom. For if we will, our destiny is to become more and more free in the widening circles of fulfillment called Eternal Life.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Rudolph Otto, Idea of the Holy; London, Oxford, Galaxy Paperback. Otto was a German Protestant theologian. Others of varied persuasions who nevertheless agree that the "sacred sense" is the core of religious experience are: Julian Huxley, a Humanist, in Religion Without Revelation, New York, Mentor Books, 1964. Rufus Jones, the "mild mystic" of the Society of Friends in The Radiant Life and A Call to What Is Vital; New York, Macmillan, 1949. Albert Schweitzer. who has become the living conscience of the 20th Century, in Out of My Life and Thought; New York, Mentor, 1960. His code is "reverence for life." Carl Jung, psychoanalyst, speaks of the "collective unconscious" or "symbol-making factory" in man that leads us to religious expression reflecting a kind of "racial memory." The Undiscovered Self, New York, Mentor, 1964. Tielhard Chardin, a Catholic scientist, in The Phenomenon of Man; New York, Harper Torch book, speaks of a kind of knowledge-sphere which is hidden in us. John Wisdom and Ronald W. Hepburn, both in the positivistic tradition, agree on this sense of holiness. See the latter's Christianity and Paradox; London, Watts and Company, 1957. The "depth-theologians," e.g. Tillich, Marcel, and Buber, speak of "intuition" and in various ways hold that "unconditional concern" in man is the foundation of all religion.
[^2] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, edited by Joseph Fielding Smith; Deseret News Press, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1958; page 351.
[^3] Documentary History of the Church, Volume V, page 526.
[^4] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 151; also Doctrine and Covenants 9:8, 9.
[^5] This is one of Kierkegaard's descriptions of the nature of the "leap of faith" to Christ.
[^6] Plato's notion of "knowledge by recollection" of a former existence was mainly conceptual or mathematical. For the prophets the awakening of "spirit memories" is also concrete, pictorial, personal. The present world is a grosser duplicate of the heavenly order, whereas Plato's heaven was a realm transcending space, time, and materiality.
[^7] Carl Jung, Modern Man in Search of a Soul; New York, Harcourt Brace.
[^8] The view that freedom is only explicable if we assume man's premortal existence is defended by John Wisdom in Philosophy and Psycho Analysis; Oxford, Blackwell, 1953. The difficulties of reconciling the evidence both for causation and freedom are outlined in Foundations of Ethics, W. D. Ross; Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1939; chapter, "Determinism and Indeterminism."
[^9] The decision to enter mortality in a physical body, for example, is final. Not just in the sense that consequences will extend forever. But in the sense that the embodied condition will be everlasting.
[^10] There are puzzles, for example, such as Augustine's-what God was doing before He created man and how man can be blameworthy for acts which follow inevitably from the nature which God created. Another is how the indeterminist can establish responsibility when he says that "free will" events "just happen." The "Gordian knot" is cut not by indeterminism, but by self-determination. Cause-effect relationships, apparently, are universal. But man is, and always has been, one of the unmoved movers, one of the originating causes in the network.
[^11] See Man's Search for Meaning, Viktor E. Frankl; New York, Washington Square Press; pages 206-210. Frankl survived two years in the most incredibly loathsome conditions in the death camps of Auschwitz. His approach to freedom is unusual on the present scene.
[^12] There are, to every kingdom, certain "bounds and conditions." All beings who "abide not" those conditions are not justified. Law enables us to be perfected and sanctified. Doctrine and Covenants 88:34-61; 130:20, 21.
[^13] Indeed, some writers on freedom are convinced that most doctrines of causal necessity have been invented subjectively by men to cover up their needling sense of responsibility. Determinism is an intellectual tranquilizer. But William James says lucidly why another part of us finds determinism intolerable, though he does not prove the existence of free will. See his essay, "Dilemma of Determinism," available in many paperback collections.
[^14] "There are three independent principles: the spirit of God, the spirit of man, and the spirit of the devil. All men have power to resist the devil." Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 189.
[^15] This is the true version of predestination, namely, that the means of our redemption were predetermined in harmony with eternal law and as sanctioned voluntarily by us. But our own agency was not "predetermined" except as its exercise carries over into our present tendencies. "God did predestinate that all who were saved would be saved through Jesus Christ, but unconditional election was not taught by the ancient apostles." Ibid., page 189.
[^16] Ibid., page 191.
[^17] This is the difference between choosing between separate acts, and choosing between whole ways of life. In this realm none of us can act, without blindness, except by revelation. The Prophet said, "A man can do nothing for himself unless God directs him in the right way and the priesthood is for that purpose." Ibid., page 364.
[^18] According to the Prophet we already have made such a covenant "before the foundations of the earth were laid." Now, as we mature in the flesh, this "new and everlasting covenant" is "renewed and confirmed" upon us "for the sake of the whole world." Doctrine and Covenants 84:33-40, 48; 86: 8-11.
[^19] "The Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your good, and his name's glory." Ibid., 21:4-6.
[^20] This is a "cannot" that reduces to an eternal "will not." It is impossible because He has so chosen, not because external forces prevent it. Another remarkable power of freedom.
[^21] "Everlasting covenant was made between three personages before the organization of this earth, and relates to their dispensation of things to men on the earth; these personages, according to Abraham's record, are called God the first, the Creator; God the second, the Redeemer; and God the third, the witness or Testator." Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 190.
