Truman G. Madsen, Eternal Man ( 1966)

CHAPTER VII

Revelation and Self-Revelation

There is surely a piece of the Divinity in us.

Something that was before the Elements and owes no homage to the Sun. Nature tells me that I am the Image of God as well as Scripture.

He that understands not this much hath not his introduction or first lesson and is yet to begin the alphabet of man.

—Sir Thomas Browne, Religio Medici.

Intensive self-analysis is the preoccupation of our time. Many methods are employed to probe the mysterious regions below the consciousness, regions "sheer, frightful, no-man-fathomed." Out of this has arisen a variety of attempts to define and explain man's religiousness. And thus, for example, there are "reductions" of religion to folk-psychology, or primitive taboo, or flights of wish, or emotional purgation, or aesthetic ritual, etc.

On one point there is surprising agreement among writers otherwise opposed. It is recognition of a wholly unique spread of awareness in man—that is called, by Otto, the "numinous" sense—deep innate sensitivity to something sacred, an underived feeling for the holy, with responses of wonder, awe, and reverence. [^1] This, it is claimed by many, is primary, a given fact of human consciousness that cannot be traced to rational or empirical sources. We do not learn it. It is somehow, and strangely, innate.

For this and a vast spectrum of related phenomena, the Prophet Joseph Smith gave a seminal explanation: The heightening sense of light within is rooted in man's spirit. It is not something magically created at birth. It permeates our cumulative heritage of individual awareness and extends infinitely into the past. Its composition is actually derived from a Divine nebula of elements "in which," the Prophet taught, "dwells all the glory." [^2]

Explaining the Inexplicable

Attempts to account for the bases of religious consciousness that are "this-worldly," therefore, often leave a great deal unexplained or inadequately explained away. But the recognition that religion is more involved in recovery than discovery, that our destiny is not union with Divine realities, but reunion, opens up a whole new perspective.

Within the framework of Judaeo-Christian assumptions, for example, it aids immensely.

This recognition explains, to begin with, the Prophet's classic statement on religious knowing. Whether written, spoken, or directly presented within, the "word of Jehovah" has such an influence over the human mind, the logical mind, that it is convincing without other testimony. [^3] When it comes, he later said, as a flow of pure intelligence attended by a burning in the center self, it is of God. [^4] Our search for external warrant is really the confirmation and application of what is already, and more certainly, known.

It aids in comprehending the essence of faith. Faith or trust in the Divine is not a blind leap nor desperate gullibility, not "being crucified on the paradox of the absurd." [^5] Faith rests on knowledge and self-knowledge and cannot survive without them. It is the expression of the inner self in harmony with a whole segment of one's prior experiences. These experiences, however hidden under mortal amnesia, are indelible in their effect on our affinities, kinships, and sensitivities. [^6]

Understanding our religious destiny clarifies the apparent requirement, which may be said to underlie the whole of the scriptures, that we are expected both to believe and respond. To the query, how can you believe what is utterly unevidenced, the question may be returned, how have you managed to repress the ingrained evidence within? The caution, often justified in religion, that one should not say he knows when he does not know is to be matched with the caution that it is equally deceptive to claim one does not know when, in fact, he does know. Both errors betray and disrupt the self.

This understanding of our relationship to God gives meaning to the theme of modern revelation that the forces of darkness operate by subtraction more than by addition. "That which was from the beginning is plainly manifest unto them," and "every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning." Then "one cometh and taketh away light and truth, through disobedience, from the children of men, and because of the tradition of their fathers." (Doctrine and Covenants 93:31, 38, 39.) The love for darkness which follows on the flouting of the inner light often goes under apparently praiseworthy disguises: objectivity, intellectual integrity, precision, strength to resist one's "mere feelings," etc.

This understanding exposes the structure of testimony and the nature of judgment. "Every man whose spirit receiveth not the light is under condemnation. For man is spirit. . . ." (Doctrine and Covenants 93:32, 33.) This is to say, as B. H. Roberts puts it, that the spirit is "native to truth"; that as a flame leaps toward a flame, the soul's very nature is to reach toward and embrace the light. One who thrusts down or represses these sovereign impulses sunders himself. He eventually falls victim, as Jung maintains, to some of the worst forms of psychosomatic illness and misery. (Contrary to the Freudians, Jung believes one can healthily suppress his more superficial desires, however compulsive, but not these.) [^7] Of all the laws of spiritual life, this may be the most fundamental. He who welcomes truth and light, on the other hand, moves toward "a perfect bright recollection" and "receiveth truth and light until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things," growing "brighter and brighter until the perfect day." (Doctrine and Covenants 93:28. Compare 50:23, 24; 88:67.)

The Uprush and the Downflow

To move from interpretation of the sacred inner life to adequate description is notoriously difficult. Nevertheless, here is an attempt to capture the flavor of the Latter-day Saint "experiment in depth," revelatory touches with the self that seem to disclose the longer-than-mortal sense. (Inevitably we veer into the oblique but somehow more expressive language of simile and metaphor.) There are:

—Prayer flashes, when our words outreach thought and we seem to be listening above ourselves, completely at home while we are surprised at hints of hidden spirit memories within.

—Familiarity of persons, immediate luminous rapport—this face or that gesture or motion—that elicits the sense of recall, a premortal intimacy, especially in the environs of teaching and being taught.

—Haunting sensations, usually visual, sometimes auditory, of a landscape of life or a bitter predicament in the soul, that call up simultaneous feelings of "again" and "for the first time"; like being thrust, as leading actor, into the last act of a play without knowing, and yet almost knowing, what occurred in the first two.

—Numbing protests from below sometimes of unrelievable urgency or guilt, that are ruthless in unmasking our pretense. These are not simply the yeas or nays of "conscience" about acts, but bell sounds of a whole self that will not be muffled, that ring with presentiments, thrusting us toward ends that seem tied to an elusive but white-lighted blueprint inside.

—Shades of consciousness that occur just at awakening or just before sleep, unpredictably impressing while they express, in images or silent words or free association. By the sanctity of their feeling-tone, these are different than our usual helter-skelter menagerie of thought.

—Dreams and illusions that seem not to be mere dreams or mere illusions, catching us quite off-guard and lingering in their after-effect, as if life were a game of internal hide-the-thimble and we were "getting warm" to our own potential.

—Unaccountable reverberations (e.g., in tear-filled eye or tingling throat or spine) from a phrase or sentiment (which, for the speaker or writer may be merely parenthetical), or from a strain of music, or some trivial stimulus in the midst of drudgery, bearing a holy atmosphere of spontaneous and total recognition.

—Reflections of our faces in the mirror when we look in and not just at, our eyes. As if light were coming to the surface, and a curious recovery, and even awe, of the self occurs. There lurks an autobiography, a soul-story that is foreign, yet intimate, unfolding a more-than-I-thought-I-was.

—Right-track feelings, the sense of the foreordained, like emerging from a fever to find that roughshod or happenstance trials have been presided over by some uncanny instinctual self who knows what he is about. Just before or just after turning a crucial corner, this someone nearer than you, that is you, holds a quiet celebration that injects peace into the marrow of the bones.

Such flashes and drives are tied to the whole gamut of complex mental life and may have neat and utterly mundane naturalistic explanations (such as the chemistry of the occipital lobe). Yet the joy that comes from these uprisings, rooted, as they seem to be, in some more primal creative being and that, in turn, in God, supersedes any of the pleasures of human possession or external manipulation.

Cleaning the Lampshade

Much of modern life is a darkening process, cutting us off from the uprush of the fountain at our center. The lives we live and the demands of environment to which science and technology and strategy are admirably adapted, tend to lead us toward self-estrangement.

Becoming more out of alignment with our inner selves, straining to present faces that are acceptable to the world, we suffer a shallowing effect. And what William James called "the Energies of Men" are trapped and suffocated, because we are afraid of being deluded, we have a revulsion at many forms of religion, and a kind of psychological hypochondria which makes us suspect our subconscious is solely inhabited by snakes and spiders.

Was it a sort of ancient hoodwink the Master recommended—these strange sentences about "becoming as a little child"? Are the virtues of the childlike more obvious than the vices of the childish?

Maybe He was saying more, saying that we are not, as empiricists assert, born an empty tablet on which the chalk of childhood writes. Maybe He was saying that a child has swift, untinctured affinity and response to his own burning deeps. He is exemplary not, as is so often said, in vulnerable readiness to believe others' voices, but in soul-unity that prevents disbelief of his own. He has whole, happy, healthy relationship with the core of creativity and spirituality which is his glory-laden spirit.

Footnotes

And that it may not be supposed, that all this is done by a simple and servile obligation to their common practice, or by any authoritative impression of their ancient custom, without judgment or reasoning and from having a soul so stupid, that it cannot contrive what else to do, I must here give you some touches of their sufficiency in point of understanding. Besides what I repeated to you before, which was one of their songs of war, I have another, a love-song, that begins thus: "Stay, adder, stay, that by thy pattern my sister may draw the fashion and work of a rich ribbon, that I may present to my beloved, by which means thy beauty and the excellent order of thy scales shall forever be preferred before all other serpents." Wherein the first couplet, "Stay, adder," etc., makes the burden of the song. Now I have conversed enough with poetry to judge thus much: that not only, there is nothing of barbarous in this invention, but, moreover, that it is perfectly Anacreontic. To which may be added, that their language is soft, of a pleasing accent, and something bordering upon the Greek terminations.

Three of these people, not foreseeing how dear their knowledge of the corruptions of this part of the world will one day cost their happiness and repose, and that the effect of this commerce will be their ruin, as I presuppose it is in a very fair way (miserable men to suffer themselves to be deluded with desire of novelty and to have left the serenity of their own heaven, to come so far to gaze at ours!) were at Rouen at the time that the late King Charles IX. was there. The king himself talked to them a good while, and they were made to see our fashions, our pomp, and the form of a great city. After which, some one asked their opinion, and would know of them, what of all the things they had seen, they found most to be admired? To which they made answer, three things, of which I have forgotten the third, and am troubled at it, but two I yet remember. They said, that in the first place they thought it very strange, that so many tall men wearing beards, strong, and well armed, who were about the king ('tis like they meant the Swiss of his guard) should submit to obey a child, and that they did not rather choose out one among themselves to command. Secondly (they have a way of speaking in their language, to call men the half of one another), that they had observed, that there were among us men full and crammed with all manner of commodities, while, in the meantime, their halves were begging at their doors, lean, and half-starved with hunger and poverty; and they thought it strange that these necessitous halves were able to suffer so great an inequality and injustice, and that they did not take the others by the throats, or set fire to their houses.

I talked to one of them a great while together, but I had so ill an interpreter, and one who was so perplexed by his own ignorance to apprehend my meaning, that I could get nothing out of him of any moment. Asking him, what advantage he reaped from the superiority he had among his own people (for he was a captain, and our mariners called him king), he told me: to march at the head of them to war. Demanding of him further, how many men he had to follow him? he showed me a space of ground, to signify as many as could march in such a compass, which might be four or five thousand men; and putting the question to him, whether or no his authority expired with the war? he told me this remained: that when he went to visit the villages of his dependence, they plained him paths through the thick of their woods, by which he might pass at his ease. All this does not sound very ill, and the last was not at all amiss, for they wear no breeches.

---
Notas:
[^1] See Rudolph Otto, Idea of the Holy; London, Oxford, Galaxy Paperback. Otto was a German Protestant theologian. Others of varied persuasions who nevertheless agree that the "sacred sense" is the core of religious experience are: Julian Huxley, a Humanist, in Religion Without Revelation, New York, Mentor Books, 1964. Rufus Jones, the "mild mystic" of the Society of Friends in The Radiant Life and A Call to What Is Vital; New York, Macmillan, 1949. Albert Schweitzer. who has become the living conscience of the 20th Century, in Out of My Life and Thought; New York, Mentor, 1960. His code is "reverence for life." Carl Jung, psychoanalyst, speaks of the "collective unconscious" or "symbol-making factory" in man that leads us to religious expression reflecting a kind of "racial memory." The Undiscovered Self, New York, Mentor, 1964. Tielhard Chardin, a Catholic scientist, in The Phenomenon of Man; New York, Harper Torch book, speaks of a kind of knowledge-sphere which is hidden in us. John Wisdom and Ronald W. Hepburn, both in the positivistic tradition, agree on this sense of holiness. See the latter's Christianity and Paradox; London, Watts and Company, 1957. The "depth-theologians," e.g. Tillich, Marcel, and Buber, speak of "intuition" and in various ways hold that "unconditional concern" in man is the foundation of all religion.
[^2] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, edited by Joseph Fielding Smith; Deseret News Press, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1958; page 351.
[^3] Documentary History of the Church, Volume V, page 526.
[^4] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 151; also Doctrine and Covenants 9:8, 9.
[^5] This is one of Kierkegaard's descriptions of the nature of the "leap of faith" to Christ.
[^6] Plato's notion of "knowledge by recollection" of a former existence was mainly conceptual or mathematical. For the prophets the awakening of "spirit memories" is also concrete, pictorial, personal. The present world is a grosser duplicate of the heavenly order, whereas Plato's heaven was a realm transcending space, time, and materiality.
[^7] Carl Jung, Modern Man in Search of a Soul; New York, Harcourt Brace.
