The P Chapter 2 aTriarchs and MaTriarchs

Our Fathers and Mothers

As its name suggests, Genesis is a book of begin- that the sons of Abraham are those who are (opposite page) Footprints from nings. Here we read of the beginning of family life people of faith. (Gal 3:6–7) the past to eternity—Abraham

(Gen 4:1–2, 4:25–26), of music, craftsmen and cities Recite the account of Abraham according to this and his family have left their

ment (Gen 4:17, 4:21–22, 10:11–12), of crime and punish- Book; he was indeed a righteous person and a mark on the sands of time, (Gen 10:1–32) (Gen 4:3–15), of people groups and nations Prophet. (Qu’ran 19:42) charting the way for generations (Gen 4:26, 9:11–12, 17:1–8) , of religion and a Divine covenant From our perspective it is appropriate, then, of their descendants to begin redemption , and of hope, promise and that the journeys of Abraham and his wife Sarah, their journey to God.

(Gen 3:15, 9:12–17, 12:1–3). These stories of as described in Genesis, carried them from one end

life “in the beginning” (from Bereshit, the title of the of the Fertile Crescent to the other, across a great book in Hebrew) coalesce in the lives of the Patri-sweep of land that was to become so important in archs and Matriarchs: Abraham and Sarah, Isaac the rise and early history of Judaism, Christianity and Rebekah, Jacob, Leah and Rachel, and Joseph. and Islam. At the same time, Abraham’s journey

As the ancestral head of a family that was to be-from Mesopotamia (Gen 11:31–12:3), then to and from

come “as numerous as the stars of the sky and the Egypt (Gen 12:10–13:1), anticipated later journeys that sand on the seashore” (Gen 22:17), Abraham is held his descendants would make into and out of the

alike: in special regard by Jews, Christians and Muslims same lands: Israel’s sojourn in Egypt, the Exodus,

the Deportation to Assyria and the Exile to Babylon

Rabbi Hanan bar Rava said in the name of Rav: (Gen 47:27; Ex 13:17–18; 2 Kgs 17:1–23; 2 Chron 36:20–23) . Israelite captives in Assyria On the day our father Abraham departed from Although ancient Mesopotamia and Egypt were playing the lyre, from the palace this world, all the notables of the world’s na- fertile lands, well watered by powerful rivers and of-of Sennacherib at Kuyunjik tions stood in a line and said: “Alas for the world fering social and economic opportunities, the envy (Nineveh). Knowing that their that has lost its leader! Alas for the ship that has of the known world, Abraham was not at home in ei-father Abraham had journeyed lost its pilot.” (Baba Bathra 91a–b) ther. Instead, he was called—Divinely compelled— from Mesopotamia to “the

to go to a thin, barren land between, with few of the land that I will show you,”

Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned natural resources that are normally considered nec-these captives could only sing to him as righteousness. Therefore, be certain essary for “the good life.” Abraham’s sojourns in the songs of sorrow in the land they

too wanted to leave behind.

One hundred forty years

later Judean exiles in Babylon

refused to play their lyres as

long as they were outside the

Land of Promise (Ps 137:1–3).

Abraham’s Migration.

While Abraham’s journeys

from Ur of the Chaldees to

Haran and then Egypt carried

him across the sweep of the

Fertile Crescent, he was most

at home in Canaan, the land

God promised to his many

descendants.

19

ch2_Patriarchs_Matriarchs.indd 19 This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2014 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, 2/6/13 1:02 PM

Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your The PaTriarchs and MaTriarchs

land of Canaan, where he owned no plot of ground of patriarch in this land of opportunity, but in-until he bought a cave in which to bury his wife stead he moved on, prompted by the divine call (Gen 23:1–20) , set the stage not only for the birth of of God, to a place known only as “the land that I two great peoples—the Jews through Isaac and the will show you” (Gen 12:1). Aging and childless, and Arabs through Ishmael—but for the human jour-lacking both a son and now a home base, the two ney taken by each one of his countless descendants most essential resources for a semi-nomad, Abram through the uncertainties of life (Heb 11:8–19). journeyed into the unknown. Following the general

Although it is not technically proper to label him line of the great trunk route connecting northern

as such, Abraham’s lifestyle bears certain important Mesopotamia to Egypt, Abram, his wife Sarai and resemblances to Bedouin, at least Bedouin who in-his nephew Lot entered Canaan from the northeast. habited the Middle East in pre-modern times. For They camped on the outskirts of both Shechem and millennia, large extended families of semi-nomad-Bethel, two established city-states in the hilly center ic pastoralists—herders of sheep, goats and cattle of the land, and offered due obeisance to the God grouped along family and clan lines—have inhab-who had promised this rocky landscape, of all places, ited the thin band of arid land that lies between the to his descendants (Gen 12:4–8). We can assume that Fertile Crescent and the inhospitable north Arabian Abraham’s encampment at both places was rather desert. Following the change of seasons in search of lengthy, for no short-term visitor would be granted

Rare photograph from the adequate pasturage for their animals, these families the right by the local inhabitants of the land to build archives of Sultan Abdul and clans would move and settle as needed. Most an altar to a yet-unknown deity, the reality of his Hamid (1876–1909) showing tended to stay within the limits of certain broadly divine call notwithstanding. a group of Bedouin in the defined territories and developed reciprocal rela- From there Abram and his not-yet-a-family jour-Negev.

tionships with persons in nearby towns or cities, neyed south along the spiny central ridge of south-exchanging goods and services and benefiting from ern Canaan, a land fertile enough when the rainfall mutually recognized water and grazing rights. There is good but one that always lies at the doorstep of is some evidence for occasional large-scale migra-famine. His movement was slow and deliberate, tions from one region to another, however, and the paced by the speed of grazing sheep and goats, and movement of Terah with Abram (Abraham), Sarai he certainly interacted with people from every vil-(Sarah) and Lot from Ur of the Chaldees in Baby-lage and city-state along the way including Gibeon, lonia (southeastern Mesopotamia) to Haran at the Jerusalem, Bethlehem and Hebron. This portion of upper arc of the Fertile Crescent (Gen 11:31–32), fits Abram’s journey ended in the Negeb, a largely bar-this pattern.

ren expanse of fine, powdery soil that lacks sufficient

Haran was a true urban center in its day (its rainfall for agriculture, tucked between the arable

name derives from a word that means variously hills of Canaan and the dry Sinai desert (Gen 12:9).

Salt formations along the Dead “highway,” “caravan” or “business finance”), and This biblical Negeb should not be confused with the Sea evoke images of Lot’s wife, when Terah entered its social and economic orbit large V-shaped southern half of the modern state turned into a pillar of salt for he found a homeland that offered a secure future of Israel which, although called the Negev today, is turning her back on the land for his family. Abram, apparently the eldest son both geographically and historically part of the Sinai. of God’s promise. (photo: Garo (cf. Gen 11:27), stood to inherit the lion’s share of Although the biblical Negeb is suitable for a semi- Nalbandian)

the wealth and prestige that accompanied his role nomadic lifestyle, a widespread famine soon forced

Abram on to the fertile Nile delta in Lower Egypt.

Here his initial attempts at establishing a symbi-

otic relationship with Pharaoh turned sour, and

Abram had to be rescued by the hand of God, hav-

ing nevertheless gained economically for the effort

(Gen 12:10–13:1).

Upon returning to Canaan, Abram’s growing

band faced the consequences of denuding its graz-

ing land and so split into two organic families, with

Abram staying in the hills between Bethel and the

Negeb and Lot descending into the Rift Valley near

the Dead Sea. Lot eventually found grazing rights in

the vicinity of Sodom (Gen 13:2–13), a fateful choice

that would prove to be his undoing (Gen 19:1–29). The

fiery destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah and re-

turn of the region to a salty wasteland eventually

forced Lot’s descendants farther east, into the lands

that would one day become Moab and Ammon

(Gen 19:30–38). Here the writer of Genesis, like lat-

20

ch2_Patriarchs_Matriarchs.indd 20 This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2014 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, 2/6/13 1:03 PM

Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your

The PaTriarchs and MaTriarchs

Abraham and Isaac in the

Land of Canaan. Abraham

and Isaac traveled throughout

southern Canaan, forging

important relationships with

people from various city-states

in the region. Their line of

travel along the “Patriarchal

Highway” established a

tradition of rights to the land for

their descendants.

The Negev—Past and

Present. In the Bible, the

Negeb was a tight sideways

“8”-shaped basin south of the

hill country of Judah. With

scant rainfall and powdery loess

soil, this was shepherd land.

Everything south of that was

simply “wilderness,” beyond

where even shepherds normally

would go. Today the entire

region is called the Negev.

er biblical authors, emphasized the geographical Negeb; anachronistically, this was called the “land movement of persons from the land of promise back of the Philistines” in the Genesis account (Gen 21:34; to the east, a route opposite that which Abram had cf. Gen 26:1). Although Abraham won grazing rights originally come, as a way both of setting apart the from the king of Gerar, water remained a source of divine choice of Abram’s new land and the people friction between the two and prompted a formal meant to live in it (Gen 3:24, 36:1–43; 2 Kgs 24:14–15). alliance that recognized the rights of each within

For his part Abram remained in Canaan, mov-their respective territories (Gen 21:22–34).

ing alternately between the southern hill country Abraham’s longest journey after settling in Ca-around Hebron and the Negeb (Gen 14:13, 18:1, 20:1, naan was not for the benefit of his flocks, but as a 22:2, 23:2). He set up his main base of operations in man of war. The challenges inherent to daily surviv-the Negeb at a place called Beer-sheba (Gen 22:19), al in the harsh conditions of semi-nomadism foster some distance east of Gerar, the closest urban cen-survival skills that are best tested in war, and Abra-ter. Archaeological and literary evidence suggests ham had his chance when an alliance of kings from that in Abram’s day Beer-sheba was just an en-Mesopotamia raided the territory of Sodom and Go-campment spot near a well (Beer means “well”), morrah, taking Lot and his possessions as war tro-apparently near the location of the later Israelite phies (Gen 14:1–12). Abraham and 318 trained men (Iron Age) city of Beer-sheba (Tel Sheva) or some-of his household, a formidable fighting force, chased where else in the general vicinity. At one point later the Mesopotamian kings up the Rift Valley to Dan in life, probably during another famine, Abram, (Laish) and then on to Hobah, a location not yet who by then bore the covenanted name Abra-identified with certainty but somewhere north of ham (which Genesis 17:1–8 takes to mean “father Damascus (Gen 14:13–16). Though in the vicinity of of a multitude”), established his camp near Gerar his extended family in Haran, Abraham returned to (Gen 20:1). Gerar controlled a fertile expanse of land Canaan, pausing on his way to meet Melchizedek at the juncture of the coastal plain and the biblical king of Salem (likely Jerusalem, a place that Abra-

21

ch2_Patriarchs_Matriarchs.indd 21

11/21/12 9:51 AM

This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2014 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your The PaTriarchs and MaTriarchs

Encampment at the well

of Beer-sheba, 19th century

engraving. More than just a

watering hole, a well in the

desert is a focal point of social

life, where acquaintances

are made, strengthened or

renewed. This is a place where

water rights determine social

interaction, and the identity

and intent of a stranger—like

Abraham’s servant in search

of a wife for Isaac—must be

revealed quickly.

ham would have known from his prior journeys be-possible to overestimate the sense of pride, accom-tween Bethel and Hebron; Gen 14:17–24). As a result plishment and satisfaction that Abraham felt when, of this meeting, Abraham’s reputation and rights during a feast celebrating Isaac’s young life, his were strengthened in the central hill country. public honor was restored (Gen 21:8). Then came the

Abraham’s arsenal for survival included skills in bombshell—Abraham was to take Isaac to the land

the art of diplomacy and with the sword, in hospi-of Moriah and offer him as a burnt offering back to

in Middle Egypt. Location of Beni Hasan, tality and in living off the land. But these weren’t God (Gen 22:1–2). Although the writer of Chronicles far from Canaan, evidence of Though enough, for he lacked what mattered most, a proper understood that the place of this intended sacrifice Semitic migrations to Egypt was heir (Gen 15:1–2). The solution lay in the hands of was just outside the northern wall of Jerusalem on found here. God alone, and in two dramatic scenes which took the hill on which Solomon would build the temple

place at unnamed locations somewhere in Canaan, (2 Chron 3:1), it is important to distinguish his spe-Abraham received not only the divine assurance cific reference to “Mount Moriah” from the more of a son born of he and Sarah (Gen 17:1–27), but of general “land of Moriah” to which Abraham and a real homeland for what would be countless de-Isaac journeyed. In fact, the tenor of the account scendants (Gen 15:1–21). The borders of this promised in Genesis suggests that the act was carried out far land, from the river of Egypt (the Wadi el-Arish in from human eyes (Gen 22:3–5), probably somewhere the mid-Sinai) to the great river, the Euphrates in in the hill country or wilderness of Judah but cer-northern Syria, were realized in the biblical period tainly not adjacent to an established urban center only during the United Monarchy, when Solomon such as Jerusalem. In the end Isaac was redeemed maintained some degree of formal control over (Gen 22:9–18); with his life spared, that of Abraham’s this vast area (Gen 15:18; 1 Kgs 4:21). In the mean-family was again assured.

time, Abraham and Sarah had taken matters into Then Sarah died—according to Rabbinic sourc-their own hands, producing a son through Hagar, es (Tanhuma, Va-yera 23) it was from fright after hearing Sarah’s maid (Gen 16:1–4). Though this was a cultur-what had almost happened to her son—and was ally acceptable solution for a childless couple, it did buried in the Cave of Machpelah opposite Mamre create jealousies in the home and fell short of the (Hebron). Abraham purchased the cave from divine promise (Gen 16:5–6; cf. Deut 21:15–17). Hagar Ephron the Hittite, a local inhabitant of the land and her son Ishmael fled toward Shur in the mid-(Gen 23:1–20). Abraham refused Ephron’s offer to use Sinai, a wasteland barely fit for human habitation the cave free of charge; had he accepted Ephron’s (Gen 16:7–15; cf. Gen 20:1, 21:9–21). Exiled from the land of generosity, Abraham would have been acknowledg-promise, Ishmael became the ancestor of the Arabs; ing that his descendants’ rights to the land should the list of his descendants in Genesis 25:12–18 in-remain under the authority of its indigenous in-cludes names of tribes and places known in the vast habitants. Rather, by insisting that he purchase the Sinai and Arabian deserts south and east of Canaan. burial cave outright, Abraham took the first legal

Finally, but in God’s good time, a son was born step in providing an ancestral land for his descen-

to Abraham and Sarah (Gen 18:1–15, 21:1–7). It is im-dants, in perpetuity. Abraham’s grandson Jacob

22

ch2_Patriarchs_Matriarchs.indd 22

11/21/12 9:51 AM

This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2014 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your
