The PaTriarchs and MaTriarchs

would continue the process by purchasing land in

The sacrifice of Isaac as

Shechem (Gen 33:18–20). Eventually Abraham, Isaac

depicted in a 19th century

engraving (Carta, Jerusalem).

and Rebekah, and Jacob and Leah were all to be

This was the great test. Would

buried in this family tomb (Gen 25:9–10, 49:29–33).

Abraham be faithful to God?

Abraham’s son Ishmael married an Egyptian

And would God faithfully keep

woman (Gen 21:21), which was probably prudent giv-

His promises to Abraham?

en his mother’s Egyptian bloodline (Gen 16:1) and the

fact that he had been exiled from his father’s house.

But not so for Isaac, the child of promise! To main-

tain the strength of the family—as well as the integ-

rity of the divine promise—it was essential that the

heir marry within and keep the family’s human and

economic resources intact. For this reason, Isaac’s

wife had to come from among his closest relatives,

the family of Abraham’s brother back in Haran.

Abraham’s servant was entrusted with the sacred

task of arranging the marriage. This was perhaps the

same Eliezer of Damascus who, before Isaac’s birth,

had stood in line to inherit everything (Gen 24:1–4;

cf. 15:2). Loyalty and honor run deep in semi-nomadic

households and so the servant complied, thereby en-

suring that his own future would remain subordinate Gerar’s frontier and the limits of Abimelech’s im-Mount Moriah, the Temple to that of Isaac. Rebekah willingly stepped into the mediate economic interests, Isaac was able to camp Mount. The writer of role of matriarch-in-waiting (Gen 24:67) and followed without outside interference (Gen 26:18–25). With the Chronicles connected Mount Abraham’s footsteps from Haran back to Canaan. balance of power restored in the Negeb, Abimelech Moriah with the more general

Upon the death of Abraham the responsibility of reestablished with Isaac the covenant that he had “land of Moriah” where

maintaining the family’s welfare fell squarely on the previously made with Abraham (cf. Gen 21:22–34) Abraham offered Isaac to God . shoulders of Isaac, no small task given the marginal Meanwhile, Rebekah had given birth to twins. . (2 Chron 3:1) climate of the Negeb and the crucial need to protect Destined to become two rival nations, Jacob (Is-the limited resources available there. Another fam-rael) and Esau (Edom) already fought for territory ine drove Isaac west to Gerar, where the prevailing in her womb (Gen 25:19–26). Esau, the firstborn, was rainfall was predictable enough to support not only very much at home in the brutish conditions of herding, but agriculture (Gen 26:1–6, 12–14). Isaac’s the Negeb, while Jacob, part by nature and part by skills at both, when blessed by the hand of God, his mother’s coddling, preferred a homeland secu-tipped the local economy his way. Understandably rity akin to what Rebekah had left behind in Ha-This 19th century b.c. wall threatened, Abimelech the king of Gerar rescinded ran (Gen 25:27–28) . The name Jacob is a play on the painting from a tomb in Beni the water rights that he had previously granted to word “heel,” and appropriately throughout his life Hasan on the east bank of the Abraham, forcing Isaac to withdraw toward the des-the more sophisticated Jacob attempted to trip up Nile depicting a caravan of ert but to a place still within the valley controlled by his churlish older brother. Early on Jacob traded a Asiatics journeying to Egypt Gerar (Gen 26:15, 18; cf. 21:22–34). Taking matters into common pot of lentil stew for Esau’s birthright—it represents the continual influx his own hands, Isaac opened a series of wells that was a real steal—and so through the kind of trick-of people from the region of

his father had dug, reclaiming his family’s rights to ery or cleverness that was quietly admired in the Canaan into Egypt during the b . c . The the land. In each case, the “Philistines” of Gerar art of ancient Near Eastern diplomacy, he moved second millennium journeys of Abraham, Joseph successfully contested these rights, driving Isaac into the slot of heir-to-the-patriarchy (Gen 25:28–34). and Jacob to Egypt are set farther away. Finally, back at Beer-sheba, beyond Later, toward the end of Isaac’s life, Jacob similarly against this migratory backdrop.

23

ch2_Patriarchs_Matriarchs.indd 23

11/21/12 9:51 AM

This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2014 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your The PaTriarchs and MaTriarchs

grabbed the patriar-boys were to become the ancestral heads of the

chal blessing from twelve tribes of Israel, and Jacob’s deathbed bless-

Esau, and with it ing for each carried geographical information that

formal confirma-matched the particular part of the land of Canaan

tion of his role as where each tribe would settle (Gen 49:1–27).

head of the family In the end Laban’s extended family had two

once Isaac had died heads: he by right and Jacob by practice. This was

(Gen 27:1–40). Pre-an untenable situation and so the family and its

dictably, Esau plot-resources were divided, with Jacob and those un-

ted to seize back der his care moving back to the land of his birth

his rights by force (Gen 31:1–55). Like all semi-nomads on the move,

(Gen 27:41). Jacob was both strong and vulnerable during his

And so Jacob long journey home. He traveled south slowly, along

fled, under the con-the edge of the open desert, with his wealth strung

venient suggestion along, juicy prey for wild animals or desert raiders.

of Rebekah, back to In the highlands of Gilead, opposite Canaan, Jacob

The remains of the eastern gate the land where a part of his mother’s heart still lay heard that Esau, with four hundred men, was on of the fortified city of Shechem, (Gen 27:42–28:10) . Tracing the now familiar patriarchal the way to meet him. Knowing that memories live

1750–1650 dating to Middle Bronze IIB (c. highway from Beer-sheba north along the spiny long—a characteristic still endemic to the Middle the strong, well-established role b.c.), represents backbone of the hill country, Jacob stopped one East—Jacob feared the worse. He tried to placate of the city-state in the central night at Bethel (“the house of God”), where with Esau by offering a portion of the hard-earned inher-hill country during the time of a glimpse of heavenly geography, Jacob received itance from his wives’ family, perhaps also hoping the Patriarchs. Although they God’s promise that the land would someday belong that some would count against the debt of the sto-were most at home herding their to his many descendants. With a response true to len birthright (Gen 32:1–21). Then, in the wild, dark sheep and goats along the semi- character, Jacob tried to bargain favorable terms cleft of the Jabbok River, Jacob fought with a man

(Heb. ish) tooth and nail, all night. “Is it Esau?”—

arid seam between the desert (Gen 28:11–22) .

and the sown land, Abraham, Arriving in “the land of the sons of the east” the thought probably raced through his mind. In Isaac and Jacob had to develop (Gen 29:1) near Haran, Jacob met Rachel, the this melodramatic scene ripe with danger, Jacob fi-and maintain cordial, working daughter of Rebekah’s brother Laban, at a well nally realized that his lifetime of struggles had really relationships with established (Gen 29:2–12). This remains a classic “boy meets girl” been with God all along (cf. Hos 12:3–4), and that in cities such as Shechem. They scene typical of the ageless world of semi-nomad-spite of his own skills of survival and his conniving

doing so. were not always successful in ism. By means of the expectations that came with inner nature, God had chosen to bless him anyway.

hospitality and negotiation, Jacob attached himself Jacob “the heel,” who had built a career out of his to Laban’s household, first as a worker and then as a own struggle to supplant others, was now named son, twice over. Typically a man in Jacob’s position, “Israel,” one who strives with God and for this rea-already an heir, would take his new bride back to his son, prevails (Gen 32:22–32).

Although it is too simplistic own home, but the expediency of the moment—his By now both Jacob and Esau had become patri-and overly romantic to equate own survival and a chance to marry well—kept him archs and agreed to respect each other’s rights and modern-day Bedouin with in the neighborhood of Haran. Laban, who, like Ja-territory (Gen 33:1–17). Esau stayed east of the Rift biblical characters, various cob, was skilled in the clever art of survival, gained Valley; his descendants spread throughout southern aspects of Bedouin life do an upper hand on his guest in order to ensure that Transjordan and the northern Arabian Peninsula and preserve ancient patterns of both of his daughters would receive a proper future, can be traced among known tribal and city names living that can help shed light and so Jacob married the older, homely Leah as well in later centuries (Gen 36:1–43). Jacob’s family headed on the thoughts and deeds of the as the younger, more beautiful Rachel (Gen 29:13–30). west, stopping first at Succoth where the Jabbok Patriarchs and Matriarchs. Jacob stayed in Haran under the patriarchal au-River meets the Jordan, a lovely spot in the mid-Jor-

thority of Laban for twenty dan Valley (Gen 33:17). From there he followed good years. These were good years, grazing land up the Wadi Faria to Shechem, a well-secure and full of opportu-established Canaanite city-state on a hub of hill- nity. Jacob honed his skills in country routes blessed with abundant water and animal husbandry so that the fertile fields. Here Jacob settled for some time and flocks under his care multi-gained a degree of permanent status by purchasing plied and were strong, but did land and building an altar to El-Elohe-Israel (“God, so at the expense of Laban the God of Israel”; Gen 33:18–19). Eventually, like (Gen 30:25–43). His family even-Abraham before him (cf. Gen 12:6–9), Jacob moved on tually numbered eleven sons to Bethel, built another altar and continued south, and one daughter, with an-settling in the vicinity of Hebron (Gen 35:1–27).

other son on the way (Gen Jacob’s family matured in the fresh climate of the

29:31–30:24, 35:16–20). These Hebron hill country. The aging patriarch favored

24

ch2_Patriarchs_Matriarchs.indd 24 This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2014 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, 2/6/13 1:04 PM

Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your

The PaTriarchs and MaTriarchs

Jacob and His Sons.

Although Jacob spent twenty

years of his life in Haran,

his return to Canaan with a

large family in tow marks the

beginning of the history of the

“sons of Israel.”

Joseph, the oldest son of Rachel, his favorite wife, as brothers’ welfare, caught up with his older siblings Late at night and alone in the heir-apparent, a situation that was a continual thorn in Dothan. There Joseph was seized and sold to a cut of the Jabbok River deep in the sides of the ten older brothers (Gen 37:3–11). As passing caravan of easterners—Midianites and Ish-in the Dome of Gilead, Jacob the years passed and his holdings grew, Jacob rou-maelites who were tracking the trade routes of the had the wrestling match of a tinely split his flocks among his various sons, send-ancient Near East, bound for the lucrative markets lifetime—and one that changed

his life. The Supplanter became

ing some one way and others another, according to of Egypt (Gen 37:18–35).

the change of seasons and established patterns of Joseph ended up attached to the house of Po-One who Strove with God. grazing. At one point Jacob’s older sons drove their tiphar, a high official in the court of Pharaoh who flocks to the fertile land around Shechem, then lived in Goshen (Gen 37:36, 45:10). Goshen lay in the as far north as the picturesque valley of Dothan northeastern Nile Delta, a region that had been in-(Gen 37:12–17). As recently as the mid-twentieth cen-filtrated by West Semites—among them shepherds tury some Bedouin families from the Hebron hills and others looking for a better life—throughout still grazed their flocks around Dothan; perhaps the mid-second millennium b.C. The 15th Egyptian each passing generation of shepherds and farmers Dynasty (c. 1650–1550 b.C.), composed of foreign-maintained this ancient grazing pattern by protect-ers from southwest Asia whom the native Egyptians ing the rights handed down to them from their labeled hekaw-khasut, “rulers of foreign lands” (i.e., fathers. Joseph, sent by Jacob to enquire of his Hyksos), based its operations here, at Avaris (Tell ed-

25

ch2_Patriarchs_Matriarchs.indd 25

11/21/12 9:51 AM

This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2014 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your

The PaTriarchs and MaTriarchs

Dab’a). Many scholars his family moved to Goshen. His journey took him

find this context to through Beer-sheba, where God renewed the prom-

be a comfortable fit ise of land and descendants that was first given

for Joseph’s migra-to Abraham (Gen 46:1–4; cf. Gen 12:1–3, 15:18–21, 17:1–8,

tion and rise to power. 26:2–5, 28:13–15), then across the mid-northern Sinai

The Nile Delta along the same Way to Shur on which Hagar and

was probably the Ishmael had fled Beer-sheba years before (cf. Gen 16:7).

greatest breadbasket Jacob and his family rode out the famine in Egypt,

of the ancient Near then stayed—life was good there, after all, com-

East, so much so that pared to the marginal hills and deserts of Canaan

the writer of Genesis (Gen 47:1–48:22). When Jacob finally died he was bur-

compared it favorably ied back home in the Cave of Machpelah outside

to “the garden of the Hebron. His final resting place was a down payment

LORD” (Gen 13:10). Its on the promise that his descendants would someday

fertility was due to return to that land of the living (Gen 50:1–21).

the annually renewed And so the story of the patriarchs and matriarchs

deposits of fresh silt ended where it began, with a divine promise that a

brought downriver by special family would live on a special land under the

Haram el-Khalil, site of the the late summer floods, and a series of low inun-promise and protection of God. This is the essence Cave of Machpelah near dations usually signaled famine. Joseph’s career in of biblical shalom, life lived the way it’s supposed to Hebron, is holy to both Jews Pharaoh’s court coincided with a particularly severe be. Although in the end Abraham, Sarah, Isaac, and Muslims. Abraham’s right famine throughout the entire region, so much so Rebekah, Jacob, Leah, Rachel and Joseph all failed to the place is claimed by all of that his brothers twice came to Egypt to buy grain to realize the fullness of their God-given potential his descendants. (NEAEHL) (Gen 41:46–45:28).

(Heb 11:13–15), their lives anticipated the struggles

Realizing the advantages of living under the and hopes of future generations that can be traced

protection of the Egyptian royal house, Jacob and from the pages of the Bible until today.

The family line of Terah spread

widely over the ancient Near

East. This became a family of

tribes, fluid, active and jostling

for position in a land dependent

on God. Their descendants still

inhabit the Middle East today

in relationships often a little too

close for comfort.

26

ch2_Patriarchs_Matriarchs.indd 26

9/23/13 11:27 AM

This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2014 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your
