this event, may we not also believe that the relation to the procession of the Son differs from that of the Father? Would it not be a more exact statement of the Scripture teaching to say, that the Son, or Christ, sends the Spirit, and gives the Spirit, which is his, because the right to bestow it is his, either essentially, or as given him in his office as Messiah, and that the Spirit thus sent proceeds from the Father? In this event the Father would be the source of the procedure, and the Son the agent in sending it forth. Is not this bestowment on the Messiah, of this right to send the Spirit, suggested by Christ's declaration, "If I go not away,

the Comforter will not come unto you," (John 16:7) as well as by the language, "The Spirit

was not yet given, because Jesus was not yet glorified." John 7:39. These points are presented for consideration, while it is admitted that the assertion, that the Spirit proceeds also from the Son, is less objectionable than the denial. The Scriptures seem to leave it so doubtful, as to forbid any positive statement about it. But the preponderance of evidence is in favour of a procession from both Father and Son.

IV. SUBORDINATION BETWEEN THE PERSONS

The absolute equality of each of these persons, as God, has already been pointed out; and the possibility of inferiority, in other respects, was then intimated. There are some scriptural statements which seem to indicate this. Christ said expressly of himself, "The

Father is greater than I." John 14:28. He also not only taught that the Father had sent him,

but compared with that his own sending of his disciples, (John 17:18) and declared that he

came, not to do his own will but that of him that sent him, (John 6:38); that he came not of

himself, (John 7:28); that he spoke not of himself, but that the Father had given him a

commandment, what he should say, and speak, (John 12:49); that his teaching was not his

own, (John 7:16); that the word they heard was not his, but his Father's, (John 14:24); that

he had given and spoken the words given him by the Father, (John 8:26; 17:8); that the

Father had given him to do the work he had accomplished, (John 17:4); that he could do

nothing of himself, but what he saw the Father doing, (John 5:19); that the Father was with

him, and had not left him alone, (John 8:29); and that the Father had sanctified (consecrated)

him, (John 10:36). Peter also preached to Cornelius "Jesus of Nazareth, how that God anointed him with the Holy Ghost, and with power," and that he performed beneficent and

miraculous acts because "God was with him." (Acts 10:38). Christ also denied the goodness

of any but God, (Matt. 19:17; Mark 10:38; Luke 18:19), and as to the day of judgement, as-serted that "of that day or that hour knoweth no one, not even the angels in heaven, neither

the Son, but the Father," (Mark 13:32, ["but the Father only," Matt. 24:36]); and, that to sit on his right hand, and on his left, was not his to give, but that these positions shall be given

to those for whom it is prepared of his Father, (Matt. 20:23; Mark 10:40). We are told also of his prayers to God, of which the remarkable statement is made, that "in the days of his flesh," he "offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that

was able to save him from death, and having been heard for his godly fear." (Heb. 5:7). Christ

124
