what canst thou do? deeper than Hell; what canst thou know?" Job 11:7-8. Elihu is represented

as saying, "Behold, God is great and we know him not." Job 36:26. And Job, after his descrip-tion of God's acts of power, declared, "Lo, these are but the outskirts of his ways; and how

small a whisper do we hear of him! But the thunder of his power who can understand?" Job

26:14. The Psalmist, referring to the Omniscience and omnipresence of God, cried out,

"Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is high, I cannot attain unto it." Ps. 139:6.

(2) On the other hand, in opposition to Agnostics, the Bible declares that the partial knowledge of God attained by men is actual knowledge and not some inferior conception.

God said through Jeremiah, "I will give them an heart to know me that I am the Lord" (Jer.

24:7), and again "they shall all know me from the least of them unto the greatest of them."

Jer. 25:34. Our Lord himself, in his prayer to the Father, referring to those given to him that to them he should give eternal life declares " This is life eternal that they should know thee

the only true God and him whom thou didst send, even Jesus Christ." John 17:3. The apostle

who recorded this prayer uses this language, "He that knoweth God heareth us" (1 John 4:6),

and also "He that loveth not, knoweth not God." 1 John 4:8.

The Bible, therefore, plainly teaches that God may be known, and so known as to be truly worshipped.

II. ALMOST UNIVERSAL BELIEF IN GOD; ITS SOURCES.

Belief in the existence of God has been almost universal among men. The same ideal of perfection has not everywhere been found. Some have gone no farther than to be moved by the sense of the supernatural, and to believe in a power to which they are subject, and upon which they depend. But at least this much is to be found in the lowest, forms of fetish wor-shippers. Others have multiplied the numbers and forms of those towards whom they have felt this sense of dependence, and have accepted the existence of many gods. Yet, among these polytheists, the traces of the One God have not entirely disappeared, for they have referred the gods themselves to one originating source. Some, following too closely the analogy of man's nature, have believed God to be the animating soul of the world. The highest spiritual conception of God has been found only in those nations which have been recipients of his revelation. But the most ancient records show that, in the earliest times, the knowledge possessed by all was comparatively simple and pure.

So universal has been this belief, that but very few of the millions of the race in all its ages have denied the existence of God. It has been questioned whether these few have been deceived as to their actual convictions, or have been insincere in their avowal of Atheism; because it has seemed so impossible for man not to believe in a God. A greater number still have been skeptical; sometimes led by wishes born of depravity and sin, but, also, sometimes misled by philosophical speculations, and apparently earnestly desirous to know the truth.

But the firm conviction of mankind in general that this belief is unavoidable in any man in his normal condition, and that its absence is due to some crushing out or erasure of his

11
