nature, and their subordination within and in the work without. The whole work of redemp-tion is ascribed to the Triune God, but each of the persons is revealed as sustaining distinct official relation to it.

(a) The Scriptures are explicitly declared to be from God, John 3:34; 10:35; 1 Cor. 2:9,

l0; 1 Thess. 2:13; 2 Tim. 3:16; Heb. 1:1.

(b) Christ attributes to the Father his own power and authority to speak, and declares

him to be the source of what was revealed by himself. John 3:34; 7:16; 12:49; 15:15. The same

truth is taught in Rev. 1:1, where the distinction between the persons shows that "the Revel-ation of Jesus Christ, which God gave him," was given by the Father. It is from the Father also as a source, that the Spirit derives the truth which he reveals. It is as the Spirit of truth

that Christ declared that he proceeds from the Father. John 15:26. The cause he assigned for his subsequent promise that the Spirit should guide into all truth was "he shall not speak

from himself; but what things soever he shall hear, these shall he speak." John 16:13. That the truth, thus spoken, should be from the Father, through the Son, appears from vv. 14 and

(c) But while the Father is thus declared to be the source of the revelation of redemption, it is the Son by whom he has made it known. He is, in his divine relation, especially called

the Word of God. Him we are commanded by the Father to hear as his "beloved Son." Matt.

17:5. In his own person he so manifested the Father that he could say, "He that hath seen

me, hath seen the Father." John 14:9. During his incarnation he spoke personally, as did the

prophets of old. Heb. 1:1, 2. He was that prophet whom Moses foretold, Deut. 18:15-19;

and is so proclaimed in Acts 3:20-22. He declared himself to be the light of the world. John

8:12. He foretold the future as to himself, his disciples, Jerusalem, and the world. He began

the preaching of the great salvation. Heb. 2:3. He gave especial instruction to his apostles, both before his death and after his resurrection, not only as to the gospel of the kingdom, but as to all things which were to be observed by them, and by those whom they should teach. Especially, during this latter period, did he instruct them as to the relation of his suf-ferings and death to the prophecies of the Old Testament.

(d) In this work of revelation, however, the Holy Spirit is made known to us as the op-erating agent. Everywhere it is the Spirit to whom the word sent by God is referred. "Men spake from God, being moved by the Holy Ghost." 2 Pet. 1:21. This is spoken of the Old

Testament writers in general. It is specifically declared of David, Matt. 22:43; Acts 1:16; and

of Isaiah, Acts 28:25, and of the author of the 96th Psalm, in Heb. 3:7. These Old Testament writers constantly attribute their instructions to the Spirit of God, as, for example, David

130
