through trespasses and sins," (Eph. 2:1,) that they might have faithfulness, (Gal. 6:22,) and

the spirit of sonship, (Gal. 4:6,) and may be sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise, (Eph.

1:13,) which witnesses to believers that they are "children of God; and, if children, then heirs;

heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ" Rom. 8:16,17. It is thus, also, that God, having predestinated that they shall "be conformed to the image of his Son," sanctifies them, in the

sense of consecrating them, "in the truth," (John 17:17,) and, also, in that of cleansing and

purifying them from sin, Eph. 5:26; 1 Thess. 4:7, and causes them "to be transformed into

the same image from glory to glory." 2 Cor. 3:18. Throughout all of this work the Father is

also the person who is especially addressed in prayer in the name of Jesus, Eph. 2:18; 3:14,

through the moving of the Spirit, Eph. 6:18; Rom. 8:26, and from whom comes "Every good

gift and every perfect boon," James 1:17, as well as the justification, pardon, adoption and sanctification of believers, and also the heavenly kingdom he has prepared for them.

These are some particulars which show how completely the Father is identified with the redemption of man. They are not exhaustive of what we are taught. Indeed the whole is from him as its source, and not merely in a general way in the gift of his Son and Spirit, but as working by and through them in each particular. In redemption, as in creation and providence, he is ever present, constantly willing, and continually working; though not directly by himself, but through the Son and the Spirit.

Some portions of this work of the Father will need hereafter more full discussion; though not so much as some of that of the Son, and of that of the Spirit, all of the acts of whom must be more particularly and minutely examined.

A short statement is, however, necessary here as a summary of what will be discussed as to each hereafter, and also that the official subordination may be shown.

(2.) The action of the Son in redemption is briefly, yet almost fully described in Phil.

2:5-11. We are there taught of that official subordination to the Father which he willingly assumed for the discharge of this work, which corresponds with the statement, elsewhere, that he was sent by the Father. We are also told of that act of condescension, by which he assumed our nature, and became man in his incarnation; of his voluntary humiliation to the death of the cross; and of that honour, bestowed upon him, in that nature, by which in his exaltation he has been made an object of universal worship, "to the glory of God the Father."

We learn, elsewhere, that in the period of his earthly residence he became our example as man, as he likewise in it set forth in his own person the image of his Father. By his active obedience to the law he fulfilled for his people the righteousness due by them. By his suffer-ings, and death, he paid the penalty of their sin. As the reward of his work, he received the promised Spirit which he sends forth for the salvation of those whom God has given him. All power has also been bestowed upon him, that his gospel may be preached with success, and he is now made king in Zion, and invested with mediatorial dominion over all things.

132
