full of examples of this principle. Of this kind is the serpent's curse, "upon thy belly shalt

thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life," Gen. 3:14; of this also that connected

with the natural injuries which men and serpents would inflict on each other, Gen. 3:15;

that of the rule of the husband over the wife, Gen. 3:17; and that of the thorns and thistles

in the ground and the sweat and the labour for the means of life, Gen. 3:18, 19.

(1.) This might be an objection if it were claimed that the penalty of natural death was the only penalty, or if it could be shown that the death thus threatened was so exclusive as to forbid that natural death should be in any way associated with it.

(2.) It is even doubtful whether the corrupt tendency to death and its beginnings may not be ascribed to the very hour of Adam's sin. If that sin removed all hope of God's coun-teracting the natural mortality, this would be so; whether it was to be counteracted, as Lange quotes Knobel as supposing [Comm. on Genesis, p. 239], "through the tree of life," or by some other means. It would also be true if; as Lange thinks, the threatened penalty, "death, here corresponding to the biblical conception of death, must be taken primarily to mean moral death, which goes out of the soul or heart, and, through the soul-life, gradually fastens itself upon the physical organism." Comm. on Gen., p.207. Under such circumstances the moral death would be the eventual cause of the physical death, and to the latter would be assigned the same time of beginning with the former. This might also be done, even if the gradual decay were a mere accompaniment of the moral death without being actually caused by it.

In favour of the idea that natural death is included in the penalty, there is:

Hence it is that to one who does not carefully study the Scripture statements, the most obvious idea is that the death threatened was chiefly natural death.

the transgression: "Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return." Gen. 3:19.

sin. But whether so, or not, it is unquestionably the teaching of Romans 5:12-14; also of 1

Cor. 15:21, 22, 55, 56. [See some valuable remarks on this point in Edwards' Works, vol. 2, p.373.]

II. Spiritual death was also an effect of Adam a sin. Our inquiry into natural death as a penalty leads us to look for some other and higher evil as resulting from sin. It must be something which occurred at the very time of eating, which affected that part of man that

195
