did my mother conceive me," Ps. 51:5. "Foolishness (wickedness) is bound up in the heart

of a child," Prov. 22:15.

(3.) The fact of this corruption. Before the flood it is said: "And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his

heart was only evil continually," Gen. 6:5. "Every one of them is gone back; they are altogether

become filthy," Ps. 53:3; see also Ecc. 8:11; Matt. 15:19; Rom. 1st chapter at length, as to the

heathen, in connection with Paul's question, Rom. 3:9. Similar descriptions appear in Isa.

59:3-14; in Gal. 5:19-21; Titus 3:3; 2 Pet. 2:13-18.

(4.) This corruption extends to every affection of the heart and mind. Mr. Goodwin, in the Lime Street Lectures, p. 128, says: "The soul is corrupted with all its faculties; the mind

with darkness and ignorance, Eph. 5:3; being subject to the sensitive part, and strongly

prejudiced against the things of God, 1 Cor. 4:24; the conscience with stupidity and insens-

ibleness, Titus 1:15; the will with stubbornness and rebellion, Rom. 8:7; the affections are become carnal and placed either upon unlawful objects, or upon lawful in an unlawful

manner or degree, Col. 3:2; the thoughts and imaginations are full of pride, and vanity, and

disorder, Gen. 6:5. And as for the body, that is become a clog, instead of being serviceable

to the soul, and all its members and senses instruments of unrighteousness to sin, Rom.

7:19. It is, I say, in general a universal depravation of every part in man since the fall; and more particularly it consists in a privation of all good, in an enmity to God and the things of God, and in a propensity to all evil." See also Hodge, vol. 2, p. 255, and Gill's Divinity,

vol. 1, p. 474. [Better proof texts than those referred to in the above quotation are Eph. 4:18

and Rom. 1:21 instead of Eph. 5:3; and Rom. 6:12; 7:24and 8:5-7 instead of 1 Cor. 4:24.]

(5.) This corruption has not been equally developed in all. The doctrine of total depravity does not mean such equal development. The Scriptures recognize degrees of wickedness as well as of hardening of the heart, and even blinding of the minds of some. But they also represent that the lack of this development is due to differing circumstances and restraints by which some men are providentially surrounded.

(6.) This corruption does not destroy accountability or responsibility for present sins.

(a) The Scriptures universally recognize man's liability to punishment for all the thoughts of his mind, and the desires of his heart or the emotions of his physical nature, as well as for his acts. These are characterized by more or less of heinousness according to their nature and the circumstances under which they are committed. The more intense the corruption, the more guilty is the man regarded.

(b) The conscience of mankind approves these teachings of Scripture. We do not excuse men because of any state of moral corruption. The evidence of this is seen in the immediate difference which is made whenever physical compulsion or physical disease (insanity) leads to an act which otherwise would be regarded as sinful and blameworthy.

197
