This was followed by the hewing of the "two tables of stone like unto the first" (Ex. 34:2), and by the making of the tabernacle (chapters 35 to 40), upon the finishing of which "the cloud covered the tent of meeting, and the glory of the LORD filled the tabernacle. And when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the children of Israel went onward through all their journeys; but if the cloud were not taken up, then they journeyed not till the day that it was taken up. For the cloud of the LORD was upon the tabernacle by day, and there was fire therein by night, in the sight of all the house of Israel, throughout all their

journeys." Ex. 40:33-38.

A comparison of the threat of Ex. 33:3 and of this record with the language of Ps. 99:7:

"He spake unto them in the cloudy pillar," and Isaiah 63:9: "And the angel of his presence saved them," shows that the cloud was the visible manifestation of Jehovah to Israel, and that the angel of his presence embodied the glory of Jehovah. Its presence with Israel was the presence of Jehovah himself.

This identification of Jehovah with the angel is also exhibited with equal clearness by a

comparison of Ex. 13:21 and 14:19. In the former it is said that "The LORD went before them by day in a pillar of cloud to lead them the way;" in the latter we read of "the angel of God which went before the camp of Israel."

(2) With God. This identification of himself with God is made by the angel which ap-peared to Abraham, by saying: "Now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not

withheld thy son, thine only son, from me." Gen. 22:12. (See also verses 15, 16.)

(1) Creative power. He promised Hagar: "I will greatly multiply thy seed, that it shall

not be numbered for multitude." Gen. 16:10. And in like manner said to Abraham: "I will certainly return unto thee when the season cometh round; and, lo, Sarah thy wife shall have

a son." Gen. 18:10.

(2) Sovereignty The power of absolute right over the cities of the plains is asserted in the foretold destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, and his answers to the successive prayers

of Abraham that upon certain conditions he would spare those cities. Gen. 18:18-33.

(3) The Judge of all the earth is the efficacious title given by Abraham as he pleads with the Man before him, whom he recognizes as Jehovah, not "to slay the righteous with the

wicked." Gen. 18: 25. Two of the three men who appeared to Abraham are called angels

(Gen. 19:1), and this third is manifestly "the angel of the Lord."

at the Bush in which the angel of the Lord appeared (Ex. 3:2) when "God," by which name as well as that of Jehovah the angel is called, commanded him: "Draw not nigh hither: put

off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground." Ex. 3:5.

A like command was given to Joshua (Joshua 5:15) by the man that appeared to him and

218
