ing evil. The king says to Jehoshaphat, "did I not tell thee that he would not prophesy good concerning me, but evil" (verse 18). Then the prophet proceeds to tell a vision wherein God is represented as wishing to destroy Ahab and asking of all his hosts, who will persuade Ahab that he may go and fall at Ramoth Gilead. And after various replies one Spirit came and said, that he would persuade him by being a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And the prophet adds, "Now therefore, behold, the Lord hath put a lying spirit in the mouth

of all these thy prophets; and the Lord hath spoken evil concerning thee." This 1 Kings

22:21-23, is the place that is frequently referred to as a case of God's misleading Ahab. Inde-pendently of the fact that the prophet uses drapery for what he says, he tells the King distinctly God's will, and, as his prophet who ought to be heard, declares the truth. This passage ought not to weigh for a moment in favor of the idea that God seeks effectively to harden, and thus to destroy.

Again, we have a class of passages, for they are many, such as the one before referred

to as showing Reprobation, Matt. 13:11-15. This passage follows the Septuagint translation.

The corresponding passages (Mark 4:11, 12, and Luke 8:10) follow the Hebrew of Isaiah

6:9, 10, and are still stronger than Matthew. But Matthew may be taken as explanatory of the parallel and other like passages. The doctrine meant was so plainly understood that the language is not always guarded. It may not have been by Christ in its utterance. But we have here the intended meaning manifested in a single phrase, "and their eyes they have closed lest haply they should perceive," "and should turn again and I should heal them."

The passage in Isaiah 63:17, is easily explained in like manner: "O Lord, why dost thou make us to err from thy ways, and hardenest our heart from thy fear?"

On the contrary, in view of what has been said, this interpretation seems most natural. These are fair examples.

Deut. 2:30. "But Sihon, king of Heshbon, would not let us pass by him: for the Lord thy God hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, that he might deliver him into thy hand, as at this day."

Acts 19:9. "But when some were hardened, and disobedient, etc., . . . he (Paul) departed from them."

Rom. 9:18. "So then he hath mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardeneth." The example referred to here is that of Pharaoh which, as we have seen, is a case of self-hardening under mercies.

297
