hold of truth. Only thus does he make truth effectual. Therefore, the outward washing or partaking can have no effect to renew, or regenerate the heart, which must itself have been prepared, before it can even appropriate the truths conveyed by these ordinances.

The above statements are only intended to meet the views of Romanists and such others as claim regenerating influence of sacraments, and not those of such as make Baptism only a condition of pardon. The latter claim that regeneration is through the word only and are met by the proofs that the Spirit acts independently of the word.

Conversion

I. This is the result of regeneration. The new heart is prepared to turn to God and does actually so turn. Without regeneration, the sinfulness of man keeps him away from God, causes him to set his affections upon self and his own pleasure, and to find gratification in things which are opposed to God and holiness. The regenerated heart has new affections and desires and is, therefore, fitted to seek after God and holiness.

II. It is both the act of God and of man co-operating with him.

1 Kings 18:37. "Thou hast turned their heart back again."

Ps. 80:3. "Turn us again, O God; and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved."

Ps. 85:4. "Turn us, O God of our salvation."

Song of Sol. 1:4. "Draw me; we will run after thee."

Jer. 30:21. "I will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach unto me."

Jer. 31:18. "Turn thou me, and I shall be turned."

Ezek. 36:27. "And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them."

John 6:44. "No man can come to me, except the Father which sent me draw him."

Deut. 4:30. "Thou shalt return to the Lord thy God."

Prov. 1:23. "Turn you at my reproof."

Hosea 12:6. "Therefore turn thou to thy God."

Isaiah 55:7. "Let him return unto the Lord."

Joel 2:13. "Rend your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God."

Acts 11:21. "A great number that believed turned unto the Lord."

III. The question naturally arises what is the nature of conversion. In reply it may be said that it consists:

307
