more, if not altogether, in the testimony of others than in any knowledge of, or confidence in that to which we commit ourselves.

It is only through the combination of the two that we have faith, which must be an in-telligent trust. By it we believe not only in him upon whom we trust, but we do so because we believe the facts which make him trustworthy.

Hence it is that the Scriptures use it in the twofold sense, uniting the two ideas in the case of believers in Christ, because not only do they rely upon Jesus, but, from the belief of the facts concerning him taught in God's word; they know whom they have believed, and why they should believe him.

Christian faith, therefore, is personal reliance upon Christ for salvation because of belief of God's testimony as to our sinful and ruined condition, and as to what Christ has assuredly done to save us.

It is based, therefore, upon the knowledge of this testimony as given by our own con-sciences and the word of God. It is consequently an act of the mind. As the truth thus appre-hended is spiritual, so it is apprehended spiritually by the heart. As it occurs in the heart of a sinner, so it must be the act of a regenerated heart which alone is inclined to such belief as constitutes trust. And it is attained by this heart through the illuminating influences of the Spirit of God.

III. The nature of saving faith will further appear by noticing its objects.

These objects are not mere abstract truths, nor opinions, nor facts, but only such as are connected with a person.

(1.) As representing the Godhead. As such, it has him also for its object, not in all the aspects he bears to man, for it does not apprehend him as Creator, Preserver, Ruler, or Be-nefactor. These are aspects believed in, but they are not the basis of saving faith.

This has respect to him only in those relations in which he is viewed in special connection with salvation.

(a) As a God of holiness, hating sin, himself infinite in purity, before whom even the angels are chargeable with folly.

(b) As a God of justice, who will certainly punish every sin, even the least.

(c) As the righteous judge, who will show no favor, and who has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world.

(d) As the omniscient searcher of hearts, who knoweth even the most secret thoughts and intents of the heart.

(e) As the almighty and living God, into whose hands it is a fearful thing to fall.

(f) As the God who delights not in the death, but rather in the salvation of the wicked.

(g) As the God, whose love for the world has sent his own Son for its salvation.

313
