Fortunately, however, we have sufficient teaching to show what is the true faith.

There is the case of Simon Magus, Acts 8:13-24. Manifestly he had historical faith, and yet the Apostle is led to say of him, verse 21, "Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter: for thy heart is not right in the sight of God." The case of Judas also is one of bare historical faith.

That faith, however, is a work of the heart, is manifest from the following passages:

Acts 2:37. "They were pricked in their heart."

Rom. 10:8-10. "Shalt believe in thy heart that God raised him from the dead, * * * with the heart man believeth unto righteousness."

See an illustration of the difference between historical faith and hearty acceptance of

the truth in John 12:42, 43and Rom. 10:16-21.

2 Cor. 3:3. "In tables that are hearts of flesh," also verse 6, "the letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life."

Heb. 10:22. "Let us draw near with a true heart."

2 Tim. 2:22. Christians are described as those who "call on the Lord out of a pure heart."

It is also proved by all we have seen of the necessity and nature of Regeneration, Con-version and Repentance.

Hodge, [Outlines, p. 473,] gives this further proof from the effects of faith. "The Scriptures declare that by faith the Christian `embraces the promises,' `is persuaded of the promises,' `out of weakness is made strong,' `waxes valiant in fight,' `confesses himself a stranger and pilgrim seeking a better country.'" As faith in a threatening necessarily involves fear, so faith in a promise necessarily involves trust. "Besides, faith rests upon the trustworthiness of God

and, therefore, necessarily involves trust. Heb. 10:23 and the whole 11th chapter."

Such cannot be the nature of saving faith, because.

(1) This is not the experience of an early, but of an advanced stage of Christian life.

(2) Because this is not the object of Christian faith. That object is Christ, and the state-ments of God's truth concerning him and salvation. Those statements are general so far as the revelation is made. They are made personal by our acceptance. But our faith enters into that condition. If we can satisfy ourselves that our faith is undoubtedly genuine, not merely temporary, but actually one rooted in Christ, we may gain this assurance, but that assurance would rest not on God's word, nor on Christ's salvation, but on the evidence afforded by the Spirit's work in our hearts. [See Hodge's Outlines, p. 478.]

(3) The Scriptures give an example in Paul of a true Christian who could say "I buffet my body and bring it into bondage: lest by any means, after that I have preached to others,

I myself should be rejected." 1 Cor. 9:27. See also Phil. 3:12-14.

316
