questionable. His position, like that of those who fully obey human laws, is recognized without any special act affirming it.

Hence it is that the Scriptures so commonly use the word "just," dikaios, of one who is, in some one or in all respects, perfectly conformed to the law by his own acts, and who is, to that extent, therefore, personally holy, applying the term not to men only or even to

Christ, who was made under the law, but also to God himself. See Matt. 1:19; 5:45; 9:13;

Luke 23:50; Acts 3:14; 7:52; 22:14; Rom. 3:26. This usage has given rise to the opinion of some that justification is not simply a judicial act, but that it involves holiness in the one justified, and in the case of justified sinners an infusion of holiness in the act of justification.

But that this is an error is obvious,--

8:33, 34), and not of sinfulness. Condemnation is never spoken of as the infusion of a cor-rupted nature, and consequently justification would not involve that of a holy nature.

tion with personal righteousness, as of God in Acts 17:31, and of Christ "the Faithful and

True," Rev. 19:11, and of the martyrs in Heb. 11:33, and of human obedience to the law in

Rom. 10:3, 5; Phil. 3:6, 9, is, in connection with God's justification of sinners, applied, though chiefly by the Apostle Paul, to "the righteousness which God bestows or accepts," and which is imputed to the sinner or reckoned to his account.

Another term, dikaiosis, signifies "the act or process of declaring righteous," viz., justi-fication.

The word dikaioma, which means "that which is declared righteous," and hence a statute or command, as something which the law of God declares to be a righteous requirement, is used in connection with justification for "the deed by which one declares another righteous, and is partially equivalent to dikaiosis."

The principal word which is used for expressing the nature of God's action in justification is dikaioo, "to justify," which means everywhere "to declare righteous," "to regard and rep-

321
