The correctness of the statements, as to the forensic nature of justification, and its being an act of God which declares simply the relation of the justified to the law, will more plainly appear from what we shall learn of the nature of Sanctification, which is another of the privileges bestowed upon the people of God, as the result of their union with Christ.

I. MEANING OF THE TERMS USED.

While justify, as has been seen, means simply to declare just, or to treat as just; sanctify means to make holy. The usage of Scripture is as clear in this case as in that. The word "holy" in Scripture has, however, various meanings. It is sometimes applied to things, and not to persons only. (1.) It is used in the sense of that which is set apart or dedicated to an especial use. Thus, God threatens that instruments of vengeance will be "prepared" (sanctified)

against "the king's house of Judah," Jer. 22:7. But the dedication is most frequently for some

holy use. Thus, "holy" is applied to the Sabbath day (Ex. 31:14); and to the house of God

(Lev. 16:33); and to the water (Num. 5:17); and to the vessels of the young men (1 Sam.

21:5). (2.) Things are also called holy from their connection with holy persons. Thus, the "place" on which Moses stood was proclaimed "holy" on account of its connection with Je-

hovah (Ex. 3:5); likewise the Mount of Transfiguration (2 Pet. 1:18). (3.) As descriptive of an act free from sin, and performed with holy motives. Thus, the kiss of Christian salutation,

called in 1Pet. 5:14a kiss of charity, is in several other places called a "holy kiss." 1 Cor. 16:20;

2 Cor. 13:12; 1 Thess. 5:26. (4.) "Holy," as tending to produce holiness; as "most holy faith"

(Jude 20). (5.) It is most generally used as descriptive of personal character, whether the holiness be perfect, as in God, or angels, or glorified saints; or partial, as seen in his people

on earth. A few of the many instances of its application to this last class are 1 Sam. 2:9; Acts

9:13; Rom. 15:25, 26; Phil. 4:21; Eph. 1:1; Col. 1:2; Rev. 18:24.

The doctrine of sanctification has reference to the first and last of these usages of "holy;" to the last more especially, as including the character of holiness produced by the continuous working of the Holy Ghost through the word of truth; but also to the first, as involving that dedication of person and life to God, which constitutes that "living sacrifice, holy, acceptable

unto God," which is the believer's "reasonable service." Rom. 12:1. Christian holiness includes both character and life. "Sanctification" is the process by which these are accomplished. The "sanctified" are those who are thus made holy. To "sanctify" is to make them thus holy.

II. WHO ARE SANCTIFIED.

The sanctified are those only who are in Christ Jesus, who have been regenerated, and have been justified through faith.

332
