does he bear witness with their spirits that they are the children of God, and, removing the spirit of bondage to fear, bestows on them the spirit of adoption, whereby they cry Abba,

Father. Rom. 8:15, 16.

(4.) The fruit of this indwelling Spirit is declared to be "in all goodness and righteousness

and truth." Eph. 5:9. It is specifically stated to be "love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness,

goodness, faith, meekness, temperance." Gal. 5:22.

(1.) Christians are called upon to recognize this presence of the Spirit. 1 Cor. 3:16, 17. They are exhorted to "walk by the Spirit," and assured that, in so doing, they "shall not fulfill

the lust of the flesh." Gal. 5:16. They are taught that "they that are after the flesh do mind

the things of the flesh, but they that are after the Spirit the things of the Spirit." Rom. 8:5. They are told that, because of the indwelling Spirit, "we are debtors, not to the flesh to live

after the flesh," and thus, by implication that we are debtors to live after the Spirit. Rom.

8:12. They are charged to "grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, in whom ye are sealed unto

the day of redemption." Eph. 4:30. In these, and in other ways, their co-operation with the Spirit in the work is implied quite plainly.

(2.) They are exhorted to engage in the work of self-purification. The apostle exhorts the Ephesians not to "walk as the Gentiles also walk, in the vanity of their mind, . . . to put away . . . the old man, which waxeth corrupt after the lusts of deceit; and be renewed in the spirit of their mind, . . . and to put on the new man, which after God, hath been created in

righteousness and holiness of truth." Eph. 4:17-24.

(3.) This self-purification is declared to be the work of every one that has the hope of

likeness to Christ. 1 John 3:3.

(4.) Direct promises and commands, and exhortations to perfection and holiness, imply

co-operative action in those who are in the process of attaining sanctification. Matt. 5:48;

2 Cor. 7:1.

(5.) All warnings against the power of temptation, the lust of the flesh, the subtlety of Satan, the influence of the world, the grievous character of sin; all exhortations to lead a virtuous and godly life, to set the affections on heavenly and divine things, to consecrate the soul and body to God; all motives to these ends drawn from the work of Christ, as an exhibition of divine love and mercy, as an example of purity of life, and of patient suffering, or as personally connected with the believer because of his union with the Lord,-in short, all that the Scriptures contain fitted to lead the Christian to a higher spiritual life, is evidence of his co-operation with the Holy Spirit in the work of sanctification.

The author of sanctification is indeed the Divine Spirit, but the Christian actively unites with that Spirit, "working out his own salvation with fear and trembling," being exhorted

337
