just been made. But it is distinctly asserted. Those who believe are said to have been "ordained

to eternal life." Acts 13:48. Those finally glorified are said to have been foreordained to be

conformed to the image of his Son, and, therefore, called. Rom. 8:29. Referring to the falling away of some, the apostle writes to Timothy declaring that nevertheless the "Firm foundation

of God standeth, having this seal, "The Lord knoweth them that are his" (2 Tim. 2:19), thus establishing the identity of those that are thus known with those who shall remain steadfast. Our Lord himself declared this final salvation to be the will of God. "This is the will of him that sent me, that of all that which he hath given me I should lose nothing, but should raise

it up at the last day." John 6:39.

It is the power of Christ, and of God, which makes it impossible that the sheep shall be

snatched from their hands. John 10:27-29. It is God that will perform the good work which

he had begun. Phil. 1:6. "It is God which worketh in you," says the apostle to the Philippians,

"both to will and to work for his good pleasure." Phil. 2:13. Peter addresses his readers as those "Who by the power of God are guarded through faith unto salvation ready to be re-

vealed in the last time." 1 Pet. 1:5. He likewise invokes that "Grace . . . and peace be multiplied" to those who "have obtained a like precious faith," . . . "seeing that his divine power hath granted unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness." 2 Pet. 1:1-3. The Apostle

Paul declares that it is God that is to be thanked because of the growth of faith. 2 Thess. 1:3. In the same chapter he says, "We also pray for you, that our God may count you worthy of

your calling, and fulfill every desire of goodness, and every work of faith, with power." 2

Thess 1:11. It is in reliance, upon this power, that Paul triumphantly wrote to Timothy, "I know him whom I have believed and am persuaded that he is able to guard that which I

have committed unto him against that day." 2 Tim. 1:12.

end that the promise may be sure to all seed." Rom. 4:16. It is only "as many as are led by

the Spirit of God" that "are the sons of God." Rom. 8:14. "It is not of him that willeth, nor

of him that runneth, but of God that hath mercy." Rom. 9:16. This gracious character, which is ascribed to the whole work of salvation, is not less true of it in the end, than in the begin-ning. Hence, when the apostle prays for his brethren at Thessalonica, "may your spirit and soul and body be preserved entire without blame at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,"

he immediately adds "faithful is he that calleth you, who will also do it." 1 Thess. 5:23, 24. That faithfulness consists in the fulfillment of gracious promises, and not of matters of ob-ligation and duty.

347
