Hence the Scriptures speak of God as "the judge of all," (Heb. 12:23); and of his judgement

according to truth and righteousness, which cannot be escaped, Rom. 2:2, 3, 5. In the Apo-calyptic vision, John "saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne"

when the books were opened for judgement. Rev. 20:12, 13.

But this judgement is not by God, as God. Jesus told the Jews that "neither doth the

Father judge any man, but he hath given all judgement unto the Son." John 5:22. The cause of this is that the Son is not only divine, but human, and that his relation to humanity endows him with peculiar qualifications for this office, which, like those for the salvation of man, could not be possessed by one only divine. Christ, therefore, taught his disciples that the

judge would be the "Son of Man," (Matt. 16:27, 28; 25:31-34), and declared to the Jews, that the Father "gave him [his Son] authority to execute judgement, because he is the Son of

Man." John 5:27. Indeed, it would seem that the judgement is to be exercised peculiarly by Christ as man; for it is at least especially announced of him in his nature. Peter preached to Cornelius, concerning Jesus of Nazereth, "that this is he which is ordained of God to be the

judge of quick and dead." Acts 10:42. Paul wrote of "the day when God shall judge the secrets

of men according to my gospel by Jesus Christ," (Rom. 2:16); and encouraged the Corinthians

by declaring that "we must all be made manifest before the judgement seat of Christ," (2

Cor. 5:10) and, on Mars' Hill, announced that God had "appointed a day in the which he

will judge the world in righteousness by the man whom he hath ordained." Acts 17:31.

We cannot hope to understand all the reasons for this appointment of Christ, as Son of Man, to the judgement of all. They are connected, in part, with the position of King and Lord, to which he has been assigned for the complete triumph of his kingdom, and the manifestation of God's power and grace. They are also doubtless associated with the relation which, as man, he occupies to mankind, and especially to the church of "first-born ones." But it is certain that, by the connection of the office of judge with Christ as man, is removed every obstacle in the way of a public, visible judgement. Since it is the Son of God who is the Son of Man, all that makes it necessary that God be the judge is found in him. But as man, the judge is no longer the invisible God, who can only be seen in the works of his Creation, and Providence; but God in Christ, the Godman, in his visible material form, who, therefore, can be manifested before the eyes of all, in a judgement which is, not simply general, as inclusive of all, but public, as openly manifested before all. It appears, therefore, that the person of the judge adds another reason to those heretofore mentioned why any judgement which occurs at death will be supplemented by, and consummated in, the final judgement of the last day.

IV. THE PURPOSES OF THIS PUBLIC JUDGEMENT.

Still further proof of the same fact will appear from some, at least, of the purposes of this public judgement.

376
