THE WICKED

In the last chapter, nothing was said specifically of the awards of the judgement day. Yet is the public bestowal of these the culminating point of interest in that occasion. Judgement, without the expression of its results, in rewards and punishment, would be empty and vain. Hence the Scriptures do not leave us ignorant of what sentences will be pronounced upon the righteous, and wicked, and of what will be the final state of each. Of necessity, these must, in some respects, resemble those of the intermediate state; of which the condition of the righteous and wicked after judgement will be an enlargement and a culmination. It is not strange, therefore, that the Scriptures teach more fully, and emphatically upon these subjects.

I. THE FINAL STATE OF THE RIGHTEOUS.

There is upon this point little dispute as to the meaning of the Scripture statements. As they are numerous, they will best be presented under several classes of description.

Our Lord declared that "then shall the king say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the

world." Matt. 25:34. This is called "eternal life" in v. 46. As this is, probably, a description of the nature of the blessings to be attained, rather than a declaration of the literal language that will then be used, other statements may here be added which are of the same nature. One that is given in the parable of the talents, in which his lord said to him of the five talents, "Well done, good and faithful servant:thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will set

thee over many things:enter thou into the joy of thy Lord." Matt. 25:21, (cf. Matt. 24:27). The righteous are spoken of as "wheat," and it is said that the householder at the harvest

time will say to the reapers, "gather the wheat into my barn," Matt. 13:30. Our Lord, in his explanation of this parable, says of those thus represented by the wheat, "then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father," v. 43. Corresponding to this language, is the declaration of Peter, that, "when the chief shepherd shall be manifested,

ye shall receive the crown of glory that fadeth not away." 1 Pet. 5:4. There may be added, also, the promises made in Revelation to "him that overcometh," viz.: to eat of the tree of life which is in the paradise of God," (Chap. 2:7); "That he shall not be hurt of the second death," (2:11); "That he shall be given of the hidden manna," and "a white stone, and upon the stone a new name written," (2:17), and given authority over the nations, (2:27,) to "rule them with a rod of iron," (2:27); to "be arrayed in white garments," (3:5), and "walk with me (Christ) in white," (3:4), to be made "a pillar in the temple of my God, the new Jerusalem, and the new name of Christ, written upon him," (3:12); to sit down with Christ in his throne, 3:21; "to inherit these things," with the promise, "I will be his God, and he shall be my son."

382
