The same fact is justly argued from its being the abiding place of Christ. His human body must occupy a specified place in space. It has been replied to this argument that, "since deity and humanity are indissolubly united in Christ's single person, it is difficult to consider Christ's body as limited to place, without vacating his person of its divinity." But this objection is made in forgetfulness of the fact that Christ, in his divine relation, is not limited by his human nature, much less by his human body. This was shown by him, while on earth, when,

in conversation with Nicodemus, he spake of himself as being in heaven, (John 3:13), although his body was manifestly on earth. Was his ubiquity as God interfered with by his location then in space as man? It was in like manner that Christ saw Nathanael under the fig tree,

when he was not bodily present. John 1:48.

The idea of ubiquity of the body of Christ has been abandoned, however, while still it is denied that his human soul is limited to space. Thus it is said that "since deity and humanity are dissolubly united in Christ's single person, we cannot regard Christ's human soul as limited to place without vacating his person of its divinity."

But this is equally erroneous. Divine attributes are not conferred on Christ's soul because of its union with a divine person. But ubiquity, or omnipresence is a divine attribute. It is much more difficult for us to understand how the unity of Christ's person did not convey

to the human soul all knowledge belonging to Christ as God. Yet we are distinctly told (Matt.

24:36; Mark 13:32), that there was such a limitation of knowledge as to the time of Christ's second coming, as could only be true of Christ in his human nature, and not of him as God. The perfect humanity of Christ, which is his as truly as his perfect divinity, makes necessary such location in space as is suitable to a human soul. Whatever superiority may accrue to either the human body or soul of Christ can never place either of these beyond the excellence of created existence, or confer upon either the nature or attributes of God.

No similar objection, however, can be made to an argument to the same effect, drawn from the bodies of the saints. Heaven cannot be regarded as only a state in which they have communion with God, but must be accepted as the place of their abode in their glorified bodies, in which they dwell with each other, and rejoice in the state of happiness and glory which is also theirs.

We have no means of ascertaining the location of heaven. That this earth, in its renewed

condition, may be the future heaven is favoured by Rom. 8:19-23; 2 Pet. 3:5-13, and Rev.

21:1-3. But these passages are entirely to indefinite and doubtful to give any certainty, or even very strong probability, on this point.

Heaven is spoken of in certain descriptive terms. It is called "a better country, that is a

heavenly." Heb. 11:16. It is the place which we shall have a "a building from God, an house

not made with hands, eternal in the heavens," (2 Cor. 5:1, 2); and "a place" among the "many

mansions" in the "Father's house;" John 14:2. It is called "the kingdom," Matt. 13:43; 25:34.

It is possible that heaven is also meant by the "Jerusalem that is above," (Gal. 4:26), and "the

384
