George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

Preface

Edward Gibbon once referred to the reign of a Roman emperor as "marked by the rare advantage of furnishing very few materials for history; which is, indeed, little more than the register of the crimes, follies and misfortunes of mankind." Such words could well describe the brief history of Mormon Nauvoo, especially its social history. What has been recorded about that brief, seven-year period invariably revolves around the crimes and follies of the enemies of the Nauvoo Saints and of the misfortunes of the Mormons themselves—all of which has left us with only a few materials for reconstructing the daily lives of the residents of Nauvoo.

Why is the social life of Mormon Nauvoo sufficiently significant to merit a reconstruction? If social history is a valid study at all, and most historians agree it is, then certainly Nauvoo deserves such a telling, if for no other reason than to fill a vacuum that has been neglected by Mormon historians and ignored by non-Mormons.

Latter-day Saint writers have approached the short life-span of Nauvoo as a vital seven-year period that needs explaining either in terms of doctrinal development or historical relevance to the growth of non-Mormon hostility in the second half of the nineteenth century. Nauvoo was, after all, the scene of the Prophet Joseph Smith's last five years on earth and the place where many of the Church's cardinal doctrines were revealed. With respect to national history and the American community in general, Nauvoo must also be treated as the seedbed of an intermountain empire and the Mormon-Gentile political relationships for the next half century.

The social history of this unique Mormon community has been overshadowed for Latter-day Saint scholars by the pioneer history of the Mormon Rocky Mountain West, which has more accessible and far more abundant historical sources. Even the residents of Nauvoo themselves were too caught up in the doctrinal developments of the early Church and the political turmoil in Illinois to leave us much of their social history. And to the non-Latter-day Saint scholars, where is the interest in an obscure Illinois river town that had such a brief life span one hundred and fifty years ago?

Only if such an obscure town could demonstrate its uniqueness in history would the ordinary lives of the people living there justify a book. Mormon Nauvoo does indeed seem to meet that qualification. Unfortunately, as impressive as a visit to this restored, historic city might be, recognition of its unique status in American and even world history might be easily overlooked. And future recognition might be discouragingly slow in arriving in a nation disposed to commercial amusements and exalted symbols of nationalism. Most of the city's unique characteristics associated with this painful phase of American history do not lend themselves to approbation and sanctification. Nevertheless, to the Saints who lived out those seven years, the sanctification became a reality. To later generations of Saints, an aura of reverence has enshrouded the abandoned city. In the process, this now peaceful town overlooking the Mississippi River achieved an unsought status in its uniqueness, a status not to be envied but certainly one to be known and remembered as these features of Nauvoo's uncommon history demonstrate:

These very traits demand a greater study of the lives of those who made it so. But ironically, Nauvoo's supreme eccentricity was its insistence on being a model nineteenth-century American city, differing only perhaps in a naive desire by its inhabitants and leaders to display those characteristics, those homes, businesses and shops, a government and militia, a temple and farms, that would most favorably impress their fellow Americans with their qualities as industrious and desirable citizens. Perhaps they were too successful in such an imperfect and violent society as frontier America, which resented this unique people and city in their midst. It was likely that this latter characteristic, exemplified in their daily lives, inevitably brought about their exile and created less laudable characteristics of their beloved city.

Whatever the case, the story of those early American Saints living those seven short years on the river's edge in Illinois needs to be more fully told. This book perhaps will be a beginning.
