George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

1

Building the City

"At cutting down trees or cutting them up," observed a critical English editor early in the nineteenth century, the Americans "will do ten times as much in a day as any other men I ever saw. Let one of these men upon a wood of timber trees, and his slaughter will astonish you." [^1] This was without a doubt somewhat of an exaggeration, but for the Saints settling Commerce, the description was perhaps more accurate than for other comparable groups of western pioneers. There was need to hurry. Most of these Latter-day Saints came to Illinois impoverished by their cruel exile from Missouri. About the only thing they could call their own was the land their prophet had provided for them on the banks of the Mississippi. Once again they had to build homes from what nature offered—and nature did not seem to offer very much. It was, according to one description, a mosquito-infested swamp with a tree-clad hillock where the temple would be built. The marshland of Commerce containing six small houses was so entangled with trees and bushes it was almost impassable to a person on foot and totally impassable to teams. [^2]

A handful of the immigrants found homes in long-abandoned cabins in the vicinity, but only a handful. Most of the newcomers were forced to live in wagon boxes, tents, or dirt dugouts while they began their log homes along the marshy lower levels of the eastern river bank. Here terror struck again, but this time the enemy was unknown, and it was even more relentless and deadly than the Missourian mobs. The task of building homes was soon exchanged for one of digging graves and caring for the sick. Malaria, or ague and fever, as it was then called, was quite common in the Mississippi Valley, but it hit the already weakened and ill-housed Saints very hard. The marshy site they had selected for their settlement was ideal for the disease-carrying mosquito. Soon so many entire families were down with the fever that at times there weren't enough healthy people left to care for the sick or even to bury the dead. Sidney Rigdon preached a mass funeral sermon for all the dead. [^3]

That was the situation when Joseph Smith began a day of faith-healing of the sick: "On the morning of the 22nd of July, 1839, he arose reflecting upon the situation of the Saints of God in their persecutions and afflictions. He called upon the Lord in prayer, and the power of God rested mightly upon him. . . . He healed all in his house and dooryard, then, in company with Sidney Rigdon and several of the Twelve, he went through among the sick lying on the bank of the river, and he commanded them in a loud voice, in the name of Jesus Christ, to come up and be made whole, and they were all healed." [^4]

As the season progressed, the malarial attacks lessened. Strengthened by the arrival of new families from the Quincy area, the Saints began the job of building the town. In October 1839 the high council voted to set prices on town lots, ranging from two hundred to eight hundred dollars. [^5] Terms were very easy. Many buyers did not have to pay until 1843 or even 1850; some lived on their land until the exodus without paying one cent. [^6]

Although it seems logical that land values would be at their lowest in 1839 and increase as the population increased, such was not necessarily the case. With the Church being the purchaser of most of the land in the area, Church leaders could set nearly uniform prices and guarantee sales to bona fide settlers, thus preventing the wild speculation associated with most western boom towns. Ann Pitchforth, who arrived at Nauvoo three years after settlement began, commented on land values to relatives back in England. Her account reveals that the prices of lots in the city had not increased, but had perhaps, although she was unaware of it, even decreased from the values set in 1839:

"Rents are very high owing to the increasing value of the land in the City. I intend to save money to buy a house and lot as most people here do; then I shall have no rent to pay. We have a very small house with two rooms and a shed, no upstairs and the rent is 9 pounds and 10 shilling ($47.50) a year. By paying 20 pounds ($100) down, I can secure a house and one acre of land and leave the remainder to be paid by 10 pounds ($50) a year till paid off. Forty pounds ($200) will buy a house and lot and all in the City. Of course there are many houses 5 times as much, but we could improve ours little by little as we could afford." [^7]

By the spring of 1840 the worst of the previous year's sickness was past. Winter had temporarily solved the malaria problem, and draining the flats soon solved it more permanently. Settlers streamed into the new town, and the beginning of summer found the building of homes the major item of business in Commerce. Joseph Smith recorded on 1 June 1840, "The Saints have already erected about two hundred and fifty-houses at Nauvoo, mostly block houses, a few framed, and many more are in course of construction." [^8] Block houses were squared-log houses. Eventually most of the homes in Nauvoo were of this type.

The Times and Seasons elaborated on the construction news in a June 1840 editorial: "There are also about one thousand acres of land divided into town lots, and the size of each lot, except those which are fractional are eleven rods by twelve, which makes elegant gardens." Only four such lots were planned for each block, leaving a great deal of land with each home. The purpose, of course, was to provide enough room for gardens and orchards to allow the owner to be self-sufficient. The present Brigham Young home has a garden approximately thirty-six feet by one hundred feet and an orchard of twenty-seven trees, including plum, apricot, apple, peach, crab, pear, cherry, and persimmon. These dimensions are probably comparable to those of the original garden and orchard. It is questionable, however, whether Nauvoo was settled long enough for many of the fruit trees to mature and bear fruit.

Joseph Smith had planned Nauvoo to give residents the greatest advantages of both rural and urban life. Farms were located on the perimeter of the city so that farmers could return to Nauvoo at the close of each day, enabling them to participate in the cultural and religious activities of the city. He believed also that the ideal city should remain small enough to allow most of its inhabitants to have a speaking acquaintance with one another. His design called for a city of ten to fifteen thousand people. [^9]

As the summer of 1840 progressed, so did the growth of the new town. Streets were laid out, fences built around gardens, and more land cleared while the incessant sounds of axes, saws, and mauls continued from sunup to sundown. In little more than a year after the first settlers arrived on the marshy flats, the town had an appearance of permanency. Joseph noted in his journal in August, "The number of inhabitants is nearly three thousand, and is fast increasing. . . . It is our intention to commence the erection of some public buildings next spring." [^10] And Joseph had some specific public buildings in mind. In a letter he sent to the Twelve in England that October, he outlined three major accomplishments necessary to make Nauvoo an economic, spiritual, and cultural center: build an industrial complex, construct a temple, and found a university. Before he was martyred in 1844, all three were becoming a reality.

Another reality was the growth of Nauvoo into an important city, commanding notice on the Illinois frontier. The 1840 census showed it to be similar to Quincy and Springfield in population and already half the size of Chicago. [^11] By 1841 articles on this boom town in Hancock County, Illinois, were appearing in newspapers in other parts of the country. Nauvoo newspapers were, with justifiable pride, quick to reprint them. One such article, taken from the Upper Mississippian, was printed in the Times and Seasons on 15 February 1841. The article noted that Nauvoo had "added from 75 to 100 buildings, mostly neat and painted, spread over a large extent of ground, and covering the plain and the bluffs in the rear.—These numerous new, bright looking buildings, scattered about amongst the trees and shrubbery which abound here, present, in warm weather, a delightful appearance. . . .

"Nauvoo is said to have a population of about 3000 inhabitants some 300 buildings, several small traders, Tavern keepers, Phisicians, and various kinds of mechanics and laborers: and some water craft, among which is a small steam-boat called Nauvoo."

Many of Nauvoo's new citizens were immigrants from the British Isles, converted by missionaries helped by glowing articles on Nauvoo appearing in the Millennial Star. This was the Church's official newspaper in England, which reprinted articles from Nauvoo's newspapers to help entice new converts and settlers. This item appeared on 10 June 1841: "Everywhere we see men of industry with countenances beaming with cheerful content hurrying to their several occupations and scenes of labor. The sound of the axe, the hammer, and the saw, greet your ear in every direction, and others are springing up, and ere we are aware of it are filled with happy occupants."

The success of the missionary effort can perhaps be discerned by a word of caution that the Star published for English emigrants only two months later in August 1841: settlers in Nauvoo "cannot expect to rent houses and enter at once on a comfortable living—but must pitch tents and build temporary cottages. Thirty to forty yards of calico will make a good tent and four to six weeks work with little expense will erect a small cottage."

Words of caution were not really that necessary. Homes were being constructed so rapidly that "newly arrived citizens with money or sound credit usually found houses ready for occupancy." Even as early as July 1841, a wagon train of seventy Saints from Chester County, Pennsylvania, and another with an unspecified number from Canada all found a place to live "in two or three days." [^12] Such wagon trains of Mormons, passing through gentile communities and headed for western Illinois, were an impressive sight. The Illinois Gazette, published at Peru, Illinois, reported in 1841 that in a recent week "nearly 40 wagons containing about 240 immigrant men, women and children bound for Nauvoo in this state have passed through our town. They hale from western New York for the most part. Several families however, are from England. Their appearance was respectable and many of them, no doubt, are wealthy families." [^13]

That same summer, one of the Church leaders responsible for much of this immigration returned to Nauvoo from England after an absence of two years. Heber C. Kimball noted that when he had left for England in September 1839, there were not more than thirty buildings. Upon his return in July 1841, there were about twelve hundred buildings and hundreds of others in progress. In the 10 September 1841 Millennial Star, he recalled that "we built our houses in the woods (with) not a house within half a mile of us, now the place, wild as it was at that time, is covered into a thickly populated village."

In spite of its size, observers did not always agree on Nauvoo's appearance as a recognizable city at this time. A Mormon schoolteacher, Warren Foote, who lived near Quincy, described Nauvoo after a visit in September 1841: "Some parts of the city is very rough broken ground. The log houses are scattered over nine square miles. It looks more like a thickly settled country than a city." [^14] Perhaps Brother Foote, having heard so much about the city of the Saints, was just expecting too much. Most frontier observers would have been more impressed. On 15 November 1841, the Times and Seasons published a description of the city as it appeared after all the summer construction and the influx of immigrants. It described the southern portion of the flats as being extensively built up and the area north of the temple as being densely populated. East of the temple for some ten miles the land was still more or less timbered but "completely spotted with dwellings." On the large prairie east of the city, several buildings were either in progress or completed. Fencing, planting, and preparing the land for cultivation was in progress.

In November 1841 Joseph Fielding, recently released from his very successful mission to the British Isles, saw Nauvoo for the first time. Two months later he wrote to Parley P. Pratt, who was responsible for his conversion to the Church, to describe his impressions upon his first view of that city to which so many English converts had come: "Late in the evening . . . we came in sight of some neat cottages fenced in with pickets, manifesting to us that the hand of industry was there different from anything we had seen since leaving England, even by the light of the moon; this was the first we saw of the city of the Saints . . . and we were then told that we had two miles to go to that part of the city where we were going. We soon passed the temple, went from street to street, as in some large city, till we came near the river. . . . I can truly say that the place, in general, exceeds my expectations; in short, one could hardly believe it possible that a town of such extent, could have been built in so short a time, especially by a people generally poor—there are many log, many frame, and many brick houses." [^15]

Fewer observers commented on the people who built Nauvoo, however, so a contemporary description of the people themselves is of special interest. The St. Louis Atlas carried such a description of the inhabitants by a non-Mormon who visited Nauvoo in 1841. The Millennial Star reprinted an extract on 10 December of that year: "Scores of mechanics and laborers are busy as bees . . . and as they are all influenced by a public spirit unknown to the most of our communities—they do more work and bring more to pass than people do elsewhere. . . . they present the appearance of an enterprising, industrious, sober and thrifty population indeed, as in the respects just mentioned, have no rivals east, and, we rather guess, not even west of the Mississippi."

A non-Mormon visitor to the city in March 1842 noted that the incorporated limits contained, "it is said, about seven thousand persons." [^16] Five months later, in August 1842, the Millennial Star recorded that the city contained "within its corporation, something like 10,000 inhabitants, while many thousands more are settled and are improving in the country around. . . . It is more than probable that in the course of 12 months, this city will number 15-20 thousand inhabitants—the buildings are mostly temporary cabins, built of wood and are very small, unfinished, and inconvenient; but they are such as are generally erected in the beginning of new settlements in every part of the country, and will soon give place to those of brick and stone. . . . the streets are broad and pleasant, but not yet paved."

The visitor in March had seen a city that had not yet experienced its normal seasonal growth for 1842, but by October, the summer and fall influx of immigrants had taken place. Thus we read a little different description of the city in the Times and Seasons of 1 October 1842: "For three or four miles upon the river and about the same distance back in the country, Nauvoo presents a city of gardens, ornamented with the dwellings of those who have made a covenant by sacrifice, and are guided by revelation, an exception to all other societies upon the earth."

The writer went on to say that houses in Nauvoo were small compared to houses in eastern cities and that seven or eight hundred houses in Nauvoo contained a population of fourteen or fifteen thousand people. This figure is surely an exaggeration, for it would have meant at least twenty people in each of the "small" houses, but a more reasonable figure is somewhat difficult to arrive at. Most estimates of the population were casual and based on statistics that were often unclear about what they actually included. For instance, the 1840 federal census noted an average of approximately six persons per household in Hancock County, Illinois. In 1840, however, Hancock County as a whole was a relatively sparsely settled frontier, and frontiers usually were not family oriented and had small households. The households of the Latter-day Saints, which did not follow traditional frontier patterns, were probably larger. If there were seven or eight hundred houses in Nauvoo in 1842 (remember Heber C. Kimball had mentioned twelve hundred buildings the year previous), the population of Nauvoo would probably have been no less than six thousand. A Church census in 1842 records four thousand people in eight hundred households, [^17] but it is unclear whether the census was conducted before or after the summer immigration season—a potential difference of as many as two or three thousand people. Furthermore, it is not known whether the Church census counted just Church members or the entire Nauvoo population—a potential difference of at least another thousand.

[In Old Nauvoo Brigham Young's Home

It appears that an estimated population of fifteen thousand within Nauvoo's city limits in 1842 is high, but four thousand is low. Remember, some residents spoke of five thousand refugees in the Commerce area as early as the fall of 1839. Considering the available information, it seems reasonable to estimate a population of seventy-two hundred by the end of 1842 for the incorporated city and close to eleven thousand for the metropolitan area. Certainly descriptions of what was occurring in the building industry in 1842 lend credibility to such a figure. On 29 October 1842 the Nauvoo Wasp reminded its readers that "every day is seen, phoenix-like, the ponderous fronts of new and extensive buildings starting into existence, peering themselves above the roofs of the more humble ones that surround them, and where lots (in a short time) smile under the products of cultivation to be crowned with residences." Even rental property was in demand. About this time Ebenezer Robinson used money from the sale of the Times and Seasons printing shop to build a brick row of eleven tenements for rentals.

The Robinson tenements were not the only brick buildings being erected in Nauvoo. By 1842 the brickyards were kept busy supplying brick for many fine homes that still impress visitors nearly a century and a half after their construction. One such home was that of Brigham Young, which was ready in April 1842. His diary revealed that any spare time from Church activities was "spent in draining, fencing and cultivating my lot, building a temporary shed for my cow, chinking and otherwise finishing my house; and as a cellar was needed underground, I built one with brick. Frost never penetrated it, although in summer articles would mildew in it." [^18]

In August 1842 the Millennial Star reported to its readers: "The foundation of the Nauvoo House is laid, and the walls are from 10-20 feet (i.e.) from the bottom. This is to be a large and splendid building, for the accommodation of strangers and visitors; it is built in shares of $50; the foundation is stone, but the walls are to be brick. These buildings have furnished many of the poor with work."

By the time 1842 drew to a close, Nauvoo was experiencing its greatest growth, and its life as the Mormon Zion was more than half over.

The new year 1843 saw the arrival in Nauvoo of a young non-Mormon named Charlotte Haven. She was not an especially friendly observer, and just how accurate she was is difficult to discern, but we learn much from letters she wrote during her almost year-long stay in the city. In one of her first letters written to relatives in New England and dated 22 January 1843, she estimated that the population of Nauvoo "is now fourteen thousand, and when the river opens in the spring there will be a larger increase. . . . [the] city is spread over an area of 6 or 8 miles—inhabitants seem scattered." [^19] In fact, trips were actually made by steamboat from the southern part of the city to the northern part and back. The Prophet Joseph penned in his journal in 1843: "At six P.M. went with my family and about one hundred others on a pleasure excursion on the Maid of Iowa, from the Nauvoo House landing to the north part of the city, and returned at dusk." [^20]

A convert from Canada named Jacob Scott wrote in March 1843: "I think there are more than one hundred handsome brick houses in Nauvoo now. . . . Perhaps there is not any other city on this globe improving as fast as Nauvoo. It is supposed that there are at present ten to twelve thousand inhabitants in the city alone, and the country around it and Montrose is swarming with the Saints. . . . It is supposed that there are at present two thousand from England, Scotland, Wales and the Isle of Man waiting between New Orleans and this place until navigation opens, and two thousand more are expected out next spring and summer from the same places." [^21]

Another convert, John Needham, related in a letter to relatives in England his impression of the city when he first saw it in 1843: "When within five or six miles of this place, we heard the agreeable cry, 'Nauvoo to be seen,' the long-looked-for place; every eye was stretched toward the place, as you may be sure our eyes gazed with delight, but astonishment, to see the great extent of it. The city seemed to rise gradually from the sea, with the houses much scattered, but over a great extent of ground; it has without any mistake, more so than any place we had seen before, a grand appearance. It looked very pretty from the river. . . . The extent of the city is four miles, laid out in lots and streets in nice order." [^22]

"Wherever we turn," the Nauvoo Neighbor reported on 5 October 1843, "brick houses are going up; tradesmen of all kinds seem to be full of employment, particularly those that are in any way connected with building."

John Needham recognized that Nauvoo could not fairly be compared to older established cities with finer homes, but he nevertheless remained impressed by this city on the Illinois frontier. Part of one of his letters was quoted in the Millennial Star in November 1843. "We have," he noted, "a good many brick houses, and others are frame-wood and log houses. Some . . . appear strange to the person who has been accustomed to live in a fine-built place, but a great many are quite smart large brick houses, which would look well in any city. I was quite surprised to find so many good brick-built houses." [^23]

The Reverend Samuel Prior, a Methodist minister visiting Nauvoo in the spring of 1843, revealed his amazement in his report on the city of the Saints:

"At length the city burst upon my sight, and how sadly was I disappointed. Instead of seeing a few miserable log cabins and mud hovels, which I had expected to find, I was surprised to see one of the most romantic places that I have visited in the West. The buildings, though many of them were small and of wood, yet bore the marks of neatness which I have not seen equalled in this country.

" . . . I was almost willing to believe myself mistaken; and instead of being in Nauvoo of Illinois among the Mormons, that I was in Italy at the city of Leghorn, (which the location of Nauvoo resembles very much). . . . the inhabitants . . . in two or three short years rescued it from a dreary waste to transform it into one of the first cities in the West." [^24]

A typical frontier town, especially a boom town, usually consisted of log cabins and pole huts for the first two or three years. Experienced travelers encountered such towns elsewhere on the American frontier, and certainly non-Mormons expected nothing more from such an "ignorant and disillusioned sect as the Mormons." Log cabins in the old Northwest Territory at this time, however, were neither an indication of crudeness nor a lack of progress but just plain sensible construction. Harriet Martineau, an English traveler who had visited the region, described log houses in the Northwest as comfortable, easily kept clean, cool in summer, and warm in winter with an air of beauty about them and a hue that always harmonized well with the soil and vegetation. [^25]

A newspaper editor from Warsaw, Illinois, reported that at its peak Nauvoo consisted of "1,200 hand-hewn log cabins, most of them whitewashed inside, 200 to 300 good substantial brick houses and 300 to 500 frame houses." [^26] And another reporter, shortly after the city was abandoned, "took occasion to ascertain as near as possible the number of houses in the city. From my position on the Temple, I could count a large portion of the city; and from actual count, and estimate based upon count, I think there are at least two thousand homes in the city proper, and in the suburbs five hundred more—making in all two thousand five hundred homes. About one-half of these are mere shanties, built of logs, some of poles plastered over, and some framed. Of the remaining portion—say twelve hundred houses—all are tolerably fit residences, and one-half are good brick houses in the city. There are probably five hundred frame houses in the city, most of which are good buildings, and some are elegant and handsomely finished residences." [^27]

One criticism of Nauvoo that seemed to be unanimous among visitors was the poor condition of the streets and roads. The September 1843 Millennial Star published the account of John Needham, the friendliest observer, who still felt compelled to comment on the streets as "not yet paved, but are in the rough, in dry weather pleasant, except for a little dust but in wet weather unpleasant: some are better than others." The explanation for the bad streets can be gleaned from a letter by convert Sarah Hall Scott, who arrived in Nauvoo with her husband in the fall of 1843: "The soil differs much from anything I ever saw. I have not seen a stone or any gravel in the place. The mud here sticks to my feet just like paste." [^28] The pastelike mud and the lack of gravel for paving plagued Nauvoo for the entire duration of Mormon residence there. Perhaps to compensate for the disagreeable thoroughfares, special efforts were expended to improve other aspects of city life.

And beautifying the city was in keeping with their religious doctrine. The Saints' thirteenth article of faith announced to the world that "if there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report, or praiseworthy, we seek after these things." Thus Joseph Smith encouraged the beautifying of the city, and city ordinances even required spacious lots with trees and gardens. Admittedly, this requirement became difficult to fulfill as more and more settlers crowded into the city and buildings were erected on lots smaller than those originally planned. Nevertheless, the city leaders enforced building, street, and walkway ordinances to make Nauvoo a place of beauty. Such ideas of beautification were unique in their application to a new American community.

Beautifying a town in the process of construction was no easy task. Landscaping and other beautification is normally the last phase of construction, but in Nauvoo there was no last phase of construction. Construction was Nauvoo's principal activity throughout its life, for town lots included gardens, fences, orchards, and outbuildings. Summer kitchens, smokehouses, privies, barns, and stables were constantly being added to existing homes, not to mention the continual building of more new houses.

As the summer immigration drew to an end in the fall of 1843, Joseph Smith noted in his journal that Nauvoo "now contains near 3,500 houses, and more than 15,000 inhabitants." [^29] This estimate undoubtedly included the city and environs but was still a somewhat optimistic guess.

About the same time, a non-Mormon visitor to Nauvoo seemed duly impressed by what the Saints had accomplished thus far. The Neighbor published his report on 20 September 1843: "A quick drive of a few hours brought us through the eastern portion of the city of Nauvoo, to a very eminent situation on the bluff, at which place a magnificent stone building was in progress of erection; which we at once pronounced the Temple. The majestic Mississippi showed its broad waters and numerous islands, for miles. The far-famed Iowa presented itself beyond in view like a beautiful landscape. The sight is delightful, from a gradual descent of about a mile to the river, and there on either hand, up and down, may be seen with one glance of the eye; covered with buildings of almost every description, from the humble cot to the stately mansion; harmoniously intermingled; all seemed hustle, life and business. . . . Several days were very satisfactorily spent in visiting each portion of the city, and to say truth, such another scene of industry, enterprise and good order in society I never before witnessed. . . .Apparently peaceful with their neighbors, of good morals and industrious; turning the broad prairie into fertile fields, and making an extensive market in the most fertile part of the state."

This glowing description was merely signed J. E. in the Neighbor and was one of the last detailed and friendly descriptions of Nauvoo by visitors. The following year, 1844, saw the assassination and increasing persecution, which left little space for general commentary on city growth in letters, journals, or newspapers. Nevertheless, the tragic events of 1844 did little to slow the growth of Nauvoo. Neither did the fact that Illinois was not considered the permanent home of the Saints. In July 1843 Joseph Smith publicly prophesied that the Saints would yet settle in the Rocky Mountains. [^30] In February 1844 Joseph wrote in his journal: "I instructed the Twelve Apostles to send out a delegation and investigate the locations of California and Oregon, and hunt out a good location, where we can remove to after the temple is completed." The Prophet recorded in his journal in May of that year: "Nauvoo continues to flourish, and the little one has become a thousand. Quite a number of splendid houses are being erected, and the Temple is rapidly progressing." [^31]

That is the paradox of Nauvoo. Until the very day of their departure westward, the people of Nauvoo built and planned and dreamed as though their beloved city would last forever. This paradox is poignantly exemplified in John Taylor's newspaper, the Neighbor. Taylor, who was one of Joseph's inner circle and well aware of plans to abandon Nauvoo, on 27 March 1844 published a letter lamenting the loss of so many fine old trees that would have improved the looks of Nauvoo. The letter encouraged citizens to preserve remaining trees and even to plant new ones for shade, beauty, and the health of the inhabitants. The 2 April 1845 Neighbor advertised:

CHESTNUT TREES

The subscriber has about 10 or 11,000 beautiful Chestnut trees, in the garden near Willard Richards near the Temple, now ready for sale. Now is the time for transplanting. . . .

P. H. Young

Planting trees in a soon-to-be abandoned city is baffling. It is likely that even a nineteenth-century resident of Nauvoo would have been unable to explain satisfactorily his continued efforts to build up that temporary city on the banks of the Mississippi. It was almost as if the inevitable exodus would never come. Nauvoo continued to grow. A census taken in August 1844 marked the population of the city proper at 11,057. Some authorities estimated that the suburbs contained one third more. The official Church estimate, as expressed by Roberts and Lund, totaled about twenty thousand for the metropolitan area. [^32]

Although that estimate is undoubtedly an exaggeration, an interesting comparison might still be made with some of the older, established American cities, according to the federal census of 1840. In that year Washington, D.C., contained 23,364 people; Pittsburgh was listed at 21,115; and Nauvoo's neighbor one hundred miles downriver, St. Louis, boasted 16,469. New Orleans, where so many Mormon immigrants made landfall after their Atlantic voyage, consisted of 102,193, and the east coast debarkation center, New York, totaled 312,710. [^33] It is likely that Nauvoo by 1845 was as large as St. Louis had been in 1840.

A rather prophetic poem published in the Times and Seasons on 15 October 1844 compared Nauvoo with other great cities whose past glories became but memories:

O tell me not of Ancient Rome, of Athens, or of Troy; Gone, gone is all their greatness without one gleam of joy, Nor speak ye yet more modern names, tho fair and lovely too; What is their beauty, what their fame, compared to fair Nauvoo?

If 1844 ended on this foreboding note, 1845 seemed to open with business as usual. Contemporary reports suggest a life typical of a frontier boom town. Immigration continued heavy with more and more immigrants arriving by river steamer, and fewer by wagon overland. Builders were finding it increasingly difficult to keep pace with the rate of immigration. "The continual emigration to this city, makes houses to let scarce," noted the Neighbor of 28 May 1845, warning owners not to take advantage of the situation and commit the sin of extorting heavy rent from the poor.

Visitors walking the noisy bustling streets of the city in 1845 would have found it incomprehensible that the townspeople were not building for their children and grandchildren. Brigham Young, president of the Quorum of the Twelve, wrote from Nauvoo in January 1845 to Wilford Woodruff, who was doing missionary work in England: "There are many good buildings erecting in different parts of the city, there is not much sickness in the place, and there never was a more prosperous time, in general, amongst the saints, since the work commenced. Nauvoo, or more properly, the 'City of Joseph,' looks like a paradise. All the lots and land, which have heretofore been vacant and unoccupied, were enclosed in the spring, and planted with grain and vegetables, which makes it look more like a garden of gardens than a city." [^34] The purpose of all the planting was to add to the self-sufficiency of the city because of continuing persecution and harassment from outside.

The need for additional cultivated land within the city could have interfered with efforts to provide a pleasing and spacious environment for the citizens, but the construction of sidewalks and streets continued nonetheless. A city ordinance stipulated spacious streets and walkways—sidewalks were to be eight to ten feet wide, depending upon the width of the streets they bordered. Many western towns had wooden walks, but there is no evidence of them in Nauvoo: most walks were constructed of stone, stone chips, or brick. [^35] At its peak, according to one estimate, Nauvoo had ninety-one miles of stone sidewalks. [^36] Another writer estimated approximately seventy-five miles of roadway constructed by the Mormons in Nauvoo. Interestingly, these figures suggest there were more sidewalks than streets. According to this same writer, the streets were relatively unimproved, surfaced with clay and sand. Chuckholes were filled with stones, broken brick, gravel, or whatever else was handy. [^37] Because contemporary letters and journals speak of the lack of gravel or stone in the Nauvoo area, what this writer called gravel was probably stone chips from the quarry and from the stonework being carried on near the temple. Plaster, lime, and broken bricks from the construction were also used for street repair, but these materials never proved really satisfactory.

Like the planting of trees, the construction of sidewalks and streets and buildings continued even as the Saints prepared to leave their city. Several projects were completed or commenced during the eighteen to twenty months after the martyrdom. Two wings were added to Brigham Young's home in the latter part of 1844, Heber C. Kimball's and Willard Richards's two-story brick homes were completed in 1845, John D. Lee's residence was completed, a home was begun for Lucy Mack Smith, the Seventies' Hall and Cultural Hall were completed, and work continued on the Nauvoo House. The Mississippi stone dike intended as a ship lock and waterhead for shops and machinery was begun but not completed. [^38]

By the late fall of 1845, although construction in Nauvoo did not cease until the Saints were rolling their wagons out of the city, the reality of the looming exodus had added a new dimension to city life. A new industry had sprung up, one that rivaled almost any other industry the Saints had ever imagined possible for their lovely city. Brigham Young recorded: "Every hundred have established one or more wagon shops; wheelwrights, carpenters and cabinetmakers are nearly all foremen wagon makers, and many not mechanics are at work in every part of the town preparing timber for making wagons. . . . shops are established at the Nauvoo House, Masonic Hall, and Arsenal, nearly every shop in town is employed in making wagons.

"Teams are sent to all parts of the country to purchase iron; blacksmiths are at work night and day and all hands are busily engaged getting ready for our departure westward as soon as possible." [^39]

Ironically, during those final months of feverish preparation to depart, the city experienced its most rapid growth. Every day families arrived from outlying settlements, burned out or otherwise driven from their homes by "wolf-hunting" mobs. Seeking the protection of the city and the Nauvoo Legion, these refugees hurriedly constructed many of the crude "shanties" described by anti-Mormons after the exodus. Then in February 1846, the first wagons pulled from the yards and shops and moved toward the river. All during the spring and summer, the chief sounds of the city were the crunching of wagon wheels on streets leading to the ferry, the hammers and saws now silently packed away in toolboxes in the departing wagons.

No other city in American history had ever undergone such a transformation in so few months. No other people, en masse, had closed the doors of their homes in such a flourishing city and abandoned so much. By October 1846 external forces had reduced the once magnificent city to a virtual ghost town. [^40] The sounds of construction that had been ever present for the past seven years were now replaced by an eerie silence. The repair of streets and sidewalks was no longer a problem—they were empty.

The best description of the abandoned city was written by Colonel Thomas L. Kane, who visited it soon after the exodus: "I was ascending the last hillside upon my journey, when a landscape in delightful contrast broke upon my view. Half encircled by a bend of the river, a beautiful city lay glittering in the fresh morning sun; its bright new dwellings, set in cool green gardens, ranging up around a stately dome-shaped hill, which was crowned by a noble marble edifice, whose high tapering spire was radiant with white and gold. The city appeared to cover several miles; and beyond it, in the background, there rolled off a fair country, checquered by the careful lines of fruitful husbandry. The unmistakable marks of industry, enterprise and educated wealth, everywhere, made the scene one of singular and most striking beauty.

"It was a natural impulse to visit this inviting region. I procured a skiff, and rowing across the river, landed at the chief wharf of the city. No one met me there. I looked, and saw no one. I could hear no one move; though the quiet everywhere was such that I heard the flies buzz, and the water-ripples break against the shallow of the beach. I walked through the solitary streets. The town lay as in a dream, under some deadening spell of loneliness, from which I almost feared to wake it. For plainly it had not slept long. There was no grass growing up in the paved ways. Rains had not entirely washed away the prints of dusty footsteps.

"Yet I went about unchecked. I went into empty workshops, ropewalks, and smithies. The spinner's wheel was idle; the carpenter had gone from his workbench and shavings, his unfinished sash and casing. Fresh bark was in the tanner's vat, and the fresh-chopped lightwood stood piled against the baker's oven. The blacksmith's shop was cold; but his coal heap and lading pool and crooked water horn were all there, as if he had just gone off for a holiday. No work people anywhere looked to know my errand. If I went into the gardens, clinking the wicket-latch loudly after me, to pull the marygolds, heart's-ease and lady-slippers, and draw a drink with the water sodden well-bucket and its noisy chain; or, knocking off with my stick the tall heavy-headed dahlias and sunflowers, hunted over the beds for cucumbers and love-apples,—no one called out to me from any open window, or dog sprang forward to bark an alarm. I could have supposed the people hidden in their houses, but the doors were unfastened; and when at last I timidly entered them, I found dead ashes white upon the hearths, and had to tread a tiptoe, as if walking down the aisle of a country church, to avoid rousing irreverent echoes from the naked floors." [^41]

A few of the homes in Nauvoo remained occupied (one hundred years later the town census listed 931 residents), but for the next century, the silent rebuilding of nature largely replaced the bustling sounds of a city under construction. In 1847 a visitor to the abandoned town described it from the tower of the temple as a "city in the centre of an apparently boundless wilderness. To the east lay in perfect beauty the grand Prairie of Illinois, reaching to the waters of Michigan; to the North and South faded away the winding Mississippi; and on the west, far as the eye could reach, was spread out a perfect sea of forest land." [^42]

Building the City

---
Notas:
[^1] Andrus and Andrus, They Knew the Prophet, pp. 130-31.
[^2] McGavin, Nauvoo, the Beautiful, p. 43.
[^3] Ibid., p. 42.
[^4] Bouquet, Compilation of Documents Concerning Nauvoo, p. 42.
[^5] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 47.
[^6] Oliver, Eight Months in Illinois, pp. 244-45.
[^7] Kimball, "Heber C. Kimball and Family," pp. 454, 477.
[^8] Fitch, American Building, p. 86.
[^9] Kimball, "Mormons in Early Illinois," p. 22.
[^10] Illinois Amer. Gd. Series, pp. 98-100.
[^11] Davidson, Life in America, 1:514-16.
[^12] Hazen, Popular Technology, 2:113.
[^13] American Almanac for 1843, p. 153.
[^14] Miller and Miller, Nauvoo: The City of Joseph, p. 77.
[^15] Era, July 1970, p. 22.
[^16] Oliver, Eight Months in Illinois, p. 125.
[^17] Godfrey, Godfrey, and Derr, Women's Voices, p. 123.
[^18] History of the Church, 4:418.
[^19] Ibid., 4:608-9.
[^20] Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi, p. 183.
[^21] History of the Church, 6:255-58.
[^22] Hazen, Popular Technology, 2:113.
[^23] Rohrbough, Trans-Appalachian Frontier, p. 340.
[^24] History of the Church, 5:512-15.
[^25] Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi, p. 158.
[^26] Hazen, Popular Technology, 2:113.
[^27] 27. McGavin, Nauvoo, the Beautiful, p. 256.
[^28] 28. Mulder, Among the Mormons, p. 129.
[^29] 29. History of the Church, 6:9.
[^30] 30. Andrus and Andrus, They Knew the Prophet, p. 107.
[^31] 31. History of the Church, 6:222, 377.
[^32] 32. Halford, Nauvoo—The City Beautiful, p. 248.
[^33] 33. American Almanac, 1844.
[^34] 34. History of the Church, 7:431.
[^35] 35. Enders, "Plotting the City Beautiful," pp. 410-15.
[^36] 36. McGavin, Nauvoo, the Beautiful, p. 315.
[^37] 37. Enders, "Plotting the City Beautiful," pp. 410-15.
[^38] 38. Allen and Leonard, Story of the Latter-day Saints, p. 205.
[^39] 39. History of the Church, 7:535-36.
[^40] 40. The reasons behind the forced exodus are primarily of a religious and political nature and are too numerous and complicated to be adequately treated in this social history. Suffice it to say that jealousy over Mormon political power in Illinois, fear and envy of the rapidly expanding city of Nauvoo and its formidable Legion, and an intense hatred of the untraditional aspects of the Mormon faith, especially plural marriage, all combined to doom peaceful coexistence between the Saints and their non-Mormon neighbors.
[^41] 41. Kane, Mormons, pp. 3-5.
[^42] 42. Lanman, Summer in the Wilderness, p. 33.
