George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

2

The Builders

When the frost arrived, work on the temple itself ceased, but "scores of men are at work in the stone quarry, and from ten to twenty teams are at work, bringing the stones to the place; . . . [work] is to be accomplished by tything and consecrations, the Saints bring this in on one day in the week, viz. on Saturday; this is to prevent confusion—the sum thus brought in has often exceeded 1000 dollars per week." This item in the August 1842 Millennial Star described succinctly how the labor system operated in building the public buildings in Nauvoo.

Two major public construction projects, the temple and the Nauvoo House, employed hundreds of workers throughout most of the life of the city. Hired workers labored beside tithe workers, who donated their labor. At one time or another every male Church member who could perform physical labor worked on one of the public building projects. Those who were unable to work because of age, disability, or another Church assignment were expected to tithe their money, their valuables that could be traded or sold, or their provisions. An unusual example of tithing property to the temple was related by Sarah Kimball, wife of Hiram Kimball. She was a member of the Church and wished to donate to the temple, but her husband was not, and though he had considerable property, she did not wish to ask him for tithing for her church.

When her first child was born, however, she asked Hiram what he thought the child was worth. Was he worth one thousand dollars? Of course he agreed the child was worth at least that much. She then told her husband she was donating her half-interest in their son as tithing for the temple. When Hiram told the Prophet of the incident, Joseph seemed pleased with the joke and said, "I accept all such donations, and from this day the boy shall stand recorded, church property." He told Hiram he could either receive five hundred dollars and give up total possession or pay five hundred dollars and retain possession. Hiram asked if city property was an acceptable substitute. Being told it was, he promptly donated an entire city block to the Church. [^1]

Most contributions to the temple and to the Nauvoo House were more traditional. Surviving ledgers record such contributions as these: [^2]

Elijah Fordham - 3Â½ lbs. of beef, 1 lb of butter $.20 Joseph W. Johnson - 5 lbs. of flour .10 Mrs. Marm - 2 days work washing @37Â½ .75 Orson Spencer - 40 lbs. of pork 2.00 Moses Martin - 1Â¾ lbs. of butter .17Â½ Daniel Spencer - 49 lbs. of flour .98 Edward Hunter - 2 chickens @12Â½ .25 Mrs. Stead - 1 days work washing .37Â½ William C. Heaps - Â½ bu. of potatoes .12Â½ Anson Call - 27 lbs. of beef .81

It is apparent that female Church members were not exempt from donating to Church building projects. Relief Society sisters made large donations of clothing, labor, and provisions.

The laborers who worked on the public building for hire were paid with these donated goods. Many of the more skilled workers, such as the stone cutters, masons, and finish carpenters, were "called" to work on the temple, but because it was their full-time work, they were paid in the same way as those who worked full time out of choice. William Mendenhall, a brick mason, listed the provisions which were issued to him in exchange for labor. Some of them were as follows: [^3]

12 lbs. of flour from Nauvoo House $ .25 2 lbs. of butter .25 2 dozen eggs .10 1 gallon of molasses .50 2 lbs. of sugar .20 1 bottle of castor oil .12Â½ 2 lbs. of candles .25 Â½ cord of wood .75 venison and milk .35 cash paid for a letter .25 1 veleece 2.75 1 gallon of soap .25 25 lbs. of midlings .37Â½

The receipt of pay in provisions was really no inconvenience, because Nauvoo had, to a large extent, a barter economy.

Besides the work available on public buildings, there was plenty of work available on private buildings. After the exodus, it was estimated that approximately twenty-five hundred houses had been built in Nauvoo over a seven-year period. Of these, observers estimated that at least five hundred were of brick and the remainder were either log, frame, or poles plastered over. [^4] Some of the Saints had used water and sod to make a type of sun-dried brick.

When settlers arrived in Nauvoo, the first homes they erected were invariably of logs because they could be built cheaply and quickly to provide shelter. Such log dwellings were often built cob fashion, with clay and mortar chinks between the logs. Often built without floors, windows, or enough fireplaces, log houses might have one, two, or three rooms with shallow attics for sleeping. It was undoubtedly just such a primitive log house that Warren Foote described staying in on one of his visits to the city in 1841: "I awoke this morning and found myself buried in snow. The house we slepped in had no floor and was very open and the snow had blowed through the crevices and covered us up. . . . Many of the houses being very open the snow blowed into them and melting made it extremely disagreeable." [^5]

Although such houses were primitive and relatively inexpensive to build, to the impoverished Saints even a log cabin was costly and required a variety of building materials. William Oliver, who spent eight months in Illinois in 1843, recorded the cost of erecting a log home eighteen feet by twenty feet and its outbuildings:

Six days cutting & logging trees 6.00 Six days hauling logs, one man & two yoke of oxen 9.00 Fourteen days hewing logs 21.00 One thousand boards for roofing 10.00 Nails for roofing 1.50 Putting on roof 5.00 Plank for flooring and loft 14.00 Laying down floor, the workman bed & board 12.00 Making and fitting doors 10.00 2000 brick for chimney 10.00 Chunking spaces with bits of wood 1.00 Daubing, one hand four days 4.00 Building stable for 2 horses 15.00 Building smokehouse 15.00 Building cow pen 7.00 Digging well 7.50 etc.

The total cost, excluding the furnishings, was $239.77, [^6] or in current dollar values, about $10,000.

Despite the cost, many of the Saints either added to their homes or replaced them with better ones during their stay in Nauvoo. Heber C. Kimball, perhaps a little untypically, built four homes for his family during Nauvoo's short history. The first one was a crude log shack that had been a stable. His second one was a fourteen-foot by sixteen-foot cabin of hewn logs located just east of the present state park. His third house was also of hewn logs but more commodious with three lower rooms and an upstairs chamber, which he built in 1841 after returning from a mission to England. In 1843, he had added a brick addition to his log home and in 1845, the log portion was removed and replaced by a two-story main brick portion. This is the brick home on the flats that has been restored and opened to the public. His family lived in this last fine home for only four months before the exodus. [^7]

The replacement of older log homes with frame or brick buildings was not at all uncommon on the frontier, but it usually occurred over a more extended period than was the case in Nauvoo. According to James Marston Fitch, an authority on American building, land was settled in the Northwest Territory in two distinct waves. The first wave was the "stump-burning," cabin-building frontiersmen; the second was the farmers, town builders, and merchants. Each had its own characteristic buildings, the log cabin being the mark of the first and the Greek Revival courthouse—in Nauvoo's case, a temple—the mark of the second. Fitch pointed out that "as the nineteenth century approached the halfway mark, the time lag between the two waves steadily narrowed, so that in states like Indiana and Illinois they could coexist." [^8] In Nauvoo this process was condensed into seven years, and both distinct waves coexisted in the same town.

Nauvoo settlers who couldn't afford the more desirable and prestigious brick homes but who wanted something better than log homes built frame dwellings. Records indicate that four or five hundred frame homes were built while the Mormons lived in Nauvoo. [^9]

Unfortunately, contemporary accounts do not reveal how most of these frame homes were constructed. Previous to 1832, frame buildings were generally made of heavy, braced timbers mortised, tenoned, and pegged together. The frame was enclosed with vertical planking, and if the building was a house, another layer of siding was applied, usually of overlapping clapboards. Then in 1832 the "balloon" frame, so called because of its lightness and strength, was invented by George W. Snow of Chicago. [^10] In this type of construction, which is still used today, the heavy, braced frames made of large timbers were replaced with lighter studding closely spaced and held together by sheathing under the clapboards. This construction technique was not possible until cheap, machine-made nails became available in quantity—as they were by the 1830s. [^11]

Probably the older style frame houses were the most numerous in Nauvoo, and quite possibly all the frame homes were of this type. In the 1841 two-volume Popular Technology; or, Professions and Trades, Edward Hazen did not mention the new balloon frame construction. The chapter on carpentry referred to the traditional frame construction: "Oak and beech are much used in constructing frames, in which great strength is required." [^12]

But whatever the type of framing, the homes were susceptible to the elements. The 8 May 1844 Nauvoo Neighbor reported storm damage to some residences in the city: "Hurricane—Yesterday we had a violent storm of wind and rain, accompanied with tremendous thunder and lightning, several houses were un-roofed in the city, one or two were blown down; but we believe that no person has been seriously injured."

The type of building least likely to suffer storm damage, and which almost every Nauvoo citizen wanted eventually to build, was the substantial and attractive red brick home. Not just in Nauvoo but throughout the old Northwest in the 1840s, progress was marked by the change from log cabins to frame houses to brick. Nauvoo was different in the rapid replacement of wooden buildings with brick homes. In 1840, for example, of the 54,113 homes built in the United States, 15.5 percent were brick or stone. In Illinois that year, of the 4,467 homes built, only 7.5 percent were brick or stone. By 1846, in Nauvoo 20 percent of all homes were brick. [^13] These figures are especially startling when we consider the impoverished conditions of the Saints in 1839 and the adverse conditions under which they built their city during the next seven years. It was not only the energy-distracting actions of the enemies of the Church but also the energy-absorbing new industries, including the monumental temple, that restrained even more ambitious home building.

Apparently the residents intended to accelerate the use of brick in building construction, inasmuch as clay for top quality brick was abundant near Nauvoo. [^14] By 1842 brick kilns were in operation, although some still "burnt their own brick." In that same year brick was becoming so common that a city ordinance fixed the size of bricks made for sale in Nauvoo. According to the 30 April 1842 Nauvoo Wasp, the bricks had to be 9Â¼ inches long, 4Â½ inches wide, and 2Â½ inches deep, and the molds had to be stamped N by the Sealers of Weights and Measures—or the brick makers were subject to a fine.

On 14 January 1843 the Wasp advertised to brickmakers and laborers that Hiram Kimball, a well-known city merchant, desired to contract to make one million bricks. The contract apparently was filled at a reasonable price, because a year later, according to the 10 April 1844 Neighbor, Kimball was selling bricks at $360 cash per 100,000. The average home, incidentally, didn't require that many bricks. Wilford Woodruff noted in his diary that his Nauvoo home required 14,574 bricks, for which he paid $88.65. He added that the roof cost $12.00 and the cornice and gutters to carry rainwater to a cistern cost an additional $29.00. [^15]

The pace continued, and competition increased. In the 21 February 1844 Neighbor, a builder advertised for bids on half a million bricks stating "time of delivery, quality, whether pressed or unpressed, and the difference in price; whether the clay has been aired or frosted; and what proportion of broken brick will be included in count." The editor encouraged "our Brick Makers to look to this thing without delay," and they evidently did. The following week, on 28 February, the paper noted that two brick makers had responded, one offering to fill the contract at four to five dollars per thousand according to quality and the other one offering a half million unpressed brick at $3.25 per thousand.

On 18 June 1845 the Neighbor anticipated the manufacture of four million bricks in Nauvoo during that summer. The brick kilns were apparently burning around the clock. Incredibly, only six months before the exodus began, the Neighbor saluted the continuing activities of the building industry. The 6 August 1845 issue carried this item: "Well done—from 150 to 200 teams busied business on Monday last, by hauling wood to the Nauvoo brick-kilns."

Home construction in Nauvoo was not the work only of carpenters and brick masons. The homes required the expertise of craftsmen. Fine woods were sold in the Nauvoo lumber yards to be worked by joiners and finishing craftsmen. The British traveler, William Oliver, noted that the sale of such wood in Illinois was indeed profitable: oak plank sold for $1.75 per hundred feet whereas walnut, curly maple, and other scarce woods were selling for $3.00 per hundred. [^16]

Plasterers, painters, and glaziers were also kept busy. Bathsheba Smith mentioned in a letter to her missionary husband in 1842: "Br. Lightle says he has bespoke a man to plaster my house and he will find lime and sand and hair. I think of getting the two roomes plasterd." [^17]

The building industry absorbed the labors of hundreds of other workmen—blacksmiths who forged the hardware, lime burners who made the plaster and whitewash, well-diggers, stonemasons, shingle makers, and common laborers. But all these workmen did not reside or work in Nauvoo. Some important builders of Nauvoo lived and worked almost four hundred miles north in the pine forests of Wisconsin.

The city that Joseph Smith envisioned required vast amounts of timber—timber that did not grow on the prairie of northwestern Illinois. The huge pine forests of Wisconsin were the closest and best source, so the Church established a temporary lumbering colony on the Black River in Wisconsin Territory. By 22 September 1841, plans were completed, and "a company of the brethren started for the pinery, some five or six hundred miles north, on the river, for the purpose of procuring lumber for the Temple and Nauvoo House." [^18]

The Prophet waited more than six months, perhaps to see some results, before reporting more fully on this undertaking in his journal. In April 1842, he copied into his journal an editorial from the Times and Seasons: "A company was formed last fall to go to the pine country to purchase mills, and prepare and saw lumber for the Temple and the Nauvoo House, and the reports from them are very favorable: another company has started, this last week, to take their place and to relieve those that are already there: on their return they are to bring a very large raft of lumber, for the use of the above-named houses." [^19]

Actually the members of the first expedition had experienced more problems than the news article suggested. They had bought for fifteen hundred dollars a decrepit sawmill near the falls of the Black River that required a great deal of labor to put into shape. The workmen suffered from inadequate food and housing during the cold Wisconsin winter and had to fight off attacks by nearby lumbermen who resented the Mormon intruders. [^20]

There were also minor problems with the Indians who owned the land where most of the lumbering operations took place. The Menominees, Chippewas, and Winnebagoes sold lumbering privileges to the whites, for which they received "pitiful annuities and proceeds." The Mormons purchased lumbering privileges from the Menominees, who owned the land from the falls of the Black River to its sources. The Indian agent opposed the lumbering operations of the Saints but reluctantly agreed after the Indians, who needed the extra income, approved the arrangement. [^21]

Despite these early problems, the experiment was successful the first year and was expanded and made more permanent. Only three weeks after the appearance of the Times and Seasons editorial, an ad appeared in the 23 April Wasp for pinery reinforcements:

Pine Country! Latter-Day Saints!! Run Here Wanted within one week from this Day 10 Milch Cows with Calves, at least two weeks old: and 5 Yoke of Oxen: All in good order for driving to the Lumber- Mill in the North. Brethren, shall this drove fail-and no lumber for the Temple!

The Wisconsin pinery enterprise continued successful. On 9 July 1842 the Wasp reported: "Two keelboats sloop rigged and laiden with provisions and apparatus necessary for the occasion and manned with fifty brave fellows started this morning on an expeditions to the upper Mississippi among the Pineries, where they can join those already there, and erect mills, saw boards and planks, make shingles, hew timber, and return next spring with rafts for the Temple of God, Nauvoo House, &c. to beautify the city of Nauvoo."

The rafts were the means of moving the lumber from the northern camps to Nauvoo. Only a month later, on 4 August, the Wasp editor informed his readers that several rafts of boards, plank, scantling, and shingles from the pineries had arrived in the city. One of the rafts "covered but little less than an acre of surface" and contained one hundred thousand feet of sawed lumber and sixteen thousand cubic feet, or one hundred ninety-two thousand square feet, of hewn lumber.

Such huge lumber rafts were apparently common in Canada and northeastern United States at this time. The 1841 Popular Technology described such rafts: "The boards, or, as they are frequently denominated, planks, are placed in the water, one tier above another, and fastened together with wooden pins. Several of such rafts are connected by means of withes to form one; and at each end of this, are placed one or two huge oars, with which it may be guided down the stream. Upon these rafts, shingles and laths are also brought to market." [^22]

Such rafts were apparently not that common on the upper Mississippi and in Wisconsin in 1841. Malcolm Rohrbough claimed that the Mormons with their innovative log rafts from the Black River in 1842 demonstrated "a new technique for moving lumber. Others copied their methods. . . . By 1850 great lumber rafts moved on all the major Wisconsin rivers." [^23]

Throughout the summer and fall of 1842, lumber rafts up to an acre in size continued to arrive in Nauvoo, and other companies of workmen left the city to reinforce the Wisconsin lumber camps. By 1843, houses had been built in the camps and fifty acres of land had been cleared and planted in wheat. Three excellent mills were now in operation at the Black River Falls, capable of turning out fifteen thousand to twenty thousand feet of lumber daily. The location of the Mormon camps, noted the Neighbor on 19 July 1843, was the best one west of the Allegheny Mountains.

In that same month, Bishop Miller, who was in charge of the lumber camps, arrived at Nauvoo on a raft containing one hundred seventy thousand feet of lumber that, he said, was all sawed in two weeks and brought downriver in two more. There was opportunity for as many more mills as the Church could build, and each could turn out five thousand feet per day. All that the camps lacked, the bishop noted, were hands, and these he was apparently successful in getting. A few days later, the Maid of Iowa started back upriver for the pineries with Bishop Miller and a large company on board, along with their families. [^24] During that season, Bishop Miller and his lumber crews rafted six hundred thousand board feet of lumber to Nauvoo. [^25]

Minor Indian problems continued at the Black River settlement. Early in 1844 the Menominees and Chippewas asked the workmen on the Black River to preach to them, perhaps in appreciation for the Mormons having kept them from starving during the previous winter. But when things got better, the Indians requested the removal of all the lumbermen. Church agents were able to change the minds of the Indians and the government agent approved continued timber cutting. When other problems surfaced, Bishop Miller began to make plans to abandon the pineries.

Nevertheless, the lumbering operation was a success. According to the 28 May 1845 Neighbor, during 1844 Nauvoo received more than three million feet of lumber at an average price of fourteen dollars per thousand, which was four dollars per thousand less than the price charged by non-Mormon mills in Wisconsin. The rafts delivered more than four million shingles and lath plus a great deal of square timber and cedar posts. In fact the Church mills on the Black River could not satisfy Nauvoo's demand for lumber, and private enterprise hastened to supply it: "The trade in lumber has also given rise to . . . lumber merchants; these purchase the lumber from the original proprietors, who bring it down the rivers, and, in their turn, sell it to builders and others." [^26]

The lumber provided by these merchants was used for homes and other private buildings in the city. One of the lumber merchants was John Bleazard, who advertised in the 1 May 1844 Neighbor These private merchants were especially important to Nauvoo because the original purpose of the Church pineries was to provide lumber only for the temple and the Nauvoo House. Periodically, however, large quantities of lumber from the pineries were diverted for other buildings. This diversion caused a few problems, especially with Bishop Miller and the northern workmen, who felt the lumber should be used only for its original intended purpose. Friction between the Church authorities, who were pushing the completion of the temple and the Nauvoo House, and the private builders, who were concerned with providing housing, was evident in a matter the city council dealt with in 1841.

Not all timber came to Nauvoo ready-cut as lumber rafts from Wisconsin, so sawmills were set up in Nauvoo to cut up logs floated downriver. One of these sawmills, which belonged to a Mr. Annis was constructed close to a street. It became necessary to put some of the logs in the street in order to move them from the river into the water-powered mill. At one of its meetings the council ordered the removal of the mill. After considerable protest, Mr. Annis accomplished the removal at his own expense.

In general, however, all parties cooperated in an enterprise that seemed overwhelming at times. No other city in the United States up to this time had experienced such phenomenal growth in so short a period of time, having to provide housing on a large scale for new residents while at the same time constructing a religious edifice of the magnitude of the Nauvoo Temple.

The construction of this temple, requiring thousands of feet of lumber from the forests in the north, invites a comparison with the construction of Solomon's temple, which depended on the forests of Lebanon north of the Jewish capital. Just as the Temple of Solomon was razed and the Jews forced into exile, so was the Nauvoo Temple razed and the Latter-day Saints forced into exile.

And just as the ancient Jews had been forced into captivity in a land northward, so was the same fate planned for the Saints in 1845. As reported by the Neighbor on 26 February 1845, a bill was introduced that year in Congress called "An Act for the Relief of the People Called Mormons, or Latter Day Saints." The bill set aside a tract twenty-four miles square "in the region known as the Pineries in the Territory of Huron" for Mormons only, known as the Mormon Reserve. A Federal Superintendent would be appointed over them. This bill, had it passed, would have imprisoned the Saints on a reservation, much as the Indians in that same period were being moved onto reservations for their safety. The Saints, ever suspicious of government motives, preferred the mountains of the west to the "Pineries in the Territory of Huron." The pineries had provided the necessary raw materials for Nauvoo when the Mormons were free to make use of them, but the pineries would not, the Saints resolved, be their prison.

The Builders

---
Notas:
[^1] Quoted in Rowley, Nauvoo: A River Town, p. 272.
[^2] Ibid., p. 267.
[^3] Enders, The Steamboat Maid of Iowa, p. 325.
[^4] History of the Church, 5:292.
[^5] Ibid., 6:266.
[^6] Haven, "Girl's Letters from Nauvoo," p. 629.
[^7] Marryat, Diary in America, p. 253.
[^8] Aitken, Journey Up the Mississippi, p. 33.
[^9] Miller and Miller, Nauvoo: The City of Joseph, p. 87.
[^10] Tryon, Mirror for Americans, 3:565-67.
[^11] Moore, Trip from New York, p. 46.
[^12] P. A. M. Taylor, Expectations Westward, p. 116.
[^13] Haven, "Girl's Letters from Nauvoo," p. 629.
[^14] Aitken, Journey Up the Mississippi River, p. 33.
[^15] J. Hall, West, p. 166.
[^16] Brush, Growing Up with Southern Illinois, pp. 150-51.
[^17] Rowley, Nauvoo: A River Town, p. 257.
[^18] Gabriel, Pageant of America, 4:90.
[^19] R. A. Bartlett, New Country, p. 322.
[^20] Martineau, Society in America, 3:152.
[^21] Farrar, Young Lady's Friend, pp. 407-8.
[^22] Oliver, Eight Months in Illinois, p. 229.
[^23] Ibid.
[^24] Chevalier, Society, Manners and Politics, p. 220.
[^25] Martineau, Retrospect of Western Travel, 2:5-6.
[^26] Nevins, American Social History, p. 195.
