George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

3

On the River

"There is no sound in the world so filled with mystery and longing and unease as the sound at night of a river boat blowing for the landing—one long, two shorts, one long, two shorts. . . . The sound of the riverboats hangs inside your heart like a star." [^1] That was the memory of an old-timer who spent forty years on the Mississippi River, and it was the kind of memory found in the hearts of fifteen thousand Saints who evacuated Nauvoo in 1846 and headed west across the central plains. For the previous seven years, the river had been the lifeblood of their city, sustaining its commerce and encouraging its growth. It assisted the gathering of the Saints and served as the baptismal font for hundreds at a time. It soothed a troubled multitude after the persecutions of Missouri and inspired the temple builders as they labored on the hill overlooking it. To a large degree, it made Nauvoo the city it was, beautiful and large and prosperous.

Historians have tended to overlook the preeminence of Nauvoo as a river town. The economic importance of the Mississippi was demonstrated in the city charter, which extended the city limits to the midpoint of the river. The Prophet Joseph Smith foresaw the potential development of the waterfront area and the need of the city to have jurisdiction over it. [^2] "Every item imaginable for home and commercial use was carried by the hundreds of boats which plied the rivers, including flour, lumber, dry goods, furs, agricultural implements, farm produce, newspapers, the U. S. mail, military stores, foreign imports, iron and 'Galena Cotton' [lead]." [^3]

But the river carried more than just goods. It carried people, and exciting people they were. Few landlocked cities could hope to entertain such a variety of intriguing visitors as could a river town in nineteenth-century America. Boats touching at Nauvoo carried gamblers, Indians, soldiers, actors, roustabouts, fur trappers, slaves, musicians, and riverboat men. And to Nauvoo especially came well-known political figures, writers, and theologians anxious to see the font of Mormonism and its prophet.

Admittedly such visits did not occur during the entire year. During the winter on the upper Mississippi, river traffic came to a halt when the river froze over. On 1 March 1843 the Prophet noted in his journal: "The Mississippi froze up on the 19th of November last, and still continues so. Wagons and teams constantly pass over on the ice to Montrose." [^4]

The longer the river stayed open the better for the commerce of Nauvoo. In 1844, according to the 7 February Nauvoo Neighbor, the river did not freeze solid until February: "The weather has been very severe for a few days past and there is now a good bridge over the Father of Waters." But ice over it eventually did, every winter, and Nauvoo was cut off from the rest of the world except by horse and by foot for several weeks. Then in the spring came the thrilling breakup of the ice, which marked the beginning of another exciting season of river traffic and immigration: "Navigation is open, and steamboats are almost continually plying up and down our majestic river. They have already brought several families of emigrants to this place." [^5]

The non-Mormon resident Charlotte Haven wrote to her family in the east in May 1843, "The Mississippi has at last broken its icy bonds, and flows majestically onward, blue and clear as crystal." [^6]

The description "clear as crystal" might cause modern observers of the Mississippi to wonder if she was talking about the same river they know; however other writers verified her description. The English traveler Captain Marryat, who traveled the upper Mississippi shortly before Nauvoo was settled, noted: "The waters of the present upper Mississippi are clear and beautiful; it is a swift, but not an angry stream, full of beauty and freshness, and fertilizing as it sweeps along." [^7]

Other travelers observed that south of where the Missouri River flows into it, the Mississippi was yellow with mud and silt, but the upper River, which flows past Nauvoo, was "quite clear, and consequently more pleasant to look at and to drink." [^8]

The river was not always beautiful and pleasant. It could be angry and destructive. At times it flooded the flats at Nauvoo and forced the sawmills to close. On 25 April 1844 the river rose high enough to do serious damage to farms. [^9]

At other times the river was too shallow for navigation. This was often the case with the lower rapids, which stretched from Nauvoo south to Keokuk. During such periods steamers could travel the river only with the aid of lighters, shallow-bottomed boats towed along by the steamers into which the goods could be transferred to give the steamboats more draft. An item in the Neighbor on 17 July 1844 noted that lighters were unnecessary because there had been "high water now for five months, a circumstance which has not occurred before for several years."

And at all times of the year and on all parts of the river were obstructions that made travel hazardous at best and fatal at worst. Snags—trees anchored to the bottom by their roots—tree fragments, stumps, logs and branches lodged together—called wreck-heaps—rocks, sunken boats, and sawyers—tree trunks anchored in the mud that moved up and down with the current—all were capable at any moment of piercing a boat's hull. [^10]

Less hazardous but perhaps more irritating to travelers were the river insects. The traveler Nathaniel F. Moore recorded an uncomfortable night aboard a steamer tied up near Nauvoo. The boat and everything about it were covered with "Mormon flies." He heard one of the deckhands cursing "these damned Nauvoo flies," [^11] large, moth-like flies that are still peculiar to that part of the Mississippi River.

Such dangers and discomforts however, did not hold back the tide of immigrants flooding into Nauvoo from Europe and the east coast. These converts used three major routes to reach their temporary Zion. Before 1840 travelers to Missouri and Nauvoo went by boat up the St. Lawrence River or out the Erie Canal and then took a steamer along the southern shore of Lake Erie, making the last part of their journey overland. Two or three ships from the British Isles used the St. Lawrence route early in Nauvoo's history. The second major route was by wagon across the Appalachian Mountains to the Ohio River, down the Ohio to the Mississippi, and then up that river to Nauvoo. At least three ships carrying Mormon immigrants docked in New York and used this route. After 1840 larger numbers of immigrant Saints used the third route, which took the incoming Saints directly from the British Isles to New Orleans and then up the Mississippi by steamboat to Nauvoo. During Nauvoo's existence, twenty-five ships sailed from Liverpool to New Orleans with converts bound for Nauvoo. [^12] Charlotte Haven noted in another letter in May 1843: "Several boats pass daily. Those coming up leave fifty to a hundred passengers to swell the Mormon ranks." [^13]

Latter-day Saints on their way up the river would see barges burdened with up to one hundred tons of cargo and the crews of twenty required to force the barge upriver at the rate of six or seven miles per day. There were also numerous keelboats, pirogues, huge arks, Indian birch canoes, log skiffs, gondolas, and dugouts. The most numerous of all the river craft were the flatboats, however.

The English writer and traveler W. Aitken, who traveled up the Mississippi to Nauvoo in the 1840s, observed, "The number of flatboats, rudely constructed, sailing with the current, and guided by oarsmen, is almost inconceivable." [^14] One authority on early western commerce estimated that in just the year 1842, approximately four thousand flatboats descended the Mississippi River. [^15] These flatboats, or broadhorns, as they were often called, were some twenty feet wide and sixty feet long, roofed, with a longsteering oar and two side oars. A pilot stood at the steering oar, and four more men worked the sweep and side oars. [^16] At night the flatboats carried flaming pine brands as a warning to steamboats not to run them down. Flatboats carried cargos of corn, pork, venison, hams, beans, dried fruit, and other produce downriver to New Orleans. The boats were usually made just strong enough for the three- to five-week trip downriver to market where the goods were disposed of and the boat broken up and sold. The crews then worked their way back upriver as deckhands on steamboats.

The steamboats are the craft to which the romance of river travel has attached itself, even into the present. Steamboating was born about 1812. Thirty years later, 1842, when the life of Nauvoo was half over, steamboating was a mighty enterprise, but its life too was half over. Thirty years later it was dead. But in the heyday of steamboating, from 1823 to 1848, approximately 365 different steamboats worked the upper Mississippi above Keokuk, 200 of them in the lead trade. An average of at least ten lead steamers each week from the lead mines at Galena, Illinois, Dubuque, Iowa, and Lancaster, Wisconsin, stopped at or passed Nauvoo during the steamboat season. Other steamers stopping at the Mormon capital carried furs, lumber, Indian annuities, military supplies, and soldiers. [^17] These steamers averaged two hundred tons in weight with crews of about thirty-five. During the 1840s, Mississippi steamboat tonnage exceeded that of the entire British Empire. [^18]

For most Mormon immigrants in the 1840s, their first trip on a steamboat was never to be forgotten: the heavy laboring of the engine, the shrill whistle of the safety-valve, the crackling of the furnace, the splashing of the huge wheels, and the roar of the scapepipe. But long before the trip was completed, it had become unpleasant enough to make the travelers eagerly anticipate the comfort and peace of Nauvoo. R. A. Bartlett, who wrote a social history of the American frontier, described a typical trip on a Mississippi River steamboat:

"The vessels were risky; accidents and explosions were common. . . . The boats were crowded, with cabin passengers often sleeping on carpets or doubling up, and the poor deck passengers suffering needless hardships. [The boats] were dirty; they had no modern refrigeration for food; they had the odors of live stock, of unwashed humanity, and of unsanitary facilities. Even the best boats did not have inside plumbing, including water closets, until the 1850s. Not only a common brush and comb for all passengers, but even a common toothbrush. . . . sometimes sixty or seventy men . . . had to use the same two wash basins and two towels." [^19]

The traveler Harriet Martineau wondered "how the ladies of the cabin can expect to enjoy any degree of vigour and cheerfulness during a voyage of four or five days, during which they wash merely their faces and hands." [^20]

And Mrs. Farrar warned her readers of the pushing and shoving on these early steamers with a wild scramble for the best places at meals. [^21] On the poordeck, where many of the Mormon immigrants traveled, the passengers furnished their own food, which they had to buy at landings along the river. On many boats, deck passengers could take their meals with the crew at twenty-five cents a meal. [^22]

Mrs. Farrar also warned prospective travelers about the lack of privacy in the cabins at night, all the men sharing a single cabin and all the women sharing another. Consequently, she complained, it was impossible to undress completely. Deck passengers had to carry their own bedding, slept in the open, and did not undress at all for the two-week trip upriver.

The reason the Mormon immigrants most often chose deck passage was the much lower cost, about one-third that of cabin fare. In 1842 cabin fare from New Orleans to St. Louis was twenty-five dollars whereas deck passage was only eight dollars. [^23] Passage from St. Louis to Nauvoo cost an additional two or three dollars.

Most European Saints who crossed the Atlantic to New Orleans were unaware that the most dangerous part of their journey was yet ahead of them. According to the French traveler Chevalier: "The voyage on the Mississippi is more dangerous than a passage across the ocean. . . . In the former, you are exposed to the risks of explosions, and of fire, and in ascending, to that of running against snags and planters . . . the danger of your boat falling afoul of another, running in an opposite direction in a fog, to say nothing of the inconvenience of getting aground on sand-bars." [^24]

Because of the constant danger of mishaps on steamboats, knowledgeable river travelers took life preservers with them. Some experienced travelers even slept during the day and stayed awake and dressed during the night when they perceived the danger to be the greatest. [^25] Unfortunately, most of the Saints bound for Nauvoo were not experienced, so they were compelled to take their chances with the rest of the unprepared passengers.

Travel at night was especially hazardous. A crew member was assigned to stand at the prow, watching and listening for obstructions, holding a rope attached to a bell near the wheelhouse. When he rang the bell, all engines would stop until he rang it again. Charles Dickens described such a night trip near St. Louis in 1842. He believed the bell sounded at least every five minutes, and each time the engines stopped he was nearly flung from his bed. [^26]

Statistics bear out the risks of travel on the Mississippi River. The average length of service for a boat before it was wrecked, sunk, burned, or sold for junk was three years. [^27] Nauvoo residents were constantly reminded of the dangers they had faced or might yet face by the articles on steamboat accidents in each week's issue of the local paper. An April 1842 issue of the Nauvoo Wasp described the sinking of the steamboat Illinois, which struck Mechanic Rock, nearly opposite Nauvoo, and went down in eight feet of water. The boat and all its freight were a total loss, but no mention was made of any fatalities among the two hundred fifty soldiers on board. In October of that same year, the paper mentioned the sinking of three steamers in one week—all from striking snags.

On 7 January 1843 the Wasp editor noted the increasing number of steamboat losses. Previous to 1839 there had been 106 losses with more than one thousand lives lost, but in the eighteen months since mid 1841, sixty-nine boats had been lost on the river. The editor concluded with a call to Congress for help in improving navigation. The 16 October 1844 Neighbor excitedly carried a notice of the invention of a compressed air horn to prevent accidents in foggy weather. This fog horn, called a "telephone," was not mentioned again, so its success is uncertain.

Steamboats to Nauvoo encountered another hazard, the lower rapids, which extended for fifteen miles from Nauvoo to Keokuk. The traveler Nathaniel F. Moore described a steamboat trip through these rapids in 1845. They tied up until 10 when the wind died down, "it being impossible to pass the rapids so long as the surface was ruffled by the wind, interfering with the Pilot's ability to watch for snags and rocks." Before starting, all the freight, baggage, and male passengers were transferred to "lighters." [^28]

In spite of these rapids, Nauvoo was a busy river port, even compared to St. Louis, one of the busiest in the world. In that city in 1842, there were 2,412 arrivals a year, or an average of 6.5 arrivals every twenty-four hours. [^29] Only a year later, the 13 September 1843 Neighbor reported that the New Haven, Connecticut, Herald found it newsworthy that four or five steamboats docked each day at the Mormon city of Nauvoo. Although this estimate was perhaps somewhat inflated, by 1844 local newspapers had started carrying ads for riverboats docking at Nauvoo, giving days and times and who to contact for passage or freight. Nauvoo had come of age in river transportation.

In fact, Nauvoo was large enough and busy enough to boast two landings. One was at the Nauvoo House on the south end of Main Street, and the other was at the end of Granger Street at the north end of town. [^30] A ride to this landing was a favorite outing for citizens of Nauvoo, including the Prophet, who recorded in his journal in March 1844, "After dinner rode up to the upper landing to see the 'St. Louis Oak' steamer." Again the following month, "Rode out with Brother Heber C. Kimball and William Clayton to the steamboat landing." [^31] No steamboat arrival was mentioned on this trip, so perhaps the landing was just a pleasant place to ride to.

The busiest and most popular landing was the lower one on Main Street, next to the Nauvoo House. The arrival of boats from downriver presented a scene similar to one described by a reporter from the Louisville Journal in 1837: "The incessant 'boom, boom, boom,' of the high pressure engines, the shrill hiss of scalding steam, and the fitful port-song of the negro firemen . . . lower guards thronged by emigrants with their household and agricultural utensils. Drays rattling hither and thither . . . porters cracking their whips . . . clerks hurrying to and fro, with fluttering notebooks . . . hackney coaches dashing down to the water's edge." [^32]

[In Old Nauvoo Nauvoo House Landing

Joseph Smith occasionally commented on landings at the Nauvoo House, which he could see from the Mansion House. In April 1844 he wrote, "Steamer Mermaid touched at Nauvoo House, landing at 5 P.M. for a short time when going down." [^33] This landing was where most of the Saints arriving from New Orleans first set foot in Nauvoo. The Neighbor reported on 7 May 1845, "Mermaid came to, before the foundation of the Nauvoo House early on Friday morning, with Mormons and goods for Nauvoo—36 hours from St. Louis." Three years previous, the arrival of a steamer was more of a novelty and earned extensive space in the paper, letters, and journals. The Millennial Star printed in August 1842 a letter Elder William Clayton wrote on 30 March 1842, describing the arrival of the steamer Ariel loaded with Saints from England: "About 5 o'clock the boat was seen coming up the river, the whole deck crowded with Saints. I went to the landing place along with Elder John Taylor, his wife and others. . . . there were not less than from two to three thousand Saints on the shore, anxiously interested in the scene. Many were there who wanted to give the strangers (yet brothers) a hearty welcome; . . . others waiting to ascertain if any former acquaintances were in the company . . . and many, whose hearts throbbed with joy, and their eyes wept tears, expecting to see their mothers, their fathers, their children, and other relatives, & c., & c. While all this hustle was going on on shore, the boat was now within 300 yards, coming directly for the shore; the confusion was so great I could but faintly hear those on the boat singing a hymn (I believe, 'The Latter-day Glory')."

A steamer's stay at Nauvoo could be overnight or for several hours, as on 21 May 1844 when "the Maid of Iowa arrived at 8 A.M., with sixty-two Saints from the Eastern States on board. . . . started up the river for Wapello on the Iowa river at 3 P.M." [^34] Or it might stay only long enough to take on firewood. Steamers consumed vast amounts of wood, which provided a profitable income for such lumber merchants as Hiram Kimball, who advertised in the 4 September 1844 Neighbor for "a good quantity of steamboat wood for which a fair price will be paid, delivered at Kimball's landing."

Early in the history of Nauvoo, the Saints decided it was a matter of self-sufficiency to acquire their own steamer. Within three years the Church owned its own steamboat, the Maid of Iowa, built in Iowa and launched in 1842. It was small by Mississippi riverboat standards, being only sixty tons and one hundred fifteen feet in length, but during the next four years it traveled the entire Mississippi from New Orleans to Wisconsin as well as many of its tributaries. The Maid of Iowa served at various times as military transport, excursion boat, immigrant vessel, and floating church meetinghouse. It was, however, primarily a freighting vessel with a crew of sixteen or seventeen, cabin accommodations for thirty, and room for approximately one hundred fifty deck passengers. [^35]

For a time starting in 1843, the Maid of Iowa also served as the ferry between Nauvoo and Montrose. Actually the Church operated a ferry between Nauvoo and Montrose throughout the life of Nauvoo; however, the term ferry meant different things at different times. In 1839 and again in 1843 the ferry was a skiff or rowboat propelled by oars. In 1841 and in 1843 it was a "horse boat," powered by two horses working a treadmill to turn the wheels and propel the boat. The ferry business was profitable, if we can judge by the rates charged. Even though the rates were regulated by city council, they seem rather high when compared with the one dollar-a-day wages common for laborers at that time. These rates were published in the Neighbor on 14 June 1843:

One horse wagon .75 Two horse wagon 1.00 4 wheel carriage for 2 or 4 horses 1.50 2 wheel carriage for one horse .50 Cart with one horse .50 Horse, Ass, Mule, Jenny .25 Foot Passenger .12Â½ Horse with rider .37Â½ Oxen per yoke .25 Every head of stock over 1 year .18Â¾ Under one yr., sheep, hogs .06Â¼

For the ferry, the river meant business, but it did not mean all work and no play for everyone along its banks. William Kennerly, who grew up in St. Louis about this time, remembered that "all traveling for pleasure was by the river routes and the broad Mississippi River." [^36]

Pleasure excursions, which began in the 1830s, reached their peak in the 1850s. In the 1840s they were affecting the economy and the social life of Nauvoo. Tourists from around the world disembarked at landings along the Mississippi to see local points of interest. Nauvoo, with its temple, its prophet, and its unique people was certainly one of these points of interest. On one occasion, crowds gathered to watch a race between two excursion steamers crowded with passengers bound for Nauvoo and the 1842 Fourth of July festivities. At the same time canoes arrived from Iowa filled with gaily dressed Indians. [^37]

The Saints themselves were fond of travel to other points of interest along the great waterway, and the Neighbor frequently referred to those excursions. On 10 May 1843 it announced the departure of the Maid of Iowa with one hundred passengers, including the Smith family, for a pleasure excursion to Burlington. The travelers were entertained on the way by a band and a talk by Parley P. Pratt.

The following month, on 7 June 1843, the Neighbor reported a river excursion to Quincy by young citizens on Captain Jones' ferry boat. More than fifty couples left Nauvoo House on the ferry with the band playing. According to the 3 July 1844 Neighbor a pleasure trip on the steamer New Haven to the Illinois bluffs offered a fine opportunity to see the bluffs and the prairie recently cultivated in Illinois. The fare was one dollar.

Most such trips were by steamboat, but on 27 August 1845 the Neighbor published an unusual invitation to a sailboat ride on the Mississippi over the rapids to Keokuk, Iowa, or to see the scenery on the islands. The Twelve, Mother Smith, and the widows of Joseph and Hyrum were invited to sail free.

Little is recorded about what might have been the most obvious activity on the river—fishing. One news article mentioned it only indirectly in relation to a fatal accident on the river. The 9 August 1843 Neighbor grimly informed its readers of the running down by a river steamer of Thomas Clifton while he was fishing for perch. "The friends of the deceased," who, it noted, was the keeper of the Second Ward Tavern, "have attempted to raise his body by firing large guns, but without success."

Perhaps the river as a source of food was too obvious to be mentioned by the residents of Nauvoo. A passing traveler did mention fishing in a book he published in England in 1845. He recalled that on his trip to Nauvoo in "speaking to (a young man) about the quantity of fish in the river, he swore there were acres of fish in it. . . . A line had been set with a hook and bait, and a large cat fish was caught. . . . Sixty or seventy pounds was its weight." [^38]

In the summer, in addition to fishing and boating, residents of Nauvoo could swim and bathe in the river or just stroll along its banks. In the winter, when the river froze over, the slippery surface attracted grownups as well as children. As could be expected, the Prophet found time for just such activities with his family: "At four in the afternoon, I went out with my little Frederick, to exercise myself by sliding on the ice." [^39]

Joseph, of course, did not live to remember for long this excursion with his son or the many other happenings on and along the great river. But when his followers surrendered their farms and orchards and homes to the Illinois mobs three years later and drove their teams westward away from the river for the last time, they remembered. It was not just the sounds of the riverboats that hung inside their hearts like a star. In their hearts were all the sights and sounds and smells associated with that majestic river, which the dust and the winds of the Utah desert could never obscure.

On the River

---
Notas:
[^1] Raumer, America and the American People, p. 451.
[^2] Cross, Life in Lincoln's America, p. 56.
[^3] Godfrey, Godfrey, and Derr, Women's Voices, p. 129.
[^4] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 46.
[^5] McDermott, Travelers on the Western Frontier, p. 313.
[^6] Ibid., pp. 312-13.
[^7] Quoted in Buley, Old Northwest, 1:463.
[^8] History of the Church, 4:244.
[^9] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, pp. 43, 75.
[^10] Chevalier, Society, Manners and Politics, p. 296.
[^11] Lyell, Travels in North America, 2:73-77.
[^12] History of the Church, 4:24, 414.
[^13] Buley, Old Northwest, 1:462.
[^14] History of the Church, 6:398.
[^15] Andrus and Andrus, They Knew the Prophet, p. 127.
[^16] History of the Church, 4:394-98.
[^17] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 47.
[^18] Ibid., p. 38.
[^19] History of the Church, 5:439.
[^20] Rowley, Nauvoo: A River Town, p. 263.
[^21] Buley, Old Northwest, 1:486.
[^22] Grund, Americans, p. 327.
[^23] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 47.
[^24] Ibid., p. 54.
[^25] History of the Church, 6:170.
[^26] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 48.
[^27] History of the Church, 5:278.
[^28] Ibid., 6:427, 429.
[^29] Ibid., 4:21; 5:525.
[^30] Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi, pp. 150-51.
[^31] Buley, Old Northwest, 2:318.
[^32] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 40.
[^33] Halford, Nauvoo—The City Beautiful, p. 342.
[^34] Buley, Old Northwest, 1:488.
[^35] Haven, "Girl's Letters from Nauvoo," p. 616.
[^36] Martineau, Retrospect of Western Travel, 1:293.
[^37] Farrar, Young Lady's Friend, p. 404.
[^38] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, pp. 36, 38, 42.
[^39] Ibid., p. 92.
