George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

4

Pikes and Paths

Land travel in the 1840s, especially on the frontier, was hard work. Generally speaking, people traveled from necessity, not for pleasure. Travel was physically draining, dangerous, and dirty, and there were many discomforts and delays. The heavy rains and spring thaws transformed the dirty roads of Illinois into deep mud, broken here and there by ponds of standing water hiding holes that travelers could only guess the depth of. When Brigham Young and the other apostles returned to Nauvoo by stage in 1844 after the death of Joseph Smith, they had to walk around the mud holes and in places had to pry out the embedded wheels of their stagecoach. In that same year another traveler, riding in a coach from St. Louis across Illinois to Chicago, described his trip:

"Never before saw such a road. We were tossed about like tennis-balls in the coach; and obliged to get out I know not how often, to avoid the danger of being overturned. We then went literally through thick and thin, in the road and out of the road, through standing or trodden-down grass; till sprinkled and spattered with all kinds of soil, exhausted and dripping with perspiration, we took our places again in the thumping, jolting, rickety vehicle. No one would risk traveling at night under such circumstances; we lodged therefore in Juliett." [^1]

One frontier tale tells of a half-mile stretch on a "highway" that was in such unexpectedly good condition that a delighted traveler drove his buggy back and forth all day "to get the good out of it." [^2]

At times Nauvoo was nearly isolated. During a rainy spell in the summer of 1844, Bathsheba Smith wrote to her husband, George, who was away on a mission, "The roads have been so bad, the bridges are most all washed away that it is all most impossable to go to or come from Messedonia [Macedonia] here." [^3]

[In Old Nauvoo River Road Bridge

The Nauvoo period was an era of improving transportation. By the end of the 1830s, distance was starting to be measured in hours rather than in miles. For example, according to Buley, in 1839 the distance from New York to Cleveland was eighty-four hours and from Cleveland to Chicago, ninety-six hours. Such travel time, however, was most likely under ideal conditions with travelers using what railroads were available. All too often the conditions were not ideal and railroads were not available, especially in frontier Illinois. The best road through Nauvoo was the River Road, connecting Quincy to the south with Rock Island to the north. There were two other well-traveled roads into Nauvoo: one directly west from LaHarpe, twenty miles away, and another, northwest from Carthage eighteen miles away. A company of Latter-day Saints, including diarist Warren Foote, traveled along this road in September 1841 to attend conference in Nauvoo: "I started today in company with E. Allen and wife for Nauvoo to attend the Semi Annual Conference. We went by the way of Carthage. . . . About sunrise it began to rain as we were passing through Carthage. This place is 18 miles from Nauvoo. . . . It rained all day, and we did not get to Nauvoo until 10 o'clock at night." [^4] Approximately sixteen hours were spent on the road between Carthage and Nauvoo, so the travelers averaged slightly over one mile per hour. Foote did not describe his mode of travel on this occasion, but his trips to Nauvoo were usually by ox team.

Mud was a major concern to travelers for the next fifty years as it had been for the previous two hundred. Olley Williams, writing for the Western Journal in 1848, said, "If some of us have waded through mud almost to our knees for the last quarter century, there is no reason for entailing this state of things upon our children." [^5] Yet state governments were not ready to assume the expense necessary for changing this "state of things." Not until 1900 did seven states inaugurate highway departments and relieve some of the counties of their highway burdens. Until then all roads were the responsibility of inexperienced county or town officials, who issued some rather vague specifications for road construction. A typical county law passed in St. Louis the same year Nauvoo was settled read as follows: "The commissioners shall locate the routes over such ground, as may be conveniently, and finally, and with as little expense as possible, graduated so as not to exceed five degrees elevation." [^6]

Even when instructions for road building were more specific, as in the case of the National Road, which terminated in Illinois, specifications left much to be desired. Builders of this road, one of the best in the entire country, allowed stumps of trees twelve inches or more in diameter to be left in the road. It did require, however, that "all stumps within the said center of thirty feet must be rounded and trimmed in such a manner as to present no serious obstructions to carriages." [^7]

Since it was left to local jurisdictions to construct roads and in the absence of taxes to pay for such roads, officials sought ways to do it without much expense. They soon discovered that the least painful method for residents was a road tax payable in labor. Throughout most of the 1800s, one could pay his "road tax" with a set number of days' labor. If one furnished horses or oxen, the equivalent number of hours could be subtracted from his own required time. Using horsedrawn scoops and stonebolts, residents worked off their taxes by filling in mud holes, smoothing out ruts, ditching, and removing stumps or other obstacles. A law spelling out such an arrangement was included in the Nauvoo city charter: "Sec. 26. The inhabitants of the city of Nauvoo are hereby exempted from working on any road beyond the limits of the city, and for the purpose of keeping the streets, lanes, avenues, and alleys in repair, to require of the male inhabitants of said city, over the age of twenty-one, and under fifty years, to labor on said streets, lanes, avenues, and alleys, not exceeding three days in each year; any person failing to perform such labor, when duly notified by the Supervisor, shall forefeit and pay the sum of one dollar per day for each day so neglected or refused." [^8]

Mormon journal keeper Warren Foote recorded the times he worked on local roads. On 27 May 1841 he wrote, "Today and tomorrow I have to work on the road with other young men." Five years later, after the first contingent of Saints had already evacuated Nauvoo and headed west, he recorded, "Yesterday and today I worked out my polltax on the road," a road he very shortly left behind when he too headed west. [^9]

Despite the road repair by local citizens, early nineteenth-century travel was universally difficult and dangerous. In long-settled New England, in an effort to improve the bad state of the roads laws were passed in many towns to make them responsible for accidents to travelers within their limits. [^10] Although Harriet Martineau declared that she traveled upwards of ten thousand miles in the United States, by land and water, without accident, her record was extremely unusual. Another foreign traveler, Charles Lyell, recalled being on a stage in Ohio in 1842 when "a fellow traveler pointed out to [him] a spot where the coach had been lately upset in the night. He said that in the course of the last three years he had been overturned thirteen times between Cincinnati and Cleveland, but being an inside passenger had escaped serious injury." [^11] Mrs. Farrar, in The Young Lady's Friend, warned against screaming, which would frighten the horses even more.

Accidents were common both outside the cities and within their boundaries. The Prophet Joseph recalled in his journal that on his trip to Washington, D.C., the driver left the coach unattended while he entered a public house "to take his grog." Something frightened the horses, and they ran away at full speed with the passengers still inside the coach. Joseph calmed the passengers and then climbed out of the careening vehicle and reined in the horses after they had run two or three miles. The passengers praised him and spoke of a reward until they discovered he was the Mormon prophet, and then, "I heard no more of their praise, gratitude or reward." In another incident, in the spring of 1844, Joseph mentioned his carriage being "upset on the Temple Hill, but no one was hurt." [^12]

Apparently the city streets were almost as hazardous as country roads. They were certainly no less primitive. With no surfacing, they were almost impossible to travel with heavy wagons in bad weather. Some homeowners laid rough timber planks on stones in their driveways or in front of their houses.

At this time, "Chicago mud-holes were such as to require extra teams to pull out coaches or wagons." [^13] Nauvoo streets were no better when it rained. Joseph recorded on a Sunday in May 1844 that "the usual prayer meeting at 2 P.M. was dispensed with on account of the mud and rain." [^14] Margarette Burgess recalled an experience with the mud when she was a child in Nauvoo: "My older brother and I were going to school, near the building which was known as Joseph's store. It had been raining the previous day, causing the ground to be very muddy, especially along that street. My brother Wallace and I both got fast in the mud and could not get out." [^15] She remembered fondly how the Prophet got them out of the mud, cleaned them up, and sent them on to school.

Although young Margarette and her brother found travel on foot to be troublesome, a high proportion of travelers used that method. The Mormon missionaries, for example, traveled great distances on foot, usually because they lacked money to pay for any other means. Don Carlos Smith and George A. Smith started on a mission to the states of Tennessee and Kentucky in the spring of 1838. They returned about Christmastime, "having traveled 1500 miles, 650 of which were on foot." [^16]

Individuals on the Illinois frontier usually gave little thought to a walking journey of ten or twenty miles or even more, hoping but not necessarily expecting to get a ride on vehicles going the same way. In September 1841 Warren Foote recorded, "About noon a young man got in company with us, who was also going to Nauvoo. He was walking. Isaac had an oxteam and the young man wished to keep in our company." [^17]

Perhaps the most common and dependable means of travel was by horseback. It was also one of the fastest, and certainly no more uncomfortable than travel by most wheeled vehicles. In 1840, when Warren Foote was driving a mail stage, he wrote: "It has been very muddy, and bad traveling this week. . . . The mud was so bad that I had to take the mail on horseback. . . . I could not ride off of a walk, it was so very muddy." [^18]

To cover long distances in an emergency, horseback was the surest method. Once when the Prophet was traveling away from Nauvoo, some friends set out to find him to warn him of a suspected kidnapping attempt. In his journal, Joseph recalled with gratitude this feat by his friends. They rode two hundred twelve miles in sixty-six hours and "had very little rest on the way; the horses were tired,—their backs very sore." [^19]

The Saints, many of them still recovering from property losses in Ohio and Missouri, could not always afford carriages or other wheeled vehicles, but most families would sacrifice to own one or more good riding horses. The city of Nauvoo seemed to be overrun with horses. For residents and visitors at the Mansion House, there was a "large and commodious brick stable, . . . capable of accommodating seventy-five horses at one time, and storing the requisite amount of forage." [^20]

The Mansion House, incidentally, was a fine lodging for travelers in early Illinois, although the larger towns did offer comparable housing. When Nauvoo was settled, Quincy boasted a hotel four stories high with eighty rooms. [^21] The Nauvoo House, when finished, would have matched it, which was perhaps what Joseph Smith had in mind. The cost of lodging in such hotels in the late 1830s in Illinois was around two dollars per week, which included four meals per day: breakfast, dinner, tea, and supper. [^22]

Outside of the cities, lodging was the nearest habitation when the sun went down. The English traveler Oliver mentioned repeatedly during the eight months he spent in Illinois that taking in travelers was the expected, hospitable thing to do, adding that it was the custom to make a charge but very nominal.

Perhaps Illinois residents did not feel as hospitable toward traveling Mormons as they did toward traveling Englishmen. Warren Foote described a trip to Nauvoo: "When night overtook us it was very cold. We tried several houses to see if we could get to stay over night, but all in vain. Finally at about nine o'clock we came to a house occupied by a Latter Day Saint, and called. He said that we could stay, but he had no bed for us. We told him we could lay before the fire and was thankful to get a shelter without a bed." [^23]

Surprisingly, travel increased in the winter, and for several reasons. First, sleighs and sleds were cheaper and easier to build than wheeled vehicles, and thus more families could afford them. In December 1842 Foote recorded in his journal, "I went up to Burton in a jumper in company with Miss Sidnie Myers." [^24] A jumper was the roughest form of sled, made of two saplings with the ends turned up and fastened by cross pieces, and it was easily constructed at practically no expense.

Second, the frozen ground made travel easier and the snow smoothed the rutted roads. After the discomforts of summer travel, the first winter snows seemed to invite travel just for pleasure. The Prophet Joseph recorded in his journal for 5 January 1844: "Commenced snowing a little before sunset, and continued all night. Snow about four inches deep. I rode out with Emma in a sleigh." [^25]

Third, streams became bridges with smooth roads of ice. Winter was the time, for example, when the Saints in Nauvoo were able to drive their teams out to the heavily forested islands in the river to cut wood for fuel.

And fourth, in an agrarian community, which Nauvoo was, there was always more leisure time in the winter for such activities as travel.

Notwithstanding the advantages of winter journeys, travelers were still faced with fighting the cold weather. To keep warm on buggy or sleigh rides, they placed footwarmers under their feet and wrapped up in heavy buffalo robes. The warmers were commonly ember boxes of perforated metal with wood frames, keg-shaped pottery footwarmers, or quite often a thick soapstone heated before starting out. Warren Foote left a vivid description of early winter travel on the prairie near Nauvoo:

"Nov. 26, 1841—It has cleared off and we started [from Nauvoo] for home [twelve miles east of Quincy]. It was very cold crossing the big prairie. We traveled until ten o'clock at night and stopped at Mr. Perry's a Latter Day Saint. Here the floor was our bed again.

"Nov. 27,—We started at 5 A.M.—found it very cold and rough traveling. The snow here is about three inches. In Nauvoo it was six or eight. The mud was frozen hard, and not worn down any made it bad traveling for the oxen, we got home about 6 P.M. cold and very hungry." [^26]

As might be expected, accidents occurred in winter as well as in summer. Unlike today, though, vehicle accidents then were less likely to cause serious injury. The Prophet described such a winter mishap: "Mr. Crane's horse . . . , which was behind us, ran and jumped into our sleigh as we jumped out, and thence over our horse and the fence, sleigh and all, the sleigh being still attached to the horse, and the fence eight rails high; and both horses ran over lots and through the woods, clearing themselves from the sleighs, and had their frolic out without hurting themselves or drivers. It was a truly wonderful feat." [^27]

Sleighs and crude jumpers dominated the roads in the winter when snow covered the ground, but throughout most of the year a wide variety of vehicles could be seen in and around Nauvoo. There were old-fashioned high-wheeled carriages capable of straddling stumps and fording streams; light, canvas covered wagons for single teams; small, two-wheeled carts; farm wagons; drays, which were dead-axle (springless), four-wheeled vehicles for hauling freight; a few phaetons, gigs, and buggies; an occasional spring-mounted carriage; and, of course, numerous stagecoaches. The Prophet Joseph mentioned vehicles his family used around Nauvoo. In June 1844, for example, he recorded, "In the afternoon I went out to my farm, and accidentally broke the whippletree of my buggy," and two days later, "I rode out in the carriage with several persons for an hour or two." [^28]

Two types of transportation not used near Nauvoo were becoming the rage in the more settled east—canals and railroads. In 1839 a group of Saints from Nauvoo sold their horses and carriage at Detroit and went on to New York City by steamboat, canal boat, and railroad. The steamboat undoubtedly went along Lake Erie, the canal boat probably went through the Erie Canal, and the railroad went from Albany to New York City. In August 1843 Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, John Page, Wilford Woodruff, and George A. Smith arrived in Philadelphia having traveled four hundred thirty miles from Pittsburgh in forty-eight hours by stage, railroad, and steamboat. [^29]

In August 1840 a charter for a Des Moines rapid railroad linking Nauvoo to Warsaw was obtained from the state legislature, but construction was apparently never begun. [^30] The railroad nearest Nauvoo was a line that ran from Meredosia on the Illinois River to Jacksonville, which began operation in 1838, the year previous to the settlement of Nauvoo. Nevertheless, missionaries traveling to and from the east used these new means of travel, as did many immigrants and visitors arriving in the Mormon city.

Travel by railroad in those days was primitive and informal with the trains stopping, as stages did, at crossroads to pick up or let off passengers. One engine that ran on the first Illinois line, the "Betsy Baker," was said to be so slow that the cowcatcher was put on the rear. When this engine ran off the tracks and into a ditch, the cost for putting it back was so great that the owners merely substituted mules to pull the cars. [^31]

In July 1840 a group of Saints made an excursion on this railroad before the engine was replaced by mules. The length of the entire line was only eighteen miles, but it proved to be an all-day trip. Warren Foote described the return trip: "We got along tolerably well, until we came to the uphill grade of the Mausaustar Creek, when we came to a dead halt. We got off and pushed, for about two miles, when some of them thought they would have some fun, and began to pull back. This would stop the train and when they started again they would pull back and stop it again." [^32] The conductor, according to Foote, finally uncoupled the last car, which the pranksters were holding back on, and headed for Jacksonville, leaving them stranded on the prairie.

More common than railroad travel for the Latter-day Saints in the 1840s was the stagecoach, which at that time ruled the Illinois roads. All of the old Northwest Territory, except Wisconsin Territory and northern Michigan, was covered with a network of stage lines, although coach travel from Carthage or Quincy and other nearby towns into Nauvoo was irregular. Some lines offered service only on demand. [^33]

Travel on any of these lines was expensive, averaging five or six cents per mile. By way of comparison, bus travel in the early 1990s was around fifteen cents per mile. Measured in comparable wage dollars, however, the cost of stage travel was ten to fifteen times more than bus travel today. Even ferries charged fifty to seventy-five cents for a wagon and horses, and twelve and a half cents for a man and horse, [^34] which compares with twenty and five 1990 dollars, respectively.

The expense of stagecoach travel appears even higher when we consider the discomforts of such means of moving about the country. Charlotte Haven described the stage she took to Nauvoo in 1843: "Our stage much resembled an Eastern butcher's wagon, and we soon ascertained that the curtains on the sides were destitute of fastenings, for they flapped up and down, to and fro, admitting a bracing circulation of air at every gust, which seemed to come direct from the Arctic regions. The driver who occupied the seat before us, told us we must on no account stop talking, 'for,' says he, 'people freeze to death on these prairies before they know it,'—and he seemed to be determined not to freeze for when not talking to us, he talked to his horses." [^35]

Another experienced traveler, Harriet Martineau, said it was the custom when ascending a long hill for gentlemen passengers to get out and walk. Some lines that offered first- and second-class accommodations required second-class passengers to push the stage, if it became necessary, while the first-class passengers merely walked. Martineau reported that passengers were required to lean left or right as the driver directed in order to prevent upsets. [^36] Mrs. Farrar, in The Young Lady's Friend, advised: "Whoever can ride with their backs to the horses, without being incommoded by it, should offer to do so, and be ready to change with any pale sufferer on a front seat. If, moreover, you take cold easily, you ought to take that seat, in order that other people may have the windows open without your being endangered, as that is the most sheltered situation." [^37]

Shortly after the Saints started settling at Nauvoo, Warren Foote got a job driving the stage between Columbus, west of Quincy, and Naples, on the Illinois River. The one-way distance was forty-five miles, which he traveled in one day: "I drove one span of horses to a carriage and changed every fifteen miles. The first trip I made about used me up. The roads were very rough, and driving so fast, jolted me terribly." The following spring, he drove the stage on another route: "I had to drive four horses on this route, but had a very light coach. My wages was sixteen dollars per month, and board. I boarded at Heslep's Hotel in Jacksonville, and at the Naples House in Naples." When 1840 ended, he concluded his journal with a commentary on his travels: "I have spent the most of my time [this year] driving stage and have come in contact with a variety of persons. . . . I traveled this year 5038 miles, principally on my stage route." [^38]

Little did Foote realize the travels still ahead of him and thousands of his fellow Saints. Six years later, from a temporary winter cabin in Iowa on his way to the Rocky Mountains, he concluded another year of his journal with these words: "Another year has rolled around. Its joys and sorrows are all past with it, and also many of the Latter Day Saints are numbered with the dead. Among that number are my dear Mother and Sister. . . . although I have had to undergo things that were not very agreeable to human nature . . . yet I feel to rejoice that I am accounted worthy to endure tribulation for the Gospel's sake, and pray that I may endure to the end. I have traveled this year 625 miles." [^39]

Pikes and Paths

---
Notas:
[^1] Arrington, Great Basin Kingdom, p. 18.
[^2] See James Kimball lecture, Nauvoo, 7 August 1986.
[^3] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 63.
[^4] History of the Church, 6:266.
[^5] Pickel Letter, no. 2.
[^6] Oliver, Eight Months in Illinois, p. 128.
[^7] Haven, "A Girl's Letters from Nauvoo," p. 626.
[^8] Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi, p. 141.
[^9] Haven, "A Girl's Letters from Nauvoo," p. 633.
[^10] Janney, John Jay Janney's Virginia, p. 78.
[^11] Wiggins, American Farmer's Instructor, p. 294.
[^12] Leslie, House Book, pp. 355-58.
[^13] Wiggins, American Farmer's Instructor, p. 273.
[^14] Tryon, Mirror for Americans, 3:554-55.
[^15] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 62.
[^16] Ibid., p. 45.
[^17] Janney, John Jay Janney's Virginia, p. 74.
[^18] History of the Church, 6:31.
[^19] Ibid., 7:445.
[^20] Ibid., 7:265.
[^21] Buley, Old Northwest, 1:486.
[^22] Grund, Americans, p. 327.
[^23] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 47.
[^24] Ibid., p. 54.
[^25] History of the Church, 6:170.
[^26] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 48.
[^27] History of the Church, 5:278.
[^28] Ibid., 6:427, 429.
[^29] Ibid., 4:21; 5:525.
[^30] Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi, pp. 150-51.
[^31] Buley, Old Northwest, 2:318.
[^32] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 40.
[^33] Halford, Nauvoo—The City Beautiful, p. 342.
[^34] Buley, Old Northwest, 1:488.
[^35] Haven, "Girl's Letters from Nauvoo," p. 616.
[^36] Martineau, Retrospect of Western Travel, 1:293.
[^37] Farrar, Young Lady's Friend, p. 404.
[^38] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, pp. 36, 38, 42.
[^39] Ibid., p. 92.
