George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

5

Farming the Land

When the Mormons evacuated Nauvoo in 1846, crossing the Mississippi on ice and on ferries, they departed in three thousand wagons, pulled probably by no fewer than ten thousand horses and oxen. Driven along with them were thirty thousand head of cattle, "a great number" of horses and mules, and "an immense number" of sheep. [^1] In the wagons were several hundred thousand pounds of flour, grain and dried fruits, vegetables, beef and bacon, and seed for their new farms in the west. This was not a typical city on the move. It was an agricultural community. In fact, farming was the occupation listed by most residents of Nauvoo, even those working at other professions. [^2]

Typical of such Illinois Mormons was Warren Foote, a farmer from upstate New York, who continued to farm just south of Nauvoo, but not exclusively, as his diary indicates. On 28 September 1844 he wrote: "The season has been so wet that we did not raise any corn, and the oats were very light. I did not make any thing much in farming. We are going to work at chairs again." [^3] In addition to farming and manufacturing chairs, Brother Foote taught school and drove a stage.

As a farming community, Nauvoo was unique in America. The city was planned as an agricultural community and in actual practice developed as such, despite its size and commercialization. Farms clustered about the city and on the opposite Iowa shore. Many of the owners lived in the city and went out to work their farms each morning. Thus the farmers could enjoy the social, cultural, and educational benefits of dwelling in the city.

Such an arrangement depended on some freedom from the dawn to dark labor that farming had traditionally required. This was to some extent possible because farming at this time was just beginning to leave the subsistence stage. Even though a farm still produced eighty to ninety percent of a family's needs, by the 1840s farms were producing larger and larger cash crops through the use of labor-saving machinery and better stock and seed.

Despite the extensive preliminary work required to establish new farms on the Illinois prairie, by 1844 Joseph Smith recorded in his journal: "Quite extensive preparations are being made by the farmers in this vicinity for the cultivation of land; and should the season prove favorable, we doubt not that nearly, if not a sufficient amount of produce will be raised to supply the wants of the city and adjacent country." [^4]

One reason the Mormon farmers were able to supply the needs of a city the size of Nauvoo was the land itself. Settlers from the east had cherished the erroneous conviction that timbered land was more fertile than prairie land. Thus earlier settlers spent backbreaking years clearing forests when prairie land lay invitingly unplowed and unclaimed. By the 1840s, this myth was destroyed as the Latter-day Saints broke thousands of acres of ground at Nauvoo. Nevertheless, the taming of the prairie was not an easy task. Sometimes it could be done only in stages, getting it ready one year and planting the next, as one letter by a Mormon farmer to friends back east suggests: "We did not farm much this summer. We have about fifty acres of ground ready to farm next summer." [^5]

There were essentially two methods of taming the wild Illinois prairie: breaking it with plows or burning it and then scattering bluegrass, timothy, or clover seed. William Oliver, the English traveler who spent eight months in Illinois in 1843, referred to the Illinois "Indian Summer" when the fall "atmosphere becomes dull and smoky, and the sun is shorn of its rays." [^6] This month-long peculiarity he attributed to the burning of the prairies, covering thousands of square miles. The fires, he noted, were either touched off by lightning or set purposely by farmers.

The prairie fires also prompted some picturesque descriptions by Charlotte Haven, a non-Mormon visitor to Nauvoo in 1843. In a letter dated 5 March, she wrote: "We are having beautiful sunsets these days, and from our parlor window we have an extensive western view: and later on in the night the heavens are all aglow with light from the prairie fires. Between the river and the Iowa bluffs eight or ten miles west, ten to twenty fires are started burning the refuse grass and straw preparatory to putting in spring crops. Often I sit up a long time after going to my room, watching these long lines of fire as they seem to meet all along the horizon." [^7]

When farmers wanted to plant the more profitable grain crops rather than hay, however, it was necessary to break the tough prairie sod with plows first. Such plows were massive implements up to twelve feet long, which required three to six yoke of oxen, with a man or a boy to drive them while another man handled the plow. The plowing was done in the late spring. The furrows were thirty inches wide, but because of the thick interwoven roots of the prairie grass, the first plowing was no deeper than two to four inches. One plow could break two to three acres per day, and then, once broken, the fields were plowed deeper with lighter plows and smaller teams.

The fruits of such labor were soon evident. In 1843 a non-Mormon visitor to Nauvoo took time to record his impression of Mormon agriculture for the 20 September Nauvoo Neighbor The four main agricultural interests around Nauvoo were livestock, grain, vegetables, and fruit. Typically, a new eighty-acre farm included fields of corn and wheat with perhaps some barley, oats, or hemp; it had pig pens, pastureland for cattle, sheep, and horses, a vegetable garden and a recently planted orchard. Some farms were considerably larger than eighty acres. In the Nauvoo Wasp of May 1842 J. R. Backenstos offered for sale a two-hundred-acre farm, half in timber and the other half fenced. Sixteen miles southeast of Nauvoo, the farm had a "comfortable dwelling house, good stabling and other out buildings; also a thriving young apple orchard. Price low and terms accommodating." "Price low," of course, was a relative term. Land prices around Nauvoo in its early years suggests some speculation, which was common throughout the entire old Northwest Territory at this time. Sample transactions from a Nauvoo period deed and mortgage book show some prices ten or fifteen times higher than the minimum federal price for land in the same area. [^8]

If any land prices were indeed low, it was because the main investment was labor, which most farmers did not consider very valuable. The primary cost of establishing a new farm near Nauvoo was not in cash outlays, which was most fortunate for the impoverished refugees from Missouri. In addition to the breaking of the land, the basic features of a pioneer prairie farm were the buildings and the fences. For the most part, all these were created by labor from materials at hand. It was thus quite possible to make something out of almost nothing except hard work.

As much as buildings, the fences increased the value of prairie land. Farms of two hundred acres, such as that of Backenstos, meant extensive fencing. The importance of fencing was noted by the English traveler, William Oliver, who referred to it as a "speedy imperative." Without it no crops were secure from cattle and horses, which roamed the prairies and woods at will. All land not enclosed, he noted, was considered common. And it was apparently a problem even in the city of Nauvoo, as the editor wrote in the 23 July 1845 issue of the Neighbor Many of the Saints were from the British Isles or New England where stone fences were most common, but on the stoneless prairies of Illinois, they had to turn to other materials to build fences. The easiest to erect, where timber was available, was the zig-zag, or worm, fence. A good sized tree with a trunk forty to fifty feet long made between one and two hundred rails. With the use of wedges and a maul, the entire tree could be reduced to rails by one man in one day. It also took a man one day to put up two hundred yards of rail fence, or a week to fence in about thirty acres. Such fences lasted at least ten years, and with the corners bound by stakes and riders, it was considered a "legal" fence. This terminology meant that if cattle broke through, the owner of the field was entitled to damages.

The number of trees along the river when the Saints settled Nauvoo made worm fences quite common around the city. On the open prairie, though, with its scarcity of trees, the farmers turned to the limitless resource of prairie sod. Sod fences, or ditch-and-turf fences, as they were called, were more difficult and more time-consuming to construct. They were, however, more permanent and, if built properly, required no repairs, as did rail fences. The 14 January 1843 Wasp carried an ad by Hiram Kimball, announcing that he wished to contract for the making of twelve hundred rods of ditch and turf fence.

Apparently there was an aesthetic quality to sod fences as well as utilitarian. In one of her very descriptive letters, Charlotte Haven wrote of such fences: "I assure you they look now in June far more beautiful and rural than the New England stone walls or zig-zag rail fences." [^9]

More appealing to the farmers, however, were the herds within the enclosed fields. The Millennial Star, ever anxious to attract new converts to Nauvoo, carried an article in August 1841 describing the livestock opportunities around that city: "cattle, hogs, turkeys and poultry . . . are reared in immense numbers and at small expense. They are purchased readily . . . for the New Orleans market, and by drovers, who take them to the east coast, Philadelphia, &c. This district affords, indeed, the chief supply of live-stock for the Union." Driving Illinois cattle back to the east coast, as the article described, was quite common during this period. A Virginian who lived southwest of Washington, D.C., remembered, "In October of nearly every year a drove of cattle from Indiana or Illinois would be driven in for sale to the farmers to be fed and fattened during the fall and winter." [^10]

Most farmers who kept milk cattle were not as concerned with milk breeds as farmers of today. Francis Wiggins, in The American Farmer's Instructor or Practical Agriculturist, published in 1840, mentioned both the shorthorn and the longhorn but added there were good and bad milkers in all breeds. Like most farmers of his day, he felt the most desirable qualities were not quantity of milk produced but gentleness, the ability to yield milk readily, and the ability to fatten easily. Most cattle were eventually slaughtered. [^11] Another contemporary writer observed that "a good native cow, will in the best season, give from ten to twelve quarts of milk a day." [^12] Such production was enough to produce up to seven pounds of butter per week. Because of primitive refrigeration methods, most milk was used to make cheese and butter during the Nauvoo years.

The more knowledgeable farmers in the 1840s recognized two major needs in agriculture: the improvement of cattle breeds and the provision of winter shelter and feeding. Various approaches to improving cattle breeds included importing some expensive breeding stock from England. Another, rather novel approach, was tried by the Illinois state legislature, which passed a law forbidding small bulls from running at large. Poor farmers howled over the injustice of such discrimination against small bulls, but there is little evidence the Mormons ever got involved in this controversy. In the prairie country around Nauvoo, where cattle were allowed to range and breed naturally, such legislation was largly ignored.

The solution to the winter feed and shelter problem was just as difficult. Traditionally, the only feed cattle had in the winter was hay cut from meadow land and stacked outdoors. Feeding only from these stacks throughout the winter, most cattle were in very poor condition by the time spring came. One "expert" stated flatly that "the practice of feeding grain to cattle . . . cannot be recommended." He thought that not only was grain too costly but root crops were cheaper and better. [^13]

Although not an expert, the editor of the Neighbor offered better advice to his readers as the 1843 winter season was about to begin. He stated in the 4 October edition: "Too much attention cannot be paid by the farmer to the improvement of his live stock. In this country it is most shamefully neglected. . . . One good cow well fed, will give more milk than four such as we generally see."

At the time of Nauvoo, horses were rather small, nondescript animals and the farmers seemed to have little interest in developing better breeds. Oxen were cheaper and seemed to satisfy most farm work needs, and the variety of horses available apparently satisfied any remaining needs. A traveler in Michigan Territory in the 1830s described a turnout of horses at a steamboat landing as composed of "spongy-looking" Ohio horses, clean-limbed Kentuckians, shuffling Illinois pacers and "tight-looking" New York trotters mixed in with bull-necked French horses and scraggy Indian ponies. Such turnouts were undoubtedly similar at the steamboat landings in Nauvoo but still, the Latter-day Saints loved horses and needed them, especially for the Nauvoo Legion. One entire cohort of the legion required horses. Because of the Mormons' keenness for horses, the editor of the Neighbor felt compelled to compare cows with horses in the 7 February 1844 issue of his paper: "A horse costs the price of three cows. The annual expense of keeping him is about three times as much. . . . every horse a farmer may keep beyond what may be necessary for farm work, is equal to forty-seven dollars and fifty cents out of [his] pocket each year. . . . An excellent one [cow] can be had for twenty-five dollars. She will last ten years; and will make on an average fifty dollars worth of butter and cheese during the year. . . . Let us reflect, then, and see if we have not too many favorite colts on hand."

Horses were not a major work animal. Oxen, usually large, neutered bulls of the shorthorn or Devon breeds, filled that capacity. These impressive animals were very much in evidence around Nauvoo, although horses pretty much swept them from the national scene by the time of the Civil War. Admittedly, horses were built for speed, but oxen were much cheaper to keep than horses were, they ate less, they were capable of a vast amount of slow, repetitive work, and, when their work years were over, they could be eaten. Of course some oxen were fattened specifically for meat and were referred to as "beef," a term just coming into use for such animals at this time.

Another common animal on the prairies around Nauvoo was sheep. Illinoisans and especially the Mormons were finding them a most profitable farm animal as a result of selective breeding. One sheep could provide three pounds of fleece annually, netting as much for the farmer as a full day's wages for a typical laborer. Thus, a large flock could provide a handsome income with a minimum of labor. Their profitability encouraged the importing of vast numbers of sheep into Illinois from the east during the Nauvoo period.

Swine were raised and fattened in Illinois for home consumption and export to St. Louis and Cincinnati. As early as 1833, Cincinnati slaughter houses were butchering over one hundred twenty thousand hogs from the old Northwest Territory, shipping two hundred and fifty barrels of pork each day during the "hog season." [^14] Easy to raise and providing a great deal of meat, herds of pigs were found on almost every farm. Long-nosed, thin creatures with legs like greyhounds, these animals roamed at large in woods and on the prairie most of the year, feeding on acorns, hickory nuts, walnuts, and hazel nuts. Such "mast" made their flesh soft and greasy but sweet. Before killing, which occurred between Christmas and the middle of January, they were penned up and fattened. In the 15 November 1843 Neighbor an article advised area farmers about what feed should be used for fattening pigs. They should be supplied every few days with "charcoal, rotten wood, ashes and salt . . . with fresh water at least twice a day." To this, the article suggested, should be added "mould and leaves from the woods, marsh mud, the scrapings of the road and yards, corn stalks, refuse straw, and offal." Fortunately for the hogs and their consumers, this farm "expert" also added corn and other vegetables to the hog menu.

Like so much other farm livestock during the Nauvoo era, poultry was also rather nondescript with no improved breeds. Geese, turkeys, and chickens roamed the yards and fields with no special feeding or care. They were a common source of food but obviously, one seldom saw a fat fowl on the table. One egg per chicken every three days was considered good production. It was not profitable to raise poultry commercially, because eggs sold for only three to five cents per dozen. In the spring when geese began to shed quills and feathers, they were penned up. Then the women picked the feathers for bedding and pulled the quills for pens, often from live birds.

One final observation should be made before leaving the subject of farm animals. At the time of Nauvoo, owners treated their own livestock, because animal doctoring had not yet developed into a profession. A most common treatment was bloodletting. A universal belief ascribed many ills, in animals as well as humans, to "bad blood." As a result, more harm than good was often done by such amateur practitioners. Some more "expert" advice was offered to local newspaper readers about such treatment in the 4 October 1843 Neighbor The major Nauvoo crops, according to the August 1841 issue of the Millennial Star, were Indian corn, wheat, potatoes, cotton, hemp and flax, and such fruits as grapes, apples, peaches, and gooseberries.

Fields were often plowed in the fall to save time in the spring, and the winter freezing and thawing aided in breaking up the soil. Corn was planted around the end of April or early May. At harvest time, farmers expected yields of fifty to eighty bushels per acre on the prairie and more than a hundred bushels an acre on the river bottoms. Observers such as the English traveler William Oliver referred to this crop as the indigent farmer's main dependence, but Nauvoo's farmers were not raising it just for themselves. The day book of Joseph Smith's Red Brick Store indicated that on 6 April 1844, one customer bought thirty-nine and one-half bushels of seed corn and another one bought twenty-five bushels of corn and nine bushels of buckwheat. Such quantities were intended for commercial purposes. Travelers described the mature corn as reaching ten to twelve feet in height and yielding one or two good ears per stalk. No part of the corn was wasted in any way. The husks were used to stuff mattresses and make dolls. The cobs were used to kindle fires and smoke meat or as stoppers for jugs, and they made fine pipes.

Besides corn, the Saints raised oats, some upland rice, and such crops as melons, squash, pumpkins, and cucumbers. Some families had patches of flax, which, after fall pulling and rotting, would be stored away for the winter. Then, when the men had more time, they would "break," "swingle," and "hackle" the flax to prepare it for spinning and weaving by the women.

Hemp was a profitable crop for Mormon farmers, and there were at least three ropewalks (rope manufacturers) in Nauvoo. The 17 May 1843 Neighbor encouraged the growing of this crop by mentioning that "the Messrs. Laws . . . have paid considerable attention to it during the past season" and that "the profits will be four times that of wheat." Henry Clay of Kentucky had introduced hemp into the western states, and the Mormons quickly found that the rich, moist river bottoms were ideal for its growth. Repeated requests in the local paper for help in the ropewalks suggests that before the exodus, ropemaking had the promise of becoming a major industry for Nauvoo.

A farmer in Nauvoo using the agricultural methods and implements that his ancestors had used required twenty-four work days (ten hours' labor per day) to plow, seed, and harvest ten acres of wheat and forty-four work days to plow, plant, cultivate, and harvest ten acres of corn. Yet two of the greatest laborsaving machines in agriculture were invented in 1839, the same year that Nauvoo was settled. In a little shop only one hundred and fifty miles north of Nauvoo, John Deere manufactured his first steel plow, so essential for the conquest of the great prairies of the west. That same year, after seeing dozens of patents issued to other inventors for unsuccessful reaping machines, Cyrus McCormick announced publicly that his reaper was ready for use. The steel plow and the McCormick reaper revolutionized farming in America.

Actually, a whole catalog of new inventions for farming was coming along about this time, but Nauvoo agriculture was just a little too early to benefit from most of them. The reaper, although available, was too costly for most Mormon farmers. The hay and grain around Nauvoo were harvested by hand with cradle scythes. "Cradling" was done with a scythe that had a light wooden frame attached. With each stroke, the frame carried the cut grain to the side where the stroke ended and deposited it on the ground. The small, loose bundles were then gathered and tied by a second person. Two men, one cradling and the other raking and binding the bundles with bands of grain, could harvest and shock about two acres a day. Farmers living south of Nauvoo were in the midst of just such a harvest when word came of the death of their Prophet. Warren Foote recorded in his journal, "Elihu Allen and I were working in the harvest field cutting his wheat when about three o'clock P.M. my wife came out and told us that word had just come that Joseph Smith and his brother Hiram was shot in Carthage Jail yesterday afternoon. I said at once, 'that it cannot be so.' Yet it so affected us that we dropped the cradle and rake and went home." [^15]

One new invention that did find its way to Nauvoo was the horse-powered threshing machine, which could separate grain from the stalks at the rate of two to three hundred bushels per day. The same farmer who laid down his cradle upon hearing of the Prophet's death refers in his journal to one of these new machines in 1841: "I have been driving team for a thrashing Machine to thrash E. Allen's wheat." [^16]

A more common method of threshing grain, however, was to spread out the bundles of grain on a threshing floor or on the ground and then use a flail to separate the grain from the stalk. The grain was swept up and cleaned to remove the chaff from the grain. By the 1840s there were fanning mills to accomplish this cleaning, which were on occasion criticized by devout people for creating a "wind contrary to nater." [^17] After cleaning, the grain was bagged for the mill. At the mill, the farmer was credited at the rate of sixty pounds to the bushel. For every bushel of wheat he delivered, he received back about forty pounds of flour and fifteen pounds of bran. The farmers hoped that this final step would show a profit for several months of backbreaking labor. All too often it did not.

By 1841 the entire country around Nauvoo was taking on a settled agricultural look. Hiram Kimball was quoted in the Millennial Star of 10 September of that year as saying that he "never saw crops look better. . . . the whole country for miles around is cultivated both with corn, wheat, potatoes and all kinds of produce."

Agriculture was an important topic of conversation and for articles in the newspaper each summer and fall in Nauvoo. In just one issue of the Neighbor, 9 August 1843, were nine articles offering advice to local farmers on such diverse topics as the culture of fruit trees, the value of "Ruta Baga" growing, the importance of stock breeding, dry floors for horses, a cure for hollow horn disease, diseases of sheep, the profitability of growing tobacco, the use of corn for fodder, and a way to increase peach yield. Two weeks later the editor informed his readers that that year's crops had exceeded expectations in spite of a dry season. Actually, crop conditions in 1843 were not as good as the newspaper suggested. Joseph Smith mentioned in his journal in September that there had been so little rain since June that the gardens had stopped growing, the corn was wormy, and the potatoes were hardly worth digging. [^18]

The poor harvest in 1843, combined with mob harassment on outlying farms the following year, created a problem in food supply for the city of Nauvoo. In July 1844 the city council appointed a special committee to solicit food donations from the surrounding countryside to supply the wants of the destitute of Nauvoo. Perhaps for this reason the Kimball store advertised late that summer for twenty five thousand bushels of wheat.

Shortages continued in 1845, probably as the result of transportation and distribution problems as much as anything else. In September, while mobs were burning outlying farms and the residents of Nauvoo were experiencing shortages, Brigham Young wrote, "There is grain enough growing within ten miles of this city, raised by the saints, to feed the whole population for two years if they were to sit down and do nothing but gather it in and feast upon it, and worship God." [^19]

Grain was not the only food the Saints counted on for subsistence. A large assortment of peach, apple, and other fruit trees were planted in groves all around Nauvoo and on the prairie. Apples and peaches were so abundant in some places they were fed to the hogs. Usually, however, such fruit was sliced and dried in the sun for winter use. Brigham Young mentioned in his journal in 1844 that he "visited at Father Mikesell's, partook of dinner and an abundance of peaches from his orchard." [^20]

There was no wide public market for Nauvoo fruit at this time, so the fruit probably went mainly to satisfy home or local needs.

By the early 1840s scientific horticulture was only beginning to produce better fruit. Even Johnny "Appleseed" Chapman, who did so much for apple culture in the midwest, did not believe in grafting—it was "against nature." Folk myth still surrounded fruit growing; for example, driving a trunk full of rusty nails was believed to force a tree to bear more fruit. Articles started to appear, however, in local papers on the subject of grafting, pruning, and feeding. In the 1 February 1842 Times and Seasons, an ad by Edward Sayers notified Nauvoo of his "various branches of Horticulture," including the pruning and grafting of fruit trees and innoculating them against disease. Two years later in the 4 September 1844 Neighbor, J. and Wm. Mendenhall advertised a large assortment of peach, apple, and other fruit trees including five thousand innoculated peach trees at twenty cents per tree. Here again we are confronted by the enigma of a people, facing certain abandonment of their homes, planting trees that will not bear fruit until long after they have left. As late as 2 April 1845, only ten months before the exodus began, an ad appeared in the Neighbor offering for sale "10 or 11,000 beautiful chestnut trees, in the garden near Willard Richards near the Temple."

A unique development of farming in the Nauvoo area was the Big Field Association, organized in February 1843. The Big Field was a community farm cultivated in common by those unable to buy farms on the outskirts of the city. Its use was regulated by a Board of Trustees. The community farm consisted of six sections of land, or 3,840 acres, east of the city and was one of many projects to aid the poorer Saints who were willing to work the land. The Neighbor carried a notice of a meeting to be held in the northwest corner of the field on 6 May 1844, emphasizing to those interested in being Big Field proprietors: "Those who are not ready and willing to improve the one talent, can make room for such as are willing to improve the five or even ten talents."

Apparently this community project was a success. In September 1845, a free dinner was given to more than six hundred persons by members of the Nauvoo Eleventh Ward and proprietors of the Big Field. The dinner required three sittings at a table one hundred and fifty feet long. According to the 10 September 1845 Neighbor it was announced at the dinner that sixty thousand bushels of wheat and corn had been raised on the Big Field during the past season, as well as an "abundance of oats, barley, buckwheat, potatoes, and other vegetables."

The Saints of Nauvoo, regardless of their professions or interests and despite the size of their city, could not escape the dominating influence of agriculture. If they did not have a farm on the outskirts or an interest in the Big Field Association, they had gardens in the city. And those who were bound to urban tasks escaped whenever they could to the beauty and serenity of the Nauvoo countryside. In August 1845 the newspaper staff took the day off for just such an outing. A staff writer described in the 27 August issue of the Neighbor what most of the farmer Saints also felt but perhaps did not usually express quite so well. In writing about the "Printers' Ride" to the farm of Mr. Wright, six miles east of Nauvoo on the prairie, he described the scene as "something that enlivens the soul and feasts the mind, after leaving the busy bustling scenes of everyday in a city, and placing ones self in the midst of an ocean of prairie, to view the handy works of God and men, in their glory: the heavenly sky: the fleecy clouds; the breathing wind: the towering stacks; the marshalled corn fields; the prairies dotted with herds of cattle, and the shepherd boys."

A year later the sky, the clouds, and the wind still looked and felt the same, but the corn fields around Nauvoo lay fallow and the herds of Mormon cattle were somewhere in Iowa moving slowly west. And the shepherd boys? If they survived to reach their mountain refuge, and many did not, they had time ahead of them to remember wistfully the wide fertile prairies of Illinois that had once been home.

Farming the Land

---
Notas:
[^1] Nevins, American Social History, p. 279.
[^2] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, pp. 9-10.
[^3] History of the Church, 4:549.
[^4] Ibid., 5:297.
[^5] History of the Church, 6:212.
[^6] Chevalier, Society, Manners and Politics, p. 353.
[^7] Launius and McKiernan, Joseph Smith, Jr.'s Red Brick Store, p. 15.
[^8] Kimball, "Heber C. Kimball and Family," p. 473.
[^9] McGavin, Nauvoo the Beautiful, p. 247.
[^10] History of the Church, 2:325.
[^11] Haven, "A Girl's Letters from Nauvoo," p. 625.
[^12] History of the Church, 4:121.
[^13] Wiggins, American Farmer's Instructor, p. 273.
[^14] Tryon, Mirror for Americans, 3:554-55.
[^15] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 62.
[^16] Ibid., p. 45.
[^17] Janney, John Jay Janney's Virginia, p. 74.
[^18] History of the Church, 6:31.
[^19] Ibid., 7:445.
[^20] Ibid., 7:265.
