George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

6

Purse and Post

"Many of the Saints in England have complained that their friends do not write to them from this country," wrote Joseph Fielding from Nauvoo in the August 1842 Millennial Star. Tardiness in answering letters from friends and relatives apparently transcends time and distance. Today, it is usually a case of our own procrastination, but the Saints in Illinois had a far more legitimate reason. Fielding continued: "One cause of this neglect is, that almost all things here are carried on without the use of money, but they cannot send letters by post without it; . . . I would, with pleasure, write letters to many individuals in England and the Isle of Man, but I must beg to be excused; it would take more money than I can at present command."

Operating a safe and efficient mail service and issuing sound money are two important functions of our federal government. It is difficult for us to imagine the inconveniences of life without them, and yet that was exactly the case in Nauvoo. The most critical of the two problems, of course, was the lack of sound money. So crucial was the need to infuse Nauvoo's economy with sound money that the editor of the Church newspaper in England, the Millennial Star, advised emigrants headed for Nauvoo not to lock up their money like misers but to put it to use in business or property for the benefit of others as well as themselves. Charles Dickens, who traveled through the old Northwest Territory in 1842, observed: "[The country] has no money; really no money. The bank paper won't pass; the newspapers are full of advertisements from tradesmen who sell by barter; [certainly true in the Nauvoo papers] and American gold is not to be had or purchased." [^1] Dickens ended up buying and spending twenty-franc French gold pieces.

The United States government, confident that all trade needs could be satisfied with specie (gold and silver coins), did not issue any paper currency designed specifically for public circulation until 1861. Because of the shortage of gold and silver in the rapidly expanding American economy, numerous private banks, with no laws forbidding them, filled the money void by issuing their own notes. Most banks were solvent enough to redeem the notes they issued, but a number of "wildcat banks" lacked the necessary funds. These banks simply shut down, leaving the owners of their notes with worthless paper, causing merchants, tavern keepers, and other business people to be very suspicious of any out-of-town bank notes. Mormon journal keeper Warren Foote recorded just such an incident in one of his travels outside of Nauvoo:

"We drove to Shalersville and stopped to feed. We had considerable difficulty in paying our bill which was 12Â½ cents. I had no money smaller than a five dollar bill [a private bank note]. The landlady said that she could not change it, so I went to a store and got it changed. I offered a one dollar to her and she said she could not change that. . . . William told her that if she could not change it, we could not pay her and we must be going. . . . She gave me the change very readily. The fact was, she did not want paper money at all, but wanted silver." [^2]

Merchants and others were more willing to accept notes issued by large banks located in such eastern cities as New York or Philadelphia. Other notes, if accepted at all, received a substantially lower exchange rate, often several percentage points lower. Merchants were also more willing to accept eastern bank notes because they could redeem them when they made their buying trips back east. The editors of the Times and Seasons of 15 November 1841 emphasized that preference in one of their periodic requests for subscription payments: "All bank bills that are current in the country where our paper circulates [except Michigan bills] will be received in payment for this paper. Eastern money is preferred."

An example of the variety of bank notes circulating in Nauvoo can be discovered from a notice in the 17 July 1844 Nauvoo Neighbor that offered a reward of fifty dollars for the recovery of notes taken from a passenger on board the Maid of Iowa in June 1843. The victim of the theft published the denominations of the bills along with the name of the bank that had issued them. He listed eleven notes, ranging from a fifty-dollar note issued on a bank in Louisville, Kentucky, to a five-dollar note on a bank in Virginia. Altogether, nine banks were represented, but only one of the eleven stolen notes was drawn on an Illinois bank.

Most currency-issuing banks in Illinois in the 1840s had a reputation for financial irresponsibility, and people were extremely fearful of accepting any Illinois paper. Joseph Smith noted that reluctance in a letter he wrote to Edward Hunter in 1842: "As to money matters here, the State Bank is down, and we cannot tell you what bank would be safe a month hence. I would say that gold and silver is the only safe money a man can keep these times." [^3]

Within three years after Nauvoo was founded, most business in Illinois cities was transacted on a near specie basis. In fact, a specie ordinance was passed in Nauvoo in March 1843 under pressure from the Prophet, who told the city council: "I say, if paper currency is an evil, put it down at once. . . . Why have the canker remaining any longer to sap our life?" [^4] This ordinance permitted only gold and silver coin to be received as lawful tender in payment of city taxes, debts, and fines imposed by the city. As can be imagined, such an ordinance, while not specifically preventing merchants or individuals from accepting paper notes, went far toward limiting the circulation of paper bank currency in Nauvoo.

The same ordinance also forbade further emissions of city scrip but allowed the redemption of scrip already in circulation. On 3 July 1844 the Neighbor advertised that city scrip would be received as payment for subscriptions at the newspaper office, if applications were made immediately. City scrip was becoming scarce, however, because it was being collected and burned at the mayor's request. In February 1844 Joseph recorded in his journal, "I burned $81 of city scrip according to ordinance." [^5]

The absence of surplus money and thus of potential depositors in part accounts for a city as large as Nauvoo boasting no banks or other formal lending institutions. Land around Nauvoo was plentiful and was excellent collateral for all kinds of credit transactions, but private banks were more adapted to manufacturing and commercial interests than to agricultural ones. In 1834, for example, of the 502 banks in the entire country, all but 88 were in the industrial northeast. [^6] A final but important reason for the lack of banks in Nauvoo was the Saints' unfortunate experience with the Kirtland financial experiments, which discouraged attempts at banking in Nauvoo.

The lack of commercial banks, however, did not mean that some of the traditional banking services were unavailable in Nauvoo. Stores such as Joseph Smith's Red Brick Store served as frontier banks. Store owners recorded transactions and accounts of personal business dealings between individuals, such as loans. A well-established store might also serve as a place of "deposit." On 12 June 1844 the Smith store day book recorded a note of credit extended to N. K. Whitney for thirteen hundred dollars on various bank notes given to the store owners. Store owners might also actually lend money to individuals with good credit. The Smith store ledger, as an example, recorded a loan of one thousand dollars at twelve percent interest, with payments being recorded on later dates. [^7] Such interest, incidentally, was quite reasonable for that period of time. Some states limited interest rates by law, but apparently the western states did not. In Illinois and elsewhere along the frontier, land speculation tended to inflate interest on transactions of all kinds to twenty-five percent or more.

For the average Nauvoo citizens who did not speculate in land or borrow money, the most frequently used money was the coin in their pocket or purse. Modern Americans, who now deal primarily with only four or five United States coins, might have found handling money in Nauvoo somewhat confusing. First of all, eleven different coins were legal tender. The three largest denominations were gold coins and the rest, except for the cent, were silver:

Double Eagle $10.00 Eagle 5.00 Half Eagle 2.50 Dollar 1.00 Half Dollar .50 Quarter Dollar .25 York Shilling .12Â½ Dime .10 York Sixpence .06Â¼ Half Dime .05 Cent .01

With this confusing variey, it is little wonder that newspaper editors, probably reflecting the frustration of their readers, asked such pleading questions as this one in the Neighbor of 15 January 1845: "When shall we have an American Currency? It is . . . fifty-eight years since Federal money was established by Congress. We are yet, however, subject to the evils of a mixed currency. . . . It is time to banish such foreign and, to us, antiquated terms as pounds, shillings and pence." Only ten days after this editorial appeared, Heber J. Kimball recorded in his journal that Brigham Young gave him five pounds sterling. [^8]

There was a great likelihood of coming across a wide variety of foreign coins in Nauvoo. The most common coins on the Illinois frontier were the Spanish dollar and fractions thereof and the French five-franc coin. To force such coins out of circulation, the United States government set the price of the Spanish quarter at twenty cents at the post office and beginning in 1844 accepted payment for postage in American specie only.

To make matters even more confusing, Saints from the northeast had to drop the terms "fo' pence" and "ninepence" in favor of such local terms as "bits" (12Â½ cents) and "picayunes" (6Â¼ cents). Prices were more often given in numbers of bits—as in two, four, or six bits—than in numbers of cents.

When the Prophet urged the city council to pass the specie ordinance to protect the Saints from spurious currency, he was concerned with more than unredeemable bank notes. A major problem in Illinois in the 1840s was counterfeiting. Western Illinois, especially Hancock County, was notorious for its infestation of thieves, counterfeiters, and murderers who welcomed the Saints as convenient patsies for their deeds. The large-scale operations of these gangs, especially the counterfeiters, forced the authorities of the county to all but give up trying to control them.

Counterfeiting was relatively easy in the 1840s. There were so many different state and foreign notes circulating that it was almost impossible to be familiar with all of them. But counterfeiting was more than printing bogus paper money. Because all paper money was suspect, counterfeiters also stamped out cheap metal "foreign coins" and "washed" them with silver or gold or would even do that to authentic copper coins. The counterfeiting problem was so serious in Nauvoo that the city government, which had the power to penalize counterfeiting, set its harshest penalty for just such a crime: a fine of up to five thousand dollars and/or imprisonment at hard labor for up to fourteen years.

Anti-Mormons in Illinois accused Joseph Smith of establishing a bogus-money factory in Nauvoo and of maintaining a gang of swindlers and counterfeiters to put the money into circulation. Nevertheless, it has become firmly accepted, as a history of Illinois published in 1879 noted, that counterfeiting in Nauvoo was the work of "organized bands of thieves who knew that they could carry on their nefarious business with more safety, as long as suspicion could be placed upon the Mormons." [^9]

Counterfeiters found it easy to imitate paper money during the Nauvoo period, but one paper product they could not duplicate was postage stamps: there was no such thing. There were no envelopes, either, so letters were folded and sealed with wax. The postmaster charged by the number of sheets of paper as well as the distance the piece of mail had to travel. The postmaster examined each piece, figured the postage, and wrote the amount on the outside of the sheets. The sender could then pay for the postage but usually did not, knowing that curiosity would compel the recipient to redeem the mail. If the recipient refused to pay for unsolicited or unimportant mail—and well-known people might receive a great deal—the Post Office kept the mail and took the loss. That was actually the case with the Prophet Joseph Smith, which prompted him to send an open letter to the editor of the Messenger and Advocate:

"Dear Brother—I wish to inform my friends and all others abroad, that whenever they wish to address me through the postoffice, they will be kind enough to pay the postage on the same. My friends will excuse me in this matter, as I am willing to pay postage on letters to hear from them; but I am unwilling to pay for insults and menaces; consequently must refuse all unpaid. Yours in the Gospel, Joseph Smith, Jun." [^10] He said he was compelled to take this step after receiving a letter of no importance that cost him twenty-five cents for postage (at a time when the average laborer earned one dollar a day). He felt that common respect and good breeding obliged letter writers to pay the postage on their own letters.

To lower the postage—either for the sender or for the recipient—writers sometimes wrote vertically across the horizontal lines and sometimes even diagonally across them all. Readers compelled to decipher such letters might well wish their correspondents had not been quite so considerate of the cost of postage.

After receiving the mail from the sender, the postmaster wrapped all the letters to each city in separate packages, tied them with twine, and included a waybill. If envelopes were used (some senders handmade them), they could be sealed only in the postmaster's presence.

Throughout most of the Nauvoo period, postage rates varied considerably, from six cents for mail traveling up to thirty miles to twenty-five cents for mail traveling more than four hundred miles. Two pages doubled the postage rate and three pages tripled it, regardless of the size of the paper. Because so many of the Saints were from the British Isles or the northeast United States, they paid the maximum rates. For the average laborer, this meant perhaps one-third or one-fourth of a day's wages.

These high postage rates may have prompted an editorial in the Neighbor of 29 August 1844 calling for a cheaper rate of postage and decrying the abuse of franking. The editor noted that one hundred and eighty tons of free mail had been sent from Washington in just three weeks' time in 1840 whereas poor people were often unable to pick up important mail at the post office because they could not afford the postage due. The government finally dropped postage rates all the way to three cents for three thousand miles, but that reduction came five years after Nauvoo was evacuated.

Despite the cost of postage, by the time of the Prophet Joseph's death the volume of mail had grown so large that the postal service predicted that the United States would soon adopt the English custom of envelopes and adhesive stamps. Actually the first envelopes were manufactured in this country in a little store in New York in 1839, but they were made by hand and were not widely distributed until the 1850s, after the invention of the folding machine. The first postage stamps did not go on sale by the United States Post Office until the year after the Mormon exodus.

During the time the Mormons resided in Nauvoo, recipients paid for the mail they received, and they paid restrictively high prices. The high rates apparently applied to books and magazines also, because they were sent not by weight but by the number of pages. The cover of The American Almanac and Repository of Useful Knowledge for the Year 1843 listed its postage: "Ten sheets. Postage under 100 miles, 15 cts.; over 100 miles, 25 cts." Almanacs, next to the Bible the most common books in frontier homes, required the highest postage rate, which was for mail containing in excess of ten sheets.

[In Old Nauvoo Sidney Rigdon's Home and Post Office

Because of the high postage for magazines, comparable to eight or ten modern dollars, a postmaster might easily find himself with numerous magazines on hand. Consequently, these government employees often acted as agents for magazine publishers by passing on unsolicited copies to interested persons who paid the postage. By sending names of such persons to the publisher, postmasters received free subscriptions for themselves.

Unredeemed letters were disposed of another way. Every postmaster published periodically in the local paper a list of the letters waiting at the post office to be picked up. Such lists might easily fill several columns in the newspaper. Letters not claimed after a certain period of time were sent to the dead letter office in Washington, D.C.

The first postmaster in Nauvoo was George W. Robinson, who was appointed in April 1840, but the best known was Sidney Rigdon, an early associate of the Prophet who apostatized from the Church after the death of his leader. His home, which served as the post office, was just a short distance north of Joseph's Mansion House on the same block on Main Street. In 1843 Charlotte Haven described a visit to that post office: "We enter a side door leading into the kitchen, and in a corner near the door is a wide shelf or table, on which against the wall is a sort of cupboard with pidgeon-holes or boxes this is the post office. In this room, with the great cooking stove at one end, the family eat and sit. Mrs. R. when I go for the mail always invites me to stop and rest." [^11]

Since there was no home delivery of mail, everyone was compelled to stop by the post office to check for mail, so we can imagine the large amount of traffic through Brother Rigdon's kitchen. The arrival of mail was an exciting event. News got around quickly, and town residents promptly started converging on the postmaster's home.

In the 9 July 1845 Neighbor the editor noted that the law now permitted free newspaper postage within a thirty-mile radius and published a list of post offices within that distance from Nauvoo. There were thirty-one.

The usual means of carrying mail from town to town in Illinois was the four-horse post-coaches or two-horse stages. Where the roads were more primitive, mail was carried on horseback or in sulkies (light, uncovered rigs). Between the river towns, of course, it was carried by steamboat.

Mail delivery to and from Nauvoo by road was slow, irregular, and undependable. In 1840 town authorities requested the postal service to carry mail twice weekly between Carthage and Nauvoo. This request was denied because of the cost, [^12] so mail was apparently being carried once weekly and probably on horseback. Before the evacuation of Nauvoo, however, because of its rapid growth, deliveries were made almost daily, but that did not necessarily speed the delivery of mail from the east.

Because of the hazardous transportation of mail in the 1840s, two or even three copies of important correspondence were sent separately as a precaution. Mail was often lost by exposure to the elements, destroyed in accidents, misplaced by inefficient handling, or even deliberately destroyed by unprincipled carriers.

During the anti-Mormon mobbings in Hancock County, for example, mail to and from Nauvoo was taken from the carriers, opened, read, and burned. Starting in 1844, important Church mail had to be carried by armed messengers from thirty to two hundred miles from Nauvoo to ensure its safety. Obviously, at this time the federal government was as helpless in protecting its mail service as it was in protecting the Latter-day Saints themselves from the Illinois "wolf hunting" rabble.

An ineffective money system, an inefficient mail service, and increasing mob action were everyday concerns to the Nauvoo Saints. Looking to the United States government, however, for sound money, for an efficient, cheap, and safe mail service, and for protection from roving mobs appeared to the Mormons more and more futile. For the sound money and the improved mail service, they might have waited, for both of these came within a very few years. But for protection from the mobs, the Saints could not wait. They had no choice but to surrender their hopes and homes, load what few possessions they were able to carry in their wagons, and leave the brutal mobs and feeble government behind.

Purse and Post

---
Notas:
[^1] Chevalier, Society, Manners and Politics, p. 309.
[^2] History of the Church, 5:271.
[^3] Brush, Growing Up with Southern Illinois, p. 123.
[^4] Carson, Old Country Store, pp. 19-20.
[^5] Pickel Letters.
[^6] History of the Church, 4:483.
[^7] Launius and McKiernan, Joseph Smith, Jr.'s Red Brick Store, pp. 14-15.
[^8] History of the Church, 6:431.
[^9] McGavin, Nauvoo the Beautiful, p. 247.
[^10] History of the Church, 2:325.
[^11] Haven, "A Girl's Letters from Nauvoo," p. 625.
[^12] History of the Church, 4:121.
