George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

7

The Merchants

The French traveler Chevalier, who published a travel book on American society the year Nauvoo was founded, could not resist the impulse to analyze the American penchant for merchandising and business speculation. Considering the nation's Puritan beginnings, he might have come close to the truth when he theorized: "Public opinion and the pulpit forbid sensual gratifications, wine, women, and the display of a princely luxury; cards and dice are equally prohibited; the American, therefore, has recourse to business for the strong emotions which he requires to make him feel life. He launches with delight into the ever-moving sea of speculation." [^1]

Unfortunately, this type of speculation resulted in the severe national depression of 1837, only two years before Nauvoo was settled. Although the depression, with its resulting lack of specie and investment capital, affected the settlement and growth of Nauvoo, it did not appear so to visitors. A Methodist preacher who visited the Mormon town in 1843 reported the place was more alive with business than any place he had visited since the beginning of the depression.

One reason the minister might have been impressed with the business activity in Nauvoo was that it extended over much of the city. There was apparently no zoning in the Mormon capital and thus no single business district was well defined. Businesses and homes were combined throughout the metropolitan area. The term business district usually referred to the merchants on the hill or to their competitors on the flats. On the hill where the temple was being constructed, the businesses that stretched along Mulholland Street were serious rivals to the ones grouped around Main Street on the flats. The businesses in the upper town, many of them owned by non-Mormons, had been built there because the area was drier and more healthful and the lots were cheaper.

Some bitterness developed between the Mulholland Street merchants and the Main Street merchants, several of whom were Church leaders. The Prophet's Mansion House and general store were located on the flats, as was the planned Nauvoo House. Having the wharves and water power, the industrial and business base of Nauvoo concentrated on the flats, but the hill section did have such well-known establishments as Adams Boot and Shoe Repair Shop, Haven's Drug Store, Power & Adams' General Store, Davis & Williams' Tailor Shop, and Horne's Comb Factory.

In the days before refrigeration, one important feature of any city was the market where farmers could bring their fresh produce and meat to sell to the townspeople. The Nauvoo city council considered building two city markets, but the Prophet convinced the council to build only one. He felt that since the upper part of the town had the temple, the lower town should have the market. It was to be established on the rising ground on Main Street, about one quarter mile north of the river. The upper town was served by produce wagons. [^2]

For the convenience of city residents, farmers were encouraged to peddle their goods anyplace in the city. All hawkers and pedlars other than farmers, however, were forbidden by city ordinance to "hawk or carry about" wares not manufactured in Nauvoo without first obtaining a license for such activity. The cost of such licenses, according to the 15 December 1841 Times and Seasons, was deliberately set at ten to fifty dollars to discourage the practice. Such ordinances were common throughout America. Local merchants, who of course had influence with the ordinance makers, simply didn't want any competition from silver-tongued Yankee pedlars.

The Nauvoo years represent a period of transition from the Yankee pedlars to general stores, the forerunners of the department stores of today. These general stores became the focal points of village life in the early nineteenth century.

It is hard to think of such stores in these terms. They were usually quite small and unimposing, unpainted buildings with narrow doors and small-paned windows. Window displays were not needed, or perhaps not thought of, and glass was expensive. The dim interiors were further darkened by the heavy traffic, smoke from fireplaces and stoves, and natural wood stained from endless sprinklings and sweepings. There was always a distinctive odor of a mixture of spices, grains, leather, textiles, wood, molasses, cheese, and so on. Goods were hung wherever a hook could be driven, and overflowing shelves and barrels and kegs filled any available floor space.

But two things made the village stores, especially the general stores, the center of village life. First of all, shopping was not a woman's task. So much food was grown at home that it was easier for the men to pick up the fewer required staples such as salt, tea, spices, and flour. In a barter economy, it was also considered more appropriate for the husband to barter his own farm- or hand-produced goods. Thus the town's business, church, and government leaders met informally in the town's general store. Second, the general store, of which there were at least thirty-five in Nauvoo at one time or another, was often the center of community life because of the attraction of the merchant himself. He was the town capitalist, the banker, the riverboat owner, the promoter of public projects, and often the speculator in early manufacturing. This was the case in Nauvoo where such merchants as Joseph Smith and Hiram Kimball promoted those very things.

Store proprietors were usually well-informed community extroverts who enjoyed the freedom associated with being their own bosses and the opportunity that freedom offered them to talk with their numerous customers about public issues. They were the travelers with news from buying and selling trips to St. Louis or New Orleans. They also, of course, handled money, which invariably enhances influence in any community.

Storekeepers might not have enjoyed the bookkeeping, letter writing, stock taking, and ordering that made for long hours, but there were some enjoyable aspects of minding the store, namely the arrival of merchandise. Goods, quite often the result of buying trips to St. Louis, New Orleans, or the eastern states, usually arrived in Nauvoo by steamboat. Arrival notices of such shipments were placed in the newspaper almost every week by merchants heralding their new merchandise and often the steamer on which it arrived. On one such day in the spring of 1843 the steamers Maid of Iowa and the Potosi arrived with cargoes of merchandise from New York and Philadelphia and were advertised in the 31 May Nauvoo Neighbor The arrival of goods at the city wharf was a time of hard work as well as excitement. Numerous heavy barrels and boxes had to be transported from the wharf to the store or warehouse. Hauling became a lucrative business in itself. In 1843 John Taylor advertised that he had one hundred to one hundred and fifty dollars worth of hauling to let in exchange for city property or woodland near the big mound.

Not all store items arrived by steamboat or in barrels or boxes. Money was scarce throughout the west, especially in Nauvoo because of previous losses to mobs in Missouri, so store goods retailed at what was known as "long credit," and payment was taken in kind. Nauvoo merchants filled their back rooms with items taken in trade: pelts of deer, coon, muskrat, and bear, dried venison hams, beef hides, feathers, honey, shingles, lumber, tan bark, cordwood, potash, chairs, berries, eggs, firkins and barrels, tubs and pails, handmade hardware items—just about anything that could be resold at a profit. Merchants then had to dispose of these items by sending them away to places where a market might be found. In 1842 one Illinois merchant wrote: "We took in a good deal of country produce during this fall and winter and to turn it into money concluded to send it down the river for a market. We therefore had a flatboat built at a cost of one hundred dollars, into which our pork, bacon, butter, corn, venison hams, etc. were loaded. . . .The trip was a failure . . . the net returns amounting to less than one half the cost." [^3]

From the other side of the counter, other Illinoisans remembered such bartering. John Burland, an English yeoman, got his first taste of prairie trade when he made and sold three hundred pounds of maple sugar. His wife, Rebecca, wrote: "We disposed of the greater part of it to a storekeeper named Mr. Varley, at the rate of seven or eight cents per pound. It must not be understood that we got money for it. Business is seldom transacted after that manner in Illinois." [^4] In exchange for their maple sugar, the Burlands received corn for seed, meal to eat, a little coffee, two or three hoes, and a Yankee ax.

The barter system resulted in at least two prices for everything, representing cash and trade terms. Actually, some merchants had several prices for the same items, depending on the merchant's knowledge of the customer and how good that customer might be at haggling. The best discounts were given for cash sales and large orders, smaller discounts for credit or barter or small orders, and perhaps no discounts for customers who might have to be dunned to exact payment.

Just how much profit did a merchant make? On the Illinois frontier, a markup of fifty percent was considered low. Seveny-five percent was common, and one hundred percent over wholesale was spoken of as making "one percent." Nauvoo prices were cheaper than in towns farther from the river, such as Carthage, where goods had to be hauled from the river landings by ox teams at considerable expense. One resident of Nauvoo, however, in a letter to friends back east, still thought prices in that city were high: "Fetch all the ten to five bit pieces you can, and muslin and calico are something like double what they are with you. Stoves are dear and if I were coming again I would fetch one. Cedar ware is high but above all things crockery ware is the worst." [^5]

Actually, the Panic of 1837 depressed prices of farm products until by 1843 they were perhaps one half of what they had been in 1836. A horse that sold for one hundred dollars in 1836 would have sold in 1843 for sixty dollars. Beef dropped from six to three dollars per hundredweight, and flour, which went for eleven dollars per bushel in 1836, could be bought for three and a half dollars.

To discourage overcharging by merchants and to help residents shop wisely, the editor of the Neighbor published a weekly price list of certain store items, based largely on St. Louis prices. Merchants soon found it risky to charge much more.

Of the thirty-five general stores in Nauvoo, the most important, if not the most profitable, was the Joseph Smith Red Brick Store. It was certainly the hub of community activity. With no banks in Nauvoo, it became a loaning agency, and it was there that the collection of contributions for the temple and the Nauvoo House took place. Supplies were issued there for the Pinery work crews, subscriptions were sold for the Times and Seasons and city lots were sold through Joseph Smith, trustee-in-trust of the Church.

The upper story, where the Prophet had his office, was almost as busy as the general store downstairs. In that upper story the city council and the Church high council met, drama presentations were staged before the Cultural Hall was completed, and meetings of the Nauvoo Legion and Relief Society were held. The Masons held their first meetings on that floor, and a public school was kept there until it became too noisy for Joseph to work.

[In Old Nauvoo Joseph Smith's Red Brick Store

To Joseph, when he opened the building in December 1841, its most important function was as a store. Behind the brief notation in the Prophet's journal, only three days before Christmas, one can sense the excitement of a proprietor getting ready for a grand opening: "This day I commenced receiving the first supply of groceries at the new store. Thirteen wagons arrived from Warsaw, loaded with sugar, molasses, glass, salt, tea, coffee, &c., purchased in St. Louis." [^6]

For two years, from June 1842 until June 1844, a store daybook was kept, which listed all the transactions for each day, including the name of the item sold, the price, whether it was a cash or credit sale, and to whom the item was sold. A quick perusal of this record book, which is now in the Masonic Library at Cedar Rapids, Iowa, reveals not only a listing of the daily customers but also the wide variety of goods sold in a frontier community such as Nauvoo in the 1840s. For example, on 2 July 1842 Wilford Woodruff bought a spade for $1.25; Wilson Law, a whip for $1.50; Brigham Young, a pair of shoes for $2.25, and a cradle scythe for $1.50; W. W. Phelps, one yard of ribbon for $.13; N. K. Whitney, three dozen eggs for $.19; Porter Rockwell, six collars for $1.60; and Heber C. Kimball, a pair of boots for $4.50. [^7] Such well-stocked frontier stores were apparently not unusual at this time. The traveler Marryat noted that in two towns on Lake Erie there were stores better furnished and handsomer than any shops at Norwich in England.

A well-stocked store, a good location, a steady supply of customers, and a congenial proprietor would usually mean success in any store, but within months Joseph had turned his store over to others. A variety of reasons prevented him from making a success of his business, but the most obvious was the problem of extending credit. He just could not say no to a customer without money, and there were many such customers in the 1840s. But no one could extend credit as Joseph did without having difficulties in collecting. It was obvious that too many customers felt that a man of God should forgive his debtors. So to head off financial ruin, Joseph turned the store and the problem of debt collection over to others.

Credit was not just a problem for Joseph Smith and the other merchants of Nauvoo. During bad times such as the country was experiencing, merchants nationwide were excessively vulnerable. They could not survive without extending credit, and often extending credit was the reason they could not survive.

Although Joseph continued to meet upstairs over his store with Church and city councils and work in his office, the retail business was taken over by new owners Butler and Lewis. In the 20 December 1843 Neighbor they advertised it as the "One Price Store," stating, "as we wish to deal honestly with all men, we shall invariably have but one price," suggesting that they might have believed the multiprice system was part of the Prophet's problems. They were certainly wrong in implying that dishonesty was associated with a multiprice system: it was a widespread and necessary practice, acceptable to most people. Perhaps because of their new "one price system," Butler and Lewis were not in business very long either. In the 22 May 1844 Neighbor Hiram Kimball advertised palm leaf hats from that location: "FIFTY DOZEN will be sold, cheaper than any other House in the city, by Kimball, at Gen. Smith's Store."

In addition to the thirty-five general stores, there were many other types of business establishments in Nauvoo. One of the easiest and least expensive to open was the commission store, which required no capital for inventory. Such stores became a convenient outlet for home manufacturers in this city of hard-working Saints. In 1844 Wade and Company opened such a store on Parley Street, a block east of Main, even trading in such things as wagons, oxen, cows, sheep, furniture, houses, and land. The following year another commission store operated by Abel Lamb was advertising its location on Mulholland Street and offering to sell on consignment any article made in the city.

One of the establishments on the hill, Pratt and Snow's Dry Goods, tried to avoid the chief trade problem of most stores when they advertised in the 15 November 1843 Neighbor a large supply of goods received from Boston but noted, "No one need ask for credit nor waste breath in bantering on price." Offering neither credit nor bantering deprived the people of Nauvoo of a service that most stores never dared attempt. Unfortunately, we have no record of the success of this radical undertaking.

A business that ran a close second to general stores as a center of community interest and activity was the drug store. It was risky for any store in the nineteenth century to specialize too much, so we find drug stores, much like their offspring of today, selling a wide variety of items. In Jesse Haven's Drug Store on Mulholland Street, customers could find not only medicines but glass, school books, stationery, wines, putty, paints, and oils.

Probably the largest and best known of Nauvoo's five drug stores was the one owned by Windsor and Sylvia Lyon. Their business was so good that they were able to construct a large brick store in 1843 behind the original log one that they had moved into in 1840. The new store was renamed the Nauvoo Variety Store, and it became an important mercantile center of Nauvoo. Like other merchants, the Lyons were forced to resort to a barter system, evident in an ad they ran in the Neighbor on 4 September 1844: "A NEW lot of GOODS, per steamer OSPREY, just received, which, with the old Stock, will be sold cheap for wheat, and so forth. . . . WHEAT on old DEBTS will please the subscriber as much as prompt pay for present purchases."

With clothing no longer exclusively the product of home manufacturing, Nauvoo had its share of such retail establishments. There were at least eight tailor shops and nine dressmaking and millinery shops in Nauvoo as well as hat shops. One hat shop made the news in 1843 when it became the focus of one of the few crime stories in Nauvoo's short history. In July of that year, according to the 2 August Neighbor, a shop owned by J. H. Hoskinson on Granger Street was broken into and robbed of one dozen unfinished hats. The fifteen-dollar reward offered for information leading to the arrest of the thieves and recovery of the property suggests that the shop owner considered the hats quite valuable.

Boots and shoes were never exclusively a home product, but in Nauvoo, with so many cattle, tanneries, and English shoemaker immigrants, a thriving boot and shoe industry arose, with at least fourteen retail outlets established during Nauvoo's seven years. Competition was keen, if we can judge by the number who advertised in the local paper. M. Adams on Mulholland Street, J. Bair on the corner of Hyrum and Page Streets, Thomas Jaap opposite the Masonic Hall, W. W. Rust just north of the temple, and George Alley on Main Street all competed for customers through ads, often mentioning where they were from or the kind of leather they used. Jaap mentioned his Scottish background, making us wonder if Scotland had a good reputation for shoemakers. And Bair and Rust both boasted about the eastern leather they used, which makes us wonder why Bair was advertising for hides and skins from local farmers. We are also led to wonder why customers might consider eastern cowhide superior to Illinois cowhide.

In addition to these shoemakers, some of the general stores sold ready-made boots and shoes. In the 21 August 1844 Neighbor Kimball's store advertised "GENTS AND LADIES SHOES—A good assortment just received and for sale very low."

Nauvoo also had merchant specialists usually associated with much larger eastern cities. Gustavus Hills, who owned a watch shop near the temple, advertised in the 19 July 1843 Neighbor that he did electro-magnetic gilding and plating at his new brick watch shop. He also asked for old gold and silver in exchange. So much of it had been turned in as tithing that the Tithing Committee complained about the number of old gold watches they had been getting.

Photography entered the United States in 1839 in the form of daguerreotypes in a studio in Philadelphia. Within five years a similar studio was advertised in the 14 August 1844 Neighbor by L. R. Foster, who was "prepared to take Likenesses, by the Daguerreotype process, in the most beautiful style of the art, either plain or coloured, at his Daguerreotype Rooms, on Main Street, a few rods above Ivin's store." It is strange that with a daguerreotype studio in Nauvoo, there are so few identifiable pictures surviving from that city. Perhaps someplace, a treasure trove of old Nauvoo photos lie awaiting discovery, pictures that could give us an even clearer image of the Mormon city.

The image we have of such businesses as Scovil's Bakery and Confectionery Shop could not be much clearer, however. It has been restored to its original appearance in its original setting next to the Masonic Hall, just as it was when it was advertising in the Neighbor. Its specialty was marriage (wedding) cakes, which ranged in price, according to their ads, from one to twenty-five dollars. And this was when laborers and schoolteachers might average one dollar per day. A twenty-five dollar wedding cake in today's dollars would cost between seven and eight hundred dollars. It is difficult to imagine any Nauvoo resident who could have afforded such a cake in 1844, but the ad certainly would have caused people to talk.

As we consider the merchants of Nauvoo, it is difficult to separate them from the craftsmen and manufacturers. Many merchants crafted their own goods, and many craftsmen and manufacturers merchandised their own products. Potterers made their own wares and retailed them from their shops. Browning crafted his guns and sold them directly to customers. There were five horsebreeder and teamster companies in Nauvoo who could, for want of a better category, be considered merchants, as would the five livery stables and the eleven grist mills in the area. The three lumberyards did not manufacture, so they would also be considered merchants, as would the Nauvoo cleaning and pressing shop. If there was a merchants association, it is probable that both the phrenologist and the horticulturist were members.

Any city the size of Nauvoo had to have public accommodations, and the Mormons provided well for their numerous visitors. Many of the earliest visitors were put up at private homes; such hospitality is a tradition among Latter-day Saints even today. In the 2 August 1841 Times and Seasons, however, the Nauvoo Ferry Hotel advertised for "travelers and resident boarders," offering "commodious stabling on the premises." This hotel was soon surpassed in size and popularity by the Mansion House, built by the Prophet as a residence and as a public house to receive properly the numerous visitors from around the world who descended upon this "notorious city and Prophet." The Prophet himself was often their "bellboy." One Sunday afternoon in 1844 he recorded, "At 2 P.M. several passengers of the steamer Osprey from St. Louis and Quincy arrived, and put up at the Mansion. I helped to carry in their trunks, and chatted with them in the bar-room." [^8] The barroom, to the disappointment of such distinguished visitors as Josiah Quincy of Boston, was only a public sitting room, because the Mansion House served no alcoholic beverages. This room was only one of twenty-two rooms, which Joseph soon realized would not be large enough for the many visitors. When the city was abandoned, also abandoned was a most imposing but unfinished Nauvoo House, which would have been one of the largest public houses in the country had it been completed. It was one hundred and twenty feet square, made of stone, and would have been five stories high. This hotel was one of Joseph's dreams, and its remains are today another monument to the Prophet's vision and dreams cut short.

Empty houses are distressing to view, but sadder still is the sight of vacant businesses. A vacant house means only that the owners have passed away or moved on. A vacant business means miscarried plans and broken dreams. Anyone can take over a vacant house, but vacant businesses must await another dreamer, who may never come. And in Nauvoo the wait was eternal: the shops were shuttered, the wharves began their slow rotting away, the warehouses never again housed more than scurrying mice or barn swallows. The merchants might plan greater enterprises in the west and build more imposing businesses, but these would never quite compensate for the lost city that had offered such great promise—a city planned by a prophet of God, settled by a people of faith, and given life by merchants with dreams.

The Merchants

---
Notas:
[^1] Grund, Americans, p. 204.
[^2] Chevalier, Society, Manners and Politics in the United States, p. 287.
[^3] History of the Church, 6:xxv-xxvi.
[^4] Van Wagenen, Golden Age of Homespun, pp. 7-9.
[^5] Brooks, On the Mormon Frontier, p. 102.
[^6] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, pp. 49-55.
[^7] Brooks, On the Mormon Frontier, p. 51.
[^8] History of the Church, 5:386.
