George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

8

Crafts and Craftsmen

"It is as if all America were but one giant workshop, over the entrance of which there is the blazing inscription, 'No admission here except on business.' " [^1] If there was one characteristic of Americans that foreign visitors to this country in the early nineteenth century agreed on, it was the American impulse to be constantly at work creating new and better homes, forging ahead in their businesses, and striving to excel in every economic enterprise they turned to. A French traveler, Michael Chevalier, observed, "If one hundred Americans were going to be shot, they would contend for the priority, so strong is their habit of competition." [^2] Such observations were not always compliments, as Chevalier's remark suggests, but even he was forced to acknowledge the rewards that seemed to follow the propensity to be constantly at work. He admitted that the American mechanic was a better workman than the European and prospered more as a result, dressing and eating as did the wealthiest of his fellow citizens.

If all America was "one giant workshop," Nauvoo was its boiler room. Some of the older established towns had their leisure class, those who had been successful in business or industry and had retired to live comfortably without further labor. Not so in Nauvoo. Not by chance had the symbol of Mormonism become the beehive. In fact, the Saints' very industriousness and resulting prosperity were partially responsible for the Missouri persecutions. Most of the Saints were from antislavery, work ethic-oriented New England stock and the laboring classes of England. Their hard work and prosperity set them apart and created envy and suspicion in the Missourians, many of whom hailed from the southern states.

The same social and economic antagonism surfaced again among the western Illinois "old settlers," who had emigrated from the same slave-holding regions of the country as the Missourians. These Illinoisans envied not only the personal prosperity of the Saints but also the prosperity of their city, which threatened to supplant some of the older, established population centers in western Illinois. When the repeal of the Nauvoo Charter was being considered before the Illinois state legislature in 1845, the non-Mormon Mr. Backenstos told that body: "Town rivalry had also something to do with this opposition to Nauvoo. While Warsaw was on the decline, Nauvoo was rapidly increasing in wealth and population." [^3]

But in 1839 the Saints did not foresee the results of their economic success. They had a city to build, businesses to open, and crafts to establish—and establish them they did.

Most of the settlers in Nauvoo tended to follow their former trades or crafts. To get an accurate picture of the crafts of Nauvoo, it would be beneficial to identify the major American occupations during the years 1839 through 1846. This information is not available, however, but occupational information is available from the 1850s. The 1855 national census was the first in which occupations were listed. By examining the occupations reported in that census from a typical frontier county, we can approximate the earlier occupations of the Saints in Nauvoo. Cattaraugus County, for example, was a rural county in New York, where the Church was organized and where many of the early Saints lived. In 1855 in Cattaraugus County there were 9,198 adult males, who were employed as follows:

Farmers 6,855 Laborers 643 Carpenters 267 Lumbermen 211 Sawyers 131 Blacksmiths 160 Joiners 59 Tailors 112 Tanners 55 Coopers 52 Millwrights 39 Shingleshavers 32

The remaining 538 men were divided among the rest of the 374 occupations listed in this census. [^4] If our approximation is correct, then almost three-fourths of the adult males in Nauvoo were engaged in agriculture. That makes it easy to understand why Nauvoo, although a metropolis by frontier standards, was still a "farming community."

With the exception of professional people and tradesmen whose work is discussed in other chapters, most of the occupations fall comfortably into the category of crafts, which did not arise in immediate response to the law of supply and demand. Raising food, building homes, administering to the sick, or selling goods at retail responded readily to such a law, but craft products might just as easily be provided by distant makers, creating a dependence on far-off suppliers. Contemporary observers complained that American craftsmanship was decaying in the nineteenth century. Craft trades, they noted, had less attraction then than to previous generations because of competition with articles made more cheaply in Europe.

The increasing deficiency of small crafts, however, was certainly more critical to the Saints than to the rest of the country. A people surrounded with as many enemies as the Mormons thoroughly understood the value of self-sufficiency. The Saints therefore encouraged craft industries to provide as many essential domestic items as possible.

One of the first things the Nauvoo city council did was to restrict the sale within the city of imported goods. Hawkers and pedlars had to obtain costly licenses to sell any goods not produced in the city, except food. The Nauvoo Neighbor of 2 October 1844 also encouraged the public to attend a series of lectures dealing with the manufacturing of items made in Nauvoo and intended for export by "workmen in wood brass, iron, steel, stone, silver, gold, precious stones, wool, cotton, silk, and every other commodity that blissifies or happifies life."

Another encouragement to domestic manufacturing was the opening of commission stores in the city. In 1845 Able Lamb advertised a consignment store, offering such locally produced goods as boots and shoes, hats, bonnets, stockings, socks, gloves, cabinetware, chairs, hoes, pitchforks, and so on.

A project offering great potential for developing the industries of Nauvoo was begun under the supervision of John Taylor. A Trades Union was formed, having for its object the establishment of industries that would produce everything needed by the citizens of Nauvoo, as far as possible, with a surplus left over for export. A variety of projects was suggested including plans for a number of hand and power looms and factories to house them. Wool and cotton for these looms were actually contracted for, and carding machines were fitted up. The Nauvoo Coach and Carriage Manufacturing Association, organized in December 1844 by the Trades Union, began operations shortly thereafter. The Union also planned another concern to turn out weapons for the Nauvoo Legion.

In addition to making the Saints more self-sufficient, another trade union objective was to provide full employment. In 1843 the Boot and Shoe Makers Association held weekly meetings to discuss ways to compete with eastern makers and assure employment for about two hundred workers in Nauvoo. The only thing lacking, they believed, was the capital to purchase large quantities of material at eastern prices.

About this time a new type of union was being discussed in Nauvoo. City craftsmen were calling for a "workers' " trade union, even inserting in the local paper such slogans as this one in the 13 September 1843 Neighbor:

Union walls are high and grand, Union walls if ably manned, Union walls are made to stand Against the strongest foe.

Although American cordwainers had established the first countrywide workers' trade union seven years before this, many citizens were frightened that such union talk would mean higher prices. Nevertheless, within two years steps were taken to organize most of Nauvoo's workers into labor unions. Early in 1845 the newspaper announced a series of meetings at Gully's Store for the purpose of organizing the various trades into unions. Although the Saints' stay in Nauvoo was drawing rapidly to a close, notices in the paper in the months following these meetings indicate that several of the trades actually did organize.

There was good reason to make them so, but wages were not the major concern of the Nauvoo craft guilds. During the depression that lasted from 1837 into the early 1840s, a minimum of twelve hours' labor a day for six days a week at famine wages was the standard practice in the United States. The workers' aristocracy of shoemakers, hatmakers, and printers might earn as much as six dollars a week, but laborers could not hope to earn even four dollars a week. Nauvoo and most of frontier Illinois operated mostly on a barter basis at this time, so a major concern to workers was the length of the work day. The national labor movement was striving to shorten the work day from the prevalent twelve or thirteen to ten hours. In 1840 President Van Buren did announce a ten-hour work day for federal employees, but this announcement probably had little if any influence on working hours in Nauvoo.

Probably more effective than the unions in providing greater worker prosperity would have been the Nauvoo Agricultural and Manufacturing Association—if it had been permitted to serve its intended purpose. Incorporated on 27 February 1841 as a joint-stock corporation by the state legislature, it was intended to raise money through the sale of stock to promote agriculture and manufacturing in Nauvoo. It did raise some money and started building a large pottery factory. Construction came to a halt, however, and the factory was left incomplete when members of the state legislature introduced bills to repeal the charter. From that point on, people feared putting money into a corporation that the enemies of the Church might be able to destroy at any time.

Because of such circumstances, major industry never got off the ground during Nauvoo's seven short years, although a great deal of manufacturing was established, including several mills, both water and steam driven. Water mills were scattered along the river and after severe rainstorms, had to be closed because of high water. News articles announcing the openings of these mills reveal types and locations. An article in the 8 October 1842 Nauvoo Wasp reported, "Newel Knight has recently put into operation a current, water grist mill on the Mississippi just below Nauvoo House." His was only one of several flour mills in the city, all of which required inspection by the city board of health.

In spite of the plentiful supply of water power, some of the Nauvoo industrialists turned to steam, a new source of power. In 1838 there were three thousand steam engines in the United States, with almost two-thirds of them in factories. Nauvoo was quick to adopt this form of power. An item in the 11 June 1842 Wasp read, "The Messrs. Law have just raised the frame of a large . . . steam flowering and saw mill. This with the Temple, Nauvoo House and about five hundred for dwellings, now in progress, keeps a goodly number of people in motion." Apparently the Law steam mill was more than just a grist mill and saw mill, because the following year in the 24 May Neighbor, it was advertised as a factory, offering for sale "spinning wheels . . . swifts, looms . . . bed stead posts, table legs, wooden bowls, and columns . . . carriage, cart and wagon wheels," and the proprietors were willing to "accept in payment almost any thing to eat or wear." The goods were marketed by Sidney Roberts, opposite the Printing Office.

Such a factory would have been an exciting place for Nauvoo citizens to visit. A giant engine was the main source of power. Leather belts ran from the power source to drive such machinery as lathes, presses, mill wheels, and so forth, located in other parts of the building. These leather belts were one of the reasons for the growing demand for buffalo hides at this time.

The various steam mills in Nauvoo had a voracious appetite for fuel, so it was welcome news when the 17 July 1843 Neighbor announced the finding of a rich vein of stone coal some sixty to one hundred miles north of Nauvoo. Measures were taken to transport a quantity by water to the city "for the use of the steam mill, black smiths, and such citizens as prefer it for fuel."

A large number of crafts became established in Nauvoo, but only a limited number were powered by the river itself because of the cost of building the essential equipment. Newel Knight's mill, for example, required the construction of a wing dam out into the river to channel the water into the mill.

The Des Moines Rapids, which fronted Nauvoo, had great potential as a source of power, but they were also an impediment to river traffic. This problem prompted a suggestion by John C. Bennett in 1841 to construct a ship canal across the peninsula, following the route of Main Street. This canal would not only provide a way for ships to avoid the rapids but would act as a huge millrace through the heart of the city for the operation of all kinds of machinery. A survey for the canal, which was to run right down the middle of Main Street, was made, but the entire scheme dropped when it was discovered that a solid bed of limestone blocked the north end of the cut. Instead, the limestone bed became the quarry for the temple.

With the canal idea dead, attention centered on damming part of the river itself. A power company was organized to raise money to build a dam from a point below the Nauvoo House to an island between Nauvoo and Montrose. From the island, another dam would be extended north to a sandbar, creating a basin with a fall of three feet to power equipment. The river west of the island would still be open for navigation. It was estimated that there would be enough room on the dam for fifty-three wheels, opening Nauvoo to manufacturing on a huge scale. Early in 1845 construction actually began, with one company of men cutting stone from the quarry and another group in Wisconsin cutting timber for the piers. Work was temporarily halted after only three weeks. In September, Brigham Young announced the future evacuation of the city, halting the project permanently.

Without a major source of power, manufacturing in Nauvoo was limited to small craft shops. Probably one of the most impressive of these small manufacturers was the iron foundry. One day in January 1846, Chief-of-Police Stout noted in his diary, "Went to Foundry and saw them casting which was the first time I ever saw this operation." [^5] Other city foundries manufactured farm tools and machinery parts, but the one that Stout visited was probably the Nauvoo Foundry. It was operated by Hiram Kimball, who constantly advertised for stone coal and old castings in exchange for new.

If a foundry was an impressive metal manufacturer, the town blacksmithies were more common and even more colorful. The best known was the one operated by the five Webb brothers. In the 9 August 1843 Neighbor Edwin Webb, the senior partner, advertised "that he has recently commenced the Blacksmithing business in his stone shop."

There were other metal workers in Nauvoo. A shop housing three tinners stood on the corner of Young and Mulholland streets. There were several silversmiths, including H. Patrick, who, in the 12 March 1845 Neighbor advertised the continuous manufacture of "rings, broaches, pins, seals, keys, bracelets, chains, and various other ornaments too numerous to mention." Edward Hunter, one of Nauvoo's iron mongers, announced in the 29 November 1843 Neighbor a "large assortment of Iron, Steel, Rasps, and Nails of various descriptions. Also a large assortment of Holloware consisting of vats, Kettles, Pans, Ovens, &.c. &.c." He advertised these as made at his manufactory and sold at his store near the corner of Partridge and Knight streets. There were, in fact, enough metal workers in Nauvoo to organize a workers association in 1845 under the name of Black, White, and Gun Smith Association.

Woodworkers were apparently equally numerous. The coopers alone had enough members to form a coopers' association, headquartered between Hyde and Partridge streets. In one issue of the paper they advertised to buy one hundred thousand barrel staves at top prices. There were also several cabinet and furniture shops. Cooledge and Hatfield were the best known, advertising in the 6 December 1843 Neighbor plain and ornamental furniture, "window sash, doors and all other kinds of wood work for country produce or cash" from a store on Parley Street.

One Mormon journal described what was probably a typical and casual manner of starting a craft business in Nauvoo. Dated 1842, the entry reads:

"[January] 15th. We bought a log house for a shop, and was very busy last week moving it on to a half acre lot that we bought of Jacob Myers. We raised it today—Weather very fine.

"22nd. We have built our chimney and got our shop nearly plastered. . . .

"[February] 5th. [Went] to Quincy today. We got some turning tools amounting to $1.75. . . .

"11th. We commenced getting out chair timber-rounds etc. . . .

"14. We got Jacob Myers to make our lathe wheel for a foot lathe. We got it started today. I turned two rolling pins.

"18th. I put together the first kitchen chair since I left Greenwood, N.Y. . . .

"[February] 15 [1843]. . . . We sold the common kitchen chair painted, without bottoms for fifty cents apiece—bottomed seventy five—Bent backs painted, varnished and hickory bark bottoms we sold at $1.25 apiece. These were very nice durable chairs." [^6]

The craft with perhaps the greatest potential because of the presence of at least two hundred members, mostly converts from England, was that of boot and shoemaking. Of constant concern throughout the life of Nauvoo was the building up of this craft to provide work for all practitioners. The Neighbor of 13 September 1843 called attention to the great quantities of hides shipped out of Nauvoo annually while forty to fifty thousand dollars worth of shoes were shipped in. To keep the money in the city, the item appealed to the surrounding farmers to sell their hides not to eastern merchants but to tanners in Nauvoo and pleaded with retailers to buy from the local shoemakers rather than import their shoes.

We have no record of the proportion of locally manufactured boots and shoes sold in Nauvoo and the number exported, but undoubtedly some of the products left the city because the business was quite extensive. Boot and shoe outlets on Mulholland Street employed several people. In 1842 a shop on Parley Street advertised for more hides and skins, and the next year, in the 29 November 1843 Neighbor, for three or four shoemakers. A boot and shoe manufacturer on Main Street advertised such Nauvoo-produced footwear as men's kips, mocks, and pumps and women's gater boots, Jeffersons, and turn corners. Prices for local footwear ranged from one dollar for a pair of slippers to five dollars and a half for a pair of fine men's boots.

Two or three tanneries supplied the leather, and they were not backyard operations. One owner who decided to rent out his tannery described it in the 14 January 1843 Wasp as a "small" tan yard and house with tanning tools and currying tools, a good patent barkmill, and good pumps. It included thirteen vats (ten indoors), all located on an acre lot in the best part of town. The following year another tannery advertised for five thousand cow hides and five thousand calf skins plus an equal number to tan on shares. It would have required a sizable tannery to handle that many hides.

Complementing the footwear business was a large clothing and cloth manufacturing enterprise. The August 1842 Millennial Star encouraged English weavers to migrate to Nauvoo to help supply the needs of the city: "Sheep are increasing here, and of course the wool will too." The following year the Wasp notified the public of a weaving business established on Durphy Street, and two years later the Neighbor announced the arrival of cotton and several bales of leather from Mississippi for the benefit of the spinning jennies and looms in the "Nauvoo Manufactory." In that same year the Tailors' Association announced the opening of two more tailor shops on Mulholland and Main streets. The notice was signed by eleven tailors.

Nauvoo was blessed with a rich supply of clay, valuable for the making of bricks. One of the largest manufacturing enterprises in the city was brickmaking, so essential in the building industry and responsible for the bricks of many of Nauvoo's fine brick homes. According to the 18 June 1845 Neighbor, at least half a dozen yards were then capable of turning out four million bricks in one summer season.

The potters of Nauvoo were often supplied with their clay by the numerous brickmakers in the city, who selected for them clay that was too tenacious, or "fat," for their own purpose. Pottery shops, including those owned by J. Grocott or Martin and Fuller, advertised such products as plates, bowls, pitchers, milkpans, churns, pie dishes, stove tubes, and chimney tops. Nevertheless, the several pottery shops never quite developed into the large manufacturing concerns that the city fathers, recognizing their potential, had envisioned.

Associated with the building industry were several lime kilns built at the upper end of Main Street near the quarry, making use of the limestone that underlay that whole area of town. The lime was essential to the plaster and whitewash found in homes throughout Nauvoo.

An interesting craft usually associated with such seaboard cities as Boston was ropemaking. Rope may be made of almost any fibrous vegetable substance that is flexible and strong, from bamboo to cotton to grasses to bark. In the United States, flax and hemp were most commonly used, and in Nauvoo enough hemp was grown to supply two or three rope-making businesses, or ropewalks. City residents were pleased to read in the Wasp of 8 October 1842: "Yesterday a rope was manufactured from the Messrs. Law hemp, in about forty minutes—all the produce of Nauvoo." The following year in the 3 May Neighbor came the announcement of another ropewalk commenced by Howard Egan, who intended to manufacture "Cordage of every description: bed cords, clothes lines, chalk lines &c., which he will sell at St. Louis prices." Located in long sheds up to one quarter mile in length, ropewalks such as Egan's were located in open fields and employed several people. In 1845 this same ropewalk advertised for three or four more workers to break hemp.

Numerous smaller craft shops were scattered about the city, including a soap manufactory on Mulholland Street operated by Abel Lamb, a comb factory on the corner of Young and Rich Streets run by Joseph Hammar, and a saleratus manufactory. Saleratus was made from pearl ash and was used in bread making. It was later replaced by baking powders.

Only three years before Nauvoo was established a patent was issued to a Mr. Phillips of Springfield, Massachusetts, for the perfection of the "friction match." Taking advantage of this useful novelty, Alex Neibaur started the Nauvoo Match Factory on the corner of Water and Durfree streets. It was one of the few Nauvoo manufactured products that excited the local editor enough to comment in the 5 February 1845 Neighbor, "Whether they be called percussion, touch, friction, reaction or locofoco," Nauvoo matches "catch fire almost as quick as lightning."

Skilled trades in Nauvoo included clock and watch making, portrait painting, and daguerreotype making. There were at least three portrait painters in Nauvoo in 1845, who apparently worked in cooperation with a local lithographer. The Neighbor mentioned a Mr. Major and Mr. Van Sickle, and Chief-of-Police Hosea Stout mentioned a third in his diary in July 1845: "Went to see Br. Campbell and engraver & Br Maudsley Portrait Painter, to have the likeness of myself & wife taken and engraved on stone, or in other words have a Stone cut of our likeness taken to be Lithographed." [^7]

Of all the numerous crafts in Nauvoo, one especially proved indispensable to the Saints in that soon-to-be-abandoned city. An early allusion to the craft of carriage making was recorded in Joseph Smith's journal on 11 May 1843: "Eight A.M., went to see the new carriage made by Thomas Moore, which was ready for traveling. Emma went to Quincy in the new carriage. I rode out as far as the prairie." [^8]

Within the next two years a full-fledged carriage-making industry had become established in the city. In 1845 the Neighbor carried ads for the Nauvoo Coach and Carriage Manufactory, located on Water Street opposite the Prophet's Red Brick Store. The products offered were coaches, cabs, chariotees, chaises, buggies, hearses, trotting wagons, lumber wagons, ox and horse carts, drays, hand carts, wheel barrows, ploughs, scythe snaths, and rakes. In May of that year the Coach and Carriage Manufactory announced its production for the previous two months. The company proudly reported in the 21 May 1845 Neighbor that it had sold thirty spinning wheels, six wagons and carriages, more than six hundred scythe snaths, almost five hundred patent wheel heads, four dozen grain cradles, sixteen dozen rakes, and numerous ploughs, wheelbarrows, and handcarts. Apparently business continued to improve, because in August the firm advertised for fifteen or twenty more workers.

Then in September it was announced that Nauvoo would be abandoned the following spring. This announcement meant that numerous wagons were needed to transport the entire population of the city. The coach and carriage company could supply only a small fraction of the necessary vehicles. Within two weeks, "coach and carriage" shops were established all over the city. In that same two weeks, the entire city was organized into emigrant companies, and each company established its own wagon shop by closing unessential crafts and trades and converting their shops or buildings. A report issued around Thanksgiving 1845 "identified 1,508 wagons ready to leave and 1,892 others under construction." [^9]

No city in history had ever turned to the manufacture of a single product with such fervor or for more compelling reasons. The boot and shoe makers became harness makers, the textile workers turned to the making of wagon covers and tents, the iron mongers and metalsmiths joined in the manufacture of wagon hardware, and the carpenters and coopers converted their shops to the manufacture of wagon bodies. On some future day, somewhere in the west, the teacher could return to her desk and the goldsmith to his bench. The tailors and bonnet makers could return again to their broadcloth and straw instead of sailcloth and canvas, and the cobbler would take up his shoemaking tools. But for now, the entire city was united in one endeavor, to build wagons to remove their families and the few possessions they could carry with them from the burning and looting hands of the Illinois mobs.

Crafts and Craftsmen

---
Notas:
[^1] Trollope, Domestic Manners of the Americans, p. 162.
[^2] P. Smith, As a City upon a Hill, p. 129.
[^3] History of the Church, 5:282.
[^4] Halford, Nauvoo—the City Beautiful, p. 227.
[^5] History of the Church, 7:365.
[^6] Ellsworth, "Mobocracy and the Rule of Law," pp. 72-73.
[^7] Hollon, Frontier Violence, Another Look, p. 25.
[^8] Ford, History of Illinois, 2:32-34.
[^9] History of the Church, 5:283, 311-16, 380.
