George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

9

The Law and Lawyers

Away from the large eastern cities, "the contempt of law is greater than I can venture to state. . . . trespass, assault, robbery, nay, even murder, are often committed without the slightest attempt at legal interference." [^1] This observation by the visiting Mrs. Trollope may have been overstated for the nation as a whole, but it contained more than just a trace of truth in describing the American frontier. Besides preserving order in the lawless and demoralizing conditions of the Illinois frontier, the law in Nauvoo had other concerns. The first concern of law in American frontier towns was rehabilitation, not punishment. "The town," one historian wrote, "punished its offenders as a father punishes his children, in sorrow and love." [^2]

Although this generalization could be disputed, it does seem to be a creditable commentary about law in Nauvoo. The mayor, Joseph Smith himself, offers a refreshing insight by describing an incident that would have been tolerated, if not actually encouraged, in any town other than Nauvoo: "While the Court was in session, I saw two boys fighting in the street, near Mills' Tavern. I left the business of the court, ran over immediately, caught one of the boys (who had begun the fight with clubs,) and then the other; and, after giving them proper instruction, I gave the bystanders a lecture for not interfering in such cases." [^3] In most frontier towns, such incidents were common demonstrations of "manhood" for the participants and entertainment for the onlookers. The Prophet, however, considered his people unique, and their religion, he was determined, was to be a way of life.

Joseph Smith was concerned about his people and interceded if he thought he might set young people back on the right track. He had a progressive sense of law and justice, as he demonstrated in the case of two youths arrested by the county sheriff for the destruction of some farm property. When a Carthage judge sentenced them to six months in jail and fined them fifty dollars, the boys' father appealed to the Prophet, who went to see the judge. On being told the boys had to be taught a lesson, Joseph replied that jail was not the proper punishment—it could easily turn them into criminals. When the judge asked him what he would do, the Prophet suggested they be released in his custody and he would put them to work on Nauvoo's streets at wages of fifty cents a day to be used for reimbursing the farmer for his damaged property. That procedure would, at the same time, save the county the cost of housing the boys in jail. The record indicates the boys learned well their lesson, and perhaps the Carthage judge did also.

Because of the pervasive influence of the Church, Nauvoo law was unique among American cities in another way. For example, the first court trials in Nauvoo were held by the Church, which continued to hold trials even after a municipal court was established. For lesser offenses, such as trespassing or slander, the case was tried before the ward bishop. More serious offenses were tried before the stake or the general Church authorities. In all cases, the supreme authority was the Prophet, and given his acute sense of justice, this arrangement was highly satisfactory to the people.

In practice, such courts were efficient, fair, and inexpensive to operate. The minor offenses, which made up a majority of the cases, were usually informally tried in the bishop's parlor or the local tavern or in the shop or field in which one of the litigants was working. Typical of such cases was that of Benjamin Hoyt, who was called before a bishop's court. He was ordered by the bishop to cease calling certain characters witches and wizards and to cease working the divining board. He appealed his case to the high council, but the bishop's decision was upheld. [^4]

The use of Church courts in place of or in addition to municipal courts had advantages other than their efficiency and the saving of tax money. The emphasis in such courts, then as now, was on forgiveness and restitution, done as much as possible in a spirit of love and to encourage repentance. Such methods were much more effective in preventing the recurrence of problems. To Church members, disfellowshipping or excommunication was usually a greater deterrent to misbehavior than municipal court fines. Merely the threat of such action would often extinguish the problem. Joseph Young, president of the Quorum of Seventy, warned his quorum members that if he "knew of a man belonging to these quorums stealing he would be cut off the church and published in the Neighbor." [^5]

In a more general way, however, Nauvoo law was not unique. On the frontier, the emphasis of law was still on the protection of the community. One noted authority on the history of American violence believed that "the period of the 1830s, 1840s and 1850s may have been the era of the greatest urban violence America has ever experienced." [^6] Another authority concluded that from 1830 through the 1850s, "mob violence not only increased markedly but also became a feature of American life—not urban life, or southern life, or western life—but American life." [^7]

Thomas Ford, governor of Illinois at the time of the assassination of the Smith brothers and the Mormon exodus, said about the large criminal elements in northern Illinois: "It was curious to witness this change of character with the change of position, in emerging from a government of strict laws [back east] to one of comparative anarchy." [^8] If, during such a violent American era, Governor Ford considered "every neighborhood" in a large part of his own state to be so lawless, it appears that Nauvoo could not have been established at a worse time or in a worse place, if the Mormons expected to live at peace with their neighbors. The violent nature of the entire country in general, and in frontier Illinois specifically, did however, permit the Mormon capital to demonstrate another of its unique characteristics.

A typical sampling of court cases and news articles in Nauvoo reveals a crime problem of such a mild nature that most American communities the size of Nauvoo could have looked to that city with genuine envy. The following cases are typical of the ones that Joseph Smith encountered in the mayor's court in 1843. On 21 February he tried two boys on a charge of stealing books from A. Milliken. On 25 March he issued a writ for the arrest of A. Fields for disorderly conduct. Fields was brought in drunk and put in irons until he sobered up. Two days later the Prophet opened court to try Fields for drunkenness and abusing his wife and fined him ten dollars and costs. And on 3 May on complaint of William Law, A. Gay was tried "for unbecoming language and refusing to leave the store when told to." He was fined five dollars and costs. [^9]

These cases, while illustrating the comparably milder nature of lawlessness in Nauvoo, at the same time demonstrate a characteristic the city courts had in common with their counterparts in other American cities. This feature was noted by the French traveler Chevalier: "The American law is very sparing of bodily punishments for simple misdemeanours, but it makes very free use of fines." [^10]

But what about major crimes in Nauvoo? According to the anti-Mormon press, which included most newspapers around the country, Nauvoo was a den of thieves and the breeding ground for every type of crime on the northwestern frontier. A typical charge is found in the Quincy Whig in October 1843, wherein the editor accused the Mormons in Nauvoo of screening horse thieves. Typical also of such accusations was the editor's refusal to identify the source of the information or the individuals involved. In reality, however, the Mormon inhabitants were generally law-abiding; lawless non-Mormons found the Saints a convenient scapegoat.

A flourishing illegal practice on the Illinois frontier was counterfeiting United States coinage and various bank currencies. Although anti-Mormons accused Church members of this crime, and searches were made by law officers visiting Nauvoo, no Mormon was ever convicted of counterfeiting. Such crimes did not cease with the exodus of the Saints, as many of their enemies had predicted. An old gentleman, a non-Mormon, related to historian Cecil McGavin how, as a young orphan, he had lived with his uncle in Nauvoo. His uncle was a skilled penman who was employed as an engraver for a ring of counterfeiters who had their press hidden in the city. It was amusing, he related, to watch the Mormons receive all the blame for their counterfeited notes. [^11]

Nauvoo citizens, incensed by false accounts throughout Illinois charging the Saints with all types of crimes, met together and drew up a list of the false charges, refuted them with testimony of leading citizens, and sent it out to be published to the country. They cited instances of their enemies selling personal property and then reporting it stolen by the Mormons, robbing bee yards and leaving the hives at Mormon doors, employing friends to "steal" saddles and bridles for which they might blame the Latter-day Saints. There is little evidence, however, that such counter-offenses by the Mormons changed anti-Mormon sentiment in their favor to any appreciable degree.

Efforts were made by Nauvoo's leaders throughout the city's existence to stamp out any form of criminal activity, no matter how mild, so that there would be nothing to fuel the fires of anti-Mormonism. Ads in the local newspapers as early as 1840 warned citizens that Nauvoo was infested with a gang of thieves. One ad in the 15 December 1840 Times and Seasons named four men as notorious thieves whom the public should be on guard against.

Such ads did not solve the problem for the Mormon leaders. All the bad publicity the anti-Mormons gave Nauvoo made it appear a haven for any criminal looking for ready-made "scapegoats." Consequently, two years later the city authorities still found it necessary to warn the citizens through newspaper ads such as one in the Nauvoo Wasp of 30 April 1842 about the criminal elements "prowling our streets by night and by day."

By 1845 the city had grown so large that the proportion of non-Mormons in Nauvoo, estimated at ten percent, meant there were about two thousand citizens who did not feel bound by Church doctrines, standards, or decrees. Although many of them did live the standards of their Mormon neighbors, others saw no reason they should live differently from how they would have lived in any other frontier community. The problem would undoubtedly have been minor if the attention of the entire nation had not been focused on every rumor of wrongdoing that emanated from the Mormon city. But as it was, Church leaders constantly warned their people about behavior that would have been accepted as normal in any other town on the frontier. In 1845, Brigham Young recorded in his journal: "I went to the stand and addressed the saints on the necessity of having more order and putting down iniquity, and exhorted the brethren to rise up en masse, and put down the thieving, swearing, gambling, bogus-making, retailing spirituous liquors, bad houses, and all abominations practiced in our midst by our enemies." [^12] He then rebuked the city authorities for their "want of energy in the discharge of their duty." Apparently stung by this rebuke, a week later the city council resolved to ferret out and bring to justice all criminals in and about Nauvoo. To demonstrate their resolve, they authorized the mayor to enlarge the police department to a number "not exceeding five hundred." Many of the policemen were Church elders who patrolled the streets part time. Nauvoo was probably the best patrolled and consequently most law-abiding city in the country.

Under ordinary circumstances such drastic action by a city council would seem to be an overreaction to relatively minor problems, but the residents appear to have recognized and appreciated the good order of their town. Soon after she arrived in Nauvoo, Ann Pitchforth wrote to her relatives back in England her impression of the Mormon Zion: "There is universal love among them. They are all kind to one another and very few houses indeed, have either locks or bolts. All leave everything outside their houses with the greatest of safety." [^13]

Efforts by the authorities to create a high degree of law and order in Nauvoo apparently succeeded to some degree. On 16 December 1843 a committee was appointed to select land upon which to erect a city prison, but the plan was never carried out. The following year, a visitor to Nauvoo, Edwin De Leon, reported that in the two weeks he spent in Nauvoo, he heard of no crime or of a police report of any crime. He stated he saw no pauperism because laws prevented it and because the Relief Society helped to control pauperism and immorality generally. [^14] The 5 February 1845 Nauvoo Neighbor published the jail statistics for the state of Illinois, leaving unsaid what the average Nauvoo citizen firmly believed about the great contrast between criminal statistics in Nauvoo and those of the state in general. Between January and October 1844, more than four thousand persons had been incarcerated, including some seven hundred women. The most frequent offenses were intemperance, larceny, debt, and assault.

About this time the chief magistrate of Illinois, after two visits to Nauvoo to investigate charges of promiscuous stealing, reported to the state legislature that the proportion of thefts in Nauvoo was not as great as that of St. Louis or any other western city. Mr. Backenstos, former clerk of the circuit court of Hancock County, reported to the Illinois state legislature in 1845 that the city of Nauvoo, with a population of twelve to fourteen thousand, did not average a total of twenty cases a year of every description of crime. Two months later in the 7 May 1845 Neighbor, the editor, referring to the repeal of the city charter by the state legislature, boasted, "A wonder—about 20,000 inhabitants live week after week in Nauvoo, without a charter, and no lawsuits. Ain't that a wonder?"

Aside from continual public reminders by Church leaders to the people to uphold moral codes, the city ordinances themselves were certainly a factor in establishing order in Nauvoo. They were strict, they were numerous, and they were enforced. One ordinance, according to the 15 December 1841 Times and Seasons, forbade anyone to exhibit "any curiosities of nature or art, not inconsistent with decency, or contrary to good morals" without first obtaining a license. Another ordinance prohibited gaming houses, improper noises or disturbances, abusive or threatening language in public, and public quarreling or fighting. The few closely controlled taverns could not sell liquor, and brothels were strictly forbidden. In fact, one charge by anti-Mormons was that the Saints would not allow a gentile resident "freedom to engage in his accustomed vices," [^15] and yet the Mormons were accused by these same enemies of practicing such vices in Nauvoo.

The penalties for violations of city laws were severe. Keeping a brothel or house of ill fame was punishable by a fine of up to twenty-five hundred dollars and imprisonment for six months. Anyone frequenting such a house could be fined up to five hundred dollars. There was even a heavy fine and imprisonment for proof of adultery or fornication. This latter prohibition was on the statute books of most municipalities in the nineteenth century but was seldom enforced. In Nauvoo the church courts were best able to discourage these actions and usually did so with the threat of excommunication.

The problem of unsavory characters entering Nauvoo for questionable reasons became more acute as time went on. Although the city had remained relatively crime free during its first six years, while it had its own charter and ran its own courts, the situation changed in 1845. From the summer of that year until their departure, Nauvoo's Saints were without municipal government because the city charter had been repealed. As a result, lawless persons began to converge on Nauvoo in unusually large numbers, believing that without a government, the Mormons could do little to control them.

In desperation, an informal defense was created by Church leaders. Troops of young boys were assigned to surround a stranger suspected of criminal or anti-Mormon activity, closely following him wherever he went, whistling and whittling on sticks of wood. Being too small to fight individually and too many to be scared away, the "whistling and whittling brigade" forced many undesirable characters out of Nauvoo. Oliver Huntington recalled in his journal that as a teenager in Nauvoo he "helped whittle doctor Charle of Warsaw out of town. [He was taking notes for the anti-Mormon paper, the Warsaw Signal.] He was a real Mormon eater." [^16] A Philadelphia newspaper informed its readers about the "whistling and whittling" brigade, calling it a "new species of Lynch law" that was less cruel but just as effective in ridding that Illinois city of obnoxious persons.

As grave as most forms of lawlessness were to the Saints, it is difficult to believe that the citizens of Nauvoo failed to see the humor in certain incidents. A notice in the 1 March 1841 Times and Seasons declared that "on Friday evening, the 19th inst. some evil disposed person entered the yard of J. M. Henderson and shamefully disfigured his horse by shearing off his mane and tail." The owner offered a ten-dollar reward for the arrest of those engaged in the "naggardly act."

Another amusing incident involved the Prophet Joseph. As mayor, he had on occasion fined those guilty of assault in the city. He recorded in his journal that he by chance encountered and had a few unpleasant words with the tax collector, who called Joseph a liar and picked up a stone to throw at him. Joseph struck him two or three times in self-defense. Immediately, the Prophet requested a witness, Daniel Wells, to impose a fine and he would pay it. Wells refused, so the Prophet rode down to Alderman Whitney, stated the circumstances, and paid the fine that Whitney reluctantly imposed. [^17]

Such an incident today would have been most profitable for at least two law firms, but law was not a profitable profession in Nauvoo, in spite of the fact that at its peak the city "boasted" nine law firms. [^18] The practice of law was not as unrewarding in New York, for example, where a beginning lawyer in the 1840s could readily make three thousand dollars annually, rising to as much as ten thousand. More famous attorneys might make five thousand dollars in a single case. Many Nauvoo attorneys, on the other hand, were forced to change professions or supplement their incomes because money was scarce on the frontier, the Church discouraged civil suits between members, the crime rate was uniquely low, and the Church leaders publicly expressed low opinions of lawyers.

As a result, practicing attorneys in Nauvoo continually resorted to placing ads in the local newspapers. In the Wasp of 12 November 1842 George P. Stiles offered to "attend to all business entrusted to his care" at his office on the corner of Knight and Wells streets, a "few rods North of the Temple." Attorney O. C. Skinner, with his office in the Masonic Hall, offered in the 31 December 1842 Wasp "several references including Stephen A. Douglas of Springfield." After the Prophet Joseph's death, his office was rented out to attorney A. W. Babbitt. Joseph's brother Hyrum, a bitter critic of the legal profession, must have made a few revolutions in his grave over the new occupant of his brother's office.

Actually both Joseph and Hyrum Smith, along with the public in general, had a rather low opinion of the legal profession. Largely because of the lawsuits and indictments they had been fighting ever since the Church was organized, they felt, and with some justification, that lawyers were responsible for many of their problems. One such opinion was expressed by Joseph when some businessmen in Nauvoo resisted some of the ordinances of the city. These merchants told steamboat captains that since they owned the landings, the captains need not pay the city wharfage fees. Because the merchants appeared to be acting on the advice of lawyers, Joseph said about the legal profession in Nauvoo: "Our lawyers have read so little that they are ignorant of this [wharfage jurisdiction]. They have never stuck their noses into a book on maritime law in their lives." His brother Hyrum was even more outspoken. At that same meeting, he declared lawyers "were made in gizzard making time, when it was cheaper to get gizzards than souls." B. H. Roberts, the Church historian, tried to temper such remarks with the explanation that "Nauvoo was unfortunate in being overrun with pettifogging lawyers at this time, and it was to these, doubtless, that the disparaging remarks of both the Prophet and Hyrum, respecting lawyers referred." [^19]

In truth, the Smith brothers were merely reflecting the general opinion of the legal profession held by the public in the 1840s. A public-speaking textbook of the times contained a practice dialogue entitled "The Village Lawyer," in which the lawyer trying to collect a fee declares: "Pay me directly, you rascal, or I'll play the deuce with you! I'll teach you to try to cheat a lawyer, that lives by cheating others." [^20]

Newspapers, including the one in Nauvoo, felt lawyers to be fair game for some rather biting humor, as this item in the 2 April 1845 Neighbor reveals: to the question "What is the duty of a lawyer when licensed and sworn?" the answer was given, "To conceal the truth and reveal the errors of his opponents."

John Taylor, the editor of the Neighbor, printed this facetious cure for the gout in the 8 November 1843 edition:

"1. The sufferer must pick a handkerchief from the pocket of a maid of fifty years, who never had a wish to change her condition.

"2. He must wash it in an honest miller's pond.

"3. He must dry it on a parson's hedge that was never covetous.

"4. He must send it to a doctor's shop who never killed a patient.

"5. He must mark it with a lawyer's ink who never cheated a client. Apply it to part affected, and a cure will speedily follow."

And yet, in spite of such ridicule, the profession carried a high degree of prestige in the public mind because of its identification with knowledge. In fact, it was considered second in importance to newspapers as a factor in public education. Law, oratory, politics, and knowledge were all blended in the public consciousness.

The philosophy of law was an important topic of study and debate in the nineteenth century. Books on the subject were avidly sought, read, and discussed by the Latter-day Saints. In their short history, they had been so vexed by lawsuits and lawyers that for their own satisfaction they delighted in reading critical analyses of their tormentors by such foreign observers as Francis Grund. In a book published in Boston in 1837, Grund attempted to explain why the American legal profession was viewed as it was by the public: "Law is called a prostitute amongst the sciences." Whereas math, medicine, and theology concern themselves with the search for what they hope is the truth, lawyers "alone feed upon its perversion when it benefits them and those who hire them." Principles, the author noted, are readily sacrificed for profit until truth loses all meaning. [^21]

The schism between the Church and the law profession intensified as problems for the Saints multiplied in Nauvoo. The official Church newspaper, the Times and Seasons, in a 1 April 1845 editorial on lawyers in Nauvoo suggested that they would find "the promulgation of the Gospel more lucrative than peddling law."

Nauvoo's leaders ascribed the cause of many of their problems to lawyers, some of whom were leaders in the ranks of the apostates and were responsible for the death of the Prophet and his brother. One of them, C. L. Higbee, had himself been fined ten dollars by a Nauvoo court in 1844 for using abusive language. Another apostate and magistrate, R. D. Foster, had also been charged with gambling and fined at about the same time. They were on the receiving end of some editorial barbs in the 3 April 1844 issue of the Neighbor: "We are sorry to find our lawyers and magistrates . . . numbered among lawbreakers rather than supporting virtue, law and the dignity of the city."

Because the Saints saw the lawyer-apostates in the ranks of the assassination conspirators and then saw the assassins go free, largely because of the efforts of attorneys, their bitterness increased toward the legal profession. Brigham Young spoke for most of his followers when, after the death of their beloved Prophet Joseph, he said: "I swear by the God of heaven that we will not spend money in feeing lawyers. All the lawsuits that have been got up against the Saints have been hatched by fee lawyers, tavern keepers, etcetera. I would rather have a good six-shooter than all the lawyers in Illinois." [^22] Within a very short time, the Saints left behind them the laws and lawyers of Illinois. A good six-shooter certainly proved far more valuable to them on the trail west and in the deserts of Utah than all the adherents of Blackstone had ever been in the law offices of Carthage and Warsaw.

The Law and Lawyers

---
Notas:
[^1] Nevins, American Social History, p. 276.
[^2] Divett, Medicine and the Mormons, p. 64.
[^3] Godfrey, Godfrey, and Derr, Women's Voices, p. 118.
[^4] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 70.
[^5] Shryock, Medicine and Society in America, p. 96.
[^6] Divett, Medicine and the Mormons, p. 60.
[^7] Oliver, Eight Months in Illinois, p. 148.
[^8] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, pp. 58, 59.
[^9] Mackenzie, Mackenzie's Five Thousand Receipts, p. 199.
[^10] Godfrey, Godfrey, and Derr, Women's Voices, p. 137.
[^11] Janney, John Jay Janney's Virginia, pp. 60-61.
[^12] Godfrey, Godfrey, and Derr, Women's Voices, p. 124.
[^13] History of the Church, 4:389.
[^14] R. Bartlett, New Country, pp. 366-67.
[^15] Pickard and Buley, Midwest Pioneer, p. 246.
[^16] History of the Church, 5:357.
[^17] Alcott, Young Husband, p. 378.
[^18] Lacour-Gayet, Everyday Life in the United States, p. 92.
[^19] Minnigerode, Fabulous Forties, pp. 81-82.
[^20] Farrar, Young Lady's Friend, p. 76.
[^21] Rongy, Childbirth Yesterday and Today, pp. 94-8.
[^22] Stickley and Amowitz, One Hundred and Forty-three Years of Dentistry, p. 12.
