George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

10

Sickness and Death

"All the inhabitants are young. I didn't see one gray head in St. Louis," [^1] wrote Charles Dickens, commenting on the absence of elderly inhabitants in that American city during his journey to this country in 1842. There was good reason for few "gray heads" in St. Louis. The life expectancy for American men in 1840 was thirty-eight years and for women, forty, although in the malarial Mississippi Valley, it may have been even shorter. Only one hundred and fifty miles north of St. Louis, however, in the same year Dickens visited that city, an editorial in the Times and Seasons of 1 September 1842 boasted of the health of the inhabitants of Nauvoo: "We may say with propriety, we know of no city, with an equal number of inhabitants, which exhibits so small a bill of mortality, weekly, as ours."

Perhaps to divert attention away from the city's health problems or to make them easier to accept, the Nauvoo Neighbor continued to publish death statistics for other cities. During one week in August, according to the 27 August 1845 Neighbor, New York City had 226 deaths, of which 127 were of children under two years of age, the chief causes being cholera infantum and consumption. St. Louis, a town of sixteen thousand inhabitants in 1840, did indeed have a high death rate. According to the Neighbor of 31 July 1844, St. Louis reported seventy deaths during the last week of July 1844. Forty-seven of the deaths were of children under five years of age, and forty of them were under one year. The cause of these deaths is not mentioned, but the time of year suggests malaria as a major cause.

Despite the Neighbor's "chamber of commerce" boasting, however, Nauvoo also felt the sharp scythe of the grim reaper. There has never been any question about the high death rate in the early days of the Mormon settlement. One writer who described Nauvoo as "the Beautiful Pesthole" claimed that "Commerce had failed to grow specifically because it was a place where Malaria was endemic and particularly virulent." [^2] In fact, malaria reached such proportions in 1841 that coffin makers found it difficult to keep up with the demand and Sidney Rigdon was forced to preach a general funeral sermon.

Death was a subject of interest in correspondence and in numerous journal entries of that period. In 1843 Sally Randall wrote to her family back east: "It is very sickly here at present with fevers and fever and ague and measles, and a great many children die with them." [^3] Scores died of malaria each year in August and September, and children were especially vulnerable. Only a year previous to the exodus, Warren Foote, a young man living at Montebello, just south of Nauvoo, recorded in his journal: "It is very sickly throughout the country and many are dying. There are not well ones enough to take care of the sick." [^4] The newspaper was a weekly reminder of the proximity of death, and the sexton's report, required by city ordinance, was likely the first article to be read by fearful friends and neighbors. The sexton's death lists published in the Wasp and the Neighbor between April 1842 and October 1845 show an average of five deaths per week, or approximately two hundred and fifty per year. Such figures indicate that perhaps 1750 Mormons are buried in Nauvoo, most of them in unmarked graves.

Besides the high rate, another distressing aspect of death in Nauvoo was the ages of the victims. A typical newspaper list, this one for the week ending 26 August 1842, appeared in the Nauvoo Wasp of 27 August. It revealed seven names, six of them children under the age of fifteen, dying from contusion of the brain, ague and fever, black canker, and drowning. The list contained only one adult, a forty-five-year-old woman whose death was caused by fever. A random selection of thirteen published lists indicated ninety-seven deaths, sixty-two of them of children in their teens or younger. One weekly list published in September 1843 listed seven children, all between the ages of five months and seven years.

There was a high child mortality rate throughout nineteenth-century America, but the unusually high rate in Nauvoo, 64 percent, appears to have had three causes. First of all, the town site, or at least the flats, was one of the worst places for malaria in a river valley notorious for the disease. Second, there was greater personal exposure to the elements because of inadequate housing and loss of belongings in the Missouri persecutions. Third, the residents, including the children, were weakened by the extra physical labor required to reestablish homes after their exile. The effect of the high child mortality rate on Nauvoo's parents was perhaps greater because of the already considerable hardships they had endured in being burned out or otherwise forced from homes in Kirtland, Ohio, and Independence and Far West, Missouri.

The most frequent causes of children's deaths were such diseases as the bloody flux, summer sickness, and cholera infantum. Although measles, mumps, whooping cough, scarlet fever, and diphtheria could be fatal, parents commonly exposed their young children to them, because they realized the diseases were less often fatal the earlier the children got them. In Nauvoo, as already noted, the most common disease for all ages was ague and fever (malaria). Smallpox was held in check by this time by vaccination.

The names of several fatal diseases are easily recognized by modern readers, but others are not, usually because the disease itself was not recognized in the mid nineteenth century. For example, typhoid, which was passed on through infected streams and wells, was called at times typhus fever, nervous fever, brain fever, bilious fever, and the flux. The causes were variously ascribed to unripe fruit, night air, grief, want of sleep, animal matter in the air, and intense thought. The cure was often bloodletting. Flux, lax, palsy, and dropsy were actually the symptoms of other diseases. Influenza was variously referred to as catarrhal fever, typhus pleurisy, quinsy, winter fever, break-bone fever, and LaGrippe. Meningitis was known as brain fever, again describing the location and symptoms rather than recognizing the disease. One problem in identifying diseases was the belief that one kind of fever could "verge upon" or turn into another fever or disease. Also, the same disease was identified differently, depending on which symptoms were used for identification. Superficial cancers were recognized, but heart and vascular conditions, nephritis, and so on were hidden behind such terms as fits, dropsies, and decay. [^5]

But one disease easily identified by modern readers was the most common not only in Nauvoo but throughout the entire Mississippi region: the "shakes," or ague and fever. The incidence of this disease along the river bottoms in Illinois in the 1820s was so severe that experienced observers doubted the possibility of making permanent settlements in that area. Travelers commented not only on the sallow and jaundiced complexions of the victims but also of their lackadaisical attitudes toward life. The last was so common that many did not consider it a disease. It was common to hear, "He ain't sick! He's got the auger!" [^6]

The "sickly season" extended from midsummer until autumn frosts, but the violent shaking associated with the recurrent malarial chills could come anytime. In a large family, someone was almost always down with the "shakes." People associated malaria with swamps but not with mosquitoes. Malaria was commonly believed to result from bad swamp air, which in turn was caused by rotting vegetable matter. An article in the Neighbor of 18 December 1844 informed its readers that "malaria consists in certain invisible effluvia or emanation from the surface of the earth, which were formerly called Marsh Miusmaia, but to which it has, of late years become fashionable to apply the foreign term malaria." The northwest portion of the city experienced more affliction from ague and fever than the eastern and southern portions. Residents and visitors alike commented on the incidence of mosquitoes in the most malaria-prone areas but never quite drew the connection.

Mosquitoes were not the only insects that made life in Nauvoo disagreeable. The English traveler, William Oliver, commented: "No sooner do those [insects] who wage war during the day retire, than their place is filled with others, labouring with equal effect through the night, whilst the indefatigable mosquito, in many situations, heads the attack at all times." [^7]

A Mormon pioneer described his experiences with this insect succinctly in his journal in July 1843: "I and my wife went . . . to Widow Moores down to Mississippi bottom Pike Co. to attend meeting. . . .staid at the Widow's over night. We never closed our eyes to sleep on account of the musquitoes." That sleepless July night on the Mississippi bottoms might very well have led to his bout with the "shakes" three months later:

"[October] 17 I had a terrible shake of the ague today which lasted about three hours.

"18 Sidnie [wife] and I both shook with the ague today and no one to wait on us.

"19 We both shook today. Father came down and took us home with him . . .

"20 I missed my shake today, but am so sore I can scarcely stir." [^8]

A medical book published in 1831 prescribes as treatment of fever and ague or intermittent fever: "laudanum in warm wine; bed or bleeding and opening bowels with senna and salts; quinine pills or Peruvian bark." [^9] Quinine, a fever suppressant made from the bark of the South American quinchona tree, was known by Nauvoo doctors, but unfortunately the supply was often adulterated and expensive, a single ounce costing as much as a good cow. A reliable and cheaper supply did not become available until several years after Nauvoo was abandoned by the Saints.

Behind every one of the several hundred deaths in Nauvoo is the story of grief-stricken parents, children, friends, and other loved ones. The extent of their sorrow is illustrated by excerpts from one mother's letter. Sally Randall, in a letter to her family back east, described the death of her fourteen-year-old son: "He was sick three weeks and three days with the ague and fever. . . . He was taken in fits the day before he died and had them almost without cessation as long as he lived. When he breathed his last he went very easy, but oh the agonies he was in before it seemed I could not endure." [^10]

Usually of less concern, unless it developed into something more serious, was the common cold, or "catarrh," as it was often called. One diarist recalled that there was rarely any time during the winter when there were not students in school unable to recite their lessons on account of "bad colds." Looking back, he felt that "neither boys or girls were dressed at all as they should be." [^11]

The fear of all parents in Nauvoo, of course, was the susceptibility of the very youngest children: the death rate in this age group was extremely high. And many times women had to cope with this problem alone, because their husbands were away on missions. Bathsheba Smith wrote in 1843 to her husband, George A., who was on a mission: "The baby is quite sick with a coald. He had a vary hot feavor last knight. Father will lay hands on him as he goes to meeting. Thare are a great many complaining with coalds. It is called the influaza." [^12] The "influaza," or flu, as we call it today, was often fatal, although in this case the Smith baby recovered.

Disease was not the only dealer of death in Nauvoo. The Wasp in December 1842 reported that Alpheus and Asa Harmon, ages forty-four and twenty-three, had been found frozen to death on the prairie. The news reports tell of deaths in the stone quarry, in well cave-ins, and even by lightning, as this report in the Neighbor of 20 August 1845 states: "A severe thunderstorm this morning, Brother Ralph was killed by lightning on Parley Street. Others were knocked down." And of course, drownings in the river were not at all uncommon, as notices and warnings in the Neighbor throughout the city's existence suggest.

In addition to such accidents, there were victims of purposeful violence, especially on the frontier. The Prophet recorded in his journal in July 1841: "Brother William Yokum had his leg amputated by Dr. John F. Weld, who operated free of charge; he was wounded in the massacre at Haun's Mill, Oct. 30th, 1838, and had lain on his back ever since." [^13] Surgery usually involved tying the patient down and perhaps fortifying his courage with some alcoholic beverage. Ether was used in surgery for the first time in 1842, but most people thought its use immoral. And in the nineteenth century, American doctors were extremely slow in taking advantage of any advance that might improve the health of their patients or their own reputations.

"Nineteenth-century medicine was of unforgivable low standards everywhere, and the horrid nostrums, purging, and bleeding could not save many. Those who recovered were strong enough to overcome both the illness and the prescription. What seemed to be lacking was plain common sense." [^14] Treatment of illness in 1840 had changed little in the half century since physicians had killed George Washington, a robust sixty-seven-year-old with a bad cold who was repeatedly bled by his doctors, urged to swallow calomel for purging and tartar emetic for vomiting, and afflicted with blistering poultices being applied to his weakened body. The cold he might easily have survived; the treatments he could not.

Illinois doctors were still using such death-dealing treatments in the 1830s and 1840s. Scholars seriously believe that doctors were responsible for more deaths than for cures. A classic medieval "cure," bloodletting, was practiced on all age groups from infants a few days old to aged individuals dying a natural death. Doctors often ascertained the amount of blood to be drawn by the age of the patient and by consulting an almanac to discover the proper time of the moon. They believed their main task was to restore a proper balance of the "humors," or basic body elements, and bleeding was one way of doing this. Other "balancing" treatments consisted of calomel or purgative and blistering poultices. About the only effective treatment, as far as making the patient comfortable, was laudanum. Made by dissolving an ounce of opium in a pint of spirits, we can well imagine the happy results and the reason so many patients asked for this cure. The typical pioneer doctor was a traveling drug store. He mixed his own medicines and rolled them into pills or powder papers. Such practices required some degree of skill and knowledge, and doctors were esteemed for their general knowledge, education, and manners, if not for their medical skill.

It was often hard to separate the honest and hard-working physician from the quack. A Springfield, Illinois, newspaper in 1834 noted that "it is one of the severest curses to a new settlement that quacks of every description find refuge there, but none do more mischief to society than the self-dubbed doctors, who in numerous herds deal death and destruction in the shape of pills, powders, tinctures, etc." [^15] Nauvoo was not as cursed as many frontier towns with quacks, probably because they were not as free to operate in such a society. Nevertheless, by our standards, such doctors were in residence, as an ad in the 15 March 1843 Wasp indicates: "Dr. W. B. Brink will treat cancers on the condition of no cure no pay, . . . a remedy that has never failed and I will pay $50 for every case where it will not perform a permanent cure." The following week the 22 March Wasp carried a notice of a malpractice suit against Dr. Brink in a child delivery case. The mother was permanently injured and sued for ninety-nine dollars. The case was tried before Mayor Smith's court, which found in her favor. Sidney Rigdon was counsel for the defendant, who, it appears, had treated the pregnant woman for a fever and declared her unborn child dead. He then forced delivery of a live baby six weeks premature, injuring the mother with his rough treatment. The week following the trial, to reassure the public, Dr. Brink advertised the continuation of his practice at his home, a few rods west of the Nauvoo Temple.

An ad in the 13 August 1845 Neighbor smacks of quackery but probably resulted in more than usually good treatment. It announced the formation of a botanic association in the city of Nauvoo for collecting herbs and roots and "preparing the same for the good of the Saints . . . Office southeast of the Temple on Warsaw and Ripley Sts." This organization may have been associated with the Thompson System of Medicine, a patented system with rights sold throughout the country. It was based on herbalism and natural healing, and it rejected the heroic medicines such as calomel, strychnine, and arsenic. It also rejected bleeding and taught abstinence from alcohol, tobacco, coffee, and tea. Perhaps because of these latter teachings, it became widely practiced among the Mormons in Nauvoo. Even Dr. Brink advertised as a botanic practitioner in 1842.

A few states required licensing in an attempt to limit quackery in the medical profession, but Illinois did not. Most state legislatures were suspicious of professional monopolies and in the Jacksonian era were not favorable to laws restricting individual freedom, no matter how that freedom might harm others. Medical training did exist, although it was very limited west of the Appalachians. The first medical college in Illinois was founded in 1837, but the first course of lectures was not offered until 1843.

Nauvoo had its share of qualified physicians, at least by the standards of that period. Probably one of the city's best physicians was Dr. Charles Higbee, who offered his services from an office in the Masonic Hall on Main Street. He was a graduate of the University of Pennsylvania and specialized in diseases of women and children. Others practicing in Nauvoo, some to a greater extent than others, were Willard and Levi Richards, John C. Bernhisel, H. Tate, J. F. Weld, Robert Foster, and John C. Bennett. The fact that some of these doctors were constantly advertising for business might reflect the financial plight of an unpopular profession in a depression era frontier town. Some physicians, such as Willard and Levi Richards, were not even practicing most of the time.

Physicians like Brink brought about the low reputation of the medical profession, which the doctors in Nauvoo could not escape, as editor John Taylor pointed out in the Times and Seasons of 1 April 1845: "Nor are the services of physicians held in so great repute in Nauvoo, that the saints confide in medicine." The Prophet, in spite of his close friendship and love for such men as the Richards brothers, warned citizens of the dangers of trusting many members of the medical profession. At a meeting in April 1843 Joseph offered this advice to some newly arrived immigrants: "Doctors won't tell you where to go to get well; they want to kill or cure you, to get your money. Calomel doctors will give you calomel to cure a sliver in your big toe. . . . And the lobelia doctors will do the same." [^16]

Such criticism of physicians seems to have been directed primarily against the "old school" doctors, who probably did kill as many as they cured with their poisons (they were often referred to as poison doctors) and bloodletting. Dr. Robert Foster, later a leader in bringing about Joseph Smith's death, was such a doctor. Although Foster made most of his living in business other than doctoring, the Prophet's attacks on Foster's profession did not ease feelings between the two men. The "botanic physicians" seem not to have been criticized by the Prophet, nor were such close friends as Dr. Levi Richards, Joseph's own physician; his brother Willard, Joseph's secretary; or Dr. Pendleton, who introduced Sappington's Quinine pills to Nauvoo. Another close friend, Dr. John Bernhisel, probably one of the orthodox physicians, spent more time as Joseph's aide than as a practitioner of medicine.

Among the well-informed, there appears to have been a common recognition of the dangers of calomel, elixir, picra, celendine, paregoric, and other such poisonous mixtures. As the influential family advisor William Alcott suggested in his 1838 The Young Husband, "I would as soon have a volcano in my house as one of those beings who are forever dabbling with medicine." [^17]

Criticism of the medical profession by Church leaders combined with the shortage of money in Nauvoo to effectively limit the number of doctors in the area, at least compared to other cities. In 1840 New York City had a ratio of one doctor to every five hundred persons. In 1845, when Nauvoo's population approached fifteen thousand, there were probably no more than five or six practicing physicians, making a ratio of perhaps one to three thousand. It is unlikely that such a low proportion adversely affected the mortality rate among the Saints.

Criticism of the medical profession by Nauvoo's leaders was not unique in the early 1800s. National critics and observers went even further. One cynic referred to doctors as no more than a bunch of "chronothermalists, Thompsonians, mesmerists, Hindu magicians, seers; of spiritists who claim to possess mysterious healing powers, and everything under the sun." [^18] A vicious attack on doctors was a reprint from the St. Louis Organ, which the editor of the Wasp, William Smith, inserted in his paper on 19 April 1843. William, a younger brother of the Prophet, apparently had even more disdain for the medical profession than did Joseph. Noting that there were so many lawyers and doctors that they could not get business, the article referred to "physicians who seem in their mistaken callings as scourges from the 'bottomless pit.' . . . [There are many mortals who] might have recovered if they had not called . . . one of these would be physicians. The lawyer gentry cannot do so much harm but who can set bounds to the mischief . . . physicians are capable of doing."

Whether or not doctors were actually responsible for many unnecessary deaths, the public believed they were. A common perception of this both esteemed and deplored profession is revealed in a book of etiquette published in the 1840s. The author advised parents of deceased children "never to let it appear in their conversations with the physician that they consider him as the cause of their affliction." [^19]

The Nauvoo era was the heyday of greater quackery than just unqualified physicians. If quackery includes superstition and folklore, then quackery abounded. Self-treatment was cheaper and easier than calling in the local physician, and medical folklore was a habit hard to break, especially when medical science had not advanced enough to replace it.

It was believed by some that ague and fever could be cured by mixing chimney soot with boiling water and taking it three times a day with sugar and cream. A variety of cures for cancer included white oak ashes mixed with calomel, saltpeter, and pulverized centipede and applied with new, soft leather. For bedwetting, the remedy was the old standby, fried-mouse pie. It's not hard to conceive of this "cure" actually working. For sore throat, all that was needed was fat from the Christmas goose; and for whooping cough, garlic rubbed on the spine. Probably no fewer than two or three hundred such remedies were in the materia medica of our pioneer ancestors, ranging from the beneficial herbal cures to the exotic and disgusting but perhaps psychologically beneficial. In most cases the folk cures were no worse than what the physicians had to offer.

One common home treatment during the Nauvoo years that required more than normal composure was the use of leeches. Mrs. Farrar advised young ladies in 1838: "If you have been with persons who were foolish enough to feel any disgust at leeches, do not be infected by this folly. . . . when they come to us from the apothecary, they are perfectly clean though slippery to the touch." To apply them, she advised, "you have only to take a piece of blotting-paper and cut small holes in it where you wish them to bite. . . . when they are filled, they will let go their hold." [^20] Whether the local apothecaries, such as Lyons Drug Store or A. T. Terrel, carried leeches, we are not told, but they probably did. The apothecaries did stock all the makings of home remedies: ginseng, alum, brimstone, turkey opium, liquorice paste, blue vitriol, rhubarb, camphor, and so on. The ads do not mention fried mice.

The greatest of all medical quackeries was patent medicines. On 4 August 1842 the Wasp listed a lengthy inventory of products in a new drug store opened by A. T. Terrell on Water Street. The products included everything from paints to sperm oil, from chalk to window glass, and "all the patent medicines." The various elixirs were practically unlimited in number. Some apparent favorites were listed almost every week in the paper, cure-alls such as Wistars Balsam of Wild Cherry, Humphrey's Pile Ointment, Dr. Williamson's Pain Soother, Dr. Halsted's Magnetic Remedies, and Bristol's sarsaparilla.

Patent medicines were not considered alcoholic beverages, although their ingredients suggest they ought to have been. The most potent was bitters: by volume, one such medicine was 60 percent alcohol, or 120 proof. The manufacture of bitters began in the reign of King George II, who imposed a high tax on liquor. To avoid paying the tax, retailers and exporters added herbs to alcohol—"bitters"—and called it medicine. By the early nineteenth century, it was commonly believed that these bitters really did have medicinal value, and they became one of the patent medicines. Actually, few medicines were patented, and eventually all bottled, nonprescription cures became known as patent medicines.

The claims of some patent medicines are amazing to modern Americans, who might wonder that some of the claims were ever taken seriously. One ad in the 25 September 1844 Neighbor advertised fever and ague lozenges, which "have never been known to fail in removing the distressing disease. In addition to which, if the directions be followed, the disease will not return. A cure in all cases guaranteed or the money refunded." Occasionally one medicine offered cures for a whole range of problems. Gridley's Salt Rheum Ointment was advertised in the November 1840 Times and Seasons as a "cure for Salt Rheum, Tetter, Michigan or Prairie Itch, Illinois Mange, Scald Head, Scrofula, Ringworm, Obstinate Old Sores of long standing, and almost all Cutaneous Diseases." A few physicians spoke out on the dangers of some of the "medicines" so commonly used, but patent medicines and home remedies remained important as long as there was a scarcity of effective medical care.

In 1848 Dr. Samuel Gregory, a physiologist in Boston, published a monograph opposing the use of male doctors for delivering babies, claiming the practice violated the feelings of husbands and wives and undermined the "foundations of public virtue." [^21] Such comments undoubtedly reflected the feelings of many Nauvoo women, who, despite the availability of doctors, turned frequently to midwives. The publicized malpractice case of Dr. Brink might also have encouraged some expectant mothers to abandon the use of male doctors.

Still another factor influenced the use of midwives in Nauvoo. Because midwifery was more common in England than in America, it is logical that with the large migration of English Mormons to Nauvoo, midwives would become more common there than in other American towns. Yet little is recorded of midwifery in the Mormon city other than that there were several. In the vacated homes of two of them, after the exodus, were found pills, ointment, salves, cough and worm medicine, scalpels, needles, scissors, tweezers, and a few obstetrical instruments. Also found was a package of scorched cloths, the result of oversterilizing.

Midwifery was more highly respected than doctoring because of the success of the practitioners, much of which resulted from the use of natural cures. Ann Duston was told by the Prophet that she would be successful if she used herbs exclusively. She did, and she became known in Nauvoo as the Herb Doctor. Using medicines from her own garden, she charged three dollars as her midwife's fee. Several others in Nauvoo continued their practice in Utah, bringing thousands of young Latter-day Saints into the world. The Prophet Joseph specifically set apart Harriet Johnson as a midwife, and in forty years of practice, she aided in the delivery of four thousand babies.

Another branch of medicine that escaped most charges of quackery was dentistry. It is a sad commentary on the rewards of virtue to note that dentists did not do well financially in Nauvoo. Doctoring was never financially rewarding there, either, but dentistry appears to have been even less so. Towns in the settled east, smaller than Nauvoo, often supported several dentists, who charged fairly high prices at a time when an average laborer's wages were less than one dollar per day. In 1848 in Lynchburg, Virginia, then a town of approximately ten thousand, a dentist offered to insert artificial teeth on gold plate for five dollars, plug teeth with gold foil for one to two dollars, and clean teeth for one to three dollars. [^22]

About this same time, Alexander Neibaur advertised in the 3 September 1842 Wasp: "Every branch of surgical dentistry skillfully and carefully performed. . . . Teeth inserted at 2.00 a tooth. All manner of produce taken; also wood; labor on the Temple. Cash not refused." He probably was not making a living from his dental work, for in the same paper he advertised the Nauvoo Match Factory, whose product could be purchased at his house. Not too long after that he offered instruction in Hebrew and German during the winter season. When the exodus took place, Dr. Neibaur had to borrow a team and wagon to evacuate his family.

Dentists had not yet gained the prestige that doctors in general seemed to enjoy. Until 1839, when the American Journal of Dental Science was established, dentistry had no professional or legal status. The world's first dental school was established in 1840 in Baltimore.

The tools and methods of the trade were little more advanced than the status of the profession itself. Some dentists were still treating tooth ache and inflammation by blistering the surface of the cheek or scarifying the gums with a lancet. Although medical books of the time noted that it was always advisable to avoid extracting teeth if possible by having them plugged, extractions were easier, cheaper, and usually less painful in the long run. Dentistry in Nauvoo consisted primarily of extractions with ingested alcohol as the only available anesthetic.

Dr. Neibaur pulled teeth with tools called the pelican and straight levers, which worked by prying against adjacent healthy teeth, often damaging them as much as the tooth being pulled. In 1840 the dental turnkey was invented in England, easing the effort of pulling teeth but not easing the pain.

There was no such thing as a dental chair until 1832, and not a satisfactory one until after the Civil War. In Nauvoo, as in most frontier or rural areas in the 1840s, patients sat in ordinary chairs. Violent movements from patients not being under any kind of anesthesia often resulted in both patient and chair lying on the floor.

Although a rather clumsy and unsatisfactory dental drill was invented in 1838, there is no evidence that it was ever used by Nauvoo's dentists. Fillings were usually gold or silver or tin foil, packed into a cavity not adequately cleaned of decayed material. The results can well be imagined: extraction eventually took place, and the the only recourse was false teeth for those who could afford the price and tolerate the discomfort. During the Nauvoo years, the lot of a denture wearer was usually most miserable. Lack of a material permitting accurate impressions made dentures painful and difficult to keep firmly in place. Although porcelain was available, most dentists still used ivory even though, because of its porous nature, it yellowed and took on an offensive odor, making the wearer most unpopular, especially close up. It was necessary to remove false teeth at night and usually at mealtime also.

The most effective dentistry, of course, is preventive dentistry, but it was only mildly practiced in the 1840s. Children were advised to preserve their teeth by washing them night and morning with a brush (usually made of a dogwood or similar twig chewed into a fibrous swab), and by rinsing the mouth after each meal with clean water. Some children chewed charcoal or used chalk and camphor or some other powder on their brushes as a dentifrice. For the more vain, special whitening powders from the apothecary were used.

Preventive medicine was not left to the concern of families. The Nauvoo city council appointed a board of health to suggest, secure passage of, and enforce public health measures in Nauvoo. Not content with just this action, President Young spoke on the subject at a fast day meeting in 1845. Chief-of-Police Stout recorded in his diary for 10 July, "To the Stand to meeting and heard Brigham Speak on the policy of preserving our health and condemned the present system of Doctors." [^23] Chief Stout did not record any specific health measures, but they were known to any well-read Saint in Nauvoo. Several issues of the Wasp and the Neighbor had detailed various measures. In the 29 October 1842 Wasp, the editor had advised, "Keep your children warm when the sun goes down. Without attention to this, September and October are hard months for them to endure."

Some editorial advice may have been of questionable value, but at least it promoted a consciousness of good health. The 5 April 1843 issue of the Neighbor carried an explanation of canker by Dr. H. Tate. Like sea scurvy, the doctor explained, canker resulted from want of pure air and proper nourishment, and proper nourishment consisted of vegetables, fruit, whole wheat, and milk. The explanation may have been inaccurate, but the advice was still good.

Another bit of advice from the editor in the 6 September 1843 Neighbor provides us with an amusing look at the extent of medical knowledge in the 1840s: "Never enter a sick room in a state of perspiration, as the moment you become cool your pores absorb. Do not approach contagious diseases with an empty stomach: do not sit between the sick and the fire, because the heat attracts the thin vapor."

Very often advice was based on the plain common sense of an observant editor. For example, in a news article in the 31 January 1844 Neighbor, the editor wrote: "A popular writer contends one fifth of all children die before [the age of one]. . . . If a farmer were to lose one fifth of his cattle he would ascertain the cause and apply a remedy." The cause, the editor continued, was that children were overfed, overclothed, and had too little exercise in the open air. The editor may have slipped up on the "overclothed" part, but the rest is passable good sense.

Our Nauvoo ancestors were not as ignorant of sanitation as a health measure as some social historians have led us to believe. The Saints owned and read such books as the Young Lady's Friend, which advised nurses to wash "the patient's hands, face and neck, and often feet too, with warm soap and water once or twice or three times a day." [^24] It also advised nurses to wash their hands before touching either food or medicine intended for the patient and never to use a cup or spoon twice without washing it.

Sometimes good health practices were observed by the Latter-day Saints without their being aware of it. Malaria in Nauvoo might have been even worse had residents not bought the "musqueto bars," advertised in the Neighbor of 5 June 1844 by Kimball's Store. These were nets to ward off mosquitoes either as canopies over beds or to cover doors and windows.

When preventive medicine was not good enough, doctors failed, and home cures were ineffective, there were funerals in Nauvoo. Funerals were held almost daily throughout the life of the city, so coffin-making must have been a full-time profession in Nauvoo. A coffin was usually made of pine and crafted to fit the deceased. It was narrow at the head end, wider at the shoulders, and narrowed back to the smallest width at the feet. Although usually stained or painted black, it was occasionally covered with black cloth, which then required an outer "rough box." For a little extra cost, the coffin could be lined by the coffin-maker or his wife. The lid was either screwed or nailed on after the funeral services, if there were services. Better coffins might have a hinged glass face cover for viewing, as did the coffins for the Prophet Joseph and his brother Hyrum.

Undertakers, a new term denoting coffin-makers who had expanded their role in arranging funerals, were not evident in Nauvoo. Among the Saints, the coffin was delivered to the home, and the rest of the funeral—dressing the body and arranging the viewing and the trip to the cemetery—was all carried out by family and friends. Such was the case in the funerals of Joseph and Hyrum, although with the Smith brothers, the hearse carried to the cemetery coffins containing only boxes of sand. To foil anti-Mormon grave-robbers, the bodies were secretly and temporarily interred in the basement of the Nauvoo House.

An interesting report of the Smith funeral describes the hearse passing the meeting ground accompanied by only a small party while William W. Phelps was preaching the funeral sermon. [^25] This arrangement would have made it impossible to attend the funeral service and also to accompany the body to the cemetery.

Because of the shortage of money in Nauvoo as well as a theology that looked upon death not as a dreaded and final farewell, funerals and mourning periods were less costly and drawn out than in other parts of the country. Even there, however, was a growing condemnation of the seemingly unnecessary and costly burden of buying mourning clothes for funerals, especially among the poor. The major expense in Nauvoo seemed to be merely the cost of shrouds. Believing his mother was also about to die, Warren Foote recorded in his journal the morning after his father died that he sent to Nauvoo to get cloth to make two shrouds. The extra costs for these "winding sheets" made shrouds less popular, so bodies were often buried without them. Joseph and Hyrum Smith, however, were wrapped in white shrouds.

Funerals in Nauvoo were usually showy only when the victim was a town or Church leader, and even then they were usually not costly. Hosea Stout wrote about the funeral in March 1845 of John P. Smith, a fellow Mason. After an address by Orson Hyde at the stand, "at 4 o'c we then marched to the burying ground where we arrived about sun set." [^26] A more elaborate funeral procession was described by Eliza R. Snow in a poem she wrote upon the death of Don Carlos Smith, the Prophet's younger brother, in August 1841: "In solemn order, mov'd across the wide Extended plain, the Nauvoo Legion . . . In the Legion's rear, still length'ning out the vast procession; walk'd a crow'd of citizens of every rank of either sex; and last of all closed in a long and glitt'ring train of carriages. I gaz'd upon the grand procession, till It disappear'd amid the dwellings which stand thickly cluster'd near the river's edge." [^27]

[In Old Nauvoo Pioneer Cemetery

These funeral processions did not end up at the same burying ground. Because of the large number of deaths in Nauvoo, at least three different cemeteries were used during the seven years the Saints were there. In May 1841 Joseph Smith recorded that a new burying ground of ten acres had been purchased outside the city limits. [^28] By June the following year, according to an ad in the 25 June 1842 Wasp, this cemetery was ready to receive bodies. Located southeast of the city and known as the Pioneer Cemetery, its lots were offered for sale at public auction at the office of Hyrum Smith. Before June 1842, the cemetery used most was one located on Durphy Street. On 15 January 1845 the Neighbor reported that the city council ordered the rerouting of Durphy Street around the cemetery instead of through it. This order was obviously not carried out, because Durphy Street makes no such detour as described by the editor. The same issue of the paper also reported the council voting funds "to fence the old burying ground," suggesting that another cemetery was in use before the one on Durphy Street. This cemetery might have been one on the flats, "near the river's edge," which Eliza Snow described as the destination of Don Carlos Smith's funeral procession in 1841.

The large cemetery on Parley Street extension is still maintained as a historic Church site. Most of Nauvoo's dead were buried there. It is this cemetery that Brother Stout mentions as requiring no less than an hour's march to reach after the funeral of John P. Smith. It is also the cemetery that Colonel Kane visited after the evacuation of Nauvoo in October 1846: "On the outskirts of the town was the city graveyard. But there was no record of plague there, nor did it anywise differ from other Protestant American cemeteries. Some of the mounds were not long sodded; some of the stones were newly set, their dates recent, and their black inscriptions glossy in the mason's hardly-dried lettering ink." [^29]

Apparently all the graves were not set with well-inscribed stones, as Colonel Kane seems to suggest. In July 1845 Chief-of-Police Stout recorded going "to the burying ground to Seek for the grave of Little Lydia my daughter." [^30] In spite of much searching and digging, he could not locate it, even with the help of the sexton.

This failure was more the failure of the sexton than of anyone else. The sexton's job was to care for the burying ground, prepare the graves, and keep records of the burials. In Nauvoo he was also required to see that lists of the deaths were announced each week in the paper. Although in other cities the sexton might be associated with a church and have duties not connected with funerals, in Nauvoo he was a public official. A city ordinance required that he dig graves, receiving two dollars for each one dug, and keep a record book listing the name of the deceased, the person's age, and the cause of death. If a family wished to dig the grave for their own dead, he would collect twenty-five cents from them and tell them where to dig. In Nauvoo the position of sexton was held by William D. Huntington, who was also a fifer in the band and a stone cutter on the temple. The sexton may have been the closest companion of the dead in Nauvoo, but no one was unacquainted with the grim reaper and the harvest he had gleaned in that fair city.

As the exiles pulled their wagons away from the Iowa shore and started their trek west in 1846, many of them must have turned for one last look at their beloved city and temple. One such exile, Elder Meeks, wrote: "In going from Nauvoo to Sugar Creek, a short distance from the ferry across the river, the road passes over a hill. The top of this hill, I was aware, was the last point from which I could see the Nauvoo temple. I have no words with which to convey a proper conception of my feeling when taking a last look." [^31] If it was so hard to leave a city and a temple built with such labor and sacrifice, it must have been even more difficult to leave behind, probably never to be visited again, the final resting place of so many loved ones. When we consider again the length of the sexton's death lists, we become acutely aware that there were few, if any, families taking one last look back across the Mississippi who were not thinking of dear ones left behind in the silent burial grounds of Nauvoo.

Sickness and Death

---
Notas:
[^1] Grund, Americans, p. 388.
[^2] Chevalier, Society, Manners and Politics, p. 459.
[^3] Grund, Americans, p. 378.
[^4] History of the Church, 6:113.
[^5] Bouquet, Compilation of the Original Documents Concerning Nauvoo, no. 1286.
[^6] Halford, Nauvoo—the City Beautiful, p. 117.
[^7] History of the Church, 5:383.
[^8] Cox, Mormonism in Illinois, p. 57.
[^9] Miller and Miller, City of Joseph, p. 100.
[^10] History of the Church, 7:271.
[^11] Brooks, On the Mormon Frontier, 1:53.
[^12] History of the Church, 5:509.
[^13] Ibid., 5:3.
[^14] Ibid., 5:383-84.
[^15] Ibid., 6:355.
[^16] Quoted in Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi, p. 113.
[^17] History of the Church, 7:309.
[^18] Quoted in Ham, Publish Glad Tidings, p. 266.
[^19] History of the Church, 5:384.
[^20] Farrar, Young Lady's Friend, p. 76.
[^21] Rongy, Childbirth Yesterday and Today, pp. 94-8.
[^22] Stickley and Amowitz, One Hundred and Forty-three Years of Dentistry, p. 12.
[^23] Brooks, On the Mormon Frontier, 1:51.
[^24] Farrar, Young Lady's Friend, p. 64.
[^25] History of the Church, 6:628.
[^26] Brooks, On the Mormon Frontier, 1:30.
[^27] Ham, Publish Glad Tidings, p. 271.
[^28] History of the Church, 4:353.
[^29] Kane, Mormons, p. 5.
[^30] Brooks, On the Mormon Frontier, 1:51.
[^31] McGavin, Nauvoo, the Beautiful, p. 236.
