George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

11

The Nauvoo Legion

"Americans are remarkably fond of military parades and honors. . . . the militia system indulges their martial spirit, without the danger and expense attending a standing army." [^1] It was not so much the fondness of the martial spirit as it was the danger and expense of standing armies that caused Americans to prefer the militia system to European-style armies. In this, however, the foreign observer Grund was absolutely right: to support a full-time army in Europe was indeed a heavy burden and had been for generations. In France during the Nauvoo era, one of every eighty inhabitants was drawn from the work force to serve full time in the military. In the United States at the same time, the ratio was one in twenty-three hundred. [^2] In 1835 the United States regular army had only 8,221 men, including 674 commissioned officers. [^3]

Such a small regular army meant that a large militia was needed in the event of a national emergency. In 1844 the total membership of state militias in the United States was 1,750,000 men. Militia service was required throughout the states for white males between the ages of eighteen and forty or forty-five, except for officials, clergymen, and Quakers. The ratio of militia to the entire population was about one to ten.

Illinois law, to which the Latter-day Saints were subject after 1838, required service in the militia. In that frontier state in 1840, more than 83,000 of a total population of 470,000 served in militias. Close to 20 percent of the inhabitants were under arms. In Nauvoo the number of militiamen approached 30 percent of the population. Illinois law, similar to that of other states in age requirements for white males and terms of active duty, required service for six months with the same allowances as the regular army.

Because of the persecutions in Missouri, many of which had been at the hands of state militia, Church leaders wisely concluded they could not trust any state militia not under their control. Because by law they were required to serve in the Illinois state militia, why not, they reasoned, make it a Mormon militia, at least in Nauvoo?

The Illinois legislature agreed. The Nauvoo city charter called for the establishment of a university and of an independent military body. In keeping with this generous charter, the city government authorized the organization of the Legion on 3 February 1841. Although independent, it was at the disposal of the governor of Illinois and was required to perform the same amount of military duty as the regular state militia. Within fifteen days after becoming residents of Nauvoo, eligible males were required to join the legion unless exempted from service under United States law, by a special act of the legion, or by a certificate of inability.

The Nauvoo Legion was a unit of the Illinois state militia and under the direct orders of the governor. Yet in 1843, when J. C. Bennett, brigade inspector, and John Bills, brigade major, petitioned the state for payment for militia services, the attorney general and other state authorities decided that the legion was not a part of the state militia. According to an article in the Nauvoo Neighbor of 9 December 1843, they declared it to be "totally independent by its Charter with its own law making and enforcing powers and designed solely to sustain the Municipal Government of Nauvoo." That this move was a ploy by the state authorities to save state money was made even more apparent a year later when the governor ordered the legion to surrender its state-supplied arms and disband even before the Nauvoo charter was revoked.

So, although partly independent, the Nauvoo Legion was an arm of the Illinois state militia. Its top officers were commissioned by the governor, it drew supplies and equipment from the state armory, and it was subject to call into active service for either the state or the nation. It would have been convenient for Joseph Smith to have had the free use of the Nauvoo Legion to repel mobbers and prevent kidnapping by Missourians, but the governor warned that the legion could be used only when he, the governor, gave permission. The legion could not be used "to suppress, prevent or punish individual crimes." [^4]

Nevertheless, there were times the legion was used without the governor's permission. In 1843 when Joseph was kidnapped by authorities from Missouri, three hundred volunteers from the legion requested permission to go to his aid. Seventy-five boarded the Maid of Iowa in pursuit, and 175 others went by horse. The Maid of Iowa pursued the armed Chicago Belle up the Illinois River, passed her grounded, and arrived in Peoria, cutting off an intended escape route for the kidnappers. At the same time, the horse troops traveled more than five hundred miles in seven days. Through the use of the troops and legal processes, Joseph was able to return to Nauvoo safely.

The most important use of the Nauvoo Legion was in suppressing the mobs after the death of Joseph. Companies of twenty to forty cavalry troops rode throughout the county, chasing mobbers, protecting Saints and pro-Mormons, rescuing those burned out of their homes, and escorting them to Nauvoo and safety. In September 1845 one company rode directly into Carthage on a rescue mission, skirmishing with mobbers on the way. The mobs fled, leaving the city in the hands of the Mormon troops. On this expedition, in which at least two mobbers were killed, the legionnaires rode sixty-five miles in twenty hours before arriving safely back at Nauvoo. Other companies were sent on expeditions to Laharpe, Macedonia, Camp Creek, and other small Mormon settlements in Illinois. From 1845 on the legionnaires also occupied defensive posts in and around Nauvoo, preventing kidnap attempts or attacks on the city itself. When the city was finally attacked by a mob army in September 1846, there were few legionnaires left to defend it. Most of them had left with the early wagon trains to protect the Saints on the trail west.

When the Nauvoo Legion was activated in 1841, a city ordinance specified that the commander of the legion should hold the rank of lieutenant general, making that officer the highest ranking officer in the country. This rank, which went to Joseph Smith, had previously been held only by George Washington. Except for a brief period when it was held by Brigham Young, the rank was not again held permanently until it was assigned to Ulysses S. Grant. Nevertheless, the Illinois state legislature had issued the commission, and Governor Carlin signed it. Just why they did is pretty much a mystery even today.

The legion was divided it into two cohorts. Each cohort was commanded by a brigadier general with a full staff. The first cohort, a mounted unit, included cavalry, lancers, flying artillery lancers, and riflemen. The second cohort, an infantry unit, included artillery, lancers, riflemen, light infantry, and infantry. Both cohorts were under the supreme command of Lieutenant-General Joseph Smith, who was the commander-in-chief.

The nomenclature used in the organization of the Nauvoo Legion was taken from Roman armies, in which a legion consisted of ten thousand men and a cohort of one thousand. In the United States, the terms legion and sublegion were used in the regular army in the late 1700s, but cohort had not been used. Why these terms were chosen for the Nauvoo militia is not clear. To be consistent with Roman terminology, a legion would consist of ten cohorts. The Nauvoo Legion never had more than two, although its numbers would have justified at least five, according to Roman practice.

When the Nauvoo Legion was activated in February 1841, it had six companies of one hundred men each. At its first general parade in April, Joseph reviewed fourteen companies with band and artillery. Joining the legion at that parade were visiting companies from Iowa and other parts of the country. In their procession to the temple site, the Millennial Star of 10 June 1841 reported, they presented a "very imposing appearance." By May of the following year, the legion had grown to twenty-six companies and more than two thousand troops. By 1844, at the time of the Prophet's death, the Nauvoo Legion consisted of no fewer than five thousand men and was considered the "largest trained soldiery in the United States excepting only the U. S. Army." [^5]

Officers in the legion were elected. In 1843 the Nauvoo newspaper announced the election of officers by members of the second cohort. Such elections were not quite as democratic as they may at first sound. It was a common practice in militia units for higher authorities to nominate qualified officers, who would then be approved or voted down by the troops. They were usually approved without dissent, especially in the Church-associated legion.

Just what the legionnaires must have looked like when they assembled for review, we do not know. There are no known photographs. Artists who have attempted recreations usually portray them all in resplendent identical dress; however, we know from eyewitness descriptions that such was not the case. Reports by visitors suggest high-ranking officers were attired in colorful and flamboyant dress, and enlisted men wore whatever they could piece together. This practice was quite common in militia units across the country, but the appearance of the legion must not have been what some visitors expected. One wrote: "Their costumes, for I can't say uniforms, were more fantastic than artistic. They were quite picturesque, certainly, for every officer and private consulted his individual taste. No two were alike. Nearly all had some badge, stripe or scarf of bright color." [^6]

In May 1843 Joseph Smith noted in his journal: "Many of them were equipped and armed cap-a-pie. . . . They had made great improvements both in uniform and discipline." [^7] A reporter from a Peoria newspaper observed them in 1841 and reported, "They seemed to be in truth a motley crew: some with one pistol; some with two; others with a pike or harpoon; and we even saw some with a brace of horse pistols, a gun and sword." [^8] Militia units usually supplied their own weapons, so it should have been no surprise to find the Nauvoo Legion members so equipped. The Saints had been forced to surrender their arms to Missouri mobs only three years previously. The wonder is that they had any weapons at all. Governor Ford stated that the legion had been furnished with three pieces of cannon and about two hundred and fifty stand of small arms. Popular rumor soon increased these arms to at least thirty cannon and five or six thousand muskets. Only a little over a year after the legion was organized, the Alton Telegraph informed its readers that the weaponry of the Nauvoo Legion consisted of five cannon, five hundred muskets, 460 pistols, eighty-five rifles, 113 Yeagers (Jager rifles), and 123 swords. [^9]

Whatever their armaments, the legion apparently acquired enough equipment and weapons and the officer corps found itself in such need of training facilities that its own armory became a priority. Accordingly, a site was chosen between Knight and Young streets on Wells Street, and on 16 September 1844 Brigham Young broke ground for the Legion's new home. [^10]

Apparently the Saints' militaristic posturing was threatening to outsiders, so editor Taylor, to perhaps allay fears, noted in the Neighbor of 21 May 1845: "In the days of the Nauvoo Legion, an arsenal was contemplated, but now, upon that spot, we behold the Academy and Reportory." In reality the legion still existed, and an arsenal was even then under construction. Only two months later the chief of police, Hosea Stout, recorded in his diary, "Went to the Arsnal to help put on the timbers for the roof." [^11] The building must have been completed, for a year later an ad appeared in the Hancock Eagle of 10 April 1846: "For Sale Large new stone building, three stories high, one square west of the Temple known as the arsenal."

Just what effect the arsenal had on the training of the legion officers and troops we do not know, because no official reports exist about their training. We can speculate, however. In the 1840s probably almost all native-born Americans living on the frontier knew how to use guns. Most rural Americans were also familiar with horses, and one entire cohort of the legion was made up of horse troops. The Saints had a further advantage as Church members in being familiar with discipline: Church leaders were the officers in the legion. We can probably safely guess that the Nauvoo militia exceeded the average state militia in efficiency and training. Certainly, in defending what they considered a righteous cause, no group could have exceeded them in spirit.

The organization and operation of the Mormon militia was strict. Privates and noncommissioned officers could leave the Nauvoo Legion only with proof that they had enrolled in a militia company in the precinct where they resided. That restriction applied only to men in the outskirts of the city, because the city for purposes of the militia was one precinct. Fines were assessed for failure to appear at all military activities. They ranged from five dollars for privates to twenty-five dollars for generals. A fine might be paid with a good fat chicken or a day's plowing instead of cash. Because labor and goods existed in relative plenty and money was scarce, many likely chose this alternative.

A few members received some pay if their duties required an inordinate amount of time. The war secretary received thirty dollars per year, the chief musician, ten, and the adjutant general, twenty. To enable the legion to pay its salaried members and for members to pay their debts to the legion, in July 1843 the city government authorized the issuing of scrip to the amount of five hundred dollars. [^12] This action was not unusual for municipal or state organizations with charters in the mid nineteenth century. Just how the average militia member earned such scrip is uncertain, but it is certain that it could be used to pay fines for absenteeism, which was always a problem in militia units.

General parades, however, were occasions when failure to attend was not a problem. When the Nauvoo Legion was activated, the first Saturdays of May and September and the Fourth of July were set aside for general parades. These day-long affairs were held on the official parade grounds near Joseph Smith's farm east of Nauvoo and featured a speech and an inspection of the troops by the commander-in-chief. The affair also included field exercises and even sham battles. Such a battle took place at the general parade in May 1842, when General Law's cavalry swooped down upon Brigadier General Rich's infantry. Afterward, another sham battle took place between the mounted riflemen under Lieutenant General Smith and the Invincibles under Major General Bennett. With two thousand troops on the field for these first demonstrations of martial skills, it must have been exciting indeed for both legion and spectators. Joseph Smith wrote this about the day when he took up his journal: "Such was the curious and interesting excitement which prevailed at the time in the surrounding country, about the Legion, that Judge [Stephen A.] Douglas adjourned the circuit court, then in session in Carthage, and came with some of the principal lawyers, to see the splendid military parade of the Legion." [^13] After the parade, Judge Douglas and other guests dined with the Prophet at his home.

Almost exactly a year later, Joseph recorded an even larger gathering on the parade grounds. Commenting on the great improvements in uniforms, discipline, and a knowledge of tactics the militia demonstrated, Joseph wrote that the Nauvoo Legion was now "the pride of Illinois, one of its strongest defenses, and a great bulwark of the western country." [^14]

Being "the pride of Illinois" was probably more a hope of the Prophet than a reality. In fact, the legion was viewed by many residents of Hancock County as a serious threat to the non-Mormon citizens. The showy general parades, which the Mormons saw as a form of competition with other state militia units, were viewed in alarm by gentile observers. Church leaders seem to have recognized that effect by the autumn of 1843. The Neighbor routinely announced the general parade for September, which was held on the sixteenth on the usual site. This time, however, there were no sham battles and no visiting dignitaries. Sensing the climate of opinion in the state, Joseph Smith reviewed the troops and then, aware of the troubled days ahead, told the officers to increase the size of the legion.

This general parade day was apparently the last one. Storm clouds were gathering thick and fast about the Church. The following May, on the day previously set aside for the general parade, a court-martial was held for removing Surgeon-in-Chief Robert Foster on charges of unofficer-like and unbecoming conduct." [^15] Foster became a member of the apostate group that brought about Joseph's death. Before the time for the next general parade, the commander-in-chief was dead and the days of review and maneuvers were past. The time for which the Nauvoo Legion had been training had at last arrived.

But was the legion really ready to defend the homes and families of the Saints? How well trained was the legion? How did the Nauvoo militia compare with similar militia units in Illinois or other states?

In 1842 a United States Army officer viewed the Nauvoo Legion and described his impressions in a letter to the New York Herald, which was reprinted in the September 1842 Millennial Star: "[The legion] approximates very closely to our regular forces. . . . there are no troops in the states like them in point of enthusiasm and warlike aspect. . . . They are enrolling among their officers some of the first talent in the country, by titles or bribes, it don't matter which. . . . you may therefore see that the time will come when this gathering host of religious fanatics will make this country shake to its centre."

The Warsaw Signal stated on 21 July 1842 that "everything they say or do seems to breathe the spirit of military tactics. . . . Truly fighting must be the creed of these Saints." [^16]

In 1843 an observer was quoted in the St. Louis Reporter as saying that the Nauvoo Legion cohorts numbered some four or five thousand men who were thoroughly disciplined and "well acquainted with the use of artillery." Reports such as these, while indicating the training and readiness of the Nauvoo Legion to defend the Saints, increased the fear of the Saints' enemies to hysterical proportions. Their apprehension and dread of the "Mormon militia" became a major factor in the events leading to the assassination of the Prophet and his brother at the hands of members of other state militia units. Governor Ford decided to pacify the non-Mormons by disarming the Nauvoo Legion. Accordingly, he sent state officials to Nauvoo to demand the return of the legion's state arms. On the advice of their leaders and recognizing that they were a unit of the state militia, the legionnaires reluctantly turned over their state-supplied weapons. Such action, incidentally, was considered by both the governor and the Saints as an official disbanding of the legion.

A short time later, perhaps to ascertain the intentions and loyalty of the legionnaires to state authority, Governor Ford dispatched a Captain Singleton with another state militia company to Nauvoo, where Singleton ordered the assembling of the legion, now disbanded and disarmed. Within two hours, two thousand of them were assembled and, to the dismay of the state authorities, were "fully armed" with their own weapons. We have no record of Singleton's response to this situation, but neither is there record of any demand for the legionnaires' arms.

To make up for the arms that the state had retrieved, the Saints quietly set about gathering more arms. In October, Theodore Turley, a gunsmith, was able to purchase one hundred muskets for the legion from sources in New Orleans. Obviously, as far as the Saints were concerned, in spite of being "disarmed and disbanded" by Illinois officials, the legion continued to function for the protection of the Saints.

Accordingly, in August, only two months after the death of the Prophet, the second cohort of the Nauvoo Legion received orders from Brigadier General Charles Rich to parade "armed and equipped," reported the 29 August 1844 Neighbor. The first cohort had done the same two weeks previously. These were not the showy general parades of earlier times but serious military drills. Brigham Young had turned over the training of the legion almost exclusively to General Rich, who quietly and efficiently set about turning the legion into a no-nonsense fighting force. The general was not concerned about the political repercussions of the legion's continued military training and activities, but the Church authorities apparently were. John Taylor, editor of the Neighbor, reflected the problem the Church leaders faced in calming the fears of the non-Mormons while at the same time effecting confidence in the Saints' ability to defend themselves. In 1845 when a rumor surfaced that the Nauvoo Legion had contracted a foundry in Cuyahoga County for twenty-four large cannon, editor Taylor scoffed in the 4 June issue of the Neighbor, "There is no Nauvoo Legion . . . and when Nauvoo needs cannon . . . it will cast its own."

Of course, the Neighbor did not believe there was no Nauvoo Legion and neither did the Saints. It was also apparent that even the man who had disbanded and disarmed them was well aware of their existence. On October 9, more than three months after Governor Ford had taken that action, and as the county of Hancock was moving toward anarchy, the governor sent a letter to Brigham Young: "The sheriff of the county may want a military force to guard the court and protect it or its officers . . . from the violence of a mob. . . . you are hereby ordered and directed to hold in readiness a sufficient force under your command of the Nauvoo Legion." [^17] Hyrum Smith had prophesied before his death that the governor would call upon the Nauvoo Legion to maintain the supremacy of the law. Brigham Young, with obvious satisfaction, copied the governor's letter into his journal.

The fulfillment of this prophecy was not the only one connected with the Nauvoo Legion. Another one had been put in the form of a poem by Eliza Snow, who was often referred to as the Mormon "Prophetess." Her multistanza poem expressed the general thoughts of the people of Nauvoo on the subject of their legion. Part of one stanza read:

See a phoenix come forth from the graves of the just, Whom Missouri's oppressors laid low in the dust: See a phoenix a "Legion" a warm hearted band, Who, unmov'd, to the basis of freedom will stand. [^18]

Years later, the reorganized Nauvoo Legion moved into defensive positions in Echo Canyon in Utah, awaiting the arrival of yet another enemy. The enemy troops headed for Utah were not mobbers but a highly trained detachment of the United States Army. Still, the cause to which the legion again responded was the same: the defense of their homes, their families, and their worship of God. Many of the legionnaires, waiting in that sun-baked Utah canyon, could remember that brisk spring morning in 1843 when they gathered on the prairie east of their beloved city of Nauvoo. They could still feel the warm breeze that carried to them the words of their Prophet and commander-in-chief: "They [the government] have always told us they had no power to help us. . . . When they give me the power to protect the innocent, I will never say I can do nothing for their good: I will exercise that power, so help me God." [^19]

And exercise that power he did when he created from the impoverished and humiliated refugees from Missouri a disciplined military force with the capability of protecting the innocent. There were to be no more Far Wests, no more unconditional surrenders to mobs, no more weaponless forced marches. The Saints eventually did leave the city of Nauvoo to the mobs, but the legion, for five years, had helped to give the Saints the security they needed to gather and grow. And when the Nauvoo Legion accompanied the departing Saints across the Mississippi in 1846, they did so, still defiant and under arms, and they had the strength, discipline, and zeal necessary to build even mightier cities for the Lord in the mountains of the west.

The Nauvoo Legion

---
Notas:
[^1] Berger, British Traveller in America, p. 134.
[^2] Halford, Nauvoo—the City Beautiful, p. 220.
[^3] Quoted in McGavin, Nauvoo, the Beautiful, p. 83.
[^4] Aitken, Journey Up the Mississippi River, p. 35.
[^5] Pickel Letter, no. 3.
[^6] Richards, Reminiscences, p. 10.
[^7] Brooks, On the Mormon Frontier, 1:63.
[^8] Miller and Miller, Nauvoo: The City of Joseph, p. 70.
[^9] Haven, "A Girl's Letters from Nauvoo," p. 624.
[^10] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 67.
[^11] Quoted in McGavin, Nauvoo, the Beautiful, p. 43.
[^12] History of the Church, 6:34.
[^13] Alcott, Young Husband, p. 102.
[^14] History of the Church, 5:345.
[^15] Monroe (Diary), pp. 110, 113.
[^16] History of the Church, 6:184.
[^17] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 56.
[^18] Haven, "A Girl's Letters from Nauvoo," pp. 620-21.
[^19] Snow, "Eliza Snow's Nauvoo Journal," p. 415.
