George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

12

The Church and the Temple

"Everywhere in the Union business came to a complete standstill on the Sabbath . . . [not] a single person working at a trade, nor a single store open on Sunday." [^1] This puritanical observance of Sundays was one striking American practice that British visitors observed.

Sundays in Nauvoo were much the same, with everyone honoring the Lord and being taught the gospel, although not necessarily the restored gospel, because not all residents of Nauvoo were Latter-day Saints. An 1841 Times and Seasons article noted that at a recent conference in the city, eighty persons were added to the Church by baptism.

Whether members of the Church or not, however, all people were welcomed in the new city. Nauvoo resident John D. Lee wrote, "All classes, Jews and Gentiles were allowed to settle there, one man's money was as good as another. . . . The outsiders were invited to join in all of our amusements." [^2]

The "outsiders" who arrived in ever increasing numbers did not remain outsiders very long. Most Gentile frontiersmen in Nauvoo's early years were not as concerned about the Saints' religious beliefs as about the economic opportunities Nauvoo offered. Many of these strangers found the faith they wanted in the Mormon church, whereas others found social and economic profits in joining with the Saints. Others never did join the Church but were good citizens of the town and friends and neighbors of the Latter-day Saints. It is impossible to know what proportion of Nauvoo's citizens were not Latter-day Saints because contemporary estimates vary so widely and no record of any religious census exists. Even the local newspapers depended on visitors for estimates. On 9 August 1843 the Nauvoo Neighbor published a report from the Cincinnati Inquirer that according to a gentleman recently returned from Nauvoo, one-third of the city's fifteen thousand residents were of various denominations. Another article in the Neighbor the following month, 13 September 1843, was taken from the New Haven, Connecticut, Herald, which reported that a non-Mormon visitor to Nauvoo was surprised to discover one-third of the population non-Mormon and "all religious sects as well tolerated as anyplace else in the state." Of course, the editor of the Neighbor was probably inclined to reprint these articles to lessen outside fears of the "Mormon City." Modern estimates place the proportion of non-Latter-day Saints somewhat lower, perhaps no higher than ten percent. Even that low estimate, however, means that between fifteen hundred and two thousand non-Mormons lived in Nauvoo. So, even though they were in the minority, these "gentiles" were numerous enough not to feel intimidated and to make more understandable the ease with which open opposition to Church authorities eventually surfaced in the city.

Most of the non-Mormons lived on the bluffs overlooking the flats. That is one reason why that portion of the town became the chief business district after the exodus. The acceptance of the non-Mormon minority on the hill and also their financial success can well be traced to the tolerant attitude of the Mormon leadership. In one of their earliest acts, the city council passed an ordinance to protect their gentile neighbors from discrimination. The Millennial Star declared on 10 May 1841 that "the Catholics, Presbyterians, Methodists, Baptists, Latter-Day Saints, Quakers, Episcopalians, Universalists, Unitarians, Mohammedans, and all other religious sects and denominations whatever, shall have free toleration and equal privileges in the city." In addition, the regulation made it illegal to ridicule or depreciate other persons because of their religious beliefs.

Such toleration was more than just legal wording for public consumption. Even visiting clergymen of other faiths were impressed by the degree of tolerance they experienced. In the spring of 1843 the Reverend Samuel A. Pryor, a Methodist minister, visited Nauvoo and reported: "In the evening I was invited to preach and did so. The congregation was large and respectable they paid the utmost attention. This surprised me a litte, as I did not expect to find any such thing as a religious toleration among them." [^3]

The common practice of the Mormon leaders to invite visiting ministers to speak to the people was a touch of genius. It helped to dispel falsehoods about Mormon intolerance, it demonstrated supreme confidence in their own doctrines, it allowed direct comparison with faiths that by their own admission lacked "answers," and it offered a rather unprofitable forum to clergymen who might otherwise have attempted to establish congregations in the mistaken belief that there were many potential converts to be had. This last point is well illustrated by the visit of a Unitarian minister from Massachusetts who was invited to deliver a sermon, which he did to a large and attentive congregation. He proposed to form a Unitarian Society in the Mormon city, and the editors of the 20 September 1843 Neighbor noted their full support for his "right and freedom to do so." There is no evidence he ever carried out his plan, possibly because he recognized a lack of serious investigators as a result of his presentation.

[In Old Nauvoo Possible site of the Grove

The large assemblies referred to by visitors were not the only religious meetings held in Nauvoo, but they were the most popular and the most widely reported because of their size. Every Sunday morning at ten, weather permitting, Saints from throughout the city and nearby communities would gather in the "Grove" to hear the preaching, often from the Prophet himself or one of the apostles. Although we have no direct evidence of the exact location of the Grove, most descriptions refer to it as west of the temple but "on the Temple site." A British visitor in 1845 recalled: "There were few trees about 'the grove,' but it bears not the impress upon it that a poet has of a grove. The seats were trees squared and just their breadth above the ground. The rostrum from whence 'the prophet' and his assistants expounded the scriptures on Sabbath days was rudely constructed of pine boards." [^4]

This popular meeting place was used for different types of gatherings: funerals, Fourth of July celebrations, general conferences, Sabbath meetings (weather permitting), and lectures by visiting lecturers. The Sabbath meetings were most common and were reported in numerous letters and diaries. A letter written in 1842 verified the size and location of these meetings: "During summer meetings about as large as common camp meetings are held in a small grove near where the Temple is building." [^5] And Mrs. Richards noted in her reminiscences: "In warm weather we held our meetings in the grove. . . . If it was necessary for a large meeting in winter it was also held there." [^6]

Some contemporary reports mention meetings at the "stand," which was not necessarily the same place as the Grove. Historian Juanita Brooks described the stand as "a platform upon which the authorities sat at their outdoor meetings, while the audience sat on benches of split logs or on the grass. This portable meetinghouse was moved from place to place according to the weather." [^7] One account of such a meeting, which was apparently not held in the Grove, was published in the Springfield Sangamon Journal in 1841. This periodical carried a report of visitors to Nauvoo describing a large meeting "under the shade of some beautiful shrubbery near the river's brink. [^8] At this early date the Grove near the Temple had apparently not yet become established as the general meeting place. By 1842 meetings were occasionally held on the first floor of the unfinished temple itself. Charlotte Haven, a non-Mormon resident, described such a meeting in one of her letters: "Some boards are placed for seats, but not half enough to accommodate the people; so men, women, and children, take with them chairs, benches, stools, etc." [^9] A newspaper article mentioned four to five thousand people being present at such a meeting later that month, but because this location could not accommodate much larger gatherings, the Grove soon became the general meeting place.

Meetings outdoors were sometimes disrupted by the weather. Warren Foote noted in his diary that on the fifteenth anniversary of the organization of the Church, the wind blew so strongly that the April general conference meeting had to be moved into a hollow for shelter. [^10] There were times when conferences could not meet at all because of bad weather. Travelers from out of town were inconvenienced, but no building in Nauvoo could accommodate the crowds. Many of the Saints traveled as many as thirty or forty miles on foot or by ox team, so the attraction, spiritual or otherwise, must have been great. To mingle with fifteen or twenty thousand fellow-believers is thrilling even today, but on an excitement-starved frontier, such gatherings were easily the most arousing events of the year.

The first ones to arrive for the meetings had the more choice seats nearer the front, leaving the late arrivals on the fringes with perhaps no seats at all. The sisters, though, no matter when they arrived, were sure of seats. Many brought their own benches, boxes, or blankets. Ann Pitchforth, caught up in the excitement of a general conference, described the gathering in a letter to relatives back in England: "It was a fine sight. In the center the Twelve Apostles, then the women with hundreds of parasols, then the men. On the outside were the carriages and the horses. The singing was good. The speeches witty, enlivening and interesting." [^11]

Miss Pitchforth did not mention, or perhaps did not notice, the distractions modern worshipers might notice, but the Prophet Joseph Smith noted them and spoke out about them. At a public meeting in 1843, Joseph complained of young men crowding onto the ladies' seats and others laughing and mocking during meeting. Like Church leaders today, Joseph was perhaps campaigning to improve reverence. The following month he again mentioned in his journal: "After preaching, I gave some instruction about order in the congregation, men among women, and women among men, horses in the assembly, and men and boys on the stand who do not belong there, &c." [^12]

The Prophet was perhaps more sensitive to disorder than those in the congregation, because most observers were impressed by the meetings and spoke most favorably of them. One such visitor was Dr. W. G. Goforth, from St. Claire County, Illinois, who attended a four-day general conference in 1844. He mentioned with obvious approval the seating of females on the left and males on the right. He noted in an item published in the 22 May 1844 Neighbor: "No alcohol drunk, no cards played or other games or heard a profane word in the four day visit." Dr. Goforth estimated the crowd to be fifty thousand on the grounds; for that same conference, Sally Randall estimated between fifteen and twenty thousand in attendance.

The women sitting apart from the men was not, incidentally, any indication of an assigned inferior status but was a Protestant custom dating back to the first Pilgrim meetinghouse in Plymouth, Massachusetts. Such seating arrangements were still being practiced in many churches in the nineteenth century. Mormon women, were in fact, more liberated than their sisters in other churches. They blessed the sick, formed their own church-associated organization, the Relief Society, and were allowed to speak in church—as long as their talks were not too long. An article in the 18 June 1845 Neighbor reported that a woman speaking in a prayer meeting had talked too long and was asked to stop.

The overwhelming dominance of male leadership in the Mormon church was not unusual in nineteenth-century America. In fact, it was widely believed that men should be the leaders. William Alcott, the Emily Post of his day, declared in The Young Husband Another thing the Saints had in common with other churches was long prayers. The Reverend Caswell, a hostile critic of the Mormons who visited Nauvoo incognito in 1842, described a Sunday service as opening with a prayer half an hour long. Actually, half an hour was a happy improvement over the two-hour prayers of some Puritan divines. If offered in anything less than a shout, a prayer half an hour long would have been little more than half an hour of incomprehensible muttering to those very far removed from the stand.

The most disagreeable aspect of meetings in the 1840s, especially out-of-doors, was the lack of a public address system. For the Latter-day Saints in Nauvoo, the situation was especially aggravating. Few orators in that decade were ever called upon to address groups as large as the congregations the Prophet and the apostles addressed. The problem is dramatized in the report of the 1843 April general conference: "At half-past eleven o'clock President Smith's lungs failed him, the wind blowing briskly at the time." [^13] An article in the 15 March 1844 Times and Seasons mentions the same difficulty in another meeting near the temple: "It being in the open air, and the audience so large, that it was with great difficulty he [Joseph Smith] could be heard by all present. We have frequently heard him . . . speak of the difficulties that he labors under in speaking to a congregation thus situated." Heber C. Kimball, although not called upon as often as the Prophet, bemoaned the situation at the Grove. He said even the thought of speaking there gave him much pain.

A requirement for being a successful open-air speaker in the 1840s was practice. The Prophet Joseph, in his characteristic desire for self-improvement, followed such a course. James J. Monroe, a tutor to Joseph's children, recorded in his diary that he arose one morning at 4:45 "and accompanied by Joseph proceeded to my usual place of morning retreat. On our way we met Oliver who went with us. On our arrival we commenced our exercises. vis: hallowing, screaming, singing and speaking." In another entry Brother Monroe wrote, "Declaimed until I became quite hoarse. I imagined the woods to be my congregation and spoke to them upon the study of Botany and its importance." [^14]

Such practice undoubtedly enabled the Saints to better hear the Prophet's voice, but it did not necessarily improve their understanding of what he was telling them. Only five months before his death, Joseph preached a Sunday sermon on salvation for the dead. Frustrated by the Saints' reluctance to understand anything contrary to tradition, he complained: "But there has been a great difficulty in getting anything into the heads of this generation. It has been like splitting hemlock knots with a corn-dodger for a wedge, and a pumpkin for a beetle." [^15]

Although the large gatherings in the Grove were the focus of many accounts of religious life in Nauvoo, it was not there that most spiritual activity occurred. Then, as now, religious life for the Saints was centered in the home. Warren Foote, a convert to the Church, described his initiation into the family worship practices of a faithful Latter-day Saint family: "The first prayer I ever made before any person was at Father Myers, when I was called upon by Mother Myers to offer up the family prayer. It was a terrible hard task and perhaps what made it worse my future wife was present. When I went to boarding there I had to take my turn in reading a chapter and singing and praying morning and evening." [^16] This kind of training was successful in forming strong Church leaders. Brother Foote later was captain of a wagon train bound for Utah in the great migration, he led two different colonizing expeditions for President Brigham Young, and he died an esteemed Church patriarch. Home training was essential.

Not a single ward meetinghouse was built during the Nauvoo period. When meetings could not be held at the Grove because of weather or when it was desirable to conduct smaller meetings, they were held in private homes, stores, mills, or any city building of a size to hold the group. In such cases the General Authorities spread themselves around as much as possible, preaching in various parts of the city. Charlotte Haven referred to such a meeting in one of her many letters home; this particular meeting was held in the Prophet's home, and the crowd started gathering two hours before the services were to begin: "When the house was so full that not another person could stand upright, the windows were opened for the benefit of those without, who were as numerous as those within." [^17] Even when weather permitted open-air preaching in the Grove, these small, scattered meetings were often conducted on Sunday mornings, reserving the large public meeting for the afternoon. On occasion, even the city's steamship, Maid of Iowa, was pressed into service as a meeting place.

Another religious meeting for the Saints in Nauvoo was the "blessing meeting." At these social-spiritual get-togethers, it was apparently traditional to serve hot wheat bread and sweet wine. Sermons would be preached, culminating with the father blessing the entire family. Eliza R. Snow mentioned such a meeting in February 1844 as "one of the bright spots on the page of my life, never to be forgotten." [^18]

To accommodate the larger public gatherings, the authorities in 1845 made plans to erect a huge tent tabernacle. It was estimated that it would require about four thousand yards of canvas and cost between one and two thousand dollars. The money was donated, and Orson Hyde traveled east in June 1845 to make the purchase, returning in October with the canvas. It was not made into a tent, however, for the time of the exodus was getting close. The canvas was probably put to use as wagon covers and tents for the western migration in 1846.

Just as most of the large religious gatherings in Nauvoo centered on the temple site, so most of the life in the city centered on the temple. The temple was the main topic of conversation when friends met in the streets and in letters sent back home. It was the showpiece to visitors, and its commanding position made it the first thing to catch the eye of boat passengers on the river. A traveling lecturer of the late 1840s, J. R. Smith, called the temple in Nauvoo the finest building in the west. Erected in only five years, it was, he told his audiences, the largest building west of Cincinnati and north of St. Louis. [^19] John Greenleaf Whittier noted that when completed, the Nauvoo Temple would be "the most splendid and imposing architectural monument in the New World . . . a temple unique and wonderful as the faith of its builders." [^20] It absorbed the interest of Mormons and non-Mormons alike.

As a public works project, building the temple provided a livelihood for numerous immigrants who might otherwise have remained unemployed for some time. Because it was a tithe-labor system that built the temple, the project should have provided one-tenth of all employment. When we consider the number engaged in the various aspects of construction, it probably did provide at least that much employment. Exactly how many people were actually engaged in the construction varied with the season. We get some idea, however, from another of Ann Pitchforth's letters to her relatives in England: "The Temple has 200 men employed continually upon it and is truly a very fine building. Six hundred men are cutting wood and stone for the 200 builders." [^21] The woodcutters were the men at the Black River pineries, whose lumber rafts furnished much of the lumber for the whole town. The entire interior and roof of the temple were of Wisconsin white pine and hardwoods. The stone cutters, of course, were the men at the limestone quarry.

The work of quarrying and preparing the stone was, without doubt, the most hazardous and grueling work in Nauvoo, but it was also perhaps the most exciting and interesting to visitors. By 1842 at least one hundred men were at work just in the quarries, drilling and blasting the rough limestone blocks. Other workers with hammer and chisel trimmed the blocks to a nearly uniform size right at the quarry. Then the blocks were hauled by wagons and carts to the temple stone shop. There they were chiseled and polished into final shape before being lifted by huge wooden cranes into position on the walls. We can get an idea of what was involved in putting these blocks in place from a brief notation in the Prophet's journal on 23 September 1844: "The first capital weighing about two tons was raised on to the walls of the Temple." [^22] The texture of the limestone blocks permitted them to be easily tooled, making them ideal for the exterior ornamentation that attracted so much attention.

The temple required a great variety of tools and vast quantities of materials—brick, mortar, wood, stone, and metal of various kinds. Woodworkers and whitesmiths and blacksmiths were kept busy. In just three and one half years more than one hundred casks of blasting powder were used at the quarry. Crews had to be fed and clothed, teams provided and fed, and wagons, sleds, carts, and their hardware supplied. Many of these items were furnished under the tithing system, but many had to be purchased, making the temple the best customer of commercial Nauvoo.

It must be noted, however, that even the money for purchasing necessary goods was itself donated. The sacrifice of time, labor, goods, and scarce money was the most revealing feature of the entire project. When we consider the impoverished condition of these temple builders, driven destitute from their Missouri homes, the magnitude of their sacrifice takes on greater meaning. There was the inevitable criticism of such an expensive project, especially by outsiders, but Joseph Smith answered them in a public address in October 1843: "Some say it is better to give to the poor than build the Temple. The building of the Temple has sustained the poor who were driven from Missouri, and kept them from starving; and it has been the best means of this object which could be devised." [^23]

Contemporary observers might have noted not only the uniqueness of the doctrine that required such a building but also, perhaps, the uniqueness of the sacrifice that built it. In speaking of Americans in general, a British visitor, Frances Trollope, observed: "It is not in the temper of the people either to give or receive. . . . the destitute in America are not liberally relieved by individual charity." [^24] Nevertheless, the Prophet wrote in October 1841: "Scores of brethren in this city have offered to board one or two laborers each, till the temple is completed, many have volunteered to labor continually." [^25]

The Saints never considered their religious activity as a form of benevolence. When the Neighbor reported that two hundred brethren with forty to fifty teams turned out in a cold drizzling rain to cut wood for the Prophet and then, two weeks later, met again to cut wood for the poor, the newspaper was simply reporting the normal religious activities of a people doing what was expected of a chosen people.

One day in August of the Saints' last full year in their city, the editors did something that was not normal. They delayed for a few hours the publication of their weekly newspaper so that they could report an out of the ordinary event: the laying of the last shingle on the temple. Now, the editors reported, the temple was considered enclosed, and the following day would be a fast day. This response may seem a rather brief recognition for such a momentous event, but the Saints did not have time for much more. In only a few months, the stillness and serenity that marked each Sabbath day would characterize all the days of their abandoned city.

The Church and the Temple

---
Notas:
[^1] Boyle, Sport: Mirror of American Life, p. 12.
[^2] Ibid., pp. 12-13.
[^3] History of the Church, 5:8; 5:21; 5:369; 6:46.
[^4] Farrar, Young Lady's Friend, p. 333.
[^5] Davidson, Life in America, 2:56.
[^6] Kennerly, Persimmon Hill, p. 105.
[^7] McGavin, Nauvoo, the Beautiful, p. 59.
[^8] Launius and McKiernan, Joseph Smith, Jr.'s Red Brick Store, p. 19.
[^9] Andrus and Andrus, They Knew the Prophet, p. 103.
[^10] Oliver, Eight Months in Illinois, p. 73.
[^11] History of the Church, 5:282.
[^12] Lindsay, Mormons and the Theatre, p. 4.
[^13] T. Kane, Mormons, pp. 30-31.
[^14] Ford, History of Illinois, 2:216.
[^15] Mulder and Mortensen, Among the Mormons, p. 121.
[^16] History of the Church, 2:519-20.
[^17] Minnigerode, Fabulous Forties, p. 83.
[^18] Miller and Miller, Nauvoo: The City of Joseph, p. 121.
[^19] Janney, John Jay Janney's Virginia, p. 58.
[^20] Hancock County School Records.
[^21] History of the Church, 4:484.
[^22] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 65.
[^23] History of the Church, 6:134.
[^24] Brooks, On the Mormon Frontier, 1:13.
[^25] History of the Church, 6:153.
