George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

13

Recreation

"No conversation, no laughter, no cheerfulness, no sociality, except in spitting; and that is done in silent fellowship round the stove, when the meal is over." [^1] Thus wrote Charles Dickens in disgust after his visit to America during the early 1840s. Another English traveler who saw little joy in American life was Charles Lyell, who wondered if the American motto should not be "all work and no play." Many Americans themselves recognized this national trait and heartily approved. When Boston workmen agitated to shorten the workday to ten hours, merchants and ship owners feared the detrimental "habits likely to be generated by this indulgence in idleness." [^2] There is no doubt about the strength of the Protestant work ethic in nineteenth-century America and its accompanying lack of "play." In Nauvoo, however, the traveler could see more balance in American life.

As the first primitive homes took shape in Nauvoo, the Saints enjoyed typical frontier entertainments—with a few notable exceptions. An editorial in the 9 October 1844 Nauvoo Neighbor warned: "It is a matter of fact . . . that the citizens of Nauvoo, are opposed to the sale and use of spirituous liquors in said city; that they are equally opposed to gambling in any way, whether by cards, dice, billiard tables, thimbles or other devices." In August 1844 a city ordinance prohibited brothels and disorderly characters, declaring them to be public nuisances. Customers of such places were subject to fines of fifty to five hundred dollars and six months' imprisonment for each offense. Such ordinances were an attempt to control the rougher elements usually associated with any frontier town.

The Saints in Nauvoo had only limited time for recreation. For the average family, economic activities took up twelve to sixteen hours per day in the summer and ten to twelve hours in the winter. These long hours of work were common for most working-class Americans in the nineteenth century. Relaxation among the common people, of Yankee stock especially, was considered a sign of weakness or even a sin. The Protestant work ethic, so strong in the northeastern United States, where so many Saints were from, suggested that ceaseless work was the only justification for man's presence on earth. The new doctrine that "men are that they might have joy" was hard for many of the early Saints to accept, but it was made easier when recreation was given an early stamp of approval by their young Prophet.

The simplest form of recreation for the Saints was the informal contact they made with each other in their daily activities. Sisters meeting at the apothecary would exchange news from back home or of births, deaths, fashions, or children—news that would then be passed on over garden fences on the way home. During their lunch hours, the workers on the partially completed Nauvoo House or the stone cutters on the hill pitched games of horseshoes while discussing the election chances of Polk or VanBuren. Brother Page, dropping off some cowhides at the tannery took time to catch up on the latest town ordinances from Brother Johnson before heading back to his farm east of town. Brother Foote, bringing in a load of chairs from his shop in Montebello to trade at the Red Brick Store, lingered to tell newly arrived immigrants about farming opportunities at China Creek.

Another common form of relaxation for the people of Nauvoo has changed little over the years. "Walking out" or "riding out" was an informal kind of recreation Joseph Smith himself enjoyed, as periodic entries in his journal indicate. One spring day in 1842: "After council, I worked in the garden, walked out in the city." On 3 June: "In the forenoon I rode out in the city." Another time: "In the morning I took my children a pleasure ride in the carriage." And again one fall day in 1843: "Evening, at home, and walked up and down the streets with my scribe." [^3] If the Prophet was an example, the streets of Nauvoo were undoubtedly still much alive with the sights and sounds of pedestrians even after each long working day was over.

Mrs. Farrar, author of the 1838 Young Lady's Friend, was quite familiar with the American custom of walking out and also with what she considered unladylike behavior for young women who participated: "You should converse in low tones, and never laugh audibly; you should not stare at people, nor turn round to look after them when passed." [^4] It was unladylike to go without gloves, swing a bag, untie one's bonnet, or beckon to a friend.

There were more rules for walking out in the city than for most games of sport. In truth, not many games of that period required rules. Some observers suggested that the violence of the Jacksonian era resulted from the lack of sport in American life to consume emotions and energy. Sports were quite different in Nauvoo and nineteenth-century America from what they are today. Few people engaged in team sports. Most Americans were fiercely individualistic and unwilling to submit to the discipline of team play. Besides, most were already exhausted by long hours of hard physical labor. The portion of society that did have the necessary leisure prided itself on more refined activities, such as hunting and riding. Consequently, much of the outdoor recreation in this country was so informal that it is difficult to estimate how much of it was for sport. Certainly many English visitors, familiar with more organized sport at home, did not recognize American recreation as such. As late as 1855, an English visitor noted, "To roll balls in a ten pin alley by gaslight or to drive a fast trotting horse in a light wagon along a very bad and dusty road seems the Alpha and Omega of sport in the United States." [^5] Just living, itself, in the fast-paced, swiftly changing America of that era was the great game. Acquiring the material results of work became a form of recreation to many. The word vacation, so meaningful to twentieth-century Americans, had not yet found its way into the speech of the working people.

But sport as recreation from the physical and emotional pressures of their society did exist in Nauvoo. Hunting and fishing, essentials in the life of the first settlers, had by the middle of the nineteenth century become a sport in the Upper Mississippi Valley. A St. Louis diarist recalled in 1840 that "spring and fall also brought our shooting and fishing seasons, and rain or shine we sallied forth to enjoy that sport." [^6]

The dearest of all outdoor sports to the heart of the American pioneer was the shooting match, and the people of Nauvoo were no exception. Although turkey shoots are not specifically mentioned by Nauvoo journal keepers, they were common throughout the old Northwest Territory. Undoubtedly the gunwise Saints enjoyed them. The owner of a turkey would stake it as a prize, charging nine pence per shot. The winner could take home a turkey for nine pence or put it up again, providing amusement for an entire afternoon.

We do know that residents of Nauvoo, including the Prophet, shot at mark. Wilford Woodruff said of his first meeting with Joseph: "It might have shocked the faith of some men. I found him and his brother Hyrum out shooting at a mark with a brace of pistols." [^7]

[In Old Nauvoo Jonathan Browing's gun shop

One of the greatest of the early gunsmiths, Jonathan Browning, was a convert to the Church in Illinois. He had a gun shop in Nauvoo, and the Nauvoo Legion, perhaps the best trained and certainly the largest militia in the country at that time, was an attractive and exciting segment of Nauvoo life. Such a combination must have been irresistible to the Mormon community in encouraging the testing of shooting skills.

Wrestling was perhaps the most popular sport in Nauvoo. Known as "catch-as-catch-can" wrestling, it was primarily a test of strength, usually arranged on the spot whenever a group of men gathered together. A few rules barred gouging and strangle holds, but almost any grip was permitted and tripping was a distinctive part of the match. The champion wrestler, and in Nauvoo that was usually Joseph Smith, was regarded with special admiration.

Joseph Smith III recalled a time from his boyhood when he visited the Red Brick Store to find that the Prophet "had spent most of the afternoon wrestling with customers. The grassy turf outside the store had been dug up and stomped down by the wrestlers and excited spectators." [^8] Contemporaries remembered that the Prophet also excelled in foot-racing, jumping distance, pulling sticks, and pitching quoits. Pulling sticks required the competitors to sit on the ground facing each other with feet together and grasping a stick. The winner pulled his opponent off the ground. Quoits consisted of pushing a flat stone, weighing twenty to sixty pounds, from the shoulder while toeing a mark. The greatest distance thrown determined the winner.

Another frontier sport was horse racing. The Saints had lost most of their possessions in Missouri, but they had not abandoned their horses. Well-bred horses were prized possessions, and their numbers were added to in Nauvoo. By 1840 in the old Northwest Territory, county fairs and other associations were holding regular races. In St. Louis, May and October were the racing seasons on the regular tracks, but racing informally was popular year-round. Around Nauvoo, horse racing was always informal. A race could be arranged spontaneously on any level stretch of road. Racing had to be spontaneous because horse racing as an organized sport inevitably encouraged gambling, which was not condoned by Church leaders. The Neighbor reflected in a brief editorial on 11 June 1845: "There has been much horseracing the past season, at various courses in the United States, but as horseracing, gambling, swearing, drinking and the other things have so little respectability connected with them, in point of honor and virtue, we have not thought it advisable to chronicle the results."

There is a popular belief that Abner Doubleday invented the game of baseball the same year Nauvoo was settled. The truth is, the game was never invented but merely evolved from some English ballgames of the type that were played by the youth of Nauvoo. These included variations of cricket, rounders, and town ball. In these games any number could play on fields of any size, and rules were variable enough to provoke argument.

Mosiah Hancock remembered how a ballgame was used to relieve the drudgery of work: "The summer of 1841 I played my first game of ball with the Prophet. We took turns knocking and chasing the ball, and when the game was over the Prophet said, 'Brethren, hitch up your teams.' " [^9] The men then pitched in to gather wood for Nauvoo's more needy families, taking an occasional break from work to pull sticks with the Prophet.

Football and basketball were unknown in America at this time. There was however, some track, boxing (regarded at first as un-American), gymnastics (introduced by German immigrants), and weight and dumbbell lifting. There is little evidence of any of these sports in Nauvoo, but there were boating contests, and swimming was apparently quite popular with the young men. In fact, the Neighbor of 5 July 1843 recorded that the city had found it necessary to pass an ordinance prohibiting "nude bathing in any waters within city limits."

Nineteenth-century sports in America were not limited just to males. In her book for young ladies, Mrs. Farrar listed a number of sports that provided good exercise for the "fair sex," including bowling, troco, quoits, archery, battledoor, graces, and skipping rope. It is more than likely, however, that even when leisure was available for the sisters in Nauvoo, their priorities did not include many sports or games. The sisters did include in their list of recreational activities more organized events, such as parties, balls, and picnics. There were "pie suppers" and church celebrations, quilting parties and husking bees to attend.

Husking bees were an Illinois social event and not quite as common in Nauvoo, but Saints who had farms on the outskirts undoubtedly adopted the husking bee with enthusiasm. William Oliver, an English traveler in Illinois, described these Illinois events as "corn shocking" or "husking frolics." The corn was divided into two piles, teams were selected, and the battle began. Oliver described an "unceasing shower of husked corn through the air into a roofless crib." After the competition, the workers retired to long tables of "eatables" set up beforehand by the older women. [^10]

With their pragmatic nature, the Latter-day Saints turned a major piece of labor into a community fun fest, described by Joseph Smith in 1843: "about seventy of the brethren came together, according to previous notice, and drawed, sawed, chopped, split, moved, and piled up a large lot of wood in my yard. The day was spent by them with much pleasantry, good humor and feeling." [^11]

Music, dance, and the theater have always filled a special place in the heart of most Latter-day Saints. John Lindsay's history of Mormons and the theater noted that "while building temples and propagating their new revelations to the world, the Mormons have always found time to sing and dance and play and have a pleasant social time. . . . Indeed, they are an anomaly among religious sects in this respect." [^12] Colonel Kane, observing Mormon dancing in Iowa after their expulsion from Nauvoo, wrote: "None of your minuets or other mortuary processions . . . but the spirited and scientific displays of our venerated and merry grandparents . . . executed with the spirit of people too happy to be slow, or bashful or constrained." [^13] And Thomas Ford, the governor of Illinois who failed to prevent the assassination of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, wrote: "The more polished portion of the Mormons were a merry set of fellows fond of music and dancing, dress and gay assemblies . . . and were by no means exclusive in admitting anyone to them." [^14]

Many groups in the 1840s held a contrary attitude toward such forms of entertainment. Quakers, Campbellites, Methodists, Baptists, and Presbyterians generally forbade dancing but tolerated what was known as play parties. At such parties, to the rhythm of music, participants marched, skipped, shuffled, chased one another, or even kissed. Some observers thought the distinction between such play parties and dancing was about the same as playing cards with a conventional deck or with some other kind.

The Saints were of course influenced by their previous religious affiliations. Some of the older Saints, like Sidney Rigdon, a former Campbellite, enjoyed parties and games as much as anyone but balked at the dancing favored by the younger Saints. Charlotte Haven, a non-Mormon guest at a party Sidney Rigdon gave in 1843, described in detail the gathering, which lasted from three in the afternoon until midnight. From three until six, the women quilted in one room while the men conversed in another. At six, the living room door was thrown open. There "a table extended, loaded with a substantial supper, turkey, chicken, beef, vegetables, pies, cakes, etc. To this we did silent justice." After supper, everyone returned to the other room and "all seemed more joyous; songs were sung . . . Then followed an original dance without music, commencing with marching and ending with kissing! Merry games were then introduced." At nine was a second supper, then more games were played, and the party broke up at midnight. [^15]

Despite the hostility of most Christian churches toward dancing during the Nauvoo period, the Saints not only allowed it but advocated it—as long as it was done in the right environment. Dancing had been a controversial issue in Kirtland, where thirty-one brethren and sisters had been disfellowshipped until they would "make satisfaction for uniting with the world in a dance on Thursday previous." This event, however, was during a period of retrenchment for the Church in Ohio, and steps were being taken against the "use of ardent spirits," "unruly children," and "loungers about the streets." [^16]

As the Latter-day Saints settled into a seemingly more permanent routine of urban living in Nauvoo two years later, Mormon cultural practices started to take on a more permanent nature. Many practices we associate with Utah had their beginnings in Nauvoo, such as the cotillion parties held at the Mansion House and informal dances in barns. The music at most of these dances was furnished by violins, accordians, and reed organs.

It was generally agreed that three ingredients were necessary for the success of parties anyplace during this time period: a copious buffet, such as Charlotte Haven enjoyed at the Rigdon home; a great deal of light, furnished usually by candles with reflectors; and of course the dancing. Until around 1840, dancing was almost exclusively quadrilles. German immigrants at this time brought with them the "impure waltz with its wanton swing." One book of etiquette suggested that "the waltz is a dance of quite too loose a character, and unmarried ladies should refrain from it altogether both in public and in private." The book suggested that young married ladies might waltz at private balls with "persons of their acquaintance." [^17] By the time Nauvoo was abandoned, the polka was making its appearance.

As much as the Prophet Joseph enjoyed socializing, however, his home was apparently too much a social center, hindering his private life and forcing a Church council to publish a notice advising people not to go to the Smith house in large crowds. Nevertheless, it seems that the homestead remained the social center until the family moved into the new Mansion House in August 1843, and then that became the center. In October that year there was a formal housewarming with two hundred prominent friends and citizens. [^18] At another party at the Prophet's home, two long tables were set up in the dining room to seat one hundred twenty couples. Guests were seated across the table from their partners. Joseph, Emma, and several young girls waited on the guests.

To unburden himself somewhat from the pressures of entertaining, Joseph rented the Mansion House to Ebenezer Robinson in 1844. The Mansion continued as a public house and brought the Prophet one thousand dollars per year plus board for his family. The Smiths kept three rooms in the Mansion. In spite of the change, parties were still held there a year later. The Neighbor reported on 2 April 1845 that fifty couples had taken supper there the previous Friday and were entertained by the band, some of the "sweet singers of Nauvoo," and two comic speakers. The newspaper article concluded with praise for the "temperance and virtue mingled in amusement without the blush of profanity or strong drink."

One of the most pleasant mental pictures we have of social life in Nauvoo is the dancing by moonlight on the deck of the Maid of Iowa. This activity was especially popular during the summer when cooling breezes from the river offered relief from the evening heat. Brigham Young, president of the Quorum of the Twelve, often attended such dances and loved to participate. He favored old-fashioned quadrilles and cotillions and an occasional reel; however, the waltz and the polka were usually barred at dances he attended.

Other social events besides parties and dances featured music, feasting, and merriment, especially such holidays as the Fourth of July. In the 1840s Americans were not ashamed to wave the flag and listen to long, impassioned speeches on patriotism. It seems ironic that a people so ill-protected by a government that had refused to address their expulsion from Missouri and now offered no protection from the menacing Illinois mobs could make the Fourth of July their biggest holiday of the year. But if we can judge from journals and newspaper reports, that is exactly what they did.

Typical Independence Day celebrations in the early 1800s included bonfires and brightly lit homes and streets at night, dinners and much speechmaking, parades by the militia and anyone who wanted to join, the firing of cannons, and in general, day-long festivities. The editors of the Neighbor apparently felt such celebrations were not appropriate and tried to temper them with some advice. Noting on 28 June 1843 that Brothers O. Hyde and G. J. Adams, who were leaving on a mission to Russia, would address the Saints on the Fourth, the editors thought it "far more advisable for all who wish to be considered Saints to assemble for religious worship. . . . The giddy and unthinking will no doubt resort to public dinners, festivals and perhaps to the ball chamber." It is difficult to determine whether the advice altered the day's events, but on 5 July 1843 the paper reported what may have been the biggest celebration ever staged in the city. More than fifteen thousand people gathered at the Grove to hear talks by Orson Hyde, Parley P. Pratt, and Joseph Smith. Three steamers arrived in the afternoon from St. Louis, Quincy, and Burlington with nine hundred guests, who were met at the landing by the Nauvoo Band and Escort Companies and escorted to the Grove, where they were welcomed by the firing of cannon. The evening's activities included fetes for the visitors in the city.

That was the last Independence Day celebration the Saints held in Nauvoo. The death of Joseph and Hyrum Smith and the failure of the authorities to bring about justice convinced the Saints that the United States was not a land of freedom, at least for them, and there was no reason to celebrate.

Perhaps not quite as joyous as a normal Fourth but just as meaningful to a religiously oriented people was Thanksgiving. It was a New England tradition as old as the Pilgrims, and many people of Nauvoo were from New England. Thanksgiving Day was kept as Christmas Day was kept in England and Germany. In fact, people of Yankee origins celebrated Thanksgiving more exuberantly than they celebrated Christmas.

We look in vain through Nauvoo's newspapers, or any other newspapers in the old Northwest Territory of that time, for any indication that Christmas was very much different from any other day of the year. The newspapers advertised no gifts or mentioned special celebrations. In some homes there were homemade candies, popcorn strings and balls, and fancy cookies with dates and figs for the occasion. A few families exchanged simple gifts, inexpensive or homemade. One journal keeper of the times recorded: "There was no systematic giving as at present. I have no recollection of ever receiving anything of any value except a very little book my teacher gave me." [^19]

It is difficult for us to imagine such a joyous custom not existing only a century and a half ago or to think of children not looking forward with excitement to gifts under a Christmas tree. There is some dispute about when Christmas trees were introduced in America, but most experts agree it occurred around the Nauvoo era. In any case, Christmas trees were not a custom in the Mormon city.

Neither was the popular exchange of Christmas cards. Commercially printed Christmas cards originated in London in 1843, but as early as 1822, homemade cards had become the bane of the United States postal system. Nauvoo had its own post office, but there is no mention by Postmaster Rigdon or anyone else about problems with Christmas cards. It is likely that few homemade cards were exchanged.

Another thing hard for us to imagine is schoolchildren not looking forward to Christmas vacations, but such was the case. In 1843 Christmas fell on a Monday, but there was school as usual for Nancy Goldsmith's classes as there was in 1844 for William Hathaway's and Jesse Haven's classes. [^20]

Christmas was at least an occasion for adult get-togethers in the evening, perhaps after a regular working day. In 1841 Joseph Smith recorded in his journal, "Being Christmas, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, and their wives, and Willard Richards spent the evening at Hiram Kimball's" for supper. [^21] Warren Foote, living south of the city, recorded in his journal on Christmas Day in 1844: "I have been helping F. Allen haul his hay from Mr. Pond's. . . . This evening, I with my wife and Albert Clement went by invitation to Bro. Abraham Miller's to partake of a Christmas supper. We had a very agreeable time." [^22]

There seems to be no mention whatever of Christmas 1842 in journals or in the Nauvoo newspaper. In 1843, however, Joseph Smith recorded in his journal that he was awakened at one A.M. by serenaders singing "'Mortals, awake! with angels join', &c., which caused a thrill of pleasure to run through my soul. All of my family and boarders arose to hear the serenade. . . . They also visited my brother Hyrum, who was awakened from his sleep." [^23]

The year 1843 seems to have been a year for great celebration of Christmas in Nauvoo. A notice in the 13 December 1843 Neighbor announced: "At the request of a large number of citizens, General Joseph Smith proposes having a dinner party, on Christmas Day at 1 o'clock P.M., for young ladies and gentlemen." In his journal the Prophet later recorded that fifty couples attended and enjoyed music and dancing. This was the party Porter Rockwell interrupted after he escaped from the authorities in Missouri.

Christmas 1844 seems to have passed largely unnoticed. Only Hosea Stout, Nauvoo's chief of police, mentioned in his diary: "Dec. 25 W. Christmas wrote at Lodge met police and Lodge as usual." [^24]

New Year's Day, like Christmas, also seems to have passed largely unnoticed in the Mormon city. Diaries mention it only as another working day or as just the beginning of a new year. A little different, however, was the beginning of Joseph Smith's new year in 1843. He recorded: "At early candle-light, went to prayer-meeting. . . . At midnight, about fifty musicians and singers sang Phelps' New Year's Hymn under my window." [^25] The following evening, Joseph wrote, a large party ate a New Year's supper at his house and enjoyed music and dancing till morning. Most of the Saints, however, began the new year in a more restrained manner. One journal keeper wrote in 1843: "I have lived to see the end of another year. . . . I should feel very ungrateful not to acknowledge the goodness of God in spareing my improfitable life." [^26] Few Saints saw reason to celebrate such sentiment with festivities and thus paid little attention to the day.

Everyone in Nauvoo did pay attention to the traveling exhibitions that visited the city during the year. Circuses, especially on the frontier, could bring to a halt almost all other town activities. The early traveling circuses, the kind that visited Nauvoo, were called "mud shows" because of the muddy roads they had to travel. They played in barns, in theaters, or outdoors (as was the case in Nauvoo) before nothing more than a canvas backdrop nailed to a building. These mud shows usually traveled at night, averaging fifteen miles, and arrived on the outskirts of towns like Nauvoo early in the morning. They halted to freshen up and put on display whatever costumes, flags, or plumes they had, and then they moved grandly into town.

On 23 August 1843 the Neighbor announced the coming of the Mabie and Howes Circus Company with "feats of activity and horsemanship." The ad concluded, "This is a large company, travels much and gives general satisfaction. Feats of herculean strength, will also be performed. Admission to the box, 50 cents—to the pit, 25 cents." Because Nauvoo had no building large enough to contain a pit and box seats, the references were probably to roped-off areas providing desirable and less desirable viewing areas. It is quite possible that only the "box" provided seats. For this performance of the circus, a steam ferry transported two hundred persons from Ft. Madison to Nauvoo. The Lee County Democrat reported that "after the landing of the boat at the wharf many of the ladies and gentlemen paid a visit to the Temple, while others paid a visit to the circus, others partook of the good things which are at all times found in the city of Nauvoo." [^27] That everyone did not go to the circus is a most favorable commentary on a city that could offer attractions to compete with a circus.

Another circus, billed in the newspaper as a "Grand Zoological Exhibition," visited Nauvoo two years later. The Neighbor advertised it on 9 July 1845 as the largest show of its kind in the United States. Its extensive collection of living wild animals featured a harnessed Numidian lion. The circus made its entrance into Nauvoo with a whole retinue of horses and wagons. Two large elephants pulled the band car. A storm disrupted the show but added to the excitement of this particular exhibition. As Nauvoo's chief of police recorded in his diary for Monday, 21 July, a hard wind "blew down the canvass and completely frustrated the calculations of the Show men." During the rainstorm, Brother Stout described the Seventies Hall as crowded to overflowing, so perhaps the exhibition was held nearby. After the storm, people "crouded on to the canvass" and made it difficult to commence the show again. Eventually the show was restarted and the Chief concluded "we had a tolerable time though it was raining most of the time." [^28]

Even the showing of a single exotic animal was newsworthy to a frontier community. The 16 October 1844 Neighbor announced the public showing of an "Ourang Outang." To see her "imitate everything she sees with so grave a demeanor," the editor said, "it is almost impossible to dismiss from your mind the idea that she is a human being. Perhaps she is! Who knows?"

Even in the midst of leaving Nauvoo in 1846, time was apparently taken by the Saints to view an exhibition of horsemanship. In June, the Hancock Eagle reported that the Olympic Arena and United States Circus, an equestrian corps, was coming to Nauvoo for one day only.

Touring human beings, if they were skilled enough or unusual enough, could attract a paying audience, and the people of Nauvoo, in spite of their poverty, would pay for such entertainment. Joseph Smith also attended, as occasional entries in his journal indicate: "In the evening, attended Mr. Vicker's performance of wire dancing, legerdemain, magic, etc." [^29] Another entry relates, "Went in the evening to see Mr. LaForest exhibit feats of strength." Exactly who LaForest was is a little uncertain, but he was probably a traveling strongman. He apparently did not rate space in the local newspaper. Perhaps the editors were not impressed. They certainly were not impressed when a giant couple visited Nauvoo. The 7 May 1845 Neighbor nonchalantly noted that the Scottish man and woman were 7'4" and 6'6" respectively. The newspaper downplayed the exhibit, citing tall individuals in or near Nauvoo, including General Brown from across the river who was 6'8" and the newspaper's youngest "devil," who was 6'4". Even some of Nauvoo's "stout" police were as great a natural curiosity and "have never yet exhibited themselves."

Others who did exhibit themselves, however, did so quite often in Nauvoo. The ill-treated and poverty-stricken remnants of the Pottawattamie, Sauk, and Fox tribes still living in the upper Mississippi Valley visited Nauvoo repeatedly, asking advice from the sympathetic Joseph Smith. The Latter-day Saints were some of the few who treated these native Americans with respect and tried to help them. Joseph recorded one visit by about forty Sauk and Fox Indians to Nauvoo in May 1844. Among them was Black Hawk's brother, Kis-kish-kee. On the second day of their visit they talked with the Prophet about their ill-treatment at the hands of whites, which he readily acknowledged. He advised them to sell no more of their land, cultivate peace with other tribes, and attempt to live in peace with the whites. "At 3 P.M.," he recorded, "the Indians commenced a war dance in front of my old house. Our people commenced with music and firing cannon. After the dance, which lasted about two hours, the firing of cannon closed the exercise. . . . Before they commenced dancing, the Saints took up a collection to get the Indians food." [^30]

Another form of entertainment, as typical of the 1840s in Nauvoo as the Sauk and Fox Indians, was phrenology. It was the craze of the 1830s and 40s throughout America. Considered a European "moral science" that professed to reveal personality traits through skull configuration, it was fun for the participants and profitable for the practitioners. Touring professionals who examined heads for a fee provided their customers with charts showing their weaknesses and strengths.

Phrenology was, however, much ridiculed by the skeptics. Under an assumed name Mark Twain once got a three-dollar reading of his "bumps" and was informed that he completely lacked a sense of humor. Joseph Smith, another skeptic, recorded in his history on 6 May 1843: "In the morning, had an interview with a lecturer on Mesmerism and Phrenology. Objected to his performing in the city." Mesmerism, which was from France and was first called "animal magnetism," eventually was revealed to be a type of hypnotism. Perhaps it was the lectures on mesmerism that the Prophet objected to because later that same year, he recorded that "in the evening, Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith, and John E. Page visited Mr. O. S. Fowler, the phrenologist, who examined their heads and gave their phrenological charts." [^31]

The results of the readings were duly published in the paper. There, on the front page of the Neighbor, the strengths and weaknesses of Nauvoo's leaders were laid bare for the gratification of the Saints' curiosity. The year previous, Willard Richards's chart had been published on the front page of the Wasp of 9 July. Unfortunately, we have no record of his or his friends' reaction to see him described as "very partial to the opposite sex," "attached to a place of long residence" (he was constantly on the move), having "indistinct notions of time, of ages, dates of events" (he was Church historian for many years), and being "without fluency" (he became editor of the Deseret News and was also Church recorder).

As we consider the hardships the Nauvoo Saints weathered, the persecutions they endured, the grueling labor they performed in once again starting from scratch to rebuild their homes and their lives, the discomforts of life in the 1840s, the diseases and deaths that frequently struck almost every family during those seven years, the hostility of their gentile neighbors, the scoffings of their friends and relatives "back home" we might wonder how any people could find joy or laughter in such circumstances. But they did, and that was part of the miracle of their faith and a testimony to the leadership of their Prophet. When the wagons leaving Nauvoo disappeared into the Iowa prairies, they carried with them a people saddened by the thoughts of all they were leaving behind, but their sadness was tempered by the memories of some of the good times they had experienced in their city by the river.

Recreation

---
Notas:
[^1] Buley, Old Northwest, 2:572.
[^2] Ibid., 2:570.
[^3] Davidson, Life in America, 2:28.
[^4] Fish, Rise of the Common Man, p. 225.
[^5] Halford, Nauvoo—the City Beautiful, p. 176.
[^6] History of the Church, 4:514.
[^7] Andrus and Andrus, They Knew the Prophet, p. 120.
[^8] Barrett, Joseph Smith and the Restoration, p. 408.
[^9] History of the Church, 6:281.
[^10] Farrar, Young Lady's Friend, p. 324.
[^11] Grund, Americans, pp. 76-77.
[^12] Illinois, Am. Gd. Ser., p. 131.
[^13] Young Man, p. 28.
[^14] History of the Church, 6:362.
[^15] Coad and Mims, American State, p. 179.
[^16] Lindsay, Mormons and the Theatre, p. 6.
[^17] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 42.
[^18] Cox, Mormonism in Illinois, p. 36.
[^19] Lindsay, Mormons and the Theatre, pp. 4-6.
[^20] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 43.
[^21] Grund, Americans, p. 85.
[^22] Cornwall, Stories of Our Mormon Hymns, p. 170.
[^23] L. Wright, Culture on the Moving Frontier, p. 190.
[^24] History of the Church, 5:49.
[^25] Cornwall, Stories of Our Mormon Hymns, p. 149.
[^26] Caswell, City of the Mormons, p. 9.
[^27] Fish, Rise of the Common Man, pp. 236-37.
[^28] Grund, Americans, p. 85.
[^29] Kimball, "Heber C. Kimball and Family," p. 477.
[^30] T. Kane, Mormons, p. 32.
[^31] Halford, Nauvoo—the City Beautiful, pp. 184-85.
