George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

14

Cultural Activities

Oratory is a lost art. It has gone the way of stone fences and buggies. Hollywood and television thrillers have destroyed it forever, but at one time it was as common as the daily newspaper and as American as the Fourth of July. In the early nineteenth century, oratory had wider appeal than the theater. Speeches could be expected at any public gathering, large or small, whether Fourth of July celebrations, camp meetings, political meetings, lyceums, or farewells. Sunday sermons and speeches at court trials were analyzed for weeks afterward. During the time the Latter-day Saints were in Nauvoo, Americans in general looked on the week that court was in session as "a general holiday. . . . all who can spare the time, brush up their coats, and brush down their horses and go to court. A stranger is struck with the silence, the eagerness and deep attention. . . . Everything is done in this country in popular assemblies, all questions are debated in popular speeches and decided by popular vote. . . . the taste for popular assemblies . . . , which forms so striking a trait in the western character, is, in itself, a conclusive proof of a high degree of intelligence. Ignorant people would not relish nor understand the oratory." [^1]

The Mormons, as interested in oratory as any other Americans, had an additional reason for improving their skills in speech making and debate. Most Latter-day Saint men expected not only to serve missions for the Church, making public speaking and debate a part of their daily routine for a few years but also to be called on at any time to explain their unique doctrine to non-Mormon neighbors and relatives. The lyceum was an extremely popular forum for honing skills in oratory.

By 1840 practically every town in the old Northwest Territory "had a lyceum. Piqua, Ohio, 1837 was claiming that almost every village half its size had a lyceum to beguile the winter evenings and disseminate knowledge." Through such organizations ordinary citizens learned rules of debate, law, and political science and heard about the best or latest books and periodicals. [^2] In 1841 the theaters in New York were all but deserted, whereas the lyceum was hard put to find lecturers enough to satisfy the crowds who came to listen. [^3] Although temporary, the lyceum was nevertheless an astonishing phenomenon of the 1830s and 1840s. One social historian called it the most important educational agency touching the lives of adult Americans at the time. [^4]

In towns much smaller than New York City, the lyceum emphasized local involvement, probably because of the shortage of well-known guest lecturers. Participants compared their own speeches and papers (written speeches were submitted) with such great orators of the time as Robert D. Owen, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Alexander Campbell, John C. Calhoun, and Henry Clay and even the ancient orators of Greece and Rome.

Nauvoo was not about to take a backseat in any form of cultural improvement, especially one so universal as the lyceum. In its issue of 29 November 1843, the Nauvoo Neighbor announced the formation of the Nauvoo Lyceum by "young gentlemen of the city . . . for the purpose of improving in debate." Gustavus Hills, watchmaker and jeweler, the article informed its readers, was selected as president, and the first debate was scheduled for December 5 at 6 P.M. The debate question, still relevant one hundred fifty years later was "Ought capital punishment to be abolished?" Other questions debated in following weeks included "Should females be educated to the same extent as males?" and "Is there sufficient evidence in the works of nature to prove the existence of a God?" [^5] We are not informed of the results of these debates, but it would be extremely interesting to have heard the arguments of the con side of these issues in a religious community such as Nauvoo, especially if any Church leaders were present.

We do know that Church leaders attended some public debates. More than a year before the Nauvoo Lyceum was organized, debates were held informally. Joseph Smith noted in his journal in February 1842, "In the evening attended a debate. At this time debates were held weekly, and entered into by men of the first talents in the city, young and old, for the purpose of eliciting truth, acquiring knowledge, and improving in public speaking." [^6] Although he makes no mention of it in his journal, the Prophet's presence at these debates was possibly something he felt was needed. Mary Thompson, who attended one of the debates, recalled, "I have seen him in the lyceum and heard him reprove the brethren for giving way to too much excitement and warmth in debate." [^7]

The Nauvoo Lyceum was held in various homes and schools in the city. At least two of the meetings were held at Orson Pratt's school. It apparently became difficult to distinguish the lyceum and other public lectures from extensions of the school system; in fact, the Lyceums were often called lecture schools. "At the commencement of the school," wrote Wandle Mace, one of the evening students, "the new members could only use a few minutes of their time, being unused to public speaking and because they must confine themselves to their subject. Before the winter was gone, however, they could occupy all their half hour and keep the subject in hand." [^8]

On 21 February 1844 the Nauvoo Neighbor announced a subject for the next meeting at the Nauvoo Lyceum which was certain to promote an enthusiastic gathering. The question was "Are the claims and qualifications of Martin Van Buren for the Presidency as good as those of Henry Clay?" The news article then listed the names of the five participants for the affirmative and the five for the negative.

When the Saints were not themselves involved in oratory and debate, they enthusiastically attended the lectures of visiting professionals. It was difficult for towns on the American frontier to attract well-known speakers, so a professional lecturer on almost any subject could fill a hall. In March 1844 Joseph Smith recorded that "Dr. Reynolds, of Iowa City, lectured on astronomy in the assembly room." [^9] Public lectures were apparently so popular that the Saints, at the end of a national depression and with money as scarce as banks themselves, were willing to pay to hear public lectures and take examinations about them afterwards. The Nauvoo Neighbor announced such an exam in its issue of 13 March 1844:

"The young ladies and gentlemen who have attended Mr. Martin's lectures, will pass a public examination on Saturday in the school room over the store of Messrs. Butler & Lewis, at 3 o'clock P.M.

"Mr. Martin makes the following offer to the citizens of Nauvoo, that he will give a second course of lectures in the month of April, to a class of one hundred and twenty, for one hundred and twenty dollars, the room procured, warmed if necessary, and lighted at the expense of the class."

These public lectures were for women as well as for men. Women not only were welcomed but were actually pampered in most such meetings. Special consideration for the "fairer sex" was not unique to Mormon Nauvoo. Mrs. Farrar, in her Young Lady's Friend, took note of this American trait: "On all public occasions there is great attention paid to the accommodation of the female part of the audience. Certain seats are allotted to their use, and they are admitted to them before the house is otherwise occupied." [^10]

Another trait that foreign visitors observed about Americans was their penchant for "all work and no play." A German writer, Francis Grund, offered this assessment of his American neighbors after fourteen years' residence: "The Americans are not fond of any kind of public amusement; and are best pleased with an abundance of business. Their pleasure consists in being constantly occupied; and their evenings are either spent at home, or with a few of their friends, in a manner as private as possible." He presented as evidence the fact that the nation's capital had only one theater, Boston two, New York three, and only one of them was profitable. [^11]

Even if it were true for the rest of the United States, which is questionable, such an observation certainly was not true for Illinois. During the 1840s the people of Illinois developed a fondness for the theater, preferring melodrama, farce, opera, and pantomime to comedy, tragedy and history plays, but theater productions of any sort were popular events that appealed to a broad cross-section of society. [^12] In fact, some fifty stock companies were supported in moderation and even gained in respectability. Nevertheless, thousands around the country still regarded the theater as the chief weapon of the devil, perhaps because of the connection of the theater in the larger cities with lewd songs, indecent dancing, and coarse expressions. A self-improvement book published anonymously in 1845 warned that "no young man can be in the habit of attending theatres without extreme liability to become corrupted in every principle. . . . they are among the most dangerous places to which young men can resort for amusement." [^13]

In Nauvoo, however, the Church turned the potential temptation of the theater into an innocent and uplifting diversion for its trouble-weary people. It took little effort to build a widespread enthusiasm for the drama in Nauvoo. The Prophet thoroughly enjoyed such entertainment, which he would duly record in his journal the following day. The 9 May 1844 entry in his journal noted: "Evening, attended theatre, and saw 'Damon and Pythias,' and 'The Idiot Witness' performed." [^14] And the Prophet himself helped to form the city's first dramatic company. [^15] Often touring professional actors played the leading roles, but most members of the cast were local people. Brigham Young made his famed debut in just such a production as a Peruvian high priest in a play called Pizarro. [^16]

A group of touring actors was mentioned in the journal of Mormon schoolteacher and part-time stage-driver Warren Foote. "Last Wednesday I started for Rushville, with a load of theater play actors, with their baggage. They were a kind of traveling theatre." [^17] But the residents of Nauvoo were not entirely satisfied with the periodic visits of touring thespians. The Neighbor published this notice in the 1 May 1844 issue:

NAUVOO THEATRE

An establishment for theatrical representations has recently been fitted up in our city. The public have been highly entertained at witnessing the three first evening's performances.

The first production of the Nauvoo Dramatic Company was Pizarro; or, The Death of Rollo, which apparently was so successful that the company went on tour, probably to other towns along the upper Mississippi. They presented Douglass, Idiot Witness, Therise, William Tell, Virginias, and The Iron Chest. [^18]

One of the factors accounting for the success of the Nauvoo Dramatic Company was the name of its leading actor, Thomas A. Lyne, a tragedian from Philadelphia who had played supporting roles to Edwin Forrest, the elder Booth and Charlotte Cushman. This nationally known actor had become fascinated with Nauvoo, Mormonism, and the Prophet Joseph Smith while on tour to the city and stayed on to help form the Nauvoo Dramatic Company. It was commonly believed, although never specifically documented, that he joined the Church while in Nauvoo. [^19]

[In Old Nauvoo The Cultural Hall housed the Nauvoo Theater

Mr. Lyne and other traveling actors had played in far worse accommodations than those afforded them in Nauvoo. Dramatic productions were staged on the ground floor of the Masonic Hall or Cultural Hall, as it was later called. The stage of the assembly room was fitted with tasteful scenery and christened the Nauvoo Theater. But the Cultural Hall was not the only theater for the Saints in and around Nauvoo. One could be set up wherever a group of Saints found a building and an audience. Warren Foote, who lived south of Nauvoo, recorded in his journal in 1841:

"[January] 17th . . . Last night a few of the young folks met at the schoolhouse and organized an exhibition [a kind of theater] I was elected secretary. . . .

"24th Last night we held an exhibition—had good order, and a fine time. . . .

"[February] 10th We held another exhibition last night." [^20]

The theater was not the only cultural activity Americans had developed a fondness for, however. The German visitor Grund observed that the "English liked to listen to music—Americans preferred making it." [^21] And among Americans, Mormons enjoyed music as much as any other group did. Hymns were sung on just about any occasion in Nauvoo. The Saints serenaded their leaders with hymns outside their homes on holidays or special occasions, they sang hymns when they needed their spirits lifted, they sang hymns on festive occasions out of pure joy, and they sang when parting from each other, as when leaving on missions. Joseph Smith was himself especially fond of music and set the precedent for succeeding generations of Saints by encouraging music in the early days of the Church. Brigham Young continued this tradition with the result that good, uplifting music has become a part of the Mormon heritage.

A persecuted people, the early Saints often found solace in music. Perhaps the best-known example of that comfort is John Taylor's attempt to cheer the Prophet and Hyrum by singing for them "A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief" shortly before they were killed at Carthage on 27 June 1844. Hyrum even asked Brother Taylor to sing the hymn a second time. When he responded, "Brother Hyrum, I do not feel like singing," Hyrum replied, "Oh, never mind, commence singing, and you will get the spirit of it." [^22]

The Mormons derived much pleasure from church music, much of which came straight down in the tradition of British Protestant hymnology. [^23] But a new faith requires its own hymns as well as its own doctrines. In 1830, only three months after the Church was organized, the Prophet received a revelation to have made a selection of hymns for the Saints to use. Two years later W.W. Phelps was appointed to print the hymns for the Church that Emma Smith had selected. That same year, the Church newspaper in Missouri, the Evening and Morning Star, started publishing the hymns selected. Unfortunately, mobs destroyed the press and much of the material was lost. The next few years of mobbings and legal conflicts put the hymnbook low on the Saints' list of priorities. It was another seven years before the project was revived.

In the fall of 1839 shortly after Nauvoo was founded, the high council, representing a poverty stricken church, voted to print ten thousand copies of the hymnbook "as soon as means can be obtained." [^24] The means were apparently not soon obtained, for a notice in the Nauvoo Wasp on 22 February 1843, some four years later, requested "persons having Hymns adapted to the worship of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, are requested to hand them, or send them to Emma Smith, immediately." The work progressed rapidly from this point, and within a short time advertisements were appearing in the Neighbor for the new hymnbooks.

We might not recognize many of the hymns sung by the Saints in Nauvoo. Only twenty-seven of the original ninety are still in use in the modern hymnals. Tunes have also changed. For example, "O My Father," perhaps the most popular Latter-day Saint hymn after "Come, Come, Ye Saints," was first sung to the tune Gentle Annie, by Stephen Foster. Then for many years it was sung to the tune Harwell. Since 1893 the hymn has been sung most often to the tune My Redeemer. [^25]

Like the Saints today, the Saints in Nauvoo had choirs. Best known of the several choral groups in the city was the Nauvoo Choir, which consisted of one hundred voices. In 1842 the Reverend Henry Caswell, an English anti-Mormon, attended, incognito, a Sunday service in the "Grove": "The officiating elders not having yet arrived, the congregation listened for some time to the performances of a choir of men and women, directed by one who appeared to be a professional singing-master." [^26] Besides hymns, the Saints, like Americans in general, loved sentimental and humorous songs. One of the most popular of this type was "Home Sweet Home," written by John Howard Payne in 1823. [^27] Such songs as these were known as parlor songs.

Instrumental music was also popular. Grund noted that the performers were usually ladies, the "gentlemen's accomplishments in the arts being commonly confined to the flutes." The author claimed he never heard a single amateur performance on the violin after several years' residence in the United States, although women performed exceedingly well on the piano, guitar, and harpsichord. [^28] Nevertheless, Buley, in his study of the old Northwest Territory, listed the violin as the most popular instrument, with flutes and wood winds next in popularity. The saxophone had not yet been invented. Other common musical instruments of the Nauvoo period were the harp, horn, trumpet and organ. Helen Mar Whitney recalled in the Women's Exponent in 1883: "President Brigham Young had a small piano and invited me to come to his house and practice with his daughter Vilate. . . . I never became weary of practicing until after I heard it was decided that we were to be broken up and move to the Rocky Mountains." [^29] Likely the thought of leaving such an instrument behind discouraged Sister Whitney from further contact with Brother Young's piano.

The Saints were forced to leave behind large musical instruments, such as this piano, when they abandoned the city to the mobs in 1846. But they took more portable ones with them. Thomas Kane, a gentile friend of the Mormons, wrote: "When the refugees from Nauvoo were hastening to part with their table ware, jewelry, and almost every other fragment of metal wealth which they possessed that was not iron, they had never thought of giving up the instruments of [their] favorite band." [^30]

The favorite band was the Nauvoo Brass Band. Led by William Pitt, the band members were converted in England and emigrated to Nauvoo as a group. The members wore white trousers and were proficient on trumpets, French horns, piccolos, clarinets, coronets, bugles, trombone, and bass drum. [^31] Helen Mar Whitney, daughter of Heber C. Kimball, mentioned that among her memories of Nauvoo, the most pleasant was the Nauvoo Brass Band. [^32]

Another popular band was the Nauvoo Quadrille Band, which played not only at quadrilles but also at benefit dances for widowed families, sick members, and departing missionaries. This band had the pleasure of playing for the riverboat cruises on the Mississippi.

Several contemporary sources refer to "the band" without specifically identifying it as either the brass or the quadrille band. Quite likely both bands had some of the same members, and the term applied to them would depend on the musical occasion. It may have been the brass band the Neighbor referred to on 13 August 1845: "Last Sabbath as the congregation dispersed from the grove, the band 'gave a chant' from the steeple of the Temple." Police chief Stout referred in his diary to "the band" in describing an event that normally was an occasion for the quadrille band, a birthday supper for Brother Egan's wife, at which the guests were entertained with "three violins, bass viol and horn, with occasional singing and agreeable conversation." [^33] Nevertheless, Stout's biographer, Juanita Brooks, described this particular band as the brass band.

And then, to increase the confusion, there was the Nauvoo Legion Band. This one was easier to distinguish, however, because it consisted of twenty to twenty-eight members and provided the soul-stirring music necessary for the marching of the Mormon army. This band was mentioned repeatedly in contemporary letters and journals, not necessarily for its excellent music but for its martial sounds as it accompanied the colorful Legionaires.

As far as proficiency is concerned, most bands and other instrumental groups of the time played "by ear." Grierson's Band, at Jacksonville, Illinois, founded in the 1850s, gained wide attention for its unique method of playing by notation instead of by ear. [^34] Thus, it is more than likely that the Legion band, if not the other two, played by ear.

Efforts to improve the quality of music in Nauvoo were apparently successful. In 1841 a Teacher's Lyceum of Music was created with the help of university music professor Gustavus Hills. [^35] Within a short time, the city residents were attending concerts. Admittedly, some of the concerts were given by such amateur groups as the Young Peoples Improvement League and the Relief Society Sisters, [^36] but by 1843 visiting professional musicians were giving concerts in Nauvoo. Two days after Christmas 1843, the Neighbor announced to its readers a public concert: "Mr. William H. Keith, will favor the citizens of Nauvoo with a concert this evening [Thursday] of instrumental and vocal music, at the brick store of Joseph Smith, commencing at 6Â½ o'clock. Admission 25 cents."

By this time the upper story of the Red Brick Store, as large as it was, no longer sufficed for cultural events in Nauvoo. The problem was solved, for a time at least, by the Masonic Hall, a large, three-story building with a theater on the first floor, which was dedicated in April 1844. The Neighbor on 2 October of that year announced in a quaint manner: "a 'grand concert' of vocal and instrumental music, in this city on Monday the 7th inst. at 6 P.M., at the Masonic Hall. From an overture on 'O God, Save Nauvoo,' there will be performed 26 various pieces, with an et cetera. Admittance 12Â½ cents. Music hath charms."

The love of the Saints for music, however, soon made even the Masonic Hall, or Cultural Hall, as it was now being called, inadequate. Perhaps the success of the "Grand Concert" convinced the people of Nauvoo of the need for a building designed strictly for music. Three weeks later, on 23 October 1844, the Neighbor announced a "music and concert hall in process of construction [which] will house the Nauvoo Choir, numbering over 100 members, and band." Sometimes called simply the Music Hall and sometimes the Music and Concert Hall, it was built by the musicians' organization and used for both musical concerts and church events. Located a block north of the temple, the hall measured thirty feet by fifty feet with eleven-foot arched ceilings and sounding jars for better acoustics. [^37] Now completely gone, this brick structure seated from seven to eight hundred persons with a raised platform at one end. [^38]

The dedication of the Music Hall in March 1845 ran for three consecutive nights with the Nauvoo Choir and Band as entertainment. Admission was free, but the newspaper noted that donations were needed to finish the hall. Finished or not, the Hall was soon put to use. Only a month later another concert ran for several evenings. On the third evening, according to the Neighbor of 7 April 1845, Elder Heber C. Kimball addressed the audience and mentioned that nearly one thousand persons were present and that this was the third night for the concert in which the Hall was filled to overflowing. Few audiences today would show such enthusiasm as to endure the length of early nineteenth-century concerts and then claim to have enjoyed them. Police Chief Stout, who attended this same concert, noted in his diary that it commenced at 6 P.M. and ended at 11 o'clock and that "we were well entertained." [^39]

Today when culture is discussed, painting and other visual arts are thought of as quickly as music, but they never became nearly as significant a part of Nauvoo culture as music, probably because art was considered to be more for spectators than for participants, and the Saints in Nauvoo never wanted to be just spectators of anything. Buley, in his study of the old Northwest, noted that art was a relatively unimportant activity in this period of time and what little there was centered largely on Cincinnati. [^40] Nevertheless, art was not totally ignored in Nauvoo. Brother Stout recorded in his diary on 7 March 1845, "Went with Br. Scovil to the Mansion then to see Br. Major who was painting scenery of the murder of Joseph and Hyrum at Carthage." Brother Major, an English convert, later sketched the scenery along the route to Utah. In April, Brother Stout again visited the "exhibition of the scenery of the Murder of Brs. Joseph and Hyrum at Carthage also of Jesus raising Lazerus and other like paintings. It was an entertaining display of art." [^41] A week later, on 16 April 1845, the Neighbor reported: "A series of paintings have been commenced in the city, to commemorate the sufferings and tragedies of the Latter Day Saints, one of which, The Assassination of Generals Joseph and Hyrum Smith at Carthage, was so far completed as to be exhibited at Conference."

The Prophet Joseph himself demonstrated an appreciation of this aspect of culture. On 15 June 1844 he recorded: "The Maid of Iowa arrived at half-past two P.M. while I was examining the painting, 'Death on the Pale Horse,' by Benjamin West, which has been exhibiting in my reading room for the last three days." [^42] This painting was likely a copy of one of West's best known paintings, done three years before his death in 1820.

The supreme expression of Mormon interest in visual art, however, was reserved for the temple, where their artistry lovingly created the stone sculpturing required for such an edifice. The exterior ornamentation of the temple, including the sun, moon, and star stones as well as the extensive mouldings required a great deal of artistic talent. But the most interesting temple sculptures were the twelve, finely carved stone oxen supporting the massive stone baptismal font in the temple basement.

Ironically, a description of the destroyed building vividly illustrates the artistry that the Saints of Nauvoo lavished on this sacred structure. When the site was finally covered over in 1865, the Carthage Republican reported: "Of the large numbers of decorations, stone carvings, &c., with which the Temple was beautified, hundreds have been secured by curiosity seekers in all parts of the country; and numbers have even gone to Europe. Some fine specimens are in the possession of citizens of Nauvoo; and numbers of the best wine cellars are ornamented over their entrances with suns in base relief, trumpets, &c." [^43] Twenty-five years after the founding of Cincinnati, Daniel Drake, the historical chronicler of the city that Buley claimed was the center of art and music in the Northwest, complained that except for sign painting and engraving, "in the fine arts we have not anything to boast." [^44] In Nauvoo, only six years after its founding, the Saints had erected and artistically ornamented a monumental edifice that was the showpiece of the west and a topic of conversation for the entire nation. It was the capstone of Mormon culture in Illinois, and, appropriately, like the Saints themselves, it vanished from Illinois just as completely.

Cultural Activities

---
Notas:
[^1] Godfrey, Godfrey, and Derr, Women's Voices, p. 135.
[^2] Gregg, History of Hancock County, Illinois, pp. 296-98.
[^3] McGavin, Nauvoo, the Beautiful, p. 43.
[^4] Furnas, Americans, p. 454.
[^5] Monroe (Diary), p. 120.
[^6] Farrar, Young Lady's Friend, p. 162.
[^7] Burgess-Olson, Sister Saints, pp. 207-8.
[^8] P. Taylor, Expectations Westward, p. 172.
[^9] Quoted in McGavin, Nauvoo, the Beautiful, pp. 41-42.
[^10] Quoted in Mulder, Among the Mormons, p. 119.
[^11] History of the Church, 5:302.
[^12] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 47.
[^13] Leslie, House Book, pp. 145-46.
[^14] History of the Church, 5:273.
[^15] Leslie, House Book, pp. 147-48.
[^16] Blum, Nauvoo: Gateway to the West, p. 71.
[^17] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 71.
[^18] Lynes, Domesticated Americans, p. 132.
[^19] Lindsay, Mormons and the Theatre, pp. 4-6.
[^20] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 43.
[^21] Grund, Americans, p. 85.
[^22] Cornwall, Stories of Our Mormon Hymns, p. 170.
[^23] L. Wright, Culture on the Moving Frontier, p. 190.
[^24] History of the Church, 5:49.
[^25] Cornwall, Stories of Our Mormon Hymns, p. 149.
[^26] Caswell, City of the Mormons, p. 9.
[^27] Fish, Rise of the Common Man, pp. 236-37.
[^28] Grund, Americans, p. 85.
[^29] Kimball, "Heber C. Kimball and Family," p. 477.
[^30] T. Kane, Mormons, p. 32.
[^31] Halford, Nauvoo—the City Beautiful, pp. 184-85.
[^32] Barrett, Joseph Smith and the Restoration, p. 415.
[^33] Brooks, On the Mormon Frontier, 1:55.
[^34] Illinois, Am. Gd. Ser., p. 138.
[^35] Allen and Leonard, Story of the Latter-day Saints, p. 159.
[^36] Halford, Nauvoo—the City Beautiful, p. 183.
[^37] Miller and Miller, Nauvoo: the City of Joseph, p. 128.
[^38] Halford, Nauvoo—the City Beautiful, p. 182.
[^39] Brooks, On the Mormon Frontier, 1:34.
[^40] Buley, Old Northwest, 2:576.
[^41] Brooks, On the Mormon Frontier, 1:25-34.
[^42] History of the Church, 6:471.
[^43] 43. Quoted in Harrington and Harrington, Rediscovery of the Nauvoo Temple, p. 6.
[^44] 44. Wright, Culture on the Moving Frontier, p. 93.
