George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

15

Homes and Home Life

In 1843 Sally Randall saw for the first time the Nauvoo home her husband had prepared for her and the children: "He has a lot with a log cabin on it and it is paid for. The house is very small but I think we can get along with it for the present. He had a table and three chairs. We have no bedsteads yet, but shall have soon." [^1] This simple but eloquent statement could well have been spoken by hundreds of Nauvoo wives about their first homes in Illinois.

According to editor Thomas Gregg of Warsaw, Illinois, the Saints of Nauvoo built about "twelve hundred Hand-hewn log cabins, most of them white-washed inside, two to three hundred good substantial brick houses and three to five hundred frame houses." [^2] Whether Gregg's observation refers just to the city of Nauvoo or to the entire suburban area, when we consider the total population, there must have been, on average, between seven and ten persons per household. Some of the finer homes of course, could easily have accommodated such large families. The John D. Lee home was ninety feet long, two and one half stories high and contained twenty-two rooms. Built of brick and with a cellar, it was wood grained and finished from top to bottom. This house was an exception, though. More typical was the home that Ann Pitchforth described in a letter to her family in England: "We have a very small house with two rooms and a shed, no upstairs and the rent is 9 pounds and 10 shillings a year. By paying 20 pounds down, I can secure a house and one acre of land and leave the remainder to be paid by 10 pounds a year till paid off. Forty pounds will buy a house and lot and all in the city." [^3]

Such small houses for large families meant a lack of privacy as we think of it today. Most homes had no hallways; residents simply went through one room to get to another. These small, hard-to-heat homes also meant several family members sharing a bed, or at least the same bedroom. Such crowding had led to the development of the trundle bed, a bed that could be pushed back under a higher one during the daytime. Privacy was also hindered in these primitive homes by large cracks in the floors of the lofts, which permitted both sight and sound to pass. Locks on bedroom doors were practically unheard of. Even the wealthy did not have the concept of privacy that most Americans have today.

The lack of privacy, however, was not the only primitive aspect of homes in the 1840s. Most walls were unpapered or colorless, windows often went uncurtained, and beds were utilitarian and undecorated. The absence of improvements gave a bare, half-furnished appearance to most homes.

Home life underwent a great change during the 1840s. Fireplaces were bricked up, and cast iron stoves replaced them. With these convenient incinerators gone, there was more trash and refuse to be disposed of otherwise. Gone was the magnetism of the open fire, so kitchens, no longer all-purpose gathering rooms, shrank in size, and separate dining rooms and parlors were added.

The amount of furniture in homes increased while its quality decreased with the advent of factory-made products. Carpets replaced rag rugs and bare wooden floors. Lithographs went up on some walls, and efforts were made to light entire rooms rather than just a table or a work area. A few homes in Nauvoo were wallpapered, but there were some painted interiors. Ready-mixed paint did not appear until around 1880 so such painters as the young Brigham Young prepared their own bases and blended their own colors. Less durable but far more common were whitewashed interiors. Because whitewash was inexpensive, it became standard practice to also whitewash the interiors of stables and cellars as well as gates and fences. Whitewash was much less permanent than paint, so its application was a common part of "spring work" in Nauvoo. Nauvoo was fortunate in having nearby limestone deposits and kilns for making the lime necessary for whitewash.

During the 1840s some baths and indoor toilets were installed as Americans recognized the importance of cleanliness. Knowledge of Greek and Roman hygiene had seemingly been lost after the fall of Rome, and although individual standards of cleanliness varied through the years, not until the eighteenth century was daily washing of the hands, face, and neck recommended practice. By the early nineteenth century, bathing of the whole body had become popular in Europe and, with the help of health faddist Sylvester Graham, bathing spread to America in the 1830s.

But the practice did not become established in America without opposition. Bathing was suspected by the authorities in some communities to be a health hazard, leading the Common Council of Philadelphia to consider banning wintertime bathing in 1835. It was described by reputable contemporary residents as being far from general in the old Northwest Territory as late as 1854. [^4] And ten years later Vassar College required the women to bathe only twice weekly.

Laborers throughout much of the nation frequently went weeks without bathing, often sleeping in the clothes they worked in. They might, however, wash their hands, face, and even feet before going to bed. Often there was not even a place nearby in which to swim. Nauvoo was conveniently near the river, which became a common place for the men and boys to bathe. James Monroe, a teacher in Nauvoo, recorded in his diary on 10 May one year: "Took my usual exercises and a cold bath in the Mississippi." [^5]

For the more modest and less hardy, however, a full bath was reserved for portable tubs indoors. Private bathtubs had been installed in a row of model houses in Philadelphia in 1832, but it is unlikely that any Nauvoo home boasted such a luxury even ten years later. It was generally believed that the best practice was to wash with cold water every day and take one warm bath each week. "Warm bathing is highly useful to the health," said Mrs. Farrar in The Young Lady's Friend in 1838, "and if properly indulged in has no debilitating effect." [^6]

But what a great nuisance it was to heat the water on the hearth and then carry it to wherever the tub was placed. There was a very definite problem in cold weather of having a warm room with privacy—practically an impossibility when the only warm room was near the fireplace where the family gathered. Mrs. Farrar described in detail the proper method of bathing, suggesting that it should be done early in the morning or late in the evening when privacy was most likely. Then, she advised, the whole body could be gone over with a cloth or sponge from one large washbowl full of water. Because so many people were unused to water, except on their hands and faces, one practitioner of hydropathy, Dr. Joel Shaw, prepared an instruction pamphlet entitled How to Bathe.

But instructions did not make bathing more pleasant, especially for young children. On pleasant summer days, mothers could indulge their young ones down at the river, but bathing on a frosty winter day in the drafty homes of that period was no fun for a shivering child. Added misery was in the coarse, homemade lye soap, which chapped and irritated tender skin. Although a mild castile soap was introduced in the early nineteenth century, bathing still remained an uncomfortable necessity in Nauvoo.

Convenience had nothing to do with other aspects of hygiene. Flush toilets had been patented in England as early as 1775, but few American homes had them in the 1840s, and they certainly were not installed in any Nauvoo home. Citizens in the Mormon capital made do with chamber pots and commodes or small outdoor privies located some distance from the house. Flush toilets were not possible in homes where water was carried in buckets from a nearby spring, stream, or well. In Nauvoo, most of the water came from hand dug wells or from cisterns, as at Brighams Young's home. Cisterns collected rainwater diverted through roof gutters and spouts and usually supplemented the water from wells. The "soft" rainwater, also occasionally collected in barrels, was ideal for washing clothes and bodies. Nauvoo well water, highly suffused with lime, left clothes with a grayish hue.

All was not inconvenience or discomfort, however, for the homemakers of Nauvoo. A letter written by Bathsheba Smith to her husband George one day in June 1844 praised "the comfort she had in her home with the flower pots in the windows and new curtains that she made and hung. She had cleaned house, baked a good dinner, and had apples stewing for a pie, preparing for company that evening." She then went on to describe her garden and the vegetables which would soon be ready to share "with the 'girls,' as she called her husband's other wives." [^7]

Many families who, like the Smiths, had lost or abandoned most of their possessions in Kirtland, Independence, or Far West, found grateful satisfaction in the few possessions they soon acquired in Nauvoo. Some homes eventually boasted fine pianofortes, factory rugs, varnished chests, and other luxuries, but such furnishings were not the norm for most of the Saints. Many residents were recent immigrants from the east or the British Isles who, like the refugees from Missouri, started out in Nauvoo with only the few possessions they had been able to bring with them.

In 1842 Church leaders in Nauvoo issued some official advice to British Saints planning to migrate to Illinois: "Passengers should take with them, as far as possible, all kind of clothing, and beds and bedding in plenty; also pots and pans, and all kinds of cooking utensils, and as many tools for the business they intend to follow, as possible. They may also take any reasonable amount of furniture, . . . as we charge them nothing for the freight of their luggage in the ship." [^8] Some Nauvoo homes did boast a few luxuries from English homes, but unfortunately, many of these items were left behind at the exodus—wagons were not able to carry as much westward as the steamers had carried upriver.

As poor as most of the immigrants were, Saints who had been through the Missouri persecutions were even less fortunate. Excerpts from a letter written by Abigail Pitkin in Nauvoo reveal some typical furnishings in a Nauvoo home as well as a few that were lost to "Missouri's wicked clan." A large number of nineteenth-century diarists and letter writers enjoyed putting their thoughts into rhyme:

Our dwelling measures "Thirteen Feet," With walls rough-hewn and white-washed neat. With chairs we're blessed with only two, Missouri claims the remaining few. . . . On shelves our dishes are ranged neat By pegs supported, quite complete. For old Missouri's wicked clan Our cupboard kept and warming pan . . . And many old trunks scattered round, In which our cabin doth abound . . . Our bed springs up against the wall Because our room is rather small; . . . Our table measures just "Three feet," With falling leaves and varnished neat. [^9]

Such furnishings as chairs, tables, and beds could be manufactured right in Nauvoo or in nearby towns, so new ones quickly replaced those lost in former homes. Warren Foote, who manufactured chairs in his shop in Montebello, was only one of several craftsmen who manufactured furniture and sold or bartered it through the general stores in Nauvoo.

Other home furnishings were less easy to replace. During the Nauvoo years clocks were mass produced in New England, but because of the cost and difficulty in shipping these fragile instruments from the east, few Nauvoo homes could display such luxuries. This lack of clocks, which would be devastating to a modern American, prompted the visiting Mrs. Martineau to note that the hours of the day in America varied from home to home and city to city. Time was at the mercy of whatever clock was last purchased in a community.

The people of Nauvoo took such inconveniences in stride. When organizers announced the time of a meeting, as was done in the Nauvoo Neighbor of 16 October 1844, they simply noted that it would take place "next Monday evening at early candle light."

Such terms suggest that buildings were illuminated at night with candles. Some were. But candles were expensive, so many Nauvoo homes were lighted by fireplaces or by grease (lard) lamps. Such lamps were easily made with a saucer or a dish with a lip over which a coil of wicking could be hung and fueled with kitchen grease. For a night light in the homes of the sick, and there were many of those in Nauvoo, a round piece of paper was folded to the center, pinched to a point, and placed on top of the saucer of grease. It would give a small light all night.

Candles, despite their cost, were still a major light source, and candlemaking was a typical household chore. Bits of tallow or animal fat were saved and melted down in large kettles. Homemade wicks or store-bought cotton twists were tied to sticks and repeatedly dipped and cooled until they were of the proper size. Faster, neater candles could be turned out six to twenty-four at a time with candle molds. One visitor to the United States during the Nauvoo years reported astral, solar, moderator, and other fanciful kinds of lamps, but though some of these were used in Nauvoo, they were less common than candles, grease lamps, and fireplaces. In 1843, a non-Mormon resident, Charlotte Haven wrote to her family back east, "now we are at the height of our ambitions with glass lamps and spirit gas." [^10] Whatever the form of lighting, it was usually dim, smoky and smelly, but artificial light enabled the women to spin or sew and the men to work or read during the usually brief period between dusk and bedtime.

When bedtime came, it was without doubt welcomed, in spite of the lack of comfortable beds by today's standards. The bed with coiled springs was not invented until the 1850s. The weary inhabitants of Nauvoo, for the most part, slept on straw or feather ticks on pallets on the floor or on lattice-rope beds. A variety of mattresses could be placed on such a network of cords. Goodholme's Cyclopedia rated them all according to their warmth and cost, although it is questionable how many Mormons read Goodholme's. He rated feathers and wool at the top and sea moss, paper shavings, and straw at the bottom.

Other bedroom furniture included the very welcome warming pan in the winter, perhaps a few prints or silhouettes on the walls, a clothes press in place of the modern closet, a wash stand that held the basin and pitcher, a china mug for teeth cleaning, and, under the washstand, a slop jar and foot bath. Next to or under the bed was the chamber pot, covered with a linen towel or a crocheted top cover.

Before the days of exterminators, there was another unpleasant addition to the bedroom. Bedbugs were extremely common and, to a large extent, accepted as inevitable throughout the country. Nauvoo had an advantage in that the houses were new and the people were more concerned with cleanliness than most frontier families.

As uncomfortable as beds were, they were still welcome on cold Illinois nights, and nights in Nauvoo could get very cold. Joseph Smith wrote in his journal in March 1843: "Very cold last night. The water froze in the warmest rooms in the city." [^11] As late as 1840 most home heating was provided by fireplaces. The large number of fireplaces in Nauvoo, with their inefficient use of fuel, threatened to create fuel shortages when the timber along the river bottom was exhausted. Articles in the Neighbor mention wood-cutting parties on the island and the large number of cords cut for just the Mansion House alone, but the city was abandoned before an acute shortage developed.

Homes were not only not insulated but the cabins especially permitted wind and even snow to penetrate. One general conference visitor to Nauvoo in November 1841 recalled: "I awoke this morning and found myself buried in snow. The house we slepped in had no floor and was very open and the snow had blowed through the crevices and covered us up." [^12] In finer two-story homes, upstairs sleeping rooms were usually without any heat. Some warmth was provided by bed warmers or by sleeping near the warmer chimney end, and feather ticks were used for covers as well as for sleeping on.

Fires were kept going because they were difficult to restart. If necessary, homeowners could "borrow fire" or use flint and steel. Matches had been invented in England a decade before Nauvoo was established, but the sulphur sticks, or "loco-focos," as they were called, were still not very common in most parts of the nation—or even dependable when they were available. Pulled through a piece of folded paper, the chemically treated tip would ignite, producing sparks and a noxious puff of smoke that smelled of rotten eggs. Apparently, matches were improved rapidly since their invention in 1827, because by 1845, a match factory was in operation in Nauvoo. The Neighbor on 5 February 1845 advertised "friction matches, wholesale or retail at the Manufactory, corner of Water and Durfee St."

A book presented to young brides in the 1840s was The House Book; or, a Manual of Domestic Economy, by Miss Leslie. This manual offered advice on all aspects of housekeeping, including the inefficient and demanding fireplace. An entire modern kitchen is child's play compared to the brick oven, which was often built into the side of the fireplace. The oven required light, dry wood built pyramid style in a certain manner, and Miss Leslie described the proper method of cleaning the ashes after the fire died out, how to test the oven for proper heat, how to place food in or take it out of the oven, and how to determine baking time, which varied from ten minutes for small cakes or tarts to over night for plum or other fruit cakes. [^13] Obviously, it would require years of experience to master such imprecise household tasks.

By the 1840s some homes no longer depended solely on fireplaces for cooking or heating. Cast iron stoves, which required many housewives to learn the art of cooking all over again, had slowly won acceptance since the War of 1812—slowly, because they were new and expensive, and many believed they fouled the air and were unhealthy. Nevertheless, cast iron stoves were used in some Nauvoo homes. The Prophet recorded in his journal in February 1843: "This morning I spent some time in changing the top plate of the office stove, which had been put together wrong." [^14]

Miss Leslie may not have offered advice on putting together office stoves, but she did offer advice to wives about tending home fires. One should always sweep the hearth after mending the fire, and sweep down the chimney to clear the soot and keep it from falling in open kettles. For chimney soot that the wife could not reach, Miss Leslie suggested setting the chimney on fire with bundles of straw—but only on rainy days or when there was snow on the roof. This latter advice would not have been welcomed in Nauvoo, where fire wardens inspected chimneys to prevent the possibility of fires.

Such crude heating methods as fireplaces and iron stoves caused numerous fires during this era but, strangely enough, not in Nauvoo. The Nauvoo newspaper carried reports of devastating fires in other parts of the United States: in April 1843 fires in North Carolina destroyed three hundred buildings, in May 1843 fires destroyed two hundred and fifty buildings in Florida, and in July of that same year, two hundred more were burned down in Massachusetts. And yet throughout Nauvoo's seven years, there was never a single mention in a Nauvoo newspaper of a local house fire. Perhaps the fire wardens made a difference, or perhaps the people of Nauvoo were more wary because of the constant warnings by the newspaper editors, or perhaps they really did read Miss Leslie, who also offered advice on the danger of home fires. One should never read in bed at night, she cautioned, as it was not only bad for the eyes but presented a danger of fire. Children should never be left alone in a room with a fire, and they should be taught to smother clothing fires with rugs or blankets. [^15]

Teaching children about the dangers of home fires was only one of the many duties of a nineteenth-century housewife, whose work really was never done. There were grates, hearths, and floors to be scrubbed and fires to be constantly tended, hot water to be carried in pitchers to the bedrooms, and slop jars and commodes to be carried out. There were candles to be made and wicks to trim and lamps to clean. There was wood or coal to be carried in from the woodshed and water to be carried in from the well. Lights and heat did not appear with the flip of switches, and water did not run with the turn of a faucet.

There were some tasks that simply could not be accomplished—such as ridding the home of the ever-present flies in the summertime. In an animal dominated society, their refuse was ever present despite unusually strict city ordinances. With window screening lacking, flies migrated freely between stables and outdoor refuse to the insides of homes and food, adding certainly to the high incidence of disease. Children took turns "minding the flies" at mealtime, chasing them from the table area with a branch or a paper duster. Netting or cheesecloth was used in some homes to protect food, sleeping babies, or sick persons, but in general, germ-laden flies were believed to be less dangerous than night air.

The grueling day-to-day tasks in a typical Nauvoo home are illustrated by the crude implements that were so much a part of a housewife's world. A contemporary Philadelphia newspaper listed, probably as advice to young homemakers, the nineteen most essential utensils in a home: boards for kneading bread, slicing bread, cutting vegetables, and preparing meat, a rolling pin, a stirring pin, two sugar buckets, two large tubs, two large spoons, a potato pounder, a lemon squeezer, a mush stick, washboard, small coffee paddle, wringer and a small tub for mixing dough. [^16]

Two of the most demanding tasks in a Nauvoo home were making soap and making clothes. Each spring, ashes that had been saved during the winter were put into the ash hopper, which was kept supplied with water. As the lye ran off, it was saved until enough was accumulated for a kettle of soap. It was common for a family to make a barrel of soft soap besides a quantity of hard soap. With so much labor involved, this barrel apparently meant a great deal to the women. In 1845, as the mobbers were getting closer to Nauvoo in their home burnings, Warren Foote, who lived south of the city, recorded in his journal: "We fully expected the mob would burn our houses today, and I began to prepare for it, by taking some of the things out of the house. Mother was not able to sit up but little, while I was busy in carrying out all the things, she said 'Warren be sure to take out the soap barrel.' She seemed to think more of the soap than anything else." [^17]

The most time-consuming task in any home was making clothes. Although many Nauvoo homes were furnished with spinning wheels and looms, ready-made clothing was being sold by this time. More common in Nauvoo, however, was the sale of cloth by the yard, to be cut and made into clothing. The "One Price Store" in the Neighbor of 15 May 1844 advertised "large assortment of Domestic, Muslins, of a superior quality, also unbleached sewing Thread of a very superior article; Blue knitting cotton." If a Nauvoo housewife had more money than skill, she could go to professional dressmakers. In the 10 July 1844 Neighbor, Miss H. Ells advertised her millinery and dressmaking abilities at the corner of Water and Main Streets opposite the Nauvoo Mansion. The availability of cloth by the yard and professional dressmakers would soon make the home spinning wheel and loom nearly obsolete, but cutting and sewing dresses, shirts, and pants still consumed much of the Nauvoo homemakers' time. The sewing machine had been invented ten years before the settlement of the city, but not for household use. Mormon women had to depend only on their nimble fingers for most of the clothing worn in Nauvoo.

[In Old Nauvoo Nauvoo's houses and other structures blended with the landscape

As well furnished and as clean as the inside of Nauvoo homes might have been, it was the outside appearances that first caught the attention of visitors, who were impressed by the persistent attempts of the city council and homeowners to keep the city clean and beautiful. Fences were built for looks as well as to keep unwanted animals out of gardens. Flowers and shrubs were planted to beautify grounds. Newspaper editorials advised against cutting down too many shade trees, and fruit trees by the hundreds were planted to enhance homes as well as provide food. Lawns were planted too, although their care was not easy. Lawnmowers appeared about 1840, but they were crude and awkward to use, and only the well-to-do could afford them. In Nauvoo, lawns were either clipped, scythed, or turned over to sheep for grazing. The stables, outhouses, woodsheds, and cow cribs, as much as possible, were drawn into the landscaping plan. Such attempts at beautification were necessary for the Saints. Life was too toilsome and painful not to be alleviated with some grace and refinement.

As we picture the "typical" Nauvoo family at home in the evening, with the patriarch of the home reading aloud to the family while the women occupy themselves with their candlelight tasks, we tend to become nostalgic for a simpler, less stressful past. We must, however, keep in mind how Nauvoo home life really was a century and a half ago. The December 1930 issue of the Journal of Home Economics published the results of a survey that had been conducted to discover which twentieth-century household appliances country families would least like to do without. The first two on the list were running water and sewage disposal. Window screens ranked third, ahead of electric lighting, central heating, refrigeration, and sufficient room in the house. [^18] Most Americans today would feel deprived and embarrassed to lack any one of these. The homeowners of Nauvoo, however, built a city, raised their families, practiced their faith, and, like their fellow citizens throughout the nation, enjoyed life with none of these modern "essentials."

Homes and Home Life

---
Notas:
[^1] Irving, Legend of Sleepy Hollow, p. 43.
[^2] Andrus and Andrus, They Knew the Prophet, p. 146.
[^3] Godfrey, Godfrey, and Derr, Women's Voices, p. 139.
[^4] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 54.
[^5] Marryat, Diary in America, p. 254.
[^6] Kitchiner, Cook's Oracle, p. 57.
[^7] Tryon, Mirror for Americans, 3:577.
[^8] Kiefer, American Children through Their Books, pp. 176-77.
[^9] Quoted in Godfrey, Godfrey, and Derr, Women's Voices, pp. 123, 130.
[^10] Kitchiner, Cook's Oracle, p. 167.
[^11] Raumer, America and the American People, p. 497.
[^12] Lynes, Domesticated Americans, pp. 186-87.
[^13] Marryat, Diary in America, p. 254.
[^14] Kitchiner, Cook's Oracle, p. 316.
[^15] Raumer, America and the American People, p. 498.
[^16] Farrar, Young Lady's Friend, pp. 346-47.
[^17] Young Man, p. 62.
[^18] Torrey, Grigg & Elliot's Third Reader, p. 32.
