George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

16

Food and Drink

"In his devouring mind's eye he pictured to himself every roasting-pig running about with a pudding in his belly, and an apple in his mouth; the pigeons were snugly put to bed in a comfortable pie, and tucked in with a coverlet of crust; the geese were swimming in their own gravy; and the ducks pairing cozily in dishes, like snug married couples, with a decent competency of onion-sauce." [^1] The author of this delightful description of early nineteenth-century American cuisine, Washington Irving, was popular in part because he struck responsive chords among his readers. Americans loved their food. Young women grew up with the conviction that taking care of a husband meant feeding him. Thus the reputation of a "good wife" was determined more by the quantity and variety she could feed her husband and family than by her skill in serving a balanced diet.

One thing that observers believed the Mormon faith was noted for was its pragmatism. The Saints of Nauvoo lived and worked for their spiritual salvation, but they also attended to their physical necessities. The Lord reminded the Prophet Joseph through revelation in 1831: "For, behold, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which cometh of the earth, is ordained for the use of man for food and for raiment, and that he might have in abundance." (D&C 49:19.)

The Latter-day Saints did not always have in abundance, especially after their forced exile from Missouri and during the first few months in rebuilding their homes and lives in Illinois. Drusilla Hendricks arrived in Nauvoo in 1839. She wrote in her journal that flour was hard to get, but there were plenty of cabbages, potatoes, and turnips. During the winter she had cornmeal but nothing with which to season vegetables. The Prophet shared the hardships of his people during those early lean times in Nauvoo, but privations never seemed to squelch his sense of humor. A visitor remembered that as a young guest of the Smith family, he was invited to eat with them. Joseph looked over the table and said, "Lord, we thank Thee for this johnny cake, and ask Thee to send us something better. Amen." [^2] The guest did not reveal just when that event occurred, but it is likely it was in Nauvoo's early years when shortages were most evident.

During summer and fall, when gardens and orchards were maturing, vegetables and fruit could be had in abundance, but staples were needed the year round, and some Nauvoo diaries mention shortages of flour, milk, butter, and eggs. Shortages were not unusual on the frontier, especially after the Panic of '37. Again, near the end of the Nauvoo years, the mobs' destruction of farms and crops in outlying Mormon settlements created shortages. Throughout most of the life of Nauvoo, however, the Saints prospered in their farms and gardens and ate well.

In February 1842 an editorial in the Millennial Star, the Church newspaper published in England, listed prices of food in Nauvoo and pointed out to would-be English emigrants that "the expense of living [in Nauvoo] is about one-eighth of what it costs in this country." One emigrant was apparently not disappointed with what she found in Nauvoo. In one of her letters home in 1844, Sally Randall wrote: "I expect you and the neighbors would like to know how we have lived. We have done very well. We have had a plenty of meat, milk, butter, flour and corn. What fruit I bought has done very well." [^3]

The greatest abundance of food around Nauvoo was free for the taking on the Illinois prairies. The Millennial Star informed its readers in August 1842: "There are no game laws; any person who pleases may hunt, shoot, or destroy rabbits, pigeons, wild ducks, geese, swan, turkeys, deer, antelopes, bears, elks, or even buffaloes and wild horses; the two latter are existing in great numbers on the great prairies, several days journey to the west of Nauvoo." Two other birds not mentioned by the editors but found in abundance in Nauvoo stew pots were prairie chickens (pinnated grouse) and quail. Both were so plentiful that most hunters disdained wasting powder and lead on them. On Christmas Eve in 1842, Warren Foote recorded in his journal, "We went out and killed several prairie chickens, and Mother made an excellent pot pie for supper." [^4] The small, plump quail were so abundant that they were caught by the scores in ground nets. These birds provided relief to the starving Saints on the Iowa shore after the few remaining inhabitants were driven out of Nauvoo by mobs in the fall of 1846.

One foreign traveler described Illinois as "charming prairie country, full of game, large and small." He mentioned a native who, when asked what game was in his district, replied, "Why we've plenty of baar and deer, but no large game to count on." [^5] Bears were considered a good source of food. Cubs were caught on the prairies and taken to such cities as St. Louis to be fattened and then slaughtered for meat. Another common prairie animal inspired a typical political joke by the editor of the Nauvoo Wasp on 4 June 1842: "Messrs. Bent and Vrain have just received twelve sacks of buffalo tongues, at St. Louis which will, in all probability, be consigned immediately to Washington City for the use of Congress to prolong the present session."

Acquiring such food as game meat was only part of the problem of putting food on the tables of Nauvoo. Keeping it edible was the biggest concern. Iceboxes were not in general use until the 1840s in the East, and it is likely they were not in use at all in Nauvoo, for diaries contain no evidence of them or reports of cutting ice. Without refrigeration fresh meat could become tainted in one day or less in warm weather. Cooking manuals of the period warned of this danger and added: "The South wind is especially unfavourable, and lightning is quickly destructive." [^6] To retard food spoilage, milk, butter, and other foods needing to be kept cool were either kept on the cellar bottom or placed in buckets lowered into the cool interior of wells, as was done in the Browning residence. Other residents stored their spoilable food in a springhouse in running water or in a cool, partially underground root cellar, as Brigham Young did. Even with this cooling, milk soured quickly, and bacteria multiplied rapidly. Lack of pasteurization and sanitation in food handling required the early development of immunity to microorganisms. Failure to develop such immunities led to early death. The sexton's weekly death lists suggest that the latter happened all too frequently.

Meat was seldom kept fresh. Beef, mutton, pork, and game were preserved in the fall or winter by salting or smoking. Meat scraps with corn meal added were made into scrapple, and hog parts were chopped and boiled into a jellied mass called head cheese or minced and cooked into meat pudding. Chickens and other fowl were simply killed whenever they were needed.

Canned foods were not common in Nauvoo. The tin can was invented in the 1820s, but the canning industry in the United States did not start until after the Civil War. Home canning was making some headway in Illinois by the 1840s, the glass jars being sealed with cork and wax. In Nauvoo, however, most homemakers still resorted to drying or storing vegetables and fruits in a root cellar.

Summer and early fall was a busy time for the women of Nauvoo. There were berries and currants to make into jellies and preserves; cucumbers to pickle in brine or vinegar; cabbages to slice up, salt down, and let sour into kraut; peppers and horseradishes to dry and grind; beans to string and corn to dry; fruit to cook into preserves or peel, core, and dry on racks; apples to press into cider or make into apple butter; root crops to bury to prevent freezing; and nuts to be hulled and stored. Some of this fruit came from newly planted trees, but much of it grew wild. A reporter for the Louisville Journal described the Illinois prairies in 1837 as "thickets of wild plum and blackberry, massive grape vines, stretching for miles along the plain . . . Vast groves of the ruby crab-apple, the golden persimmon, the black and white mulberry, and the wild cherry." The author described wild pawpaws, peach, pear, and quince along with the wild pecan or choctaw nuts, hickory nuts, and black walnuts. [^7] But who ate the fruit that grew so widely around Nauvoo? Children or adults? In 1835 Dr. William Dewees of Philadelphia wrote, "It is an error to suppose, that any fruit is positively useful, as a nourishment or as a medicine, to young children." [^8]

Because of the lack of refrigeration, canned foods, and markets for perishable produce, vegetable growing was limited to what a family could consume. Families took pride in their gardens and the amount and size of their produce, just as we do today. Contemporary newspapers suggest an intense competition between communities over produce of record sizes: pumpkins weighing one hundred thirty pounds, cucumbers four feet long, and potatoes two and one-half feet in circumference. Dubious as such claims may have been, there was no question that vegetables were improving in quality. The Nauvoo Neighbor advertised garden seeds from commercial nurseries for sale in local stores.

We learn much about gardening in Nauvoo from the letters Bathsheba Smith wrote to her husband, George, who was absent from his family on missions in 1842, 1843, and 1844, just when gardens were coming into production each year. In 1842 Sister Smith wrote: "I have got my corn and fodder sucureed, broom corn, sunn flower and beeanes likewise. Mellissa and me did it. Gilbert I expect will dig my potatoes. . . . I have had so many melens and my dear was not heare to help eat them." A year later she again described the success of their garden, especially with melons and tomatoes, and then again in 1844: "The worms trouble all the neighbor's gardens, but have not mine but little. A great many people have had more or less out of our garden sutch as lettis, onions, raddishes and greanes. Indeed I do not know what they would have done if it ware not for us." [^9]

Many of the Saints were apparently fond of melons. A short filler in the 6 August 1845 Neighbor noted that "melons are rolling into Nauvoo by the load." Three weeks later, on 27 August, the Neighbor reported a feast in the not yet completed Temple: "On Saturday last, a large number of persons partook of a feast of melons, round a table 87 feet long in the attic story of the Temple."

Greens were often mentioned in contemporary letters but salads only infrequently. Nevertheless, salads were known. An 1830 cookbook author claimed there were "seventy-two herbs proper and fit to make sallet with." [^10] There were, incidentally, few cookbooks in Nauvoo homes. Like their foremothers, Nauvoo homemakers depended upon tradition, memory, and collections of "receipts" passed down through the family or around among friends. A few cookbooks had been written in America, beginning in 1796 with a forty-seven page, paper covered volume entitled American Cookery by Amelia Simmons. Because few women had scales and weights in the kitchen or measuring cups or standard size spoons, the few cookbooks that did exist called for a handful of flour, a heaping spoonful of baking powder, and "nuts" of butter. Cooking time and temperature could not be specified because these could not be controlled with much precision when baking in a brick oven, a fireplace, or a primitive cast-iron stove.

We do not know the quality of Mormon cooking in the 1840s, but we do know that many European visitors were not impressed with American cooking. One visitor at this time wrote, "But in general, with the exception of a few families who show good taste also in this respect, the art is still in a very low condition in the United States." This visitor felt the Americans used an excessive amount of seasoning, especially salt and pepper, roast meats were hard and dry, there was little variety of sauces, and "the bread often doughy and smoking hot." [^11]

Modern writers believe differently. Carl Russell Fish, an authority on the 1840s, suggests that because women spent more time in the kitchen, food was better prepared, but even he admits there was little variety. This lack of variety is seen in an overabundance of meat and a scarcity of fresh vegetables. In the summer and fall in Nauvoo, there was a greater variety with produce coming straight from one's own farm on the outskirts of town or from farm wagons selling door-to-door.

It is certainly difficult to fault Nauvoo women for lacking variety in foods or ideas for sophisticated meals when we consider the primitive methods common in food preparation in the 1840s. Charlotte Haven, writing from Nauvoo in January 1843, described the preparation of her Christmas dinner the previous month. She roasted her venison by holding it on a long pointed stick over a bed of coals, and she roasted her potatoes by burying them in the hot ashes. Such primitive methods of cooking were not uncommon. The procedure for making "ash cakes" was to sweep the hearth clean and then place the corn meal cakes on the hottest part of the hearth and cover them with hot wood ashes. After baking they were washed and dried.

With such crude procedures, it is not surprising to find contemporary illnesses ascribed to food preparation, whether justified or not. The editor of the 26 March 1845 Neighbor was without doubt merely repeating a common belief when he issued a warning about "improperly cooked food." He claimed that potatoes exposed to the air took in oxygen, which combined with the juice next to the skin to produce a poison that caused Black Tongue. To escape the disease, wives should remove the skin, boil the potatoes, pour off the water, and then finish cooking.

Potatoes "poisoned" by oxygen were not as unhealthy as the editor believed, but certainly some American eating habits were. The American diet, for example, was extremely heavy. Mrs. Trollope noted that "ham and beef-steak appear morning, noon, and night. In eating they mix things together with the strangest incongruity imaginable . . . ham with apple sauce; beef-steak with stewed peaches; and salt fish with onions." Other foreign observers commented on the prevalence of these same three combinations of food. Mrs. Trollope complained that Americans insisted "upon eating horrible half-baked hot rolls both morning and evening. . . . common vegetables are abundant and very fine. . . . they seldom indulge in second courses . . . but almost every table has its dessert; . . . puddings, pies and all kinds of sweets, particularly [are relished by] the ladies." [^12]

[In Old Nauvoo Scovil's Bakery and Confectionery Shop

The cakes and sweets were apparently an American addiction. For those who could afford the luxuries in Nauvoo, sweets could be purchased at Scovil's Bakery and Confectionery Shop. Candy was even more of a luxury, and most parents felt it was not healthy for children. Even sugar was kept locked in small chests to remove temptation from youngsters who had little sweetening in their diets. The most common sweeteners in the homes came from the beehives scattered about the gardens of Nauvoo. The common straw-rope hive, the symbol of Deseret, was on its way out. It was almost impossible to remove either the wax or the honey from such hives without destroying the bees, so new wooden hives were replacing them.

Although we have no record of the Saints in Nauvoo indulging in the craze for another national sweet, it was available to them just a short distance down the river. An English traveler, Marryat noted: "There is one great luxury in America, which is the quantity of clear pure ice which is to be obtained wherever you are, even in the hottest seasons, and ice creams are universal and very cheap." He was amazed when a dozen dirty, swarthy iron workers entered an establishment in St. Louis and called for ice creams. [^13]

The taste for sweets extended even to breakfast. In fact, the three meals of the day were practically identical, including the desserts. In Nauvoo, breakfast was usually eggs, pork steaks, sausage, scrapple, fried potatoes, honey, and hunks of hot buttered bread with pies and preserves for dessert. In Nauvoo homes where breakfast did differ from other meals, its triumph was the griddle cake. Eaten hot from the stove or fireplace griddles, griddle cakes were usually made of Indian meal (corn meal) or buckwheat. In a prairie home outside of Nauvoo, one visitor noted a refreshing and noticeably different breakfast of large, sweet prairie strawberries gathered by the children.

Another striking difference in the Nauvoo diet when compared with our modern meals was the absence of sandwiches. They were known; in fact, one cookbook even gave recipes for sandwiches but decreed that they "have got out of fashion." Almost all sandwiches in the book consisted of a meat, such as sausage, cold pork, or grated beef, or some potted food, such as poultry, cheese, or ham. [^14]

Foreign visitors were practically unanimous in their views on American mealtime manners: they were bad. They noted with special disdain the habit of eating rapidly without conversation. The number of ads in newspapers for medicines for indigestion suggest this habit was widespread and unhealthy. A German visitor, Friedrich Raumer, noted in the 1840s "the prevalent habit of eating rapidly, and swallowing the food half chewed. . . . In no country in the world do so many persons suffer from indigestion as in America." [^15] Another American habit distasteful to Europeans was the use of a knife in carrying food to the mouth. Most Americans, however, considered this merely a custom that had nothing to do with manners. Mrs. Farrar, the American "authority" on etiquette, suggested, "If you wish to imitate the French or English you should use a fork to put food into your mouth but since Americans have as good a right to their own fashions, eating with a knife ought not to be considered as eating ungenteelly." [^16] The habit of eating with a knife, prevalent in most social classes, continued until the Civil War.

Another custom that pervaded all segments of American society in the nineteenth century was the heavy consumption of alcoholic beverages. It was not a new habit—it had been going on for two centuries, but it seemed to reach new heights in the early 1800s. Some authorities ascribe the habit of drinking alcohol to a traditional American fear of drinking water. Some evidence seems to point toward that conclusion. An 1845 book offering advice to young men said this about drinking water: "An unnecessary quantity has a tendency to weaken the system generally, and in a particular manner the digestive organs." [^17] This belief was by no means uncommon in the 1840s and certainly offered many Americans a good excuse to turn to more potent beverages. And turn to them the Americans did.

Liquor penetrated every phase of life. Bars were universal meeting places. Commercial transactions or trades were not complete without a glass of whisky. When friends met, they drank; when they parted, they drank. Stage, rail, and boat passengers drank during the trip and at every stop. Drinks were given names for the time of day or the purpose for which they were consumed: eye opener, phlegm cutter, stomach cleaner, and so forth. Liquor was everywhere prevalent, and yet drunks were allegedly seldom seen. America was a drinking but not a drunken nation.

When the Mormons put whisky on the list of prohibitions, they were going against a national practice. On the frontier, especially, liquor softened the edges of a harsh environment and offered the highest therapeutic value for a long list of health problems. It was widely believed to strengthen the heart, cure hydrophobia, reduce chills and fever, overcome general debility, restore the kidneys, fight off malaria, and cure palpitations. The widespread use of alcoholic drinks led to one of the most controversial, deep-rooted, and persistent reform movements in the nation. The temperance movement affected society as only slavery did later. The issue of slavery divided sections of the country, whereas the temperance movement divided communities. Some Baptist churches even excommunicated members who joined temperance societies.

A "Moral Instructor" published in Philadelphia in 1845 voiced the ardent feelings of many champions of temperance when it referred to coffee, tea, tobacco, and ardent spirits as "these insatiable, but fashionable leeches to the public wealth, and canker-worms to health and life." [^18] These harsh words followed by more than a decade the Word of Wisdom (D&C 89), which had been revealed by the Lord to Joseph Smith in Kirtland, Ohio, in 1833. That revelation urged abstinence from wine, strong drink, tobacco, tea, and coffee. Although not yet considered a commandment in Mormon theology, it gained ready acceptance among most of the Saints, adding to their uniqueness among their frontier neighbors.

It is not surprising, therefore, that an early city ordinance in Nauvoo controlled the sale and use of liquor. The Prophet urged passage of the ordinance by calling liquor a "poison in the stomach." He noted that herbs and roots could be found to "effect all necessary purposes," indicating that liquor was often prescribed as medicine. The regulation, passed in March 1841, was rigidly and successfully enforced. Only six months after its adoption, Heber C. Kimball wrote in the 10 September 1841 Millennial Star about Nauvoo's Independence Day celebration: "There was no drunkenness on that day as I discovered; there is no public house that keeps spirits, nor grocery [a common term for a retail liquor store], and in fact none except in case of sickness is used in the city of Nauvoo."

Outside communities took note of this bold temperance move by the Mormons. According to the Millennial Star for 10 December 1841, the St. Louis Atlas published the observations of a non-Mormon visitor to Nauvoo: "One peculiarity of life is observable among them. . . .ardent spirits as a drink are not in use among them: and the sale of spirits, except as medicine, is forbidden by law . . . Tobacco, also, is a weed which they seem almost universally to dispise." Even the Church-owned Maid of Iowa was different from other river steamers for being a "dry boat." In fact, it did not sanction gamblers, female entertainers, chambermaids, or women companions. "Women companions" was apparently a euphemism for prostitutes, and chambermaids obviously did not have a good reputation.

In 1844 Josiah Quincy, the former mayor of Boston, visited Nauvoo and was apparently disappointed with the hospitality offered at the Mansion House: "On the right hand, as we entered the house, was a small and very comfortless-looking bar-room; all the more comfortless, perchance, from it being a dry bar-room, as no spirituous liquors were permitted at Nauvoo." [^19]

As with any vice, of course, a city ordinance does not guarantee that it will disappear. The Church leaders in Nauvoo found it a nagging problem. Many frontiersmen considered whisky drinking an inherent "right." In November 1841 Nauvoo citizens became concerned about a "grocery" erected in violation of the city ordinance. It was deemed a nuisance and removed by city authorities. The following July, two men were arrested and fined $10.25 for selling whisky to the crowd. In 1843 the Prophet complained in his journal: "I have been ferreting out grog shops, groceries, and beer barrels. I have warned the rum and beer dealers to be scarce after this time." [^20] A year later, with the Prophet gone, the 14 August 1844 Neighbor continued the campaign against violators of the whisky ordinance, threatening, "The extent of the law, twenty-five dollars will be exacted of every person that breaks it."

Enemies of the Mormon church made three charges against the Saints in regard to the claim of temperance in Nauvoo. First, there were taverns in Nauvoo; second, liquor was sold; and third, beer was widely consumed. All three allegations are true, but all three statements require explanation.

Taverns were allowed by law, but section 8 of the city ordinance regulating taverns prohibited them from selling spirituous liquors. This restriction was not unusual. In many states, taverns were denied licenses to sell liquor. The primary function of a tavern in the United States in the nineteenth century was to provide rooms and meals for guests.

Liquor was sold in Nauvoo, but only by a small number of reputable retailers and only for medicinal purposes. Even proponents of temperance, with the notable exception of Joseph Smith, supported using alcoholic drinks as medicine. In 1808, when the American Temperance Movement was organized, the signers vowed to "use no rum, gin, whiskey, wine or any distilled spirits . . . except by advice of a physician, or in the case of actual disease." [^21] A law was passed by the Nauvoo city council to permit the mayor and one person from each ward to sell liquor for that purpose, noting at the time that the council members totally disapproved the use and sale of distilled and fermented liquors for beverage. With such widespread belief in the medicinal value of liquor, an outright ban would have encouraged widespread violation. The ordinance as written was thus realistic and a far more effective means of control than total prohibition. In late 1844 the ordinance was revised to permit anyone to retail liquor if he could pay for the license, but the cost, set between two and four hundred dollars annually, was so high that the restrictions still effectively prevented anyone from dispensing intoxicating drinks in Nauvoo in quantities of less than one gallon. Thus, in effect, all social drinking was banned, making Nauvoo in essence a "dry town."

Beer was indeed widely consumed. In fact, the Nauvoo Brewery carried ads in the local paper notifying citizens of its supply of ale, beer, and yeast, both wholesale and retail, at the corner of Hyde and Water Streets. The proprietor of that brewry was T. Turley. The chief of police, Hosea Stout, recorded in his diary in March 1845, "I went with the police to Schussler's brewery where we all got what beer we could drink." The following month he recounted, "Went with my wife to the Masonic Hall to a feast of beer and cakes prepared by the old police." [^22]

Beer, however, was not considered liquor. In fact, beer was to liquor in the 1840s what Coca-Cola is to beer one hundred and fifty years later—except beer was considered beneficial to a person's health. The 1840s were a time when everything consumed was believed to be related to one's general well-being. Hoff's Malt Extract, for example, was advertised as a beer to be drunk in order to maintain good health. The bottle's label stated that its contents were "a remedy recommended by European physicians." [^23] Belief in such claims was not merely a rationalization for drinking, as so-called enlightened twentieth-century Americans like to think, but a belief firmly held by most of their nineteenth-century ancestors. Nauvoo leaders who put the official stamp of approval on a city brewery and an official retailer in each ward were no less health conscious than their fellow Americans.

The role of food and drink is an interesting one in the history of the United States. The very discovery of America has been ascribed to the results of a search for a new route to the culinary riches of the Far East. If food and drink played a lesser role in the history of Nauvoo, it was not of lesser importance to its citizens. The kitchen-centered Nauvoo homes, the gardens and orchards, the outlying farms, the town builders, the produce merchants, and the Legionnaire defenders of the city—all had an interest in the cooking pots of Nauvoo. The unsung stirrers of those cooking pots performed their ceaseless tasks with no rewards in mind but the love of their families in a fruitful land at peace. That love, their doctrines taught them, could be eternal, but the fruitful land they had worked so hard for and the peace they had prayed for must wait for another time and another place a thousand miles to the west.

Food and Drink

---
Notas:
[^1] Farrar, Young Lady's Friend, p. 313.
[^2] Quoted in Cable, Little Darlings, p. 109.
[^3] Buley, Old Northwest, 1:376.
[^4] Martineau, Society in America, 3:120.
[^5] Young Man, p. 160.
[^6] Oliver, Eight Months in Illinois, p. 185.
[^7] Trollope, Domestic Manners of the Americans, p. 156.
[^8] Fish, Rise of the Common Man, pp. 152-55.
[^9] Quoted in Buley, Old Northwest, 1:376.
[^10] Minnigerode, Fabulous Forties.
[^11] Haven, "A Girl's Letters from Nauvoo," pp. 637-38.
[^12] Calhoun, Social History of the American Family, 2:157.
[^13] Ibid.
[^14] Tullidge, Women of Mormondom, pp. 154-55.
[^15] Burgess-Olson, Sister Saints, p. 205.
[^16] Farrar, Young Lady's Friend, pp. 346-47.
[^17] Young Man, p. 62.
[^18] Torrey, Grigg & Elliot's Third Reader, p. 32.
[^19] McGavin, Nauvoo, the Beautiful, p. 49.
[^20] History of the Church, 5:531.
[^21] Sellari, Illustrated Price Guide of Antique Bottles, p. 260.
[^22] Brooks, On the Mormon Frontier, 1:25; 1:34.
[^23] Sellari, Illustrated Price Guide of Antique Bottles, p. 240.
