George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

17

Courtship and Marriage

"Since girls will put it into each other's heads, that they are in love, or that someone is in love with them, it is desirable that they should understand the first symptoms of the disorder, and take early and vigorous measures to stop its dangerous course." [^1] Such was the advice Mrs. Farrar offered unmarried girls in 1838, reminding her readers that time and God will bring the right couple together. This advice to young women about falling in love was common in the nineteenth century. John Gregory, author of A Father's Legacy to His Daughters, reminded them that "love is not to begin on your part. [It] is entirely to be the consequence of our attachment to you." [^2] Thus the young man was responsible to initiate the courting, and when he did, much of it took place in the young lady's home around the family hearth on Sunday evenings and in the presence of younger children, parents, and visitors. If the young woman wished to encourage the beau, her family, if they approved, retired early and left the sitting room to the young couple. If it was desirable to discourage the young man, the parents remained uncomfortably near, and the suitor soon got the message.

Even such innocent courting as this, however, was not always approved by some groups. The Nauvoo Neighbor noted in the 9 January 1845 issue that the "Free Will Baptist General Association, lately holden in Plainfield, N. Y., resolved among other things, 'that no enlightened Christian can innocently carry on a courtship by late sitting.' " Much of the advice offered courting couples was written by country editors who had no credentials other than their imagination and perhaps articles snipped from other papers. The editor of the Hamilton Intelligencer in 1837 offered such advice as "the practice of courting after bed time" was not necessary—a man should court openly and seek a wife in daylight, and "the innocent kiss" was like dram drinking—one is never enough. [^3] The editor of the Neighbor on 9 August 1843 had less prudish and more practical advice for the young people of Nauvoo: "Never blush, never apologize if found by young men in your homespun attire, stirring the coffee, washing the hearth, or rinsing the clothes. . . . Industrious habits are certainly the best recommendations you can bring to worthy young men who are seeking wives."

Seeking a wife usually started at what we would consider extremely young ages. Courtships were much shorter because there were few obstacles to early marriage. Education was not a major requirement for most occupations, so there were fewer socioeconomic barriers; legal obstacles did not exist in most states; and few parents objected to a little more room in their homes. In addition, the community's moral guardians recognized another distinct benefit of early marriages: intimate experiences associated with longer and increasingly familiar courtships were less likely to occur, a consideration especially important in a church-dominated society like that in Nauvoo. Fifteen or fourteen or even younger was not an uncommon age for a bride. Warren Foote, a Latter-day Saint living a few miles south of Nauvoo, married Artemisia Sidnie Myers in June 1843. He was twenty-five, and she was fourteen.

The importance of marriage was impressed on young people, especially girls. There was simply no place for the unmarried person in society. Reaching the twenties unmarried often meant a life of spinsterhood, and society was extremely hard on singles. For one thing, people were not expected to live alone, even if it was affordable. This very real factor was one of the elements influencing the acceptance of plural marriage on the Mormon frontier. Unlike most of the non-Mormon frontier, Nauvoo had no shortage of women. The success of the missionary effort saw to that. Even in Nauvoo, however, the authorities felt compelled to pass a city ordinance to lessen the threat of spinsterhood. The 3 January 1844 Neighbor gave notice of this ordinance, which encouraged early marriage by permitting males over seventeen and females over fourteen to be joined in marriage. Minors (the ordinance failed to specify what a minor is) were required to have parents' or guardians' consent.

Such an attitude about early marriage for the youth of Nauvoo also made a wider choice possible for those desiring to marry within the faith. Marriage to non-members was considered a family disgrace. Harriet Martineau observed the widespread practice of "early marriages of silly children in the South and West, where, owing to the disproportion of numbers, every woman is married before she well knows how serious a matter human life is." [^4]

Other, not as readily discernible, reasons also encouraged youthful marriages. Several foreign observers noted a "peculiarity" among Americans—the practice of boarding. Single and married men, they observed, and even whole families, preferred boarding to lodging by themselves or bearing the expense of housekeeping alone. Thrift such as this, these observers thought, allowed some young men to marry sooner.

Youthful alliances were influenced by ill-informed advice in popular publications. One book by an anonymous author suggested that "long-continued celibacy contracts the mind, if it does not enfeeble it," [^5] implying that chastity was unhealthy. Sexual morality during this period is difficult to estimate. The subject is rarely mentioned in pioneer recollections, private journals, or newspapers. Scandal sheets and advice columns, as we know them, were unknown. "Tomcatting" obviously took place, as the number of "woodcolts" (illegitimate children) in any community attested. There were, however, many deterrents to premarital sex. One of these, as we have already noted, was the practice of early marriage. Another was the scattered population in the old Northwest Territory. This deterrent certainly did not apply to densely populated Nauvoo, but the lack was more than compensated by the strict morality imposed by Church doctrine. A final restriction on premarital sex was the lack of freedom of companionship between the sexes.

William Oliver, the English traveler who spent eight months in Illinois about the time Nauvoo was founded, stayed one night at a settler's cabin while crossing the Illinois prairies. "During the short time we sat, before and after supper," he recalled, "there were scarcely half a dozen words of conversation, an occurrence quite characteristic of the people, when the sexes are met." [^6] Other observers noted the same lack of social intercourse between the sexes. In America, observed Frances Trollope, "with the exception of dancing, which is almost wholly confined to the unmarried of both sexes, all the enjoyments of the men are found in the absence of the women." [^7] Later in her travels, she noticed that the separation of the sexes was enforced on steamboats. She carefully watched one man with an invalid wife. He was extremely attentive to her, she recalled, but custom decreed separate cabins, so he was forced to wait outside her room until the steward opened the cabin doors before each meal.

Such separation of the sexes, however, was not as common among the Mormons. Trollope believed the reason for the practice among Americans was the disposition of the men to drink, gamble, and spit, which would partly explain its less common occurrence among the Saints. Another explanation is the large number of English immigrants, among whom the sex barrier was not as evident.

The explanation for the lack of freedom of companionship between the sexes was somewhat more complicated than Trollope suggested, although certainly her observation had merit. There were spheres of activity that both sexes were aware of. For a woman to invade the male sphere, or assume a male role, meant losing caste, and in small-town America that could be a personal tragedy. Social acceptance meant conformity to all social mores, and playing the proper role prescribed for one's sex was a very high priority. It was a commonly held fear that a woman who became a wage earner would lose social status. A man would not want to marry a woman who had unsexed herself by becoming "literary." It was widely believed that any woman who attempted a vocation outside of domestic service made herself unfit to be a wife or mother. In Nauvoo, however, the community leadership roles, educational accomplishments, business success, and literary recognition of such Mormon women as Sarah Kimball, Louisa Pratt, and Eliza Snow, and their status as role models in the community ran counter to what foreign visitors saw in the rest of the nation.

The refusal of the Mormons to adhere rigidly to national norms in the separation of the sexes was reflected also in their courting practices. Many observers of American courtship were impressed by the lack of imagination that was shown—not by what the young couples did but by what they did not do. The formal and reserved relationships between sexes continued not only through courtship but on into the bedroom after marriage. Husbands and wives tried to conceal their unclothed bodies from each other. Starchy etiquette between men and women was far more common in the eastern states and in larger cities where most visitors and writers of American social life traveled. Among the pioneers opening the western states, including the Saints in Nauvoo, relations between the sexes were of necessity somewhat more frank and uncomplicated. An unmarried clerk of the Prophet Joseph Smith noticed an attractive young woman at church. He immediately set up an introduction through a mutual friend, walked the the woman home from church that same day, and after a brief courtship, the couple were married.

But whether the courtship was starchy or open and frank, it was in most places in nineteenth-century America strictly moralistic. Although a double standard was evident in the differences in punishment meted out for sexual sins, the ideal everywhere was purity for men as well as for women. The double standard for sexual behavior, although evident, was not as acceptable then as now: there was little tolerance for the sowing of "wild oats." One authority noted that the number of men who responded to the moral idealism of the time and kept themselves pure for marriage was larger in America than elsewhere and larger in the 1830s and 1840s than in probably any previous generation. [^8]

The double standard in punishment for sexual misconduct is observed in some newspaper editorials of the period, which also illustrate some very typical editorial rivalry. The Bloomington, Indiana, Gazette reported the case of a gentleman being fined fifteen dollars and a lady being sentenced to jail for the "crime" of bundling. The editor hoped that this example would put a stop to the "indecent manner of sparking, so common among the youngsters of Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Carolina." [^9] An Ohio editor took exception to this slur against the youth of his state and responded by questioning the injustice of unequal punishments in Indiana. Calling the reference to bundling in Ohio a falsehood, he charged that bundling was about the only mode of sparking in Indiana.

In spite of, or perhaps because of, the standards imposed on young women, they not infrequently attempted to escape their social and sexual confines. Young women in Nauvoo occasionally fell victim to the polish of gentile dandies, drummers, soldiers, steamboat pilots, and other exciting visitors and were seduced or eloped with them. That is one reason Church authorities were wary of strangers and felt compelled to warn them away or expel them from Nauvoo.

Within the confines of their well-regulated communities, of course, most young women adhered to all the manners and traditions expected of their sex, including the regulation of their vocabulary. Ladies never used words such as snooze, pants, gents, seedy, rich instead of amusing, or polking for dancing the polka. They did not allow their names to be abbreviated as Kate, Madge, or Nell, and they never addressed a gentleman by his Christian name unless he was a relative. That convention presented no problem in Nauvoo, where most acquaintances were "brother" and "sister." Even wives, in the presence of other women, would address their husbands as "Mister Smith" or, among the Saints, as "Brother Smith." Marryat, who visited America in 1837 and 1838, observed that American girls said not leg but limb of a chair. The word hip was eliminated from the vocabulary of young women, as were such words as thigh, womb, or belly, despite their use in the Bible. Sex as a subject or a word was not mentioned in mixed company and even among men only in ribald jest. Probably at no other time were men so thrilled at the sight of a feminine ankle. In the presence of women, male animals were named euphemistically. Bulls became "he cows," and boars became "he pigs." Pregnancy was never mentioned in mixed company, and, as Meade Minnigerode pointed out in his study of that period, "No gentleman must ever ask a lady any question about anything whatsoever." [^10]

Such social restriction could certainly dampen conversation between the sexes, but it could not prevent the question every man must inevitably ask if he wanted a wife. So men asked the question, and marriages took place. Unfortunately, the controversy over plural marriage in the city of the Saints has obscured the fact that probably no less than ninety-eight percent of all marriages in Nauvoo were monogamous and traditional. They were not unlike weddings in other frontier cities. A gentile resident attended a typical Mormon wedding in Nauvoo and described it in a letter to relatives back home: "Then the bridal party entered and seated themselves in four chairs placed in the center of the room. Mr. S. handed the license to the Prophet, who read it aloud. The four stood up, the guests keeping their seats. In a few simple words not very different from any other Protestant marriage ceremony, Mr. B., a lawyer of Carthage, and Miss W., a niece of Sister Emma, were united for time only. A prayer was made by Hyrum Smith, another Latter Day hymn was sung, wedding cake, apple pie and pure cold water was passed around." [^11] At this point the married guests departed and the rest of the party played games, ate and danced until one o'clock.

It was the custom of the socially correct in Illinois towns for the bride to stay hidden for several weeks after the bids (announcements or invitations) were out. The "invites" were carried from house to house by the "groomsman" (best man). The ceremony, as noted, was fairly simple and was usually solemnized at the home of the bride. There was no wedding march—Mendelssohn did not compose that until 1843. A feast always followed the ceremony, which usually took place early in the day. By evening the older folks had departed for home and the younger ones stayed for dancing and partying until late at night. The next day feasting and partying were repeated at the groom's home. Such weddings were reported in the Nauvoo newspapers. On 31 January 1844, the Neighbor carried the story of a wedding at the home of a bride's parents. The festivities lasted all day with much to eat. The next day, the report continued, the guests assembled at the home of the bridegroom for similar all-day celebrations and food. In the 6 November issue of the Neighbor that same year, a wedding notice carried the best wishes of the entire staff from the foreman down to the printer's devil.

To be assured of having their wedding mentioned in the paper, the couple either invited the editors to the wedding or sent refreshments to the newspaper office for all hands. These devices seem to have worked, although wedding announcements were still far less common than death notices. And if the editor was not invited, he could get in the last word and make the couple wish he had been invited. The editor of the Times and Seasons on 15 January 1841 noted the wedding of Mr. Hosea Stout to Miss Louisa Taylor, both of Nauvoo. "We wish them well in well doing, and just as well if the printer had been remembered at the infair [wedding reception]."

After the wedding feast, which the editors were anxious to attend, the bride's friends put the bride to bed and then the groom's friends put him to bed. Friends visited them and brought them food until the party broke up in the early morning. If the couple moved into their own home, friends conducted a charivari (shivaree), which was boisterous noisemaking outside their windows, invaded the bedroom, and perhaps even kidnapped the groom.

Young women wanted no competition from other women during their marriage, especially from professionals, and to make certain there was none, the town authorities passed an ordinance to prohibit brothels and disorderly characters (prostitutes). Joseph noted in his history that they did exist, but reports after the city ordinance was passed indicate that such characters and such places were under very strict control.

In Nauvoo, as in most other American towns of the period, white males wanted no competition either in the quest for wives. In 1844 the Mayor's Court found two unnamed Negroes guilty of attempting to marry white women. One was fined twenty-five dollars and the other, five. The reason for the unequal fines was not recorded. As unjust as this sentence may appear, we must keep in mind the far more severe punishment for similar "crimes" in neighboring communities or states such as Missouri or Kentucky. Such a moderate response as the mayor's court made to these incidents is an example of extremely liberal thinking in the 1840s.

One law of the time that seemed to show very evenhanded justice was a state statute on bigamy. Starting in 1824 Illinois law subjected both male and female offenders to one to three hundred lashes on the bare back, fine, imprisonment, and loss of the right to testify in court. Such laws, however, were hard to enforce and seldom were. This statute was not used even during the period of public outcry over the suspected practice of plural marriage in Nauvoo. Perhaps the state authorities did not want to risk scrutiny of sexual morality outside Nauvoo, which such a challenge might have entailed.

The sexual mores of the Mormons have been the focus of public discussion, a target for anti-Mormon attacks, and the butt of countless gentile jokes, ever since plural marriage became a public issue during the Nauvoo years. Mormon defense of the doctrine on spiritual grounds has done little to increase understanding. The Saints have insisted that their detractors often have a far less enviable record of morality than those who have limited their sexual practices to the confines of a plural marriage relationship. A. W. Calhoun, author of a classic study of the American family, believed that "the early Mormon could make out a plausible case for the superior morality of his system as compared with the pernicious promiscuity that tended to spring up in the growing centers of population." [^12] In the early 1800s, Calhoun noted, there were few unfaithful wives but many unfaithful husbands. Only ten years after the expulsion of the Mormons from Nauvoo for such "immoral" reasons as plural marriage, Debow's Review indicted gentile society: "In eighty years, the social system of the North has developed to a point in morals only reached by that of Rome in six centuries from the building of the city." [^13] This harsh estimate was not universally shared, but increasing marital dissolutions give some credence to the charge. In much of early nineteenth-century American society, morality condoned, if not encouraged, the growing number of divorces. On the other hand, as long as a marriage was intact, infidelity did not necessarily play a major role in declining moral standards: it was just easier for marriages to be dissolved. The French traveler Michael Chevalier observed that marriage was more easily dissolved in America than in Europe, and Harriet Martineau noticed that divorce was more easily obtained in America than in England. It was not, she noted, just for the wealthy, and when cruelty became the grounds, a most liberal meaning was given to that word.

Nauvoo women, despite the perhaps more lenient Illinois divorce laws, did not always take the legal way out. Some found desertion and elopements with lovers an easier course to follow, as occasional notices in the Neighbor indicate. On 13 September 1843 Isaac Rogers notified his fellow citizens in Nauvoo that "whereas my wife Elizabeth has absented herself from my house and board, and eloped with one Joseph Jackson, an Englishman . . . I shall hereafter pay no debts of her contracting. . . . I hereby offer . . . a liberal reward for the property [she took]." Some of the brethren apparently still had old-fashioned ideas about the sanctity of their marriage—or at least their property rights. Nevertheless, Elizabeth and Isaac Rogers did not represent the usual Nauvoo marriage.

The typical union was more lasting, more spiritual, and certainly longer remembered in its consequences. Such perhaps was the marriage of Bathsheba W. Smith, who remembered fondly the day she was married: "On the 25th of July, 1841, I was united in holy marriage to George Albert Smith. . . . Two days after we were married, we started, carpet bag in hand, to go to his father's, who lived at Zarahemla, Iowa Territory, about a mile from the Mississippi. There we found a feast prepared for us, in partaking of which my husband's father, John Smith, drank our health, pronouncing the blessings of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob upon us." [^14] George rented a small log cabin, and the young couple moved in. The roof leaked and the chimney smoked, but they made it as comfortable as possible. Bathsheba recalled their first night in the cabin, when they knelt together beside the bed and dedicated themselves to God for life. It was a long and loving marriage, filled with the sorrows of leaving everything they owned in Nauvoo, suffering through Winter Quarters, and enduring both the long trek to Utah and the later death of their son George, Jr., while he was on a mission. But theirs was a marriage filled with love. When George died, Bathsheba recorded in her journal: "He was gone my light my Sun my life my joy my Lord. . . . but I must not morn but prepare myself to meet him but my hart sinks with in my bosom nearly." [^15]

The story of Nauvoo was marked with tragedies for thousands of the Saints, but the sad times were, fortunately, made easier by the joy of loving family relationships. And many of those relationships had their beginnings in the firelit parlors of Nauvoo homes, along the snowy sidewalks of Main or Durphy Streets, along the lush, green banks of the Mississippi, during the moonlit dances on the deck of the steamer Maid of Iowa tied to the dock near the Nauvoo House, or on frosty sleigh rides over the Illinois prairies. Numerous Saints, like Sister Bathsheba Smith, remembered a joyful lifetime of matrimony, but perhaps their fondest memories centered on their early days of courtship and marriage in Nauvoo.

Courtship and Marriage

---
Notas:
[^1] Calhoun, Social History of the American Family, 2:22.
[^2] R. Bartlett, New Country, p. 362.
[^3] Cable, Little Darlings, p. 94.
[^4] Kissam, Nurse's Manual and Young Mother's Guide, pp. 83-84.
[^5] Kiefer, American Children through Their Books, p. 184.
[^6] Doyle, Social Order of a Frontier Community, pp. 206-7.
[^7] Brush, Growing Up with Southern Illinois, pp. 37-38
[^8] Urdang, Timetables of American History, p. 201.
[^9] Cable, Little Darlings, p. 109.
[^10] Ibid., p. 76.
[^11] Ibid., pp. 93-94.
[^12] Trollope, Domestic Manners of the Americans, p. 213.
[^13] James, Family Monitor, pp. 107-9.
[^14] Abbott, Child at Home, pp. 5-6.
[^15] Burgess-Olson, Sister Saints, p. 205.
