George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

18

Children and Childhood

"At the present time our city presents a most lively and animated appearance. . . . The low part of the town, which in the spring was almost destitute of inhabitants, is now thickly studded with houses and swarming with children," declared the Nauvoo Neighbor on 23 August 1843. Nauvoo was indeed swarming with children. The large families for which Mormons are noted were certainly in evidence in Nauvoo, but large families were not unique to the Saints. Most couples in the nineteenth century tended to have large families for two compelling reasons.

First, most couples did not know how not to have children. Not until about the time of the Civil War did the medical profession even begin to understand the physiology of human reproduction. The few courageous authors who had dared to discuss such matters had found their writings suppressed and themselves the objects of legal actions. It is not surprising, therefore, that the average woman knew almost nothing about conception. Second, people believed that " 'the more the merrier.' . . . our poor man counts each one of his half dozen or half score a blessing. . . . stout hands and active heads are the very things we need." [^1]

As a consequence of the need for extra workers, children in frontier families grew up very quickly. Starting at age four, the children started learning farm labor, working with animals, planting and harvesting, milking, butchering, and so on. "There was no time in the new country," one authority concluded, "for the prolonged infancy that existed in European society." [^2]

There was no concept of adolescence then such as there is now, either. Society today seems to allow a time-out stage for young people. Mandatory school attendance laws, child labor laws, and less need for the children to work at home—all give children several years to mature, develop talents, to play, and to date. That was simply not the case in Nauvoo.

[In Old Nauvoo Grave of an infant near the Browning home on Main Street

Foreign visitors, especially, were surprised at the independence and maturity of American children. One traveler was astounded when a ten-year-old boy was sent off alone at night, driving a team of horses with a high carriage to travel thirty miles and execute a difficult commission. The observer noted that not even the mother was concerned over any possible dangers. Such early training, the visitor believed, bred early self-reliance. An Englishman, William Fergusson, who visited America about the time Nauvoo was abandoned, remarked, "There are no children in our sense of the term in America—only little men and women. . . . The merest boy will give his opinion upon the subject of conversation among his seniors; and he expects to be listened to and is." [^3]

These attitudes of parents are more easily understood when we consider the infant mortality rate of that era. In the second quarter of the nineteenth century, one-third of all children died before the age of five years. That figure was an improvement over the rate of more than half in colonial times, but it was still appallingly high. In the 31 January 1844 issue of the Neighbor, the editor commented on the extremely high child mortality rate, noting that if livestock suffered such a high rate of death, the owners would be searching desperately for the causes. The editor then stated the causes and the cure for the high mortality rate: "Children are over-fed, over-clothed and take too little exercise in the air, and these are the causes of mortality among them. We agree with the writer, who recommends mothers to study Combe and Brigham instead of Bulwer and Boz." George Combe was a popular author of books on phrenology, and Amariah Brigham was the author of a book entitled Education and Health. Apparently the editor believed these books would be more helpful in raising children than novels by Bulwer-Lytton or Charles Dickens.

Studying child-care books, however, did not help much when illness struck. During the Nauvoo era, childhood illness was a horror to contemplate. Young children could expect such medications as leeches at the back of the neck for headache, lancing of the gums or leeches behind the ears for teething, chalk and powdered rhubarb for hiccups, or a sticky paste of rhubarb and magnesia for stomach ache. A child with croup could expect an emetic, bleeding, and perhaps a large blistering plaster applied to the entire throat. For almost any illness, a dose of castor oil was the standard remedy. Most advice on child-care was a mixture of superstition and common sense. One author recommended that "when the weather is mild, children should spend their time out of doors. The morning and evening air is to be avoided. . . . All violent exercise should be prohibited." [^4]

Such advice was apparently not heeded, if it was even read by parents on the frontier. Contemporary letters and journals from Nauvoo describe streets full of noisy, running children. Latter-day Saint mothers, whose families had been hardened by the past few exhausting years of persecutions, must have been horrified by the "experts" of the 1840s who were advising parents to dress their children as scantily as possible in order to "harden" the race, even at the risk of "killing off" the weaker members. [^5] Most American parents, including the Saints of Nauvoo, still followed the more traditional practice of giving children plenty of milk, plenty of sleep, and plenty of flannel, whenever possible.

In America generally, unless infants were breast-fed, plenty of milk was not easy to come by. In the early years of Nauvoo, after the losses suffered in Missouri, there was a desperate shortage of milk cows. Later, when cows became more plentiful, there was the problem of keeping cows in the city or getting milk from the farms. Lack of refrigeration resulted in most milk being made into butter, which kept better. There was also another problem: bottle feeding was very difficult. Nipples were of made of rags, sponges, wood, or bone. They were uncomfortable to use and next to impossible to sterilize.

As children grew, bread became the staple of their diet. There was little emphasis on a well-balanced diet. As a result, bone and skin disease were very common among the youth. Fresh fruits and vegetables were not prohibited; they just were not readily available most of the year. One food that was wisely prohibited to most youth during the 1840s, however, was probably carried to the extreme as a health issue. Moralists pointed to thousands of young people who "went down to ruin" on the confectionery trail, suggesting that candy and cookies led to greater evils, such as tea, coffee, liquors, snuff, opium, and tobacco. Many reformers attempted to close all confectionery shops, although there is no evidence that anyone attempted to close the confectionery shop in Nauvoo.

Poor and restrictive diets were part of the unpleasantries of childhood, but clothing was a compensation, being much more practical and comfortable for children by the Nauvoo era. Stays were out for little girls, and tight, stiff collars, shirts, and trousers were found on few young boys. Little girls wore high-waisted muslin frocks with low necks and short sleeves. They still wore the caps and bonnets of years past as well as the traditional drawers, socks, and button shoes. Young boys wore the simplest cotton or linen shirts and trousers during the week, but when Sunday came, they wore ruffled collars, slit trousers, high waist bands, and short jackets. By the age of twelve, the dress of boys was similar to that of men. Many children, like their parents before them at their age, wore no underclothing.

Life might have been simple and hard for the children of Nauvoo, but not necessarily unhappy or boring, except by modern standards. Nauvoo children, of course, never watched a movie or saw television. They had no telephones or electronic gadgets, no radios, tapes or records, no organized sports programs, no costly toys, and for the average family, no summer vacations. Travel was extremely limited, although the older Mormon children had walked greater distances than many other children in those years would ever travel. It was still mainly make-do entertainment with make-do games and toys: homemade sleds, skis, wagons, bows and arrows, slings, noisemakers such as whistles made of paw-paw or other slippery wood, bull fiddles, drums, skates and toy guns.

Colonial attitudes about childhood amusements were to let them be "lawful, brief, and seldom." By the time Nauvoo was founded, "rational play" in the interest of health and efficiency was approved, but moderation, on moral grounds, was of the highest importance. Before a public school system emerged in Illinois in the 1850s, editorials in state newspapers scorned children's games as yet another nuisance disturbing public order. Complained an indignant editor in 1855, "Our best pavements are continually blockaded with juveniles making them their sporting places to the great impediment of pedestrians." [^6] Such complaints were probably not typical in Nauvoo, not with the Prophet himself so fond of children and games. One oldtimer, speaking of his youthful days in Nauvoo, recalled playing "anthony-over" with several other children on opposite sides of a house. The owner, afraid the wooden ball would split his shingles, ordered them away. The Prophet happened by, saw the unhappy children, and invited them all to a nearby carpentry shop. There he asked Brother Hancock to make up some tippies, helped them whittle paddles, and then took them all to Main Street and showed them how to play the game of tippies.

Boy's games have for generations succeeded one another through the year. In Nauvoo, the first game "season" was marble time. While the ground was still oozing with melting snow, young Latter-day Saints scooped out the necessary holes and "knuckled at taw." After marbles came "top-time," "kite-time," and "hoop-time." A former Illinois resident remembered growing up during the Nauvoo years: "Out of school hours we played . . . the game of ball called bull pen, town ball, prisoner's base, foot racing, high jumping, far jumping, hop, step and jump . . . with frequent bouts at wrestling the square hold, the side hold, the breeches hold, Indian hug and catch as catch can." [^7]

The rules for baseball were not written until 1845, the first recorded game being played in New Jersey in 1846, [^8] but the people of Nauvoo played a game that was the predecessor of baseball. Town ball, or rounders, as it was often called, is so similar that a modern observer would immediately recognize its similarities to baseball. Another popular ballgame on the streets of Nauvoo was corner ball. Four boys would form a square and toss a ball around and then at one of the opponents grouped inside the square. In the game of "fox and hounds," one boy, the "fox," would run into some woods and the other boys, the "hounds," would try to catch him before he got back to a base. Also popular in Nauvoo for both boys and men was pitching "quates" (quoits). Two pegs (megs) were driven into the ground about twenty feet apart, and teams were chosen. Stones, or quoits, were tossed at the pegs. Points were scored for the stones landing nearest the pegs.

Perhaps the greatest childhood pleasure in any nineteenth-century American town, however, was not even associated with games or toys. The Fourth of July holiday had, by the time Nauvoo was settled, become the most exciting day of the entire year for all age groups, but especially for children. Independence Day in Nauvoo featured a grand display by the Nauvoo Legion and their marching band, with young children marching behind them. There were patriotic speeches, picnics, shooting at target, wrestling matches, stick pulling, throwing weights, horseracing, and whistling steamboats crowded with out-of-town visitors arriving at the town wharves.

Although the most active and publicly visible games were for boys, the girls were allowed a few pleasures. In 1833 Lydia Child defied majority opinion by suggesting that skating, hoop-rolling, and other boyish sports were suitable for little girls. She did concede that such play should be conducted in an enclosed garden or court, because it just was not ladylike for young girls to be "rude or vulgar, even in play." [^9] Jump rope was definitely a girl's game throughout America, and with Nauvoo's ropewalks to provide an abundance of rope, the game was without doubt popular in the Mormon city. Young girls in Nauvoo also tossed "jackstraws," using small, pretty pieces of stone. Samplers were still being made, but needlebooks, pincushions, and dolls, made by little girls and their mothers, were gaining in popularity. Most dolls in the early nineteenth century were homemade rag dolls, but by midcentury professionally made dolls were sold in some stores. Before the nineteenth century, dolls were dressed as elegant women dressed, but by the time of Nauvoo, there were baby dolls dressed as infants in nightgowns, peddler dolls with baskets of wares, little boy dolls in sailor suits, peasant dolls, and so forth.

Another childhood amusement appropriate for the long Illinois winters was books. With the Saints' emphasis on reading and education, books were fairly common in Nauvoo homes. By the time Nauvoo was founded, publishers had begun putting out books for the amusement of children rather than just for their moral education, although the authors might appear apologetic for encouraging play. In one book that described children's games, the authors wrote, "We would wish it to be understood that we are far, very far, from being willing to encourage more [play] of any kind." The primary purpose of their book, they insisted, was to "unbend the mind and invigorate the body that [children] may again return to their studies or other useful employments with fresh energy and vigor." [^10]

Many children's books were of a religious nature, preaching hell and damnation for disobedient children. The gradual realization that such literature was not necessarily good for children led to stories being written for their amusement. Washington Irving published Rip Van Winkle in 1819, Clement Moore published A Visit from St. Nicholas in 1822, and, starting in 1827, Peter Parley created a whole series of children's books. Puzzle and riddle books became very popular, and illustrations improved, with some woodcuts colored by hand. Fairy tales and nursery rhymes became more popular than ever as the morals became less blatant. Many books were designed in smaller sizes and had fewer pages in order to appeal specifically to children rather than to parents.

In the second quarter of the nineteenth century, foreign observers were practically unanimous in their opinion of American children, finding them precocious, noisy, and disrespectful of their elders. The German visitor, Francis Grund, visiting America just before Nauvoo was settled, thought the children's bad behavior was caused by bad climate, long school hours (certainly not the case in Illinois), and American parents' "liv[ing] altogether for their children." [^11] Harriet Martineau suggested that the children's behavior was not surprising in a country with huge resources needing taming and so few to do it. The English visitor, Mrs. Trollope, noted another possible reason: "I have conversed with many American ladies on the total want of discipline. . . . In the state of Ohio they have a law, . . . that if a father strike his son, he shall pay a fine of ten dollars . . . such a law they say, generates a spirit of freedom." [^12]

Whether a cause or a result of the behavior observed by these foreign visitors, the Nauvoo era saw the beginning of modern child-rearing. It was recognized that children should be taught responsible and appropriate self-management. Prior to this time, advice to parents centered on physical care, manners, and salvation. Now mothers were advised to teach appropriate responses to other actions, such as an older child biting the baby (bite the older child back), to teach a belief in ghosts (because supernatural beings exist in the Bible), and to administer appropriate forms of punishment (whipping was all right, but not for accidents or ignorance). Contrary to popular belief, theories of discipline during the Nauvoo era were no less advanced in some respects than in late twentieth-century America. John Angell James stated in The Family Monitor published in Boston in 1830: "All commands should be reasonable; there should be no wanton, capricious use of authority. . . . The first object of every parent should be to render punishment unnecessary." [^13]

Nonetheless, there was still a strong emphasis on obedience and correct behavior—much of it unabashedly pointed and moralistic. In The Child at Home, Abbott included lessons on "Consequences of Disobedience" and "Thoughts on Death," which reveals the feelings of visiting a graveyard, seeing the graves of so many children, and contemplating what their dying thoughts might have been if they had been unkind to their parents. [^14]

Sundays were observed by the children of Nauvoo much as they were by their Puritan forebears. It was not a day for outdoor games or indoor games of the types played during the week. First was the long Church service. After that came quiet home activities, including reading, especially of the scriptures. In the late afternoon there was time for quiet walks with perhaps a visit to the graveyard with parents. This was a time to learn more about those who had died the previous week (there were always some in Nauvoo) and to contemplate the meaning of death. The Saints' doctrines on the afterlife were new, but the teaching methodology was not.

Although such Church and city leaders as the Prophet tolerated and even encouraged childhood play, they were nevertheless careful about encouraging it to excess. John Taylor, editor of the Neighbor and often the unofficial spokesman for the Church presidency, included an editorial on the subject of play in the 30 April 1845 issue of his newspaper: "The habit, in towns and cities, of boys running together to play, tends to evil. Drunkenness, profanity, thieving and mobocracy result from such practices. Parents, keep your children home and make them work." It is quite possible that editor Taylor was concerned about the behavior of youngsters whom he felt were too old to be playing street games. Nauvoo experienced a few problems involving young people and when some of the town citizens started showing concern, some of the more serious-minded youth decided to help change the situation. At Heber C. Kimball's suggestion, crowds of young people met in homes and private halls to hear practical advice on the wise use of time. The result was the organization of the Young Gentlemen and Ladies Relief Society of Nauvoo, a charitable auxiliary to the women's Relief Society. As one of the first speakers, Kimball spoke out against excessive parties, dances, and entertainment. The Prophet addressed them, wisely offering them an alternative to entertainments: he urged them to devote more time to the service of the poor. The first project carried out by the young people's association was constructing a house for a disabled immigrant from England.

It is of interest to note that the association was designed for both young men and women. Education for women was changing as times were changing. The old-fashioned domestic skills of spinning, weaving, and candlemaking were no longer considered essential skills for young girls to learn. Ready-made clothing was becoming the fashion. More emphasis was being placed on training young girls with the skills a lady would need, such as playing the piano, doing embroidery, and reading classics aloud and with expression.

Much of the sexism in American culture is traceable to the early nineteenth century. The robustness of colonial social life gave way in the Federal period to extreme emphasis on "correct" behavior and delicacy in social relations, especially for the young female. Correct behavior meant remaining mostly silent in company. Wit was a dangerous talent, and learning must be kept a secret, especially from men. Apparently, most young women learned their lessons well, for foreign visitors complained of the difficulty in trying to engage American girls in conversation. Such reluctance to engage in conversation did not mean that young women were incapable of conversation, however. In fact, observers noted that when young women did talk, they were well-informed and articulate—often more so than the men.

As educational and career opportunities increased, it became not only increasingly difficult for young girls to continue to accept their accustomed role but even more bewildering to truly understand it. What was their accustomed role? The most important role of any American mother was to produce sons who would become the nation's important men and daughters who would become gentle, devout, high-principled, and accomplished young ladies, who in turn would make ideal wives for the important sons of other women. In Nauvoo, the ideal was to produce sons and daughters who would lead the Church to a more peaceful and prosperous future somewhere west of the city of their childhood.

Children and Childhood

---
Notas:
[^1] Andrus and Andrus, They Knew the Prophet, p. 145.
[^2] J. Smith, "Frontier Nauvoo," p. 18.
[^3] Marryat, Diary in America, p. 97.
[^4] Raumer, America and the American People, p. 499.
[^5] Quoted in Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi, p. 86.
[^6] Kissam, Nurse's Manual and Young Mother's Guide, p. 50.
[^7] Minnigerode, Fabulous Forties, p. 76.
[^8] Calhoun, Social History of the American Family, 2:84.
[^9] Martineau, Society in America, 3:147.
[^10] I. Bartlett, American Mind in the Mid-Nineteenth Century, pp. 38-39.
[^11] Burgess-Olson, Sister Saints, p. viii.
[^12] Barclay-Allardice, Agricultural Tour, p. 156.
[^13] Chevalier, Society, Manners and Politics, p. 304.
[^14] Berger, British Traveller in America, p. 83.
