George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

19

Women and Mothers

"Thinking to give the Prophet some light on home management, I said to him, Brother Joseph, my wife does more hard work than does your wife. Brother Joseph replied by telling me that if a man cannot learn in this life to appreciate a wife and do his duty by her, in properly taking care of her, he need not expect to be given one in the hereafter. His words shut my mouth as tight as a clam. I took them as terrible reproof. After that I tried to do better by the good wife I had and tried to lighten her labors." [^1]

This advice by the Prophet to a misguided follower was in part a consequence of all he had seen Mormon women, including his wife and his mother, endure over the past ten years. And yet as he gave this advice, Joseph well knew how difficult it would be to make life easier for the sister Saints for many years to come.

The founding mothers of Nauvoo had suffered considerable persecution and hardships before establishing their crude homes on the flats of Nauvoo. Many of them had been driven from or burned out of their homes two or three times in the last five years, each time losing what little they had gathered since the last mobbing. Joseph's own wife and his aged parents had been driven most recently from their homes in Far West, Missouri, and in the winter of 1838-39, they walked most of the distance across the state and crossed the Mississippi River to sanctuary in Illinois. Seven years later, after building up the new city of Nauvoo, making homes for their families, sending husbands, brothers, and sons away on missions, and building a temple that cost a million dollars, the Saints were again forced from their homes and driven into an unknown and dangerous wilderness to build their lives and homes all over again.

All their hardships did not deter these courageous sisters from reaching out to help those even more unfortunate. Many individual acts of charity highlight those seven short and trouble-filled years in Nauvoo. Children orphaned by Missouri mobbers were adopted, education provided for children of destitute families, goods shared with the families of brethren called to distant missions, the aged and feeble cared for, and the poor given useful employment.

In some ways Nauvoo was unlike other cities in the old Northwest Territory. Frontier communities almost invariably had twenty to sixty percent more males than females between the ages of twenty and thirty years. Nauvoo had almost equal numbers of women and men. This factor influenced the orientation toward family in Nauvoo and created both problems and advantages found in eastern communities. For example, schooling was a more pressing concern in a community with more families, especially in light of the Mormon emphasis on education.

In other frontier communities, the ratio of children under five years to women between fifteen and forty-five years of age was one child for every two women. In Nauvoo the ratio was one to one. [^2] The high birthrate added not only to the problems of caring for larger families but also to the incidence of child mortality, with the resulting psychological effects on other family members.

Letters and diaries reveal the courage and moral strength of the women of Nauvoo, but what about other characteristics and qualities not so readily disclosed? How did the women dress? What kind of manners and vocabulary did they use? How did they regard themselves? A good place to seek answers is in the writings of foreign visitors.

Captain Frederick Marryat, whose book detailing his visit to America was published in London in the year Nauvoo was founded, described a visit to a seminary for young women in New York: "As young ladies are assembled here from every state of the Union, it was a fair criterion of American beauty, and it must be acknowledged that the American women are the prettiest in the whole world." [^3] Prettiest perhaps, but not necessarily the healthiest looking. Friedrich Raumer, another visitor whose book was published in New York in the year Nauvoo was abandoned, said this about American women: "I have seen in no country in the world, among handsome women, so many pale, sickly faces. Whether this is the effect of the climate, the food [such things as smoking hot corn-bread with melted butter], the manner of life, the tight lacing, the drinking of vinegar, or all these causes combined." [^4] Many young women, incidentally, believed that drinking vinegar would remove the "vulgar" red from their cheeks. The pale faces that Raumer observed were more probably the result of the fashionable practice in the eastern states of whitening faces with rice powder. It is unlikely that this practice was followed in Illinois, where the "healthy look" was in vogue. Noting an immigrant company from Lancashire headed for Nauvoo with "an honest and healthy look," the Quincy Whig in an 1841 article commented on the "many comely women . . . handsome and delicate." [^5] Robert Barclay-Allardice, while on an agricultural tour of the United States in 1841, was especially impressed with the frankness and cordiality of American women.

The frankness he mentioned did not, however, extend to the vocabulary of cultured American women in the 1840s. Their Puritan grandmothers were moral but not squeamish in their vocabulary. As one authority noted, they had "called a spade a spade," but their granddaughters in the Nauvoo period found the most common words just too embarrassing to say in public. Legs were called "nether limbs," and the belly was called the "lower region." The breast of a chicken was merely "white meat," and a stomachache was a "chest pain." Even newspaper editors who accepted ads for remedies for female ailments did not dare print certain words, which made it a little difficult at times to figure out what the remedy was for. An ad in the Nauvoo Neighbor of 8 January 1845 announced a "kind of root which the squaws use to facilitate———; . . . they should commence using two or three weeks before their expected———, also a remedy to ease pain and allay inflammation and cleanse the———." Words associated with pregnancy were replaced with an entirely different vocabulary. A woman was not pregnant but merely in the "family way," which never led to childbirth but simply to "lying in." And "lying in" was a most appropriate term. Charlotte Haven, in a letter to her family back east, mentioned a sister-in-law giving birth to a son in February 1843. Two weeks later the mother got up and ate breakfast with the family.

Newspapers, whose editors so readily printed any news on the subject of death, never mentioned the birth of a child. Nineteenth-century Americans were apparently supposed not even to think about such indelicate events. And new mothers themselves were apparently not to think about anything at all. The author of a nursing manual during the Nauvoo era warned its readers that around new mothers "all discussions are to be avoided; and any duty which requires much effort of the mind. . . . During the four weeks following the birth of the child, the mother is to be considered an invalid, and treated as such." [^6]

With such concern for the activities of new mothers, it is fairly safe to assume that the activities of all women would be much more limited than today. An article in Godey's Magazine in 1844 asked: "Where is the true sphere of woman? Where is the seat of her dominion? My answer is H O M E! . . . These are her true rights, her true duties and there should be her supremest happiness." [^7] A writer in the Ladies Repository in 1842 reduced the duties of women to affection, reverence and faithfulness. [^8] If observers and writers of the period were accurate, the life of a woman during this era was fettered wherever she turned. Harriet Martineau, a sympathetic English visitor to America in the late 1830s, made this observation: "The lot of poor women is sad. Before the opening of the factories, there were but three resources; teaching, needlework, and keeping boarding houses or hotels." [^9] These three were certainly the three major occupations available to women, including Latter-day Saints. Teaching, the most common female occupation in Nauvoo, was considered the most appropriate vocation for any woman. Almost half the teachers in the city were women.

The 1840s were a decade of reform in America. According to writers of that period, the spirit of reform swept across the American landscape as never before or since, and the Mormons were not uninvolved. In the fall of 1841 a Massachusetts newspaper described a congress of social reformers convened in Boston's Chardon Street Chapel: "Methodists and Baptists, Atheists and Deists, Mormons and Socialists, . . . Latter-day Saints, Jews and Quakers." [^10]

One reform issue for these groups was women's rights. Men and women alike, including Latter-day Saints, were beginning to question the limited role of women in education and the professions. The Nauvoo Wasp carried a notice in its 29 October 1842 issue: "The Nauvoo Lyceum will meet at Professor Orson Pratt's School Room at early candle light on Saturday Evening next—subject for discussion, 'Should Females be educated to the same extent of Males.' " Certainly the class rolls of Nauvoo's schools indicates that parents were just as concerned about their daughters' education as their sons'. At least half the students enrolled in the schools of Nauvoo were girls according to the Hancock County School records. The Church leaders themselves broke the narrow confines of nineteenth-century chauvinism. Brigham Young, president of the Quorum of the Twelve in Nauvoo and successor to the Prophet Joseph Smith, took the lead: "We believe that women are useful not only to sweep houses, wash dishes, make beds and raise babies, but they should stand behind the counter, study law or physics or become good bookkeepers and be able to do the business in any counting house." [^11]

Some observers of the American scene during this decade looked upon job restrictions for women as an advantage. One European traveler noted that "the meanest [lowliest] of them are exempt, or I might rather say debarred, from those masculine or laborious tasks which are commonly enough assigned the sex, or assumed by them, in our country. For instance, a woman employed at work in the fields is nowhere to be seen." [^12] That was not strictly true for frontier America, for we have numerous examples of pioneer women working daily in the fields beside their husbands. In comparison with Europe, however, he was accurate, and there is little evidence that Nauvoo women played a major role in field work or other heavy tasks. Another visitor, Michael Chevalier, made the same observation by noting that the American woman "has escaped that hideous ugliness and repulsive coarseness of complexion which toil and privation everywhere else brings upon them. Every woman here has the features as well as the dress of a lady; every woman here is called a lady and strives to appear so. We [Europeans] buy a woman with our fortune, or we sell ourselves to her for her dower. The American chooses her, or rather offers himself to her, for her beauty, her intelligence, or her amiable qualities." [^13] A most astute foreign observer, Max Berger, a British resident for more than twenty years, might well have been talking of the Mormons in Nauvoo when he observed: "I know of no people with stronger domestic affections. The American marries young; he loves his wife and children . . . an American's wife is the peg on which he hangs out his fortune; . . . the Englishman loves his house . . . the American loves his wife." [^14] The numerous existing letters of missionaries to their loved ones in Nauvoo dramatically demonstrate affection and concern.

The unique relationship between men and women during the early and mid nineteenth century was noted by Charles Lyell, who visited the United States in the years 1841 through 1842: "One of the first peculiarities that must strike a foreigner in the United States is the deference paid universally" to women. He observed that they could travel alone anyplace in the country with less risk of encountering unpleasant behavior or conversation than in any other country he had ever visited. [^15] Every man was expected to protect any woman at any time. Harriet Martineau commented, "The degree of consideration shown to women is, in my opinion, greater than is rational, or good for either party." [^16]

Despite such deference, many would have preferred something more for frontier women, perhaps a life with less toil. For everyone on the frontier, life was a constant struggle—an ordeal at best, an early death at worst. Even in towns, the longest laboring hours were women's. They illustrated the adage that a man's work was from sun to sun but a woman's work was never done. They recognized their own sacrifices, but they also recognized the ruggedness of the frontier society they lived in.

Not so in Nauvoo. As has already been noted, Nauvoo was not a typical frontier town, despite male domination in the Church and city government. There was an equal number of males and females. Life did not center on such typically masculine frontier professions as mining, ranching, or lumbering. The social life of Nauvoo was not centered on saloons, gambling, fire companies, or hunting. The intellectual and social influence of women in Nauvoo society was probably disproportionately greater than in any comparable community in the United States. Mormon women were also forced to be more self-sufficient because the men, on account of their faith, spent much of their time away from domestic or professional duties. Many of them had been forced to spend considerable time defending themselves in courts, in battle, and even in captivity while wives assumed many of their duties. Even before homes were established in Nauvoo, many of the men were called to distant missions. Hundreds left Nauvoo on proselyting, political, or lumbering missions, turning Nauvoo into even more of a female oriented city.

Louisa Pratt, whose husband was called on a mission in 1843, was left with four daughters to care for and few resources: "I was left in a small log house. I immediately set about building a framed house, buying the lumber on credit." [^17] She oversaw the construction and did some of the labor herself. She also bartered and taught school for her family's subsistence.

Such strong and independent Mormon women were not about to submit to the advice in books like The Family Monitor; or, a Help to Domestic Happiness, which admonished them to meekly and gracefully "be subject in all things, not only to the wise and good, but to the foolish and ill-deserving. . . . Let it be to your glory to feel how much you can endure." [^18] Sabra Gribble certainly felt no glory in enduring her husband. In 1845 she ran a notice in the 21 May Neighbor declining to any longer be responsible for the debts of the man John Gribble, who "has taken my bed and board. . . . neither will I be responsible for his bad acts heretofore or hereafter, and solicit him to return what he has taken away, and save further trouble." The notice was signed Sabra Granger—she even rejected his name.

Neither did Church authorities agree that wives should endure ill-deserving husbands. In 1843 the Neighbor carried a notice signed by Cyrus Boley, accusing his wife Martha of leaving him without cause. The following year, on 14 August 1844, Martha published a refutation, claiming: "Cyrus Boley left his wife and fled to New Orleans and returned this Spring, refused to live with his wife, was tried by a Bishops Court and cut off from the Church. This information is given that the plaster may be made as large as the wound."

Divorce laws varied by state, New York having the most stringent laws and Illinois, the most lax. In most states infidelity and drunkenness were the chief legal grounds for divorce, but in Illinois a woman might receive a divorce for any cause that the court deemed proper. Such liberal laws did not necessarily reflect the publicly accepted view of women. And the generally accepted view was one of condescension, because of their "limited intellectual capacities." Dr. Charles Meigs, in his 1848 textbook, Females and Their Diseases informed his readers that a woman had no part in affairs of the mind. He discouraged her entry into the medical profession because she has "a head almost too small for intellect but just big enough for love." [^19]

Mormon sisters certainly had the capacity for love, but that did not diminish the intellectual capacities noted by such observers as Judge Thorp of Clay County, Missouri. As the Saints were being driven from Missouri into Illinois, the judge became acquainted with many of the exiles and noted that "the women were generally well educated and as a rule were quite intelligent." [^20] Foreign travelers such as J. S. Buckingham, who traveled extensively in the United States about this time, noted that "the women were always equal to the men, and often superior to them, in the extent of their reading, and the shrewdness of their observations." [^21]

One of these superior women was Sarah M. Kimball. As a teenager in Kirtland, she often discussed religion with her father, Oliver Granger, and attended the School of the Prophets. In later years she mentioned those experiences, perhaps to underscore the importance she placed upon doctrinal study and education among Mormon women.

Failure to stress education for young women was a common feature of American society before 1850 and was certainly not evidence of short-sightedness on the part of parents. Education was actually considered a curse for women, for two reasons. Previous to 1850 there were few job opportunities for women requiring education. Those with education who wished to work had to settle for menial jobs not fitting their abilities. Second, those who wished to marry often ended up marrying men of coarser nature and lesser talent. It was much more difficult to find refined, educated men before the days of widespread higher education.

But here again Mormon society in Nauvoo did not fit the traditional mold. There were more job opportunities for women in a tolerant and booming community like Nauvoo, and there was greater likelihood of women being able to find refined, educated men in Nauvoo. Even such outsiders as Charles Dickens, who visited a Mormon emigrant ship about to sail to America, were favorably impressed with the cultural and educational qualities of the Latter-day Saints. Amazed at the large numbers reading books and writing letters, he wrote, "I should have said they were in their degree, the pick and flower of England." [^22]

Outside Nauvoo, where distinctions in jobs and education were much greater, women were aware of their inferior status and spoke out on it, if not publicly, at least in advice to one another. Note the bitter wisdom in the advice given by an old mother to a young one: "Stimulate the sensibilities of your boys, and blunt those of your girls." [^23] No Nauvoo mother would have offered such advice, however, especially with Church leaders encouraging young people of both sexes to participate in lyceums and night schools and even encouraging the sisters to participate in a strictly female organization that included self-improvement as one of its major objectives.

The Prophet Joseph declared in 1842 at the founding of the Relief Society that he was turning the key in behalf of women "in the name of the Lord," and that knowledge and intelligence would flow down from that time henceforth. Sarah Kimball, who first suggested such an organization and by her own definition was a "woman's rights woman," traced the national suffrage movement itself to that "turning of the key," asserting that the foundation of the suffrage cause was deeply and permanently laid on 17 March 1842 in Nauvoo.

Although Harriet Martineau in 1836 pointed out the extremely limited number of occupations open to women, the sisters of Nauvoo were determined to stretch those limits and in a typical Mormon way—through organization. On 21 May 1845 the Neighbor carried the first notice of a meeting of the Female Association for Manufacturing of Straw Bonnets, Hats, and Straw Trimmings at the Concert Hall and signed by Nancy Rockwood, president.

As advanced as such organizations were, Nauvoo sisters were going against well-entrenched national opinions. William A. Alcott, one of the most influential arbiters of manners in America, referred to the laws and customs which gave the husband superiority over the wife. On the other hand, Nauvoo's leaders expressed opinions on the marriage partnership that were not yet acceptable to the vast majority of Americans. In an editorial on 6 September 1843, editor John Taylor of the Neighbor offered this advice to the husbands of Nauvoo: "The happiness of the wife is committed to the keeping of the husband; prize the sacred trust. . . . Make it an established rule to consult your wife on all occasions. Your interest is hers; and undertake no plan contrary to her advice and approbation. . . . Your wife has an equal right with yourself to all your worldly possessions." It is not altogether inconceivable that such radical ideas could have influenced the Illinois mobbers, who wanted the dangerous Mormons removed from their midst.

Whatever the case, there is little question but that the status of women in Nauvoo had progressed further and faster than in the rest of America. Male chauvinism, when it reared its head in Nauvoo, felt it necessary to do so with a smile on its face. A news bulletin in the Neighbor announced the sinking of a steamer on the Ohio River at the foot of "Petticoat Island." The article headline was "Beware of Petticoat Power!" Husbands, feeling their power slip away in the face of growing female independence, could sometimes only resort to feeble sarcasm, as another notice in the Neighbor, this one on 29 November 1843, illustrates:

Run Away One Cent Reward

As my wife Lydia has left my bed and board without cause or provocation, as she has taken a quantity of household furniture, clothing and money, I hereby offer one cent reward for her apprehension and delivery of the articles. . . .

Wm. Nesbitt

Of course most Mormon wives never thought of running away, and certainly their husbands never dreamed of a monetary value for their mates. If they had, the value of the million-dollar temple on the hill would have been very small by comparison.

Women and Mothers

---
Notas:
[^1] Cable, Little Darlings, p. 71.
[^2] Quoted in Jackson, "The Mormon Village," p. 232.
[^3] James, Family Monitor, p. 217.
[^4] Mulder, Among the Mormons, p. 87.
[^5] Ibid., p. 88.
[^6] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 57.
[^7] Hancock County School Records.
[^8] Allen and Leonard, Story of the Latter-day Saints, p. 158.
[^9] Martineau, Society in America, 1:264.
[^10] Foote, Autobiography of Warren Foote, pp. 42-43.
[^11] History of the Church, 6:263.
[^12] Monroe (Diary), pp. 117, 124.
[^13] Ibid., p. 108.
[^14] Aitken, Journey up the Mississippi River, p. 22.
[^15] Scientific American, August 28, 1845.
[^16] Buley, Old Northwest, 2:373.
[^17] Monroe (Diary), p. 104.
[^18] Raumer, America and the American People, p. 280.
[^19] Grund, Americans, p. 135.
[^20] Kiefer, American Children through Their Books, p. 153.
[^21] Buley, Old Northwest, 2:378.
[^22] Haupt, Book in America, p. 123.
[^23] Potter and Emerson, School and the Schoolmaster, p. 197.
