George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

20

Schools

Nineteenth-century schools were a grueling experience. Theodore Dwight, editor, clergyman, and congressman lamented that school was "torture rather than instruction . . . a shock from which many bright children never recover." [^1] Nevertheless, educating their children was one of the reasons the Latter-day Saints gathered to Nauvoo. In an 1838 message the First Presidency told the members of the Church: "One of the principle objects then, of our coming together, is to obtain the advantages of education; and in order to do this, compact society is absolutely necessary." [^2]

To be sure, Illinois might not seem the ideal place for any people to gather if they wanted to provide their children with a good education. In 1840 while one in two of children in New England were provided with free public schools, the ratio in the upper Mississippi Valley was one in six. Contrary to popular mythology, there was not an overwhelming public sentiment for schools on the western frontier. In fact, there was a great deal of opposition for a variety of reasons. The need for making a living was too pressing to allow children the luxury of "idle" hours at school. Many settlers considered their present situation merely a temporary stop before moving on to greener pastures further west. In addition, there was the distrust and jealousy of the learned by the less educated, and factional and local jealousies prevented the unity necessary for support of schools on a regional level. And, just as there are today, large numbers decried the ungodly influence of public schools. The author of a self-help book published in Boston in 1830 said: "A Christian parent ought not to suffer his children to associate with those, who are likely to do them harm. On this account, domestic education is decidedly to be preferred, where it can be obtained, to schools." [^3] In Illinois, especially, there seemed even greater resistance to public education. Before Nauvoo was settled, the largest part of the population had been drawn from the south, where there was no public school system.

Yet seeking knowledge was part of the Saints' religious doctrine. John Corrill, an elder from upper Missouri who visited Kirtland in 1835, described the Latter-day Saints as inspired "with an extravagant thirst after knowledge." [^4] Even enemies of the Church seemed to hold a grudging admiration for this particular trait of the Mormons. James H. Eells, an anti-Mormon living in Elyria, Ohio, wrote in a letter in 1836: "The Mormons appear to be very eager to acquire education. . . . they are by no means, as a class, men of weak minds." [^5]

For an impoverished people repeatedly driven from previous homes, providing schools for their children was not an easy matter. They could look for little help from state and local governments. Most of the adults living in Hancock County when the Mormons arrived had migrated from states where educational opportunities were even fewer than in western Illinois. Even prominent and influential men among these "old settlers," men such as J. Duncan, governor of Illinois in 1834, and T. Corbin, governor in 1839, had meager educations. Nevertheless, the Latter-day Saints had a burning desire to provide formal education for their children and forged quickly ahead with their own school system. By 1841 there was in Nauvoo a system of common schools under the supervision of the board of regents of the projected municipal university. On 15 December of that year, the Times and Seasons informed its readers that "the school Wardens of the University for Common Schools are desired to organize the schools in their respective wards. . . . the Teachers must procure a certificate of competency from the Chancellor and the Registrar before they can be recognized by the Wardens." At the common school level, classes functioned in all municipal wards with three wardens, or trustees, supervising the work. The trustees were to see that school buildings were erected (usually log cabins), select a teacher, arrange for the teacher's room and board, and listen to recitations and examinations. In practice the common school system did not become universal, because of the rise of subscription schools.

During the 1840s, Illinois relied entirely on private schools, a large number of which were incorporated in the 1830s. One school, located about three miles east of Quincy, was visited in 1843 by Mormon schoolteacher Warren Foote, as he recorded in his diary: "I went to the Institute to get some furniture. . . . The Institute is a place of learning where the pupils can work for their board and tuition . . . There are two young Indians there now being educated. They look like pretty smart fellows." [^6] In 1825 an Illinois law was passed to permit localities to levy school taxes, but opposition caused it to be repealed within a short time. It was another twenty years before a free education law was again passed, and even more years before many of the Illinois localities took advantage of it.

By 1850 all but 10 percent of American schoolchildren attended public, or "common," schools, that is, schools common to all. But in 1840 on the Illinois frontier, the distinction between private (subscription) schools and public (common) schools was often blurred. Several Mormon schools were strictly private (subscription) schools with parents paying the entire costs—no public funds were involved. Other schools were at least partially supported by public funds, and that is where confusion occurs in deciphering the records. For example, the Hancock County school records for 1843 show that Miriam Kempton taught a class of forty-two students for six weeks, a total of 736 student days, and notes the amount due as $17.17. Following this entry is a notation showing that $6.46 had been paid, that amount being the apportionment of school, college, and seminary funds. A letter to the authorities by Eli Kelsey, another teacher, requesting public money suggests that county funds were in addition to city funds. In fact, the letter and accompanying class rolls suggest that part of the teacher's pay was derived from county funds and that it was based on pupil attendance. At the conclusion of his rolls, Kelsey shows more than nine thousand student days and appears to collect two sums of two hundred dollars each. Part of this total was for his mother, also a teacher, whose rolls he submitted with his own. At the conclusion of his letter to the county requesting the pay, he asks the authority to "drop me a line through the office as soon as possible and inform me what the prospect is as to our getting the PUBLIC money." [^7]

It appears from such information that Hancock County did use some public funds for education as early as 1842. The amount paid was figured in mills per student days and could vary significantly from teacher to teacher, for reasons not always clear. Miriam Kempton received 877 mills per one hundred student days, or less than one cent per student per day. Eli Kelsey, on the other hand received more than 4,000 mills per one hundred student days, or slightly more than four cents per student per day. One obvious reason for the difference is that women teachers received less pay, but it is likely, too, that Mr. Kelsey, who was being paid at a later date, received the benefits of a more generous government. Just exactly what proportion of Nauvoo's teachers received a portion of their pay from the county is not clear. Hancock County school records list twenty-seven Nauvoo teachers who received county funds between 1842 and 1845, but we do not know how many teachers Nauvoo had during its seven years. One authority states that at least eighty different men and women served as teachers in the city. [^8]

It is not possible to neatly separate Nauvoo's schoolteachers into public and private categories. Some teachers would have been in both. Eliza R. Snow, for example, set up a subscription school over the Masonic Lodge in 1842 for a three-month term. Hancock County records indicate that the county paid her for a three-week period that same year. Many other teachers relied entirely on subscriptions.

Setting up a subscription school in those days of freedom from bureaucratic regulations was a rather simple procedure, and the idea of such schools was as old and as common as the almanac. Actually, early American almanacs refer to such schools in their advice for preparing for winter: "Secure your cellars from frost. Fasten loose clap-boards and shingles. Secure a good school-master." [^9] Schoolmasters could be secured after the parents organized a school. An even more common method was for the master to settle upon a likely spot, advertise his availability to the parents, and, if there were enough interested parents, start the school.

A year after Nauvoo was founded, such a subscription school was started by Warren Foote in a Mormon community about twelve miles east of Quincy, Illinois, as he mentioned in his diary in 1840: "Some of the people in the neighborhood wished me to take up a school. I went around to see how many scholars I could get. I only got twelve subscribed. As I wished to be improving myself, I concluded to take up school and try it." [^10]

Throughout the life of Nauvoo, notices of subscription schools constantly appeared in the local newspapers. We find one such ad in the 9 July 1843 issue of the Nauvoo Neighbor:

NAUVOO SEMINARY

Mr. Joseph N. and Miss Adelia Cole, would respectfully inform the citizens of Nauvoo, that they have opened a school in the large and convenient room, in the second story of President Joseph Smith's store, on the corner of Water and Granger streets, on Tuesday the 11th inst., [July] for the instruction of male and female . . .

TERMS OF TUITION Reading, writing and spelling $2.00 English Grammar & Geography 2.50 Chemistry and Natural Philosophy 3.00 Astronomy 4.00

A quarter will consist of twelve weeks or 65 days and no allowance will be made for absenters unless prevented from attendance by sickness or by special agreement.

Other ads show that the teacher charged by the week, at the rate of seventeen to twenty-five cents per subject. In such cases, the cost to the parents of one student taking just five basic subjects—reading, writing, geography, grammar, and arithmetic—was approximately a dollar each week, or twenty cents per day. Such education sounds reasonably priced until we remember that twenty cents a day was at least a quarter of a working man's wages for one day. That explains why so many children were not in school, even though school might last only a few weeks.

With school being held for such a short portion of the year, there was little reason to have buildings devoted strictly to that purpose. Most schools were held in private homes, upstairs over businesses, in basements, vacant cabins, barns, or any place that could hold a few bodies. From the Hancock County School records we can ascertain some of the school locations in Nauvoo for those teachers who received part of their pay from public funds. The records indicate schools being held at such locations as the corner of Knight and James streets, the Seventies Hall, the house of John Kempton, a schoolhouse on Warsaw Street, on the corner of Hibbard and Fulmer Streets, over Joseph Smith's store, and in the Masonic Hall. According to this list, schools were occasionally held in buildings designed as schools. Joseph Smith's history of the Church refers to a meeting of the inhabitants of the Tenth Ward "at the schoolhouse on the hill, in Parley street." [^11] One of the first buildings in Nauvoo was a stone building designed and built for a school by A. Cutler and J. Durphy. It was occupied in October 1839, the same year the Mormons settled Nauvoo. Charlotte Haven, a non-Mormon resident, referred in a letter to her parents to a schoolhouse in her neighborhood overflowing with children of all sizes.

Despite "overflowing" schoolhouses, all Nauvoo children were not in school. In fact, if accurate statistics were available we might be surprised to discover the large number who were unable to attend because of the cost, the need for the children at home, apathy on the part of some of the parents, and even the lack of schools. The Nauvoo teacher James Monroe noted in his journal: "I have now about a dozen in each school. Several other individuals wish to get their children in my school, but I could not take them." The shortage of schools in the city was aggravated even more a short time later when Monroe decided that he had to close one of his schools: "My scholars don't seem to take as much interest learning as they might and I almost despair of being able to do so. I find that it is too hard work for me to take care of both schools, not being able to do perfect justice to either one. I shall therefore keep the one at Brigham's no more than one quarter." [^12]

Attendance was not universal in Nauvoo, but neither was it in most of the United States at that time. Depending on the state, from one-third to one-tenth of all American children had no education during the 1840s. One authority on the midwestern frontier estimated that while one-sixth of the whole population was attending primary or common schools in states such as Massachusetts and Pennsylvania in 1840, in the old Northwest Territory the ratio was one in eleven, and in Illinois, one in fourteen. Hancock County school records for 1842 show approximately six hundred children on the rolls of Nauvoo schools that received county funds. Since the number of private subscription schools mentioned in the Neighbor whose teachers are not mentioned in the county records is at least as great as the number of county-funded teachers, we can probably double the number of students who received some education each year. Comparing that estimated figure of twelve hundred children receiving some education in the Nauvoo metropolitan area in 1842 to an estimated population of ninety-five or ninety-six hundred, we arrive at a ratio of one-eighth of the whole population receiving some schooling. That proportion is not as high as in Massachusetts, but it is still very good for a newly settled frontier community in Illinois.

For the children who were enrolled in school, there was still an attendance problem. With so many children not in school, confinement in a classroom for several hours each day for their friends was pure torture, even though school terms were not nearly as long as those of today. The term varied from approximately six to thirteen weeks long, normally during the winter months when work at home and on the farms was slack. One unusually long session was taught by Eli Kelsey in the Seventies Hall from 13 May 1844 through 20 December 1844. Just how successful Brother Kelsey was in maintaining class attendance, we do not know, but another teacher certainly had problems. In a school conducted by W. S. Hathaway in a "schoolhouse on Wells St.," in 1843 seventeen of his students no longer attended after thirty-five days. At this point twelve new students entered. Over the next several weeks, seven more dropped out and eleven more entered. Only three children stayed the entire term of 117 days. Their names were Hathaway, so probably they were the teacher's children, which would explain their inability to drop out. Records reveal that when parents were teachers, their children had almost perfect attendance, so poor attendance was not necessarily due to illness.

The solution to the ancient problem of truancy was no more readily found in Nauvoo than in other places. Schoolmaster James Monroe seemed to be aware of this when he cautiously recorded in his diary: "I learned that Jos. Taylor played truant yesterday and day before for which I talked and reasoned with him and I think I have had sufficient effect upon him to deter him from doing the same in the future at least for a short time." [^13]

For common schools, truancy was more serious because public funds depended on attendance. The day book of one teacher, Mr. Banister, shows forty-two students being taught a total of twenty-nine school days with an average absence of only once per student. What did Mr. Banister do to achieve that kind of attendance? Whatever he did, he received only $58.50 for his efforts. In contrast, Howard Coray, taught students in Nauvoo for fifty days with an absentee rate of 25 percent. A day book, incidentally, was the attendance book of the teacher. Such books had to be examined and certified at the end of each school session by the wardens or trustees for correctness before the teachers received their final pay. In much of the Mississippi Valley the number of days absent for each child was deducted from what the parents owed the school. In Nauvoo, however, attendance was not used to affect parents' cost but rather teachers' salaries, which was why the certification of the day book was so important and the keeping of it the teacher's most important duty.

Another aspect of education that has not changed is the low salaries paid to teachers in comparison to the wages of others. An Englishman journeying up the Mississippi to Nauvoo in 1845 recorded that in the Mississippi Valley, "a dollar a month for each scholar, is the general pay" for teachers. [^14] Actually, teachers in Nauvoo might have done better than that. Subscription ads in the Neighbor show prices averaging two to three dollars per subject per student per quarter. If a teacher subscribed fifteen students, each student taking three subjects, the gross would have been about two dollars per day—excellent pay at the end of a major depression, except that a large proportion of it was probably in produce. And it was not so large, either, if we average teachers' wages out over the months when they were not teaching—their wages were far less than for day laborers.

Women teachers earned even less. The year before Nauvoo was abandoned, the Scientific American reported: "The average earnings of the women in all the factories [Lowell, Massachusetts] including novices, is $1.93 per week besides their board. Many girls who have been school teachers gladly take places in the mills, as the pay is higher here." [^15] In Nauvoo, women teachers earned little more than the women of Lowell, even when they were fortunate enough to have a class of students. Mary Wilsey taught thirty-five scholars for thirteen weeks over the Smith store. Her total salary at the end of the term was $43.75, or approximately sixty-seven cents per day.

Although the difference in Nauvoo was not as great as it was for most of the country, men teachers were paid more than women were. Even for men teachers, however, the salary was inadequate, and it was necessary to find additional work. James Monroe, teacher of the Smith, Young, and Taylor children, supplemented his income by writing out the blessings that were given by William Smith, at twenty-five cents a blessing.

There was little, if any, special teacher preparation anyplace in the country. Even eight to ten years after the evacuation of Nauvoo, there were only four normal schools in the entire nation. In practice these schools were little more than secondary schools. Most of the opposition to professional training came from the schoolmasters themselves, who considered such training a slur on their competence.

As a group, teachers were not held in high esteem in the early nineteenth century. The profession seemed to attract men who disliked manual labor or who did not want to be tied to a year-round job. Many early schoolmasters had a reputation, deserved or not, for excessive drinking or wanderlust. Teachers as individuals were often respected as the intellectuals in a community, but they were still held at arm's length socially. Such prejudice did not hold true in Nauvoo or among the Mormons in general. The very nature of their doctrines discouraged class distinctions. Eliza Snow, one of Nauvoo's best known teachers, was a member of the Prophet's household and an asset in any social gathering.

A teacher's qualifications in many areas were determined by trustees, themselves often semiliterate, who quizzed the applicants for a teaching position. One such exchange is mentioned by Buley in his study of the old Northwest Territory. When asked whether the world was round or flat, the wily candidate replied, "I can teach her either way." [^16] In Nauvoo more extensive and more challenging examinations were conducted by more qualified examiners before certification was granted.

Most teachers, incidentally, were examined and certified before they began teaching, but in 1844, Howard Coray, who had been teaching in Nauvoo for quite some time, was examined and certified. Why was he examined at such a late date? Was there a question of his competency? Had parents complained? It is of interest to note that his students averaged only 37 percent attendance at the time he was examined. Whatever the case, it is obvious that the exams and certifications were intended to weed out incompetency in the profession.

Despite the lack of professional training, the quality of public school teachers was not as bad as modern writers might have us believe. Nearly all the distinguished men of the north and west taught school during some part of their careers. James Monroe, who taught in Nauvoo, recorded in his journal: "Reading a work for the advancement of teachers—dispaired of ever being able to come up to it. Must pursue means to interest their minds and fix their attentions." [^17]

The teachers of Nauvoo apparently held meetings to improve the quality of education. In the Neighbor of 30 August 1843 appeared a notice to schoolteachers to meet at the Nauvoo Seminary on 2 September to consider establishing a uniformity of class books and to promote greater "concert of action" among the teachers for the general promotion of education. One concern in promoting better education was the debate over hiring comparatively costly men teachers versus hiring the less costly women teachers. The average national teachers' wages in 1833 were $12.70 per month for men and $5.00 for women. So, by the 1840s women were hired in increasingly larger numbers and were paid about half to two-thirds the salary paid to men teachers. The trend was decried by observers who felt that young boys were losing much-needed male role models. It was the feminization of the teaching force that made mass education feasible in Illinois by the 1850s. We do not have exact statistics for Illinois, but the American Almanac for 1843 gives figures for nearby Ohio. In that state there were 2,910 male teachers averaging $3.63 per week, and 2,333 female teachers averaging $1.78 per week.

During the Missouri persecutions, after the Saints were driven destitute out of Jackson County into Clay County, many of the Latter-day Saint women taught school, not necessarily because they required lower salaries, but because they were often the best qualified. It comes as no surprise, therefore, to discover that of the eighty or so schoolteachers in Nauvoo between 1839 and 1846, approximately half were women. There are at least two reasons for the high proportion of women teachers in Nauvoo. First, fewer men were available. Many were absent on missions, and those remaining were needed in constructing the town. Second, the most energetic men in American society at this time were motivated to succeed, and they ignored teaching for more profitable labor. The Latter-day Saints seem to have had more than their share of such motivated men.

Whether the teacher was male or female, nineteenth-century teachers were accomplished in more than one area, often to an astonishing extent. There was danger in being too accomplished, however. Teachers in early Illinois who ventured beyond the basic curriculum of reading, writing, and spelling to grammar, mathematics, science, literature, or a foreign language were frequently challenged by suspicious parents who saw no practical use in these subjects. That was seldom the case in Nauvoo, where ads for schools included an amazing range of subjects. In an 1843 issue of the Neighbor, J. A. Banister offered the fundamentals and stated his readiness to teach orthography, geography, arithmetic, grammar, composition, oratory, and philosophy. The summer before Mr. Monroe offered higher mathematics, philosophy, Greek, Latin, chemistry, Spanish, and French.

Ironically, one subject not offered in schools in the Mormon city was religion. The state of Illinois provided "by law, that no literary institution or school shall have a religion department." [^18] At this time there was some debate nationally over the teaching of religion in schools. The German visitor, Grund, unused to the complete secularization of education, commented, "But the most surprising fact, in the whole course of American education, is the total absence of religious instruction in most of the elementary schools. This is entirely left to the care of the parents." [^19]

Music, however, was taught in Nauvoo. Music had first been taught in Boston only a year before the Mormon city was founded, so Nauvoo was not far behind. Under Professor Gustaves Hills, music wardens were selected to improve singing in city wards. He was also responsible for adopting music textbooks for schools in the city and for training music teachers.

Strangely enough, history was not yet an established course in American schools at this time. Its place in the school curriculum was being disputed by the authors of children's books in the early 1830s. Opponents felt history presented only "a disgusting detail of follies and crimes; and insolence of power, and the degradation and misery of our kind." [^20] History was also blamed for immortalizing the very worst men while seldom honoring the unsung benefactors who had devoted their lives in small ways to helping mankind. History was not, in fact, considered a separate subject until the second half of the eighteenth century. Then it was taught merely as memorization of chronology. One of the few places where history was recognized as a separate subject was Massachusetts, where history had been a required subject along with reading, spelling, geography, and grammar since 1832. Of the subjects required in Massachusetts schools, only history is not mentioned as a subject taught in Nauvoo.

We can speculate on the reasons history was ignored by the Mormons. Perhaps it was not yet well enough established as a subject, but the Saints had quickly adopted teaching music. Or it might be that the people of Nauvoo, themselves the objects of so much distorted and inaccurate "history" and aware of inaccuracies even in geography texts, felt that history books were even more useless, if not actually harmful. At this time geography texts carried pictures representing bear, buffalo, and elk riding down the Ohio River to market on an ark; buffalo were described as "very domestic and harmless," and among United States Territories listed in 1843 were the Northwest, Missouri, and Oregon. [^21]

Accurate or not, however, the nation's textbooks were being published at an ever increasing rate, going from an estimated $750,000 in sales in 1820 to $5,500,000 in 1850. [^22] This period also saw a significant improvement in schoolbooks—and they well needed it, being uniformly dull and colorless. The diversity of textbooks created a problem of selection, as in Connecticut, which in 1839 was struggling with two hundred different texts. [^23] Such was not the case in Nauvoo. In 1842, the Times and Seasons, the Church newspaper, published a standard list of textbooks for use in Nauvoo schools. The Eclectic Readers were on the approved list. These are probably the popular McGuffey Readers, the first of which appeared in 1836 and the others very shortly thereafter. On 16 August 1841 the Times and Seasons carried an ad for Robinson's Nauvoo Stationery advertising the Eclectic Primer, Spelling Book and first through fourth readers. The cost ranged from six cents for the primer to seventy-five cents for the fourth reader. These readers, first referred to as merely the Eclectic readers, became so popular that by 1920 they had sold more than 120 million copies. They continue to be printed and sold today. What might be surprising is that the Mormon leaders would approve of readers dominated by stern Calvinistic theology. The morals taught in these readers were pure frontier Presbyterianism, despite 1837 advertisements denying sectarianism. But what else was there?

Actually, there were many books. Harper and Brothers alone listed 195 school books, averaging in price about forty cents each. Mormon families, if they were like other Americans, owned and read their share of books. Harriet Martineau, the keen foreign observer of American life during these years, noted that "the Americans have the glory of every citizen being a reader and having books to read." [^24]

However many books Nauvoo students might have had, it is pretty certain they faced a shortage of other teaching supplies. Perhaps the most noticeable thing about a Nauvoo classroom was the absence of models, maps, globes, and other teaching aids associated with a modern school room. They were available, but few schools and fewer teachers could afford them. Many schools did not even have blackboards, which had been around since 1809. Even when they were available, a report from Connecticut pointed out in 1839 that teachers seldom used them. Students had used slates since the early 1700s, and slates could be purchased for pennies in almost any general store. Paper was available, but it was still expensive, and it was used most sparingly. In the 1840s several brands of American-made pencils were on the market selling for fifty cents per dozen. Henry David Thoreau was manufacturing very superior ones, which cost twenty-five cents each, with his father in Concord, Massachusetts. There is little evidence of widespread use of pencils in Nauvoo, however, and steel writing pens did not come into general use until mid century. Quills were still the common instrument for writing in Nauvoo schools, and the teacher or older students spent much time making or repairing such quills with "penknives." Goose quills were preferred, but turkey or even buzzard quills would do. In 1845, an ad appeared in the 9 January Neighbor for a "few hundred wild or tame geese quills wanted at this office." We are not told whether the quills were for use by the editors or for resale, but since textbooks were available at the newspaper office, it is likely that quills and even school paper was available there also. The paper would have been foolscap, the least expensive paper. Student copybooks of unruled foolscap were sewn together at home and then lined with a sharpened piece of lead. A teacher's primary duties included "setting copy" for these copybooks. The teacher wrote some sentiment in his or her best hand, and then the students tried to imitate it in their copybooks with quills and ink.

Although the first American patent for the manufacture of ink was issued to a Boston firm in 1816, it is unlikely that commercially manufactured ink was sold in Nauvoo. Ink was a product easily made right in Nauvoo by the merchants. If the parents wished to save money, they could make their own ink from nut-galls, copperas, and gum arabic, all available at the apothecary shop. To make ink with even less cost, maple bark or sumac, poke berries or oak berries, and vinegar made a most acceptable ink. A sawed-off cow horn or a lead and pewter inkstand could serve as the container.

The classroom itself was furnished with crudely made backless benches, a separate writing table and bench where the students could work with their copybooks, another table that served as the teacher's desk, a fireplace or stove, perhaps a handbell, occasionally a blackboard, and the indispensable water pail. Boys and girls, by custom, sat on opposite sides of the room. In the wintertime, however, when most schools were in session, there was the ever-present controversy over who got seats nearest the stove or fireplace. It could get pretty cold in Nauvoo at times, even to the point of the ink freezing in the inkhorns.

Students ranged in age from five or six to marriageable youth of sixteen and older. Teaching was a matter of individualized instruction, and with twenty-five to seventy-five students in a room, that was an almost insurmountable problem. Solutions that were tried with varying degrees of success included barring the youngest children from winter schools and having women teach the younger ones while the men taught and controlled the older students.

Crowding together on long wooden benches certainly led to confusion and disciplinary problems, even among the discipline-minded Latter-day Saints. Little is recorded of specific punishments meted out in Nauvoo schools, certainly nothing like those in the schools the Saints were familiar with. Corporal punishment in schools was being debated in the 1840s and was on the way out in many districts. Because attending school was not compulsory, students were in classes because they or their parents understood the importance of education. This factor made discipline problems easily controlled with the threat of expulsion. The best records we have of discipline problems in Nauvoo schools is in the diary left by James Monroe. We can hope that his methods were more typical of Nauvoo's teachers than were the more harsh methods being practiced in other schools around the nation: "This A.M. my scholars seemed to have forgotten their interest in their studies and the necessity of industry and I was almost ready to despair, but a little wholesome severity in keeping them after school, I regained all I had lost and I think lost none of their love. I see the necessity more and more of studying the characters and dispositions of my scholars as to suit my conduct and their course accordingly." And then, after that perceptive entry, we find some typical frustration: "I had considerable trouble with Caroline and I do not know what will be the end of it. She says she won't and shan't get her lessons and I tell her she shall not come to school until she does. I think she has learned it but has not recited it yet." [^25]

Of course a major factor in maintaining discipline is class size. We do not know the size of James Monroe's classes at the time he made those entries, but one of his class rolls lists forty-six students. Another teacher, Pamela Michael, carried ninety-three students on her class rolls.

School sessions might extend for only a few weeks each year, but daily sessions were unbearably long for active young bodies. Brother Monroe noted, "My time is now occupied all of the time as I am in school eight hours of the time." [^26] During the long school days, teachers expected pupils to memorize long lists of facts with such practices as singing out names of states or countries and capitals, reciting rhymes made up almost wholly of geographic facts, and so on. One student of those times remembered memorizing "long lists of tables, including apothecary weights, avoirdupois weights, troy weights, long measures, square measures, land measures and Federal and English money." [^27]

There were no report cards or written tests. All exams were oral. The first written exams did not begin until 1845 in Boston. Rather than rewards of high grades on tests or report cards to take home to parents, students received rewards of merit, which were paper certificates illustrated and decorated with a place for the student's name. Teachers handed them out as rewards to deserving students for excellence in academic work or for good behavior. Children who had few possessions would certainly treasure such certificates, in spite of the certificates having been sold to schoolmasters in quantity.

There were many obstacles to good education in Nauvoo—material losses in the Ohio and Missouri persecutions, the all-consuming energy and expense of building new homes, businesses, farms, and the temple, the inability of parents to expend money on the "luxury" of an education, poor pay for teachers and lack of qualified instructors, poor quality or lack of school buildings and furnishings, and lack of good quality books. As we look back over the progress of education in the past one hundred fifty years, we stand in awe, not only because these early Saints provided schools for their youth under such circumstances but because they provided education comparable to, if not superior to, that given in schools any place in the country. Truly a remarkable feat, except to the people of Nauvoo themselves, who believed in learning and knowledge as part of their very doctrines. A visiting United States Army officer noted in September 1842 that because of the "learned footing" upon which the Saints were establishing their religion, "ecclesiastical history presents no parallel to this people." [^28]

Schools

---
Notas:
[^1] Trollope, Domestic Manners of the Americans, p. 311.
[^2] Grund, Americans, p. 112.
[^3] Calhoun, Social History of the American Family, 2:73.
[^4] History of the Church, 6:133.
[^5] Minnigerode, Fabulous Forties, p. 133.
[^6] Nye, Cultural Life of the New Nation, p. 250.
[^7] Kett and McClung, Book Culture in Post-Revolutionary Virginia, p. 126.
[^8] Haven, "A Girl's Letters from Nauvoo," p. 635.
[^9] History of the Church, 6:180.
[^10] Nauvoo Library and Literary Institute Minutes.
[^11] Kett and McClung, Book Culture in Post-Revolutionary Virginia, p. 146.
[^12] History of the Church, 6:428.
[^13] Haven, "A Girl's Letters from Nauvoo," p. 625.
[^14] Mott, Golden Multitudes, pp. 306-7.
[^15] Nauvoo Library and Literary Institute Minutes.
[^16] History of the Church, 7:146.
[^17] Monroe (Diary), p. 104.
[^18] Raumer, America and the American People, p. 280.
[^19] Grund, Americans, p. 135.
[^20] Kiefer, American Children through Their Books, p. 153.
[^21] Buley, Old Northwest, 2:378.
[^22] Haupt, Book in America, p. 123.
[^23] Potter and Emerson, School and the Schoolmaster, p. 197.
[^24] Martineau, Retrospect of Western Travel, 2:53.
[^25] Monroe (Diary), pp. 107, 127.
[^26] Ibid., p. 13.
[^27] Janney, John Jay Janney's Virginia, p. 54.
[^28] Smucker, Religious, Social and Political History of the Mormons, p. 147.
