George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

21

Books and Libraries

"The immense exhalation of periodical trash, which penetrates into every cot and corner of the country, and which is greedily sucked in by all ranks, is unquestionably one great cause of its inferiority." [^1] This opinion of American literature and reading habits by the English visitor Mrs. Trollope shortly before the founding of Nauvoo was similar to the opinion of many Europeans. In spite of what she considered the "trashy" character of the literature, there is no question that Americans were readers. Francis Grund, another visitor to these shores about the same time, observed that: "The Americans, as a nation, are the most reading people on the face of the earth . . . but the favorite works are poetry, and next to them novels." [^2] Grund ascribed the high rate to the numbers of American women who could read. Martha Whitehouse, writing in The Ladies' Repository of 1852, felt that a major cause for women's assigned inferiority was their morbid taste for light reading. "This unreal world unfitted them for the real." [^3]

Women were expected to read religious books and moral essays. American history was perfectly acceptable reading, too, but women were warned against most novels. Shakespeare was considered a pagan and most of his writings too coarse. Byron was not advisable reading, but Thomson, Milton, Cowper, and Goldsmith were desirable.

Mrs. Trollope was absolutely right about the American love affair with periodicals. There was in the early nineteenth century a mania for periodicals. Even many of the principal English periodicals were reprinted in America. The most popular American magazines were the Saturday Evening Post and the Godey's Lady's Book. Other popular periodicals were the Metropolitan Magazine, Journal of the Franklin Institute, American Farmer's Companion, Ladies' Garland, and the United States Magazine. Most of these were monthlies, costing between one and five dollars per year. Few magazines were devoted to children, so it is difficult to determine which periodical the Prophet was referring to when he wrote in his journal three days before Christmas in 1843: "At home at nine o'clock, A.M., reading a magazine to my children." [^4]

Many books might have gone unread, as they do today, but all the magazines were read assiduously. One author in 1845 commented that the reading public's lack of patience and longing after variety led them to read periodicals rather than books. The same observer then went on to note that the "prevailing aim of the English publications was to instruct and convince, that of the Americans to please." [^5]

The obsession with periodicals, including newspapers, did not really mean, however, that books went unread in the new republic. A London bookseller, traveling in the United States in 1791, noted with surprise that "all ranks and degrees now read." Boston in the 1770s had fifty bookstores, and Philadelphia boasted over thirty. By 1820, it was estimated that 90 percent of the American population was literate. [^6] This proportion did not hold true on the frontier, but most of the Nauvoo Saints were from New England and the British Isles where literacy was relatively high. With Mormon doctrinal emphasis on knowledge and intelligence, and their leaders' promotion of education, the literacy rate in Nauvoo was undoubtedly considerably higher than among their neighbors.

What kinds of books did the Mormons turn to for their reading pleasure and what influenced them in their reading habits? Religious reasons, of course, prompted the reading of the Book of Mormon and the Bible as well as several Church publications which issued from the Nauvoo press. Other than this type of reading, the Saints in Illinois read much the same literature as other literate Americans and for the same reasons. Despite the fact that Irving, Cooper, Bryant, and Poe were writing at this time, the best-selling authors were Englishmen such as Scott and Dickens. Publishers then, just like today, did not like to gamble on unknown authors. That was why, instead of Irving and Cooper, some of the most widely read books in America were written by proven English authors such as Mrs. Hannah Moore, Miss Edgeworth, and Mrs. Jameson. These authors were not remembered a generation later, but they were bestsellers in the 1830s and 1840s.

English writers were also read because, without international copyright laws, it was cheaper for American publishers to pirate foreign books than pay royalties to American authors. In addition, reading English authors was considered a sign of good taste. Educated Americans were embarrassed and intimidated by the criticism of foreign observers and did anything they believed would gain the approval of the more "cultured" Europeans—which meant reading books by and about Europeans. A list of books suggested for a course of reading on history, biography, and travel compiled by an American author in 1838 reflected that attitude. The list, which Mrs. Farrar included in her volume entitled The Young Lady's Friend, named eight American histories but thirty-five old-world histories. The biographies included such European names as Dr. Burney, Beattie, Cuvier, Oberlin, and Mrs. Capp (unknowns today) and omitted such Americans as Franklin, Adams, and Washington.

Between the War for Independence and the Nauvoo period, national demand grew for novels, poetry, drama, and essays. At the same time demand decreased for sermons, journals, travel narratives, and autobiographies. Although contemporary accounts suggests a "craze" for fiction sweeping America at this time, there is little evidence that fiction was sweeping the old Northwest Territory or Nauvoo in particular. The reason was probably twofold. First was the difficulty in acquiring books of fiction. With money so scarce, the Saints were inclined to spend what little "book money" they had on more essential religious and educational publications. Second, reading fiction was still regarded by moralists as a vice, and although there appears to be no evidence that the Church leaders spoke out against such a practice, the Mormons were probably highly influenced by national moral standards.

Furthermore, despite the accounts suggesting a "craze" for fiction, evidence suggests that novels constituted only a small part of the inventories of booksellers. Obviously the public was not getting all it wanted. Moralists were apparently more powerful than the law of supply and demand. Even Parson Weems lamented that his suppliers sent him too many unsalable books. He complained especially about the "theological tomes that he had no more chance of selling than fiddles at a Methodist meeting house." [^7]

Perhaps because of the unfilled demand, novel reading became a major issue of controversy in the 1840s. Authors such as DeFoe, Swift, Scott, Cooper, and Irving, moralists felt, must share the blame for the moral turpitude that novel reading produces. Nevertheless, Cooper and Irving were the leading literary figures in America, just as Scott and Dickens were in England. Dickens did not come under quite as much condemnation, however, because his works included more than just novels, and he was read in Nauvoo. With the number of English converts in the city, there seems to be little question about his popularity, especially after his trip to America and his acclaimed American Notes appeared in 1842. Charlotte Haven wrote from Nauvoo in 1843: "We have been reading Dickens' notes on America, sent us by Mrs. D. of Quincy. We admire Dickens much, he has a keen sense of our national peculiarities . . . He certainly describes most faithfully travel on canals and our great Western rivers." [^8]

In spite of warnings that reading novels "weakens the intellect," moralizing was becoming less and less effective in the 1840s. Novels were here to stay. The interest in novels was a part of the growing interest in all books, making best sellers out of several. But such luxuries as best sellers were not available in Nauvoo. The only business ads for books in the Nauvoo newspapers were for school books and Church publications. A few best sellers did make their way to Nauvoo, however, brought back from England or the east coast by returning missionaries or converts or merely sent for through the mail. These best sellers included such works as The Barnabys in America, some of Poe's short stories, and Dickens's Christmas Carol, published in 1843. In 1844 Dumas published The Three Musketeers, but it probably received less notice among the Mormons than did Kendall's Narrative of the Texas Santa Fe Expedition. The Saints by this time were looking westward.

Books in general were becoming a major focus of interest in American life in the 1840s. Not only were individuals like George A. Smith and Sidney Rigdon building sizable libraries, but the Nauvoo public was demanding access to a community library. The interest in libraries and lyceums was intense throughout the country as the democratization of politics spread. And just as the people of Jacksonian America sensed the importance of education for the effective functioning of their republic, the Saints understood the importance of education for their own functioning in a hostile community. The perception of schools and libraries as a weapon of political and cultural power led to the seeking of means to encourage the diffusion of knowledge in Nauvoo. A library was merely a logical extension of the schools and university, which were already functioning. It became a question not of whether to establish a library but of what kind of a library to establish in Nauvoo.

A public library supported by tax money was never seriously considered. Most libraries in the United States in the 1840s were associated with colleges, but Nauvoo University did not have its own campus. Some of the older cities in the country had what were known as subscription libraries, however. Cincinnati had the Young Men's Mercantile Library with fourteen hundred volumes, and St. Louis boasted a subscription library of more than four thousand volumes.

With a similar library in mind, interested persons met over Joseph Smith's store on 19 January 1844. The Prophet recorded in his journal that "a meeting was held in the assembly room to divise means for the founding of another library institution in Nauvoo." [^9] Joseph's use of the word another implies that other libraries had been founded previously, but if so, they were not public libraries. At the very first meeting, more than one hundred volumes were offered by various parties. At subsequent meetings, it was decided to rent a room for the library over James Ivins's brick store and to adopt a constitution and by-laws. It was decided that any person could become a member of the society by obtaining one or more shares: the shares in stock to be paid in books at market price, money, or property. The largest stock purchase was made by Joseph Smith, who contributed approximately fifty books for which he received $54.50 worth of stock. His donations included such titles as The Life of Tecumseh, Scott's Poetical Works (five volumes), Home Physician, Apocryphal Testament, Voyages & Travels of Ross, Perry & Others, Stephens' Travels in Central America, Dictionary of the Holy Bible, Parker's Lectures on Universalism, and the Catholic Manual. In view of the losses the Prophet suffered during the Missouri persecutions, one cannot help but marvel at the library he had gathered since then and wonder about the extent of what he kept. Seventy-eight other founding members contributed a total of 366 volumes.

The library was open each Friday to receive and lend books. With the recommendation of members, nonmembers were allowed to use the library by paying five cents per week for books valued under one dollar and ten cents per week for books valued at more than that. The Institute portion of the association sponsored public lectures that were free to the public. Apparently the library expanded rapidly. At a meeting in March 1844, the librarian was directed to procure the printing of a thousand labels for labeling the library's books.

How typical were the Nauvoo library books compared to those being read by American in general? Ketts and McClung studied book culture in post-Revolutionary Virginia. Their statistics, which probably represent typical ownership of books in America at this time, afford an interesting comparison to the books in the Nauvoo Library.

Nauvoo [^10] Virginia [^11] Religious Books 16% 25-40% History 13 10-15 Belles-Lettres 13 10-15 Reference and Learning 12 7-10 Self-Improvement 7 4-7 Travels 5 3-7 Philosophy 4 2-3 Medicine 2 2-5

Although the comparison shows a striking similarity in the proportion of books dealing with each subject, what was present and absent in the Nauvoo Library does present some interesting observations.

It was not a family library. There were no youth books or child care books. There was nothing on George Washington. There were few books on business and industry, considering Mormon interest in this subject. There was only one book on building; were the others too valuable or too much in use to be donated at that time? The 1840s were an era of great reform, but there was only one book on slavery and only one on temperance—two of the most important issues of the day. There were many books on religion but none attacking other denominations. In spite of the open warfare against Catholics, Jews, Mormons, and other minority groups in America during the Jacksonian era, internecine warfare was not as evident in book publishing in the 1840s as it is in modern America. In fact, many authors went to great lengths to be accurate and fair in their descriptions of religious groups. Only three weeks before his death, Joseph Smith received a book entitled An Original History of the Religious Denominations at Present Existing in the United States. The article on the Latter-day Saints had been prepared for this book by Joseph Smith, and he, of course, had high praise for it. [^12] Books attacking other faiths were more often written by apostates or individuals with grievances rather than by other religious groups.

Volumes on religion, history, and biography in the Nauvoo Library were available in the largest numbers and were consistent with national tastes. In literature, Virgil was the only one of all the Greek and Roman writers in the library. Dickens was not present at all, nor were there any American authors such as Cooper or Irving, although Irving was being read in Nauvoo, according to Miss Haven: "I looked over his [Sidney Rigdon's] library on some bookshelves in the kitchen. It was a very good student's collection,—Hebrew, Greek, and Latin lexicons and readers, stray volumes of Shakespeare, Scott, Irving's works, and a number of other valuable books." [^13]

It is also rather obvious that the promoters of the Nauvoo Library and Literary Institute stayed clear of any "decadent" modern novels. None of the eighteen best-selling books from 1839 to 1843 were donated to the Library. Such books included four works by Dickens, Longfellow, Sparks's Life of Washington, two books by Cooper, Dana, Poe, Emerson, Tennyson, and Prescott. [^14]

In general, this library was not the typical library of a frontier town. It was more an esoteric selection to elevate the mind. Books such as the American Gardener and the Builder's Manual were in the minority whereas the largest number dealt with such topics as philosophy and the history of the Jews. [^15]

The Nauvoo Library and Literary Institute apparently lasted less than a year before it was replaced by another organization. On 23 October 1844 the Nauvoo Neighbor published a notice of a meeting to fill vacancies on the board of trustees and to "revive the exercises" of the Institute. In the same issue was a letter to the editor asking "whether the Institute is broken up?" Three weeks later, on 13 November 1844, a news article announced another meeting to be held in the Ivins's store library room "when important business will be transacted" and requested that "all the stockholders having books, will be pleased to return them to the library." It appears that the "important business" was the disbanding of the Library and Literary Institute, and the books were to be returned to the original donors. We do know that a new library was organized the following month. What were the reasons for this turn of events? In studying the evidence available in the Neighbor and the minutes of the Library meetings, there appears to have been a combination of factors.

First, the Nauvoo Library and Literary Institute did not, in spite of the late Prophet Joseph's endorsement, have the full weight of the Church behind it. It was primarily a private enterprise. The organization also suffered some problems with membership and leadership. Only two of the Church leaders were members—Sidney Rigdon and Joseph Smith—and Joseph Smith was killed five months after the Library was founded. Two other prominent members, Francis Higbee and Charles Foster, apostatized and were dropped from the Institute. The letter to the editor in the 23 October 1844 issue of the Neighbor that expressed a desire to continue a public institution for books concluded with a play on the names of some of the apostates, which apparently reflected the beliefs of some of the Institute members: "I hope nothing appears this season that Fosters of evil—no Chance(y) for it, however legal a form it may assume—Frank as I am to express myself, I trust that such men may co-operate with us as may be a safeguard to our Lyceum."

The problem of apostasy may also have been a factor in the demise of the first library and the organization of a new one. The first library was located over the store of James Ivins. One of the apostates and Expositor conspirators was a Charles Ivins. In a list of the mob members present at Carthage were "Charles Ivins and Family." [^16] If James was among them, his store would certainly have been an inappropriate site for the Library.

The Seventies Hall was dedicated in December 1844 and was an ideal site for a new library. Such a location provided an instrument for the more effective training of the rapidly expanding seventies quorum and missionary force. With new quarters and the entire missionary force acting as donors and collectors, the new library was better positioned for growth into a bigger and more inclusive educational institution. Thus, when the Seventies Hall was completed, the city council passed an ordinance incorporating the Seventies Library and Institute Association. Section 8 of the ordinance directed the librarian to receive in payment for stock in the association not only books but maps, charts, sculptures, models, paintings, antiquities, and so on. Looking forward to a seemingly secure future in Nauvoo, it also directed that the board would provide for all buildings and observatories. In January 1845, one year after the first library was organized, the Neighbor announced: "Among the improvements going forward in this city, none merits higher praise than the Seventies Library. The concern has been commenced on a footing and scale, broad enough to embrace the arts and sciences . . . [making it a] foundation for the best library in the world!"

[In Old Nauvoo The Seventies Hall, home of Nauvoo's second library

The Library was apparently well on the way to success and acquiring a considerable number of books. A list from the Seventies Library account book, compiled sometime between January 1845, when the Library opened, and the exodus, indicated a total of 675 volumes. Because this list does not contain most of the original books listed in the Nauvoo Library and Literary Institute, perhaps those books were returned to the stockholders and the Seventies Library was started from scratch. At the time Nauvoo was abandoned, the Seventies Library was taken west to become the nucleus of the first library in Utah and reportedly the first one west of the Missouri River.

Only a few months before the Saints were forced to close their books for the last time in Nauvoo, Eugene Sue's best-selling novel, The Wandering Jew, was published. It was prophetic for what was about to befall the fifteen thousand sons and daughters of Israel in Illinois. Just as Samuel the Wandering Jew, at the conclusion of Sue's novel, gives praise that his long punishment was ended, so would the wandering Saints give praise when their wanderings ended in the mountains of the west. Behind them they would leave the beautiful city that represented the labor, the sufferings, and the joys of seven short years. But in their wagons, packed away with their essential tools and seed grain, were their beloved books, the tools and seed grain for the future schools and libraries of Utah.

Books and Libraries

---
Notas:
[^1] Nevins, American Social History, p. 362.
[^2] Raumer, America and the American People, p. 298.
[^3] Trollope, Domestic Manners of the Americans, p. 311.
[^4] Hazen, Popular Technology, 2:69.
[^5] History of the Church, 6:185.
[^6] Ibid., 5:367.
[^7] Buley, The Old Northwest, 2:510.
[^8] American Almanac for 1846, p. 129.
[^9] Quoted in Pease, Frontier State, p. 439.
[^10] Buley, Old Northwest, 2:489.
[^11] History of the Church, 7:473.
[^12] History of the Church, 6:428.
[^13] Haven, "A Girl's Letters from Nauvoo," p. 625.
[^14] Mott, Golden Multitudes, pp. 306-7.
[^15] Nauvoo Library and Literary Institute Minutes.
[^16] History of the Church, 7:146.
