George W. Givens, In Old Nauvoo: Everyday Life in the City of Joseph ( 1990)

22

Newspapers

"The first thing that strikes the stranger is their extraordinary number . . . almost every town, down to communities of two thousand in number, has not only one but several daily papers. . . . many families are not contented with one but must have two or more," [^1] observed the British traveler Alexander Mackay who visited America during the Nauvoo years. The noted European visitor Friedrich Raumer believed that "by reading the daily papers, the citizens of the United States are certainly excited and instructed in a greater variety of ways than those of any other country." [^2] Although foreign observers seem to have agreed that newspapers were widely read in early nineteenth-century America, they did not all agree on the benefits of the practice. Mrs. Trollope thought it prevented reading more elevated material: "Where newspapers are the principal vehicles of the wit and wisdom of the people, the higher graces of composition can hardly be looked for . . . the general taste is decidedly bad; . . . from the mass of slip-slop poured forth by the daily and weekly press." [^3]

Whatever the literary tastes of the American people in 1840, their literacy cannot be denied, and newspapers were the most popular reading material. The 1840s have been called the "Golden Age" of American journalism. In 1776 there were thirty-seven papers in the thirteen colonies. By 1840 the number had grown to fourteen hundred. The textbook Popular Technology, published in 1841, noted that "all Europe, with its 200,000,000 of inhabitants, does not support as many regular publications as the United States, with its 17,000,000." [^4] This unusually large number of newspapers, however, resulted in low circulations for most papers and consequently little profit. Many were subsidized, directly or indirectly, by political groups or leaders.

Most newspapers during the Nauvoo era were weeklies or semiweeklies. There were only three daily papers in all of Illinois in 1840. Few daily papers had circulations exceeding two thousand; most had circulations of no more than five hundred. The European traveler Chevalier noted in 1839 that most American papers had little influence outside their local districts and they were consulted more for the news than for opinions, as newspapers were in Europe.

The smaller newspapers aspired to paid subscriptions of about four hundred in order to stay in business, but lack of subscribers did not deter most communities of any reasonable size from establishing a newspaper. It was usually put together in a print shop that took in printing jobs for the general public and also sold paper, books, and related items. The print shop in Nauvoo, which was owned by the Times and Seasons, was first located in a large brick building on the corner of Bain and Water streets on the flats and contained a type foundry, a book bindery, and stationery shop. Without the supplemental income these facilities produced, newspapers could not survive except by subsidy. Although the subscription list might total four or five hundred, subscriptions often ran unpaid for years despite the pleadings, threats, and blacklisting resorted to by the editors.

In spite of the financial plight of so many newspapers, communities less populous than Nauvoo often had several small papers. Nauvoo, as large as it became, never had more than one newspaper besides the official Church paper. As unique as this situation was among communities this size, there is a reasonable explanation. Rival newspapers usually begin when differences arise within the population, whether those differences are political, religious, social, or even ethnic. Until the Expositor affair, the people of Nauvoo were apparently so united in belief and interests that a rival paper would not have succeeded. To symbolize this communal harmony and perpetuate it, the Saints established the Times and Seasons, the only newspaper in Hancock County in 1839. Don Carlos Smith, a brother of the Prophet, in partnership with Ebenezer Robinson founded this monthly as an organ of the Church. The press had been used briefly in Missouri and was later brought to Commerce. In November 1839 operations were begun in a cellar. After a year, the sixteen-page publication became a semimonthly, creating more labor for the editors. Robinson was too ill during the first year to do much of the work, and Don Carlos, working long hours in the damp cellar, eventually destroyed his health and died in August 1841.

[In Old Nauvoo Nauvoo's first newspaper began in this cellar

The Church authorities became disenchanted with Robinson over some policies he instituted after the death of his coeditor, and Joseph Smith and the Twelve felt that Church ownership of the newspaper would prevent any future problems. Accordingly they urged Robinson to sell, and he reluctantly agreed, if the Church also purchased the entire printing establishment and facilities. They agreed to the price he set, and starting in 1842, the Times and Seasons, under the editorship first of Joseph Smith and then of John Taylor remained exclusively under Church control. Its pages were devoted to messages by the Prophet and other authorities, as well as Church news, developments, history, and doctrine. Subsidized by the Church, it had no need for advertisements and is therefore a rich deposit of Church history and doctrinal development in Nauvoo. It is of little value, however, in revealing secular happenings or disclosing the day-to-day life of the Saints in Nauvoo. For such information we must turn to the secular newspaper that was published first as the Wasp and later as the Nauvoo Neighbor.

The Wasp, Nauvoo's "public journal," was printed in an office located on the corner of Water and Bain streets, the same building that housed the offices of the Times and Seasons. William Smith, brother of the Prophet, founded the Wasp to aid his own candidacy for the state House of Representatives and to counter the violently anti-Mormon Warsaw Signal. Although applauded at the time by its Nauvoo readers, it is quite probable that the Wasp, by its vicious counterattacks, did much to arouse anti-Mormon feelings and condemnation in Hancock County in 1842. William won his legislative seat easily, but Joseph, uncomfortable with his brother's extremely partisan editorializing, persuaded him to resign as editor in 1843. Because John Taylor was editor of the Times and Seasons, which shared the same building and press, it was logical that he take over as editor of the secular paper also. He immediately enlarged the size and format of the paper and gave it a gentler name. The first issue of the Neighbor came from the press on 3 May 1843.

In January 1844 editor Taylor bought the entire printing establishment—the building and lot, press, bindery, and foundry from the Church for $2,832. [^5] This purchase made John Taylor the owner and the editor of the entire printing industry in Nauvoo. A member of the Quorum of the Twelve and unwavering in his loyalty to Joseph and the Church, he held a position of influence in Nauvoo and enjoyed the unreserved trust of the Prophet—almost. To answer Brigham Young's inquiry about Joseph's plans for the Twelve in 1843, the Prophet spelled out the Lord's wishes for each of them, including Brother Taylor: "John Taylor, I believe you can do more good in the editorial department than preaching . . . We have no one else we can trust the paper with, and hardly with you, for you suffer the paper to come out with so many mistakes." [^6]

Simple printing errors, which the Prophet seems to have been suggesting, were perhaps the least of an editor's problems in the early 1800s. Most of the problems were not as dramatic as that of the Illinois editor who could not get out his paper because he had the shakes so bad he had to use both hands to hold his breeches on, but the problems were real nevertheless. [^7]

The three biggest problems faced by editors were getting paper, getting news, and getting paid. Because of their distance from a source of supply, delays in receiving newsprint were a real problem for editors on the Illinois frontier. On 13 November 1844 the Neighbor announced a lack of paper caused by the "bad state of navigation, &c." No paper at all could be issued for one week in that same month because a steamer had taken the supply of paper up the river past Nauvoo and had not returned in time.

The difficulty of getting news to put in the paper resulted from the lack of news services such as United Press International or the Associated Press from which editors today draw their news. An important characteristic of newspapers of this time period is therefore the reprinting of articles from other papers. Most newspapers could not afford traveling reporters, so that was the only way to report news from outside the editor's own town. The editors were helped somewhat by the Post Office policy of allowing each printer to send a copy of his paper to any other printer within the United States free of postage, but the subscription still had to be paid for. For this reason, readers tended to find news articles from the same parts of the country in every issue. With the slowness of transportation and the delays of getting articles into print, the readers in Nauvoo often read news articles several weeks or even months old. For example, the 6 December 1843 issue of the Neighbor contained an article about a sheriff murdered in nearby Missouri, a crime that was committed on 31 August. An article in the 28 February 1844 issue detailed the expected arrival of a "real live China mandarin" as ambassador to the court of Queen Victoria. The news article had originated in the London Times the previous October.

Getting paid by their subscribers was a universal problem for editors of that period, and among the impoverished Mormons with more urgent priorities, collecting subscription money was even more difficult. The cost of mailing was decreased when the federal government granted free postage for newspapers of nineteen hundred square inches or less for any distance not exceeding thirty miles. [^8] Nevertheless, even the low annual cost of "$2.00 invariably in advance" for the Neighbor was prohibitive to many, and invariably the editors accepted almost anything in lieu of cash. The 16 July 1842 Wasp declared: "We want several hundred subscribers to the Wasp, who can pay cash, flour or meat, or such commodities as industrious merchants need for consumption." And the Neighbor repeatedly ran an insert like this one that was printed in the 9 January 1845 edition: "Any quantity of provisions, for subscription, at this office."

Editors who had more lofty motives than merely staying in business and turning a profit had additional concerns. Throughout the country, respect for the printed word was strong and the influence of newspapers more powerful than it is today. Paradoxically, despite this respect, there was widespread criticism of the moral content of newspapers, just as there is today of television. To meet the criticism, a few editors attempted to take the "high road" in journalism, but few did as obviously or as unsuccessfully as J. B. Turner, editor of the Illinois Statesman. Located in Jacksonville, Turner was more interested in intellectualism and defending the Mormons in Nauvoo than in sensationalism in his paper. Under the heading "Crimes and Casualties" he printed one of the most unique statements probably ever found in an American newspaper: "Our paper is small, and if our readers will for the present just have the goodness to imagine a certain due proportion of fires, tornadoes, murders, thefts, robberies and bully fights, from week to week, it will be just as well, for we can assure them they actually take place." [^9]

Most contemporary observers and even some modern writers look with greater generosity on the offerings of the newspapers of the 1840s. Buley referred to the newspapers in the Northwest Territory during the Nauvoo period as having "a literature so voluminous and rich in content that it would be impossible for any one man or group of men to digest and exhaust it." [^10] Of course, the "rich" literature Buley spoke of might well have been the compositions prompted by the interpaper feuds so characteristic of the times. Buley mentioned the bloody and bitter feuds between rival editors resulting from intense reader interest in religion and politics and editors who did not hesitate to take sides. Even the mild John Taylor, as editor of the Neighbor held his own in at least one feud. In the 28 August 1844 issue he blasted the editor of the St. Louis Era for an attack on Mormonism: "All fools are not dead yet nor will they be as long as such editors gulp down falsehood and spue slander upon the people; or filthify the community with a diarrhea of verbosity."

But even this language was a far cry from the earlier days of the Wasp, when William Smith resorted to more biting and personal attacks on the editor of the anti-Mormon Warsaw Signal. Vilification of editor Tom Sharp, noted for his unusually large nose, probably helped to harden hostility toward the Latter-day Saints. In the 30 April 1842 issue, William Smith editorialized under the heading of "Nose-olpgy": "Just returned from the promontory of Noses, Thom-ass C. Sharp, the redoubtable editor of the Warsaw Signal, having made some very important discoveries in relation to the bumps on his far-famed proboscis. The length of his snout is said to be in the exact proportion of seven to one compared with his intellectual faculties." Joseph Smith, recognizing that this newspaper feud was hurting the Saints, published a letter in his brother's paper pleading for forebearance and extending the hand of peace and friendship to all.

Improving the image of the Nauvoo newspapers by tempering their attacks on other editors was within the power of the Prophet and the editor. Other improvements seem to have been impossible to implement because the need for them was prevalent among all newspapers in the 1840s. The Wasp and the Neighbor were more typical of the secular newspapers in other communities than was the Times and Seasons, so they better illustrate the defects of nineteenth-century journalism.

The most prominent defect was the lack of noticeable headlines, which was not the result of a lack of large type. Advertisements were often set in large type. It was apparently merely the custom not to have headlines. On the front page of the 2 July 1842 issue of the Wasp we find in one column nine different subjects, all in the same size print except for the title of a poem. The only mark separating the articles is a short line. There is nothing to attract your attention to an item of particular interest—one has to read the entire column to find something that might be appealing. Undoubtedly, such a lack of headlines did lead to a more thorough reading of newspapers by subscribers.

Another major shortcoming of newspapers is illustrated in the subject matter of those nine different topics. The column starts with a joke on marriage, followed by an editorial comment on the value of a woman as mother, nurse, and teacher. Following that is an editorial treatment of taxes in England, a news item about an earthquake in a place called San Jago de Cuba, a notice of the Housatonic Railroad going bankrupt, and a poem called "The Slanderer." The last three items in the column deal with the robbery of a bank in Francisville, the redeemable status of the notes of the Farmers' Bank of Amsterdam, and the amount of wool needed to supply the Middlesex mills for one year.

The lack of organization made it easy to set up a page but extremely difficult to read. Even letters to editors were scattered throughout the paper and they didn't have to be signed except as "a friend," "a traveler," "an American," an "observer," and so forth. This made it easier for the editors of a paper to editorialize with what appeared to be letters to the editor. In Nauvoo, the editor could make it appear to readers abroad that Joseph Smith and the Saints had more non-Mormon friends than they actually did. The only attempt at organization seems to have been the tendency to reserve all the ads for the last two pages of the paper.

Another characteristic deficiency was the failure to identify the source or even the location of the event, as in the articles cited above. Where were San Jago de Cuba, Housatonic, St. Francisville, and Farmers' Bank of Amsterdam? Not identifying the state or country where these events took place may have been a consequence of lifting the articles from other papers without any editing. There is, of course, the possibility that readers in the 1840s were more versed in geography than modern readers and did not need them identified.

Perhaps the most obvious deficiency is the lack of illustrations. Woodcuts were possible, but they were too expensive to do for a daily or even a weekly paper. Such things might have been possible in large city newspapers with larger staffs and more generous budgets, but in the smaller papers, like those in Nauvoo, the only illustrations were those that could be used over and over. These were primarily the masthead and advertising woodcuts. In the Neighbor, for example, the same steamboat woodcuts advertised every week the arrivals and departures of packets serving nearby towns on the upper Mississippi. Other common and simple illustrations were used over and over to advertise patent medicines. A few editors used the same woodcut and attached different names to it. In the 21 August 1844 issue, the editor of the Neighbor published an article making fun of a New York newspaper for using a woodcut that the New York editor claimed was a correct likeness of Joseph Smith, but which had been "previously used for McLeod, Parson Miller, Babe the Pirate, and the 'Razor-Strop-Man.' " One of the most interesting illustrations to appear in any Nauvoo newspaper was that of a charioteer driving a lion, announcing a Grand Zoological Exhibition in which a famous animal trainer intended to harness and drive just such a lion during the entrance of a circus into Nauvoo. The woodcut was probably furnished by the circus.

For researchers the most distressing defect in early newspapers was the lack of local news. News seemed to be valued in proportion to the distance from which it came—the greater the distance, the greater the value. A typical issue of the Neighbor, 15 January 1845, covered a wide variety of items ranging from entertainment offered on board a deluxe steamboat to an article on Yale students to the story of a fox. Apart from two articles on the Nauvoo city council, a notice of a local trades meeting, and scattered legal notices, there is nothing of local interest. The reason for this void is not difficult to fathom. When a town has only a weekly newspaper, anything worthy of notice is known long before the newspaper can be distributed. It therefore made a paper more marketable to include unfamiliar news from distant places. We must keep in mind the intense interest that nineteenth-century Americans had about the "outside" world, places few of them would ever visit in person.

The world "inside," especially in Nauvoo, seems to have revolved around business. Advertisements for businesses thus become not only the most interesting but in many cases the most revealing sources of knowledge about life in Nauvoo. Just one issue of the Neighbor advertised a book bindery, family medicine, an attorney at law, one hundred cords of wood wanted, a bonnet maker, the Nauvoo and Montrose Ferry, a dentist, general stores, a boot and shoe establishment, a hat store, the Nauvoo Foundry, a match factory, an earthenware factory, riverboat sailings, and patent medicine and contained a smattering of ads for individuals selling land, wanting help, or seeking strayed animals.

There seemed to be no shortage of advertisers who were willing to pay the going rate asked by editor Taylor. The rates were one dollar per square (a column wide and of equal length) with subsequent insertions at thirty seven and a half cents. These rates must not have been expensive for some advertisers, because we note the same lengthy ads for several weeks and sometimes months, which cost as much as fifty to sixty 1990 dollars per week. Apparently the ads paid off, or the advertisers believed they did, especially for patent medicines.

Although some editors recognized the useless, if not positively harmful, effects of the nostrums they advertised, they frankly admitted that such advertisements were necessary to maintain the paper financially. Without the ads, small newspapers would have needed a paid circulation several times larger than they normally had. And yet we find editors like Taylor warning: "Reader! Whenever you see an extra exertion for trade, only a little 'soft soap' to 'raise the wind,' look wild! You will be Yankeed!" Was this double-talk intended for good public relations, or was it just a "tongue-in-cheek" filler?

Many times the editorials and the ads leave us hanging, much as an unfinished serial would do—even such simple ads as that for a lost trunk, which promised that whoever could give information leading to its recovery would be handsomely rewarded. Was the trunk ever found? What was in it that could have been so valuable? Another more poignant story without an ending was an ad for a missing husband printed in the 1 May 1844 Neighbor "by desire of his wife. Jane Mellen," who wrote: "John Mellin, who left Nauvoo last fall to meet his wife and family at New Orleans, whom he expected to arrive about that time from England is hereby informed that they are now in Nauvoo and very anxious to here from [him]."

The endings of such stories are not as easy to restore as the newspaper establishments themselves. The newspaper building that has been restored by Nauvoo Restoration, Inc., is the second Times and Seasons building. In May 1845 the printing establishment was moved from Bain and Water streets to the corner of Main and Kimball streets. On 28 May the first issue of the Neighbor printed in the new brick building was distributed. In keeping with the "custom" of ignoring local news, the editor took no notice of this important move. Included in the move, of course, was the press. Rapid speed cylinder presses were used in the large printing establishments in the east, but editor Taylor, like many other smalltown editors, still relied on the old Ramage lever-operated press. Such presses were slow, requiring extensive hand operation for each sheet printed, but it served the needs of most weeklies. In the new building was a type-foundry for casting additional type and a book bindery. Books in the nineteenth century were often purchased without covers, and buyers took them to a bindery such as Taylor's to have them bound in the cover of their choice. Ads in the Neighbor also described the "Bookstore in the Printing Office" where one could purchase a variety of books—textbooks, ledgers, journals, and blank books. There were also slates, paper, quills, wafers (for seals), and lead pencils.

The newspapers of Nauvoo were probably neither better nor worse than the average American newspaper in the 1840s, but to the people of Nauvoo, the local paper was not just an object of pride and a major source of knowledge. For the Latter-day Saints on the Illinois frontier, it was a major champion of their faith. When their enemies closed tightly around them and their hostile voices dominated the land, they could read the Neighbor or the Times and Seasons and feel refreshed and strengthened in their faith and their cause.

All too often, however, the things they published never got further afield than their nearest enemies. It became more and more difficult for the Saints to reach the audience they needed to reach. After the death of the Prophet, it was almost impossible to circulate the newspapers outside Nauvoo. Either the papers were destroyed in the nearby post offices or stages were stopped on the roads leading from the city and the papers were removed and burned. Acts such as these prompted John Taylor to speak out on the subject of newspapers at the Church's October conference in 1845: "The world doesn't wish any news from us, and we don't wish to urge it upon them. I have read papers until I have become tired; for they are all villainy, corruption, deceit and abomination." [^11]

It is ironic that as the Mormons relied on the power and freedom of the press to proclaim to the world the justice of their cause and to disseminate their beliefs, it was an issue of freedom of press that finally forced them from Nauvoo. The destruction of the apostates' newspaper, the Expositor, led directly to the arrest of Joseph Smith, his death, and the expulsion of the Saints from their beleaguered city.

But as the Saints prepared for the exodus and as the staff of the Neighbor cleaned the press and packed away the type for the long journey west, the final issue was read by a grieving people. Here, on 29 October 1845, for one last time the paper was able to lift the hearts and hopes of the Saints:

"The power that made Nauvoo; that gathered thousands from various climes and kingdoms; that reared the Temple; and that whispers to us now, 'Peace be still and see the salvation of God,' can guide us to bring forth a better city, a hundred fold of gathering, and five times as good a Temple."

Newspapers

---
Notas:
[^1] Nevins, American Social History, p. 362.
[^2] Raumer, America and the American People, p. 298.
[^3] Trollope, Domestic Manners of the Americans, p. 311.
[^4] Hazen, Popular Technology, 2:69.
[^5] History of the Church, 6:185.
[^6] Ibid., 5:367.
[^7] Buley, The Old Northwest, 2:510.
[^8] American Almanac for 1846, p. 129.
[^9] Quoted in Pease, Frontier State, p. 439.
[^10] Buley, Old Northwest, 2:489.
[^11] History of the Church, 7:473.
