[Page 43] Abstract: What is theosis? Why does the doctrine of theosis matter? Why did God  become man so that man might become God? In his book To  Become Like God , Andrew C. Skinner answers these questions  with compelling clarity. He provides ample convincing evidence that,  far from being a deviation from original Christian beliefs, the  doctrine of theosis, or the belief that human beings have the  potential to become like God, is central to the Christian faith.

Review  of Andrew C. Skinner, To Become Like God: Witnesses of Our Divine  Potential (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 2016). 164 pp. $18.99  (hardback).

Skinner  couches the Latter-day Saint doctrine of deification in its  scriptural and historical context. He emphasizes the strength of the  Latter-day Saints’ doctrinal position: “It is my hope that  readers will see that belief in the possibility that human beings can  become like God is not a deviation from original Christian beliefs”  (ix–x). Thus, Skinner’s explicit [Page 44] intention is both descriptive  and apologetic. But his aim is higher still; it is “to elevate our  perspective and instill in us a desire to rejoice again over the  restoration of ancient doctrine, specifically the doctrine of  deification or, as it is called in classical Christian theology, theosis — the teaching that mortals can become gods” (x).

Skinner  sets the stage for his masterful explanation of the doctrine of  theosis with introductory chapters on the nature of God and Heavenly  Father’s perfect plan. This introduction inoculates the reader from  the danger of emphasizing one particular doctrine of the Gospel to  the detriment of the beauty of the whole. Skinner’s study of the  doctrine of theosis is deep and penetrating, but it is also broad and  balanced. It squares well with Neal A. Maxwell’s insight:

Skinner  avoids the trap of isolating, spinning off, or practicing the  doctrine of theosis in solitude by unfolding it within the context of  the plan of salvation, which was prepared in Heavenly Father’s  perfect love and actualized through the Atonement of the Savior Jesus  Christ. In this context, the ancient prophetic witnesses of the  doctrine of theosis, along with the witness of Peter, the chief  apostle, and the witnesses of the post-apostolic writers, Greek  orthodoxy, the Protestant tradition, and the restored Gospel, become  clearer. By carefully establishing the connection between the  doctrine of theosis and the undergirding and overarching truths of  Heavenly Father’s loving plan of salvation and the Atonement of the  Savior Jesus Christ, Skinner inspires his readers to better  understand and assimilate the truth concerning our divine potential.

In  essence, Skinner sets out to answer a few basic questions, as posed  on the inside front flap of the book’s dust jacket:

> What  does it mean to be a son or a daughter of God? A joint- heir with  Jesus Christ? A possessor of all that the Father has? What did  ancient Christians believe about the ultimate purpose of our  creation? Do any other Christians hold similar views today?

[Page 45] The  simple answer to these questions is that far from being a heresy, as  some Christians suppose, the doctrine of theosis is one of the oldest  and most fundamental teachings of Christianity. Skinner draws from  the writings of both ancient and modern Christians to demonstrate  that the doctrine of deification was partially lost and then fully  restored through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Skinner’s  opening chapters are rich with true doctrine, including doctrinal  statements from the scriptures and latter-day prophets and apostles.  These chapters also contain illuminating personal insights. He  unpacks the statement attributed to the early Church Father  Athanasius about the role of Jesus Christ: “God became man, so that  man might become God” (4). After shedding light on the meaning of  theosis, Skinner touches on the nature of God, His character, and His  attributes, particularly His perfect love. Regarding God’s glory  and intelligence, he cites Elder Maxwell:

> I  testify that [God] is utterly incomparable in what He is, what He  knows, what He has accomplished, and what He has experienced. … In  intelligence and performance, He far surpasses the individual and  composite capacities and achievements of all who have lived, live  now, and will yet live! (19)

Skinner  notes that “one attribute of God seems to undergird and overarch  all the rest: God is love (1 John 4:8),” or as is taught in Lectures on Faith :

> [L]astly,  but not less important to the exercise of faith in God, is the idea  that he is love; for with all the other excellencies in his  character, without this one to influence them, they could not have  such powerful dominion over the minds of men; but when the idea is  planted in the mind that he is love, who cannot see the just ground  that men of every nation, kindred, and tongue, have to exercise faith  in God so as to obtain eternal life? (21)

Skinner’s  chapter on the attributes of God is one that I hope to read over and  over again, not only because it is true, but because it glows with  the love of God.

Skinner’s  chapter on “The Father’s Perfect Plan” (26) is no less true and  no less inspiring. What is the Father’s plan, and why did He create  it? Skinner cites the Prophet Joseph Smith: “God himself [found]  himself in the midst of spirits and glory, because he was greater …  saw proper to institute laws, whereby the rest could have a privilege  to advance like himself” (27). In other words, Heavenly Father  wants us to become like Him because He loves us. Heavenly Father’s  plan provides the privilege [Page 46] for His children to advance and to become  like Him, and theosis is only possible through the Savior Jesus  Christ, whom God sent to execute the plan of salvation. Skinner cites  the Prophet Joseph Smith again:

> The  great Jehovah contemplated the whole of the events connected with the  earth, pertaining to the plan of salvation, before it rolled into  existence, or ever “the morning stars sang together” for joy; the  past, the present, and the future were and are, with Him, one eternal  “now;” He knew of the fall of Adam, the iniquities of the  antediluvians, of the depth of iniquity that would be connected with  the human family, their weakness and strength, their power and glory,  apostasies, their crimes, their righteousness and iniquity; He  comprehended the fall of man, and his redemption; He knew the plan of  salvation and pointed it out ; He was acquainted with the  situation of all nations and with their destiny; He ordered all  things according to the council of His own will. (36)

Jesus  Christ came to do the will of His Father so that God’s children  might become like Him and share in His glory. Athanasius’  proclamation is true: “God became man, so that man might become  God” (38).

Skinner  then shows that there were many ancient prophetic witnesses of  theosis, the greatest of which is that of the Savior Jesus Christ  Himself. Skinner expounds upon many other Old and New Testament  witnesses of theosis, including Adam, Abraham, John the Beloved, and  the Apostle Paul. “It bears repeating” he writes, “the doctrine  of godhood is at the heart of what we aim for in the true Church of  Jesus Christ. Little wonder it is attacked, lampooned, downplayed,  diminished, and ignored in our day” (54). Skinner demonstrates that  the witness of Peter, the chief apostle, is particularly poignant  with regards to the doctrine of theosis, or that which he called  being “made partakers of the divine nature” (59). Peter received  a powerful witness of the doctrine of theosis on the Mount of  Transfiguration with Jesus and his fellow apostles James and John  (67–68).

In  addition to the witnesses of the Old and New Testament prophets and  apostles, and to further establish the truth of the doctrine of  theosis, Skinner draws from the witnesses of post-apostolic writers  such as Athanasius, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus of Lyon, Clement of  Alexandria, Hippolytus of Rome, Cyprian of Carthage, Polycarpus,  Heraclitus, Basil, Gregory of Nazianzus, Gregory of Nyssa, Cyril of  Alexandria, and deification in fifth century liturgy. He consults the  witnesses of Greek Orthodoxy, including Macarios of Philadelphia,  Macarius [Page 47] of Egypt, John Chrysostom, Maximus the Confessor, John of  Damascus, Michael Psellus, and others of the Greek Orthodox and  Roman Catholic tradition, including Bernard of Clairvaux and Nicholas  of Cusa. He gives voice to the witnesses of the Protestant tradition,  including Martin Luther, John Calvin, John Wesley, Charles Wesley,  and inspired protestant writers and poets. He also highlights the  witnesses of the restored Gospel, including Brigham Young, Parley P.  Pratt, and many others. Finally, Skinner echoes the witnesses of  Joseph Smith and Lorenzo Snow. In his King Follett discourse, Joseph  Smith taught:

> Here,  then, is eternal life, to know the only wise and true God [D&C  132:24]. You have got to learn how to be Gods yourselves, and to be  kings and priests to God, the same as all Gods have done; by going  from one small degree to another, from grace to grace, from  exaltation to exaltation, until you are able to sit in glory as doth  those who sit enthroned in everlasting power; and I want you to know  that God in the last days, while certain individuals are proclaiming  his name, is not trifling with you or me. (130)

Of  course, there are things that we don’t know, and Skinner stops  short of theological speculation. In conclusion, he returns to his  initial explanation of the nature and character of God in order to  reemphasize the truth that is most fundamental to the doctrine of  theosis, namely, “God is love.” “The possibility that each of  us may become like God,” Skinner concludes,

> should  certainly humble us, but even more, it should thrill, inspire, and  motivate us to strive to receive of God’s fulness and his glory.  Such knowledge should transform the way we see our fellow human  beings. … Latter-day Saints, by doctrine and by practice, affirm  that we are children of loving Parents who are anxious to have us  return and live in their family unit, possessing what they possess.  The doctrine of deification is a manifestation of that love. (141–42)

To  Become Like God is a life-changing book, and it is a great  addition to the Latter-day Saint Gospel library, the Christian  library, and any other library. It scintillates with the light of  truth and of true intelligence. More importantly, it radiates the  love of God and the pure love of Christ. In it, Andrew C. Skinner  provides ample convincing evidence that, far from being a deviation  from original Christian beliefs, the belief in the possibility that  human beings can become like God is central to the Christian faith. I  couldn’t recommend it more highly.

---
Notes

[1] Andrew  C. Skinner’s To  Become Like God is a  life-changing book. It is rigorously researched and eloquently  written, but more importantly, it communicates sublime truths in  simple language. It expands the reader’s vision of time and  eternity, and it inspires the humble seeker of truth to reform his or  her life in light of the ennobling doctrine of deification. “It is  true intelligence,” President John Taylor observed, “for a man to  take a subject that is mysterious and great in itself and to unfold  and simplify it so that a child can understand it.” 1 No subject is as mysterious and great in itself as the doctrine of  theosis, and in To  Become Like God ,  Skinner unfolds and simplifies this subject in a marvelous way.

[2] The  doctrines of Jesus Christ by themselves are dangerous, as G.K.  Chesterton observed. Any principle of the Gospel, isolated, spun off,  and practiced in solitude, can go wild. The incomplete insight is not  insight at all! … Just as the people of the Church need each other  “that all may be edified together,” the doctrines of the Church  need each other. 2

