[Page 305] Review  of Michaela Stephens, To Defend Them By Stratagem: Fortify  Yourself with Book of Mormon War Tactics (Gilbert, AZ:  Lion’s Whelp Publications, 2018). 246 pp. $12.99 (paperback).

Abstract: Sometimes it is easy to overlook, disregard, or discount the “war  chapters” in the Book of Mormon. Michaela Stephens’ new  book about these chapters deserves wider attention, as it is an  excellent study resource that provides valuable devotional and  academic insights while remaining accessible to lay readers.

The  burgeoning study of warfare in the Book of Mormon remains  relatively unexplored. A few authors like John Bytheway have  authored relevant books, and the war stories occasionally make it  into talks. Micheala Stephens’ new book, To  Defend Them by Stratagem ,  offers a shining example of a devotional discussion of  warfare in the Book of Mormon with insightful analysis and  plain language accessible to readers.

Stephens  sprinkles perceptive points and “aha moments” early and  throughout the book. In assessing King Noah’s behaviors, she notes  how he became unable to distinguish between real and fake threats,  and his attempts to stop them invited Lamanite reaction. She makes  the case that Noah’s response to Alma’s new church was probably  a violent sweep of friends and relatives of the believers, and  perhaps even of Lamanite lands.

> Thus,  we can see how King Noah lost the ability to discern what was really  threatening and what was harmless, and real dangers began to  blind-side him. Imagine his fear when confronted with Gideon, sword  in hand, and then seeing the army of the Lamanites invading —  threats coming from all directions. And then his people turn on him  after running [Page 306] away from the Lamanites. He never saw any of that  coming because he was so fixated on Alma (17)

The  book covers the war chapters in particular but provides insights from  King Benjamin to the Jaredites. The chapters vary in length, but they  stood out for being pithy and easily digestible. This doesn’t take  away from the astute ideas Stephens provides. For example, she  compared the wrathful oaths of Gideon in Mosiah 19 to the revenging  oath of the Nephites in Mormon 3. This made me reconsider some of my  own research. In other places, such as her educated guesses about  Captain Moroni’s backstory (Chapter 10, 35–39), her insights  inspired me to further research.

While  the book is academically insightful, its best features are  devotional. The book’s chapters are divided in such a way that  families would be easily able to add this to their home studies  curriculum. Stephens makes a good case that the 19 war chapters  receive 90 minutes every four years to study 52 pages — and that  was before the introduction of the two-hour block! The author’s  analysis isn’t overly long or complex, and quotes could be included  in Sunday school without anybody noticing. The author lists and  quotes key scriptures in her analysis, which warmly invites further  study from readers.

Stephens  promises, “In this book, you will learn about tactics that Satan  uses against us. You will learn about tactics you can use to defend  yourself. You also will learn strategies that will allow you to go on  the offensive.” The book admirably achieves this goal to create  a very enjoyable read that is nourishing and accessible for both  the mind and the soul.