[Page 309] Abstract: As the Church expands among the many nations, peoples, and tongues of  the earth, new challenges arise that require the organization and the  members of the Church to better meet the needs of the peoples in  various nations and to cope with the specific challenges that may  exist there. In this article I review a valuable book that can help  in that expanding effort.

Review  of Reid L. Neilson and Wayne D. Crosby, eds., Lengthening Our  Stride: Globalization of the Church (Provo and Salt Lake City,  UT: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, and Deseret  Book, 2018), 400 pp. $27.99.

[Page 310] On  rainy days I try to take a bus to work instead of riding my bike,  giving me some extra time to read. On my bus ride on that particular  day, I took the wrapping off a newly received book, Lengthening  Our Stride: Globalization of the Church. It would prove to be the  most inspiring bus ride I’ve had in a long time. What I read that  morning influenced my thinking when I learned later in the day of  President Monson’s passing. Many times since then, I’ve been  drawn to that book and its varied perspectives from multiple authors.  It has been a valuable read, and I would recommend it to anyone  seeking to understand the growing international presence of the  Church, the role it can play in blessing others around the globe  whether they care about our missionary message or not, and the  challenges yet to be overcome in many lands in a world that  desperately needs the Gospel to be preached to every people and in  every tongue.

Lengthening  Our Stride is divided into five parts containing 21 chapters from  a host of prominent thinkers and servants with deep international  experience. Part 1, “Poverty and Humanitarian Work,” discusses  some of the global needs addressed by the teachings, programs, and  resources of the Church. Part 2, “Public Perceptions and  Relations,” deals with the international public relations progress  the Church has made and ongoing challenges still to overcome as well  as perceptions of the Church related to its humanitarian work. Part  3, “Peacemaking and Diplomacy,” is a reminder of the need to  continue proclaiming and promoting peace in spite of the ongoing  tragedy of war between nations and among peoples, one of the most  crucial things the global Church can do in spite of our small  numbers. I found particular value in Part 4, “Religious Freedom and  Oppression,” a section treating the brutal reality that many people  in the world lack religious liberty, a need often marginalized  these days when it can be just as important to many as access to food  and water. Finally there is Part 5, “Growth and Globalization,”  dealing with some of the challenges and opportunities the Church  faces in the global community, including issues such as migration,  tension between religion and law, and the tension between the Church  and the Islamic world.

The  decision to begin the book with consideration of the painful needs of  people in many parts of the world was a wise one, in my opinion. It  sets the stage for why the Church needs to be increasingly  global. It is not about expanding numbers of members but expanding  the good that the Church can do in a world with perpetual poverty and  pain. Many of the programs and activities of the Church as well as  the service and zeal of numerous members internationally will often  make little sense unless one understands the caring that ultimately  motivates the globalization of the Church and the expansion of its  influence in the world.

As  I began reading Part 1, I was completely captivated by  Valerie Hudson’s essay, “Demographic and Gender-Related  Trends” (1–14), a rather tame title compared to her moving and  eye-opening discussion on gendercide and the “profound devaluation  of female life” in many parts of the globe. I recalled the Hmong  woman we once had over for dinner, a refugee from genocide in Laos  who had been able to flee to Wisconsin, where we lived at the time.  In our conversation, she explained to us in all seriousness that as a  woman, her opinion did not matter and that her voice and her life  were just “a leaf blowing in the wind.” We tried our best to  persuade her otherwise, but it was not easy. In her experiences and  in later tragic experiences we would share in part with her older  daughter, my wife and I could see up close some of the sorrow the  devaluation of female life brings.

Hudson,  well known as a Mormon feminist and intellectual, has a perspective  that needs to be shared and contemplated. After raising the  devastating problems of gendercide, devaluation, and abuse facing  women across the globe and exploring the different stages of evolving  misogyny in society (sometimes celebrated as “liberation” and  “progress”), Hudson offers a profound vision of how these  problems can be cured: “The restored gospel of Jesus Christ is the  strongest and most progressive force for women in the world today.  The most profound feminist act one can commit is to share the gospel”  (9). She explores the revolutionary views the restored gospel brings  and points out that the Church is the place to find the kind of men  who have been trained to [Page 312] respect women, to be faithful to them, to  actively take part in raising children, and to abhor abuse and  neglect.

> As  the Church rises in support of women and as priesthood holders begin  to conceive of themselves as part of a covenant brotherhood that has  sworn to uphold, among other things, the equality, safety, and  flourishing of all the daughters of God, you will see the eyes of all  women turn to this Church. And as the eyes of the women turn and they  begin to assess their men according to the Lord’s criteria, you  will see men begin to turn as well. For men are clearly no victors in  any of the forms of civilizational misogyny — they suffer  profoundly as well. Misogyny breeds misery for men as well as women.  (13)

How  great is the need to let the women and men of this planet know who  they are!

There  are many other outstanding chapters. Sharon Eubank’s discussion of  LDS Charities in “Zion’s Foundations” (39–56) reminds us of  the importance of our humanitarian work — not because of its  potential to lead to missionary work later, as many wrongly assume,  but because our brothers and sisters around the globe are in need and  need our love. Many underestimate how sincere and intense is the  Latter day Saint yearning for the physical welfare of  others. My years in China have shown me numerous examples of  Latter-day Saints doing much to help others faced with poverty or  illness with absolutely no hope of converting others or expectation  that missionary work would be done. Silent, selfless service abounds  in the Church and is one of the key things that members naturally do  around the world on their own and with the help of Church  organization as well.

Other  essays I particularly enjoyed include Cole Durham’s significant  “Protection of Religious Liberties” (207–224), coming from one  of the world’s great advocates of religious liberty. He critiques  the world’s downplaying of religious liberty, often swept aside as  something we can ignore until we’ve taken care of poverty and other  needs. Here he quotes Paul A. Marshall: “It is a moral travesty of  the highest order to maintain that because people are hungry or cold,  it is legitimate to repress their beliefs as well” (209). Exactly.  Durham treats some of the secular and political threats to religious  liberty and discusses initiatives to preserve it. The work he has  launched needs ongoing attention and support. Thank you, Brother  Durham!

[Page 313] William  Atkin’s “Let Them Worship How, Where, or What They May”  (199–206), emphasizing the importance of religious liberty, is  another valuable contribution, as is “Erosion of Religious Freedom:  Impact on Churches” by Michael K. Young (225–242), former  president and chancellor of the University of Utah.

Elder  Lance B. Wickman’s essay, “The Church in the Twenty-First  Century” (59–76), was from 2008. It discussed the rapidly  evolving status of the church in a variety of nations, including  Vietnam, China, and one disguised as “Andalasia” due to the  sensitive nature of the topic at the time. In the decade since Elder  Wickman’s presentation, much has changed and the book would be  stronger if there were at least an addendum of some kind to update  the information (though the sensitive nature of the topic in that  land is still painfully current). Still, the basic issues and the  nature of the challenges we face globally remain valid, and for  places like Russia and China, religious liberty remains a delicate  issue requiring faith, patience, and especially caution from members, [Page 314] including visitors who may not understand local regulations. In  China, for example, there has been remarkable kindness from the  government shown toward the expatriate congregations of the Church,  but the healthy relationship with authorities requires careful  observance of the rules we have in order to maintain trust. I  constantly worry that one well-meaning tourist or new resident could  result in painful setbacks. (Important Safety Tip: Please don’t try  to pass out religious literature or do missionary work of some kind  on your visit to China!)

A  few others essays would also benefit from an update of some kind,  perhaps on a website to support the book. For example, Warner P.  Woodworth’s chapter, “Private Humanitarian Initiatives and  International Perceptions of the Church” (77–92), is from a 2008  presentation. There is so much more that has happened since then.  Elder Anthony Perkins’ “Out of Obscurity” (93–114) also  helps us understand how the Church has risen in visibility in Asia  and elsewhere, but much has happened since his 2012 presentation.  Michael Otterson’s essay, “In the Public Eye” (115–132),  gives his inside perspective on public relations progress for the  Church around the world from his role as managing director of the  public affairs department of the Church (at the time), but that was  back in 2012 when he gave the speech printed here. His discussion of  the impact of LDS celebrities and politicians is now somewhat dated,  though still useful. I’ll also give bonus points to Otterson for  mentioning LDS bloggers as having something of a role in the public  perception of the Church.

The  book would have been stronger with a 2017 addition covering recent  developments such as the refugee crisis from the Near East and  elsewhere and some recent developments on various continents. To be  completely current is an impossible moving target for a book such as  this, but it would have been helpful to get some updates and added  perspectives from 2017.

In  spite of this weakness, this is an inspiring book that will prepare  us for the years ahead.

We  are an international Church, and many more of us need now to lengthen  our stride to step into the global community.  President Russell M. Nelson will continue to be a  powerful example of that. In spite of his age, I was deeply impressed  when he strode into the ballroom in Shanghai where foreign LDS  members meet and walked to the stage. As a very tall man, his  physical stride is truly impressive. Ninety-two years old at that  time, yet so vigorous. But it is his spiritual stride that will  challenge even the fastest of us. May we lengthen ours [Page 315] and prepare  for the ongoing globalization of the Church, that we may better bless  the lives of our brothers and sisters in every land, whether they  care about our missionary message or not.

---
Notes

[1] It  was a rainy day here in Shanghai when I learned of the passing of  President Monson. It was a day on which I would contemplate his  legacy and the new role that Russell M. Nelson would play. I thought  about President Nelson’s unique ties to China and his recent visit  to Shanghai, where he shared some of his thoughts on the  international role of the Church. He is profoundly qualified and  prepared to continue and accelerate the momentum of the Church  internationally and to further develop its potential to do good and  make life better for people across the globe. 1

[2] The  vision of the book expressed in the editor’s preface captured my  imagination and turned my mind to the inspiring words of  President Kimball many years ago when he expressed the need for  the Church to prepare for its global mission. 2 Those words, spoken while [Page 311] I was on my mission in the  international hotspot of Switzerland (where I taught people from  56 countries, by my count), inspired me to sign up for Mandarin  Chinese classes when I got back to BYU to continue my chemical  engineering education. Those few extra-major classes gave me a head  start when I came to live in China decades later and helped open  doors for numerous friendships and cherished experiences. If only I  had been more diligent!

[3] On  the other hand, one of the weaknesses of this excellent book is that  some of the essays are dated. This is, perhaps, to be expected, as  the essays are chosen from among those presented to the International  Society 3 over a number of years. For example, Michael Young’s valuable  contribution is from a 2011 presentation. Much of that essay retains  its currency, but a particularly important and alarming portion  addresses a pending (at the time) case before the US Supreme  Court that threatened the elimination of the “ministerial  exemption” allowing churches to select their own clergy without  complying with local employment laws and their anti-discrimination  policies (232–233). Young implied that the possible outcomes of  that case could include a requirement to apply all employment laws in  selecting bishops, stake presidents, and all the other lay leaders we  call in the Church. The concern was legitimate and remains a cause  for vigilance, but fortunately the case of Hosanna-Tabor  Evangelical Lutheran Church and School v. EEOC was decided in  favor of religious freedom with a 9–0 vote. 4 That decision was issued Jan. 12, 2012 — now six years ago. An  update of some kind would have strengthened the book.

