[Page 261] Abstract: The new edited volume Abinadi:  He Came Among Them in Disguise , from the Book of Mormon  Academy, is a valuable contribution to Book of Mormon studies. It  should find a wide audience and stimulate greater and deeper thinking  about the pivotal contributions of Abinadi to the Book of Mormon. It  should, however, not be considered the end of the conversation. This  review discusses the volume’s importance within Book of Mormon  scholarship generally. It also highlights certain valuable  contributions from each of the authors, and points out places where  more can be said and deeper analysis is needed.

Review  of Shon D. Hopkin, ed. Abinadi: He Came Among Them in Disguise (Provo and Salt Lake City, UT: Religious Studies Center, Brigham  Young University, and Deseret Book, 2018), 404 pp. $27.99.

A  strong addition to the field of Book of Mormon studies is available  in a newly published volume titled Abinadi:  He Came Among Them in Disguise .  Its worth as an in-depth review and analysis of the story and  character of Abinadi is enhanced by the quality of scholarship and  the level of rigorous thinking that undergirded its production.  Bringing together a strong collaboration of authors, Shon Hopkin has  produced an edited volume that can be considered essential reading  for anyone interested in better understanding the story of Abinadi  before Noah and his priests as well as its impact on the rest of the  Book of Mormon. This volume’s importance is also heightened by  the way it was produced. Published jointly by the Religious Studies  Center at BYU and Deseret Book, the [Page 262] volume obtains both the  imprint of academic scholarship and approval by Church-owned and  -operated institutions. While this may seem superficial to some, from  my perspective this is an important point, for it means that Deseret  Book is placing its stamp of approval on studies like this, which  incorporate broader scholarly and academic approaches to scripture.  It is also important in that this may (it is hoped!) reach certain  audiences that have been historically wary or completely unaware of  such academic approaches, showing that methods of academic analysis  of scripture are not something to be feared and avoided.

This  volume is also notable as the first major publishing effort of The  Book of Mormon Academy (BOMA), “an academic think tank and research  group begun at Brigham Young University in October 2013 to promote  scholarship and teaching on the Book of Mormon” (vi). The value of  this volume speaks well to the potential importance of such an  institution. As an initial foray into the possibilities for research  and production on the Book of Mormon, this volume gives me hope that  such scholarship will become much more frequent. This is important,  both for consideration of building the kingdom of God and also as it  pertains to reaching out and speaking to the broader academic  community: volumes of this type fill an important niche. As Hopkin  explains in the introduction, this volume was deliberately conceived  to follow upon and fit into the category of work by

> scholars  inside and outside of the Latter-day Saint faith [who] continue to  use current academic tools and theories to produce work that takes  the Book of Mormon seriously but that also seeks to be accessible to  those who do not believe in the book’s divinely inspired nature …  [that] are neither polemic in nature nor “apologetically”  designed to provide conclusive proof that the book of scripture is of  ancient origin. (v)

There  is — and always will be — a distinct need for continued scholarly  thinking and writing about the Book of Mormon, particularly academic  writing that is close, critical, and productive in a number of ways.

While  opinions about the value of “bracketing” in scholarship may  differ drastically, it is certainly a worthwhile effort to attempt to  reach out to others in ways that speak to their “language, unto  their understanding” (2 Nephi 31:3), in efforts to help them  appreciate the beauty, depth, complexity, and value of the Book of  Mormon. It should also be recognized that there is certainly room for  many diverse opinions about approaches and conclusions vis-à-vis the  Book of Mormon text, [Page 263] even among faithful members of the Church. This  is also evident in this volume, since all the contributors are  professors of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University, though  in some cases they come to very different conclusions about  interpretation. Such a multiplicity of approaches, methods, and  conclusions is something to be valued and appreciated rather than  feared or disregarded. This is especially important in specific,  non-mutually exclusive issues but also applies more broadly, since  “the conclusions and approaches [in the volume] are not meant to be  definitive” (vii). Although the volume is meant to follow norms and  methods of scholarly analysis, the differing authors generally show  various interpretations of what these norms and methods are and how  those interact with their faith commitments. Some chapters end up  leaning a little bit more, though not wholly so, toward the  apologetic, while others do not. This approach is intentional: BOMA  “believes that the Book of Mormon text shines best when the best  tools are used to illuminate it” (vii).

Building  upon these considerations, the intent of the volume is to begin  filling a gap in attention to those figures who could be called  “minor prophets” in the Book of Mormon, “whose important  teachings span only pages instead of full books but whose recorded  sermons have a powerful impact on the rest of the book and its  modern-day readership. … Abinadi seemed the logical choice as a  figure whose page count is significantly smaller than his prophetic  imprint” (vi).

Thus,  all the authors are using the same relatively short text as their  beginning point. But by bringing different scholarly approaches to  bear on the same text, they reveal the internal complexity of the  text and illuminate a variety of important meanings to be derived  from it. These tools (and the training in them, which the authors  exhibit) include a variety of types of academic analysis (textual,  historical, literary, and form criticism), theological and  philosophical thought, and comparative religious history.

Following  these various approaches, the volume is divided into four parts, two  or three chapters in each: “Literary Lenses: Narratological,  Sociopolitical, Biblical”; “Intertextual and Intratextual Lenses:  The Book of Mormon and the Bible”; “Cultural-Historical Lenses:  Mesoamerican and North American”; and “Theological Lenses:  Historical and Philosophical.” This review addresses briefly each  of these headings, providing a brief overview of the topic of each as  well as my reaction to the arguments or content presented (as  valuation and criticism). In some cases this will be more because of  their importance, or less where a simple summary suffices. In all  cases, however, my strong recommendation [Page 264] is that those interested in  studies in the Book of Mormon pick up this volume and engage deeply  with the essays.

Within  the general category of Literary Lenses, the foundational chapter by  Jared Ludlow, titled “‘A Messenger of Good and Evil Tidings’: A  Narrative Study of Abinadi,” provides the essential  “narratological” overview and analysis of the section of Mosiah  devoted to Abinadi and his ministry. In this type of literary  approach, Ludlow dissects the narrative into its constituent parts,  showing the distinct emphases and broader literary intent of the  author. He analyzes characters as protagonists and antagonists and  their historical background as well as the setting and arc or  progression of the story. Such a piece lays the groundwork for just  about everything that follows. Ludlow’s analysis and conclusions  are very well organized and articulated.

Even  so, I quibble slightly with some of Ludlow’s views, specifically  his use of literary approaches to scriptural text. Ludlow divides the  text into parts based on how the discussion in Noah’s court moves  between calls to repentance and overt interpretation of passages from  Isaiah. The result is some choppy divisions and atomistic parts that,  in my opinion, muddle rather than clarify the flow of Abinadi’s  words. The speech seems more disjointed than seamless, and readers  may not see how the divisions relate to one another. Though my  quibble is minor, it may pose ramifications to how we understand  Abinadi’s speech.

Daniel  Belnap’s chapter, “The Abinadi Narrative, Redemption, and the  Struggle for Nephite Identity,” is a remarkable analysis of the  place and presence of the Zeniffite colony in the Land of Nephi and  the impact of political and discursive realities on the story’s  historical setting as well as its literary composition. Belnap’s  impressive analysis helps clarify the dissension and colonizing  efforts which Zeniff provokes: “This, then, is the scene which  Mormon has set up — group of Nephites, some of whom were Nephite  elites and believed that the land of Zarahemla was not part of their  inheritance and certainly not the land of their fathers, left  Zarahemla to reclaim the old Nephite territory, apparently believing  that the greater Nephite population had gone astray through the  policy of integration and that their own group therefore represented  the true Nephite identity” (35). In one of his more impressive  claims and arguments, Belnap construes the colony’s efforts  essentially as rebellion, not simply against the state but also  against God (47‒48). This analysis alone is a worthy and important  contribution. Overall, the piece obliges the reader to think about  the sociopolitical realities of the historical situation as they  interplay with the literary contextualization, or why [Page 265] Mormon not only  inserted the narrative of the Zeniffite colony into his broader  history in the Book of Mosiah but also why he put it where he did.  However, in some places — for instance the discussion and analysis  of the position of Ammon1 as a potential part of the  Mulekite royal line and what that would mean for the search party  sent to find the colony — I see a bit of interpretive overreach  (see page 34).

The  third chapter in this section devoted to Literary Lenses is Frank  Judd’s “Conflicting Interpretations of Isaiah in Abinadi’s  Trial.” Judd’s literary approach looks mainly at the passages of  Isaiah that are pertinent to the Abinadi narrative and their places  within the Book of Isaiah. It clarifies how they are interpreted by  Abinadi and the priests of Noah: the difference revolves around the  identity and mission of the Suffering Servant, becoming one of the  major points of contention between Abinadi and the priests. While  Judd’s overview of the pertinent Isaiah material is valuable, it is  still rather general; I found myself wishing for deeper discussion of  some of the critical issues devoted to Isaiah. Likewise, while Judd’s  careful reading of the position of Noah’s priests regarding the  need for a Messiah is impressive, some distinct issues go unexplored.  Judd recognizes that although the “priests of Noah accepted the  legitimacy of the Law of Moses, it may be that they … denied that  the law was symbolic of the mission of the Messiah and that the  Messiah played a primary role in the salvation of humankind” (84).  However, in the broader issues of the denial of the Son in the  Nephite record and the teachings of early Nephite leaders  (particularly Jacob), additional pertinent evidence or information  related to the existence of the colony and its theological project  should be considered. Specifically, how could these priests firmly  reject the teachings of Nephi and Lehi about the coming of the  Messiah and his role, while yet strongly accepting their postulate  that the Land of Nephi is the Promised Land or land of inheritance?  How can the priests and Noah accept these promises and doctrines, as  taught by Nephi and Jacob yet reject the divine nature of God himself  descending? Perhaps the priests simply interpreted prophecies of the  coming Messiah as not necessarily divine but as having been already  fulfilled in someone else? I argue that this was their position  with regard to the leadership of Zeniff, though other possibilities  exist. Judd does not broach these possibilities.

The  second major part of the book is devoted to intertextual and  intratextual lenses, seeing the aspects of the Abinadi passages that  echo down through the rest of the Book of Mormon as well as how they  interact with biblical texts. John Hilton III’s contribution,  “Abinadi’s [Page 266] Legacy: Tracing His Influence through the Book of  Mormon,” is essentially concerned with the former. Offering a  wonderful introduction to the basics of method and approach of  intertextuality (93‒97), Hilton traces the usages, allusions, and  echoes to Abinadi’s words through other major sections of the Book  of Mormon. One major aspect that Hilton rightly picks up is the  relationship between Benjamin and Abinadi. A major literary  connection exists between the two, but as Hilton correctly points  out, this is perplexing: Benjamin’s speech occurred roughly 30  years (by Hilton’s logic) after Abinadi’s martyrdom, and there is  no simple or direct logical explanation of how Benjamin may have  heard or been exposed to Abinadi’s teachings; no contact existed  between the colony and Zarahemla.

The  next two chapters of this section deal with how the text of the  Abinadi narrative interacts with and is illuminated by its  intertextual relationship with biblical texts. Nicholas Frederick’s  piece, “If Christ Had Not Come into the World,” deals with the  interplay between specific phrases in Abinadi’s speech, Paul’s  letters, and John’s writings in the New Testament. Frederick  presents more information than can be dealt with in brief summary.  Yet it is an extremely well thought-out piece that presents important  considerations that emerge from a distinct comparison of these texts,  focused not only on how the phrases are held in common but also how  they are used in distinct ways, usually based in subtle shifts and  added nuance. Frederick concludes that such subtle differences are  integral to the way the Book of Mormon generally interweaves its  narratives with textual language from the New Testament.

> One  of the most astonishing aspects of the Book of Mormon is the  attention given to the weaving of text. To interact with the Bible to  the extent the Book of Mormon does risks producing a “textual  Frankenstein,” a book in which the parts have been so clumsily  constructed that the seams linking the Book of Mormon to the Bible  are not only visible but obtrusive. That the Book of Mormon (largely)  avoids this speaks to its complexity. (131)

This  interweaving supports broader points about the text of the Book of  Mormon in its relation to the New Testament, specifically its  confidence in using the New Testament and its demanding nature in  that it presupposes or expects its reader to grasp and recognize  where it specifically is in contact with the New Testament. It then  expects readers to relate and analyze the differences in both texts.

Shon  Hopkin, in “Isaiah 52‒53 and Mosiah 13‒14: A Textual  Comparison,” takes a different tack on the interplay between the  Book of Mormon and biblical texts, focusing on textual variants  between the Abinadi materials and quotations of Isaiah and those same  materials as found in the King James Version of the Bible as well as  within the Great Isaiah Scroll (from the Dead Sea Scrolls). Let me  point out only that this type of study is extremely valuable, perhaps  essential, to future studies in [Page 268] this vein. Such studies may require  an extremely close eye for detail and nuance, but this type of  scholarship is essential to continued development of scholarly works  and understanding of the Book of Mormon text. This type of engagement  will pave the way for additional studies.

Part  three of the volume, on cultural-historical lenses, illuminates the  Abinadi narrative through contextualization within a Mesoamerican or  North American setting. Kerry Hull, in the first chapter, “An ‘East  Wind’: Old and New World Perspectives,” examines the usage of the  phrase or image of the “east wind” that appears twice in Mosiah,  in both cases connected to the Abinadi narrative (Mosiah 7:31 and  12:6). He examines the usage of such a phrase biblically, including  its surprising usage in a number of places dealing with  geographies outside of Palestine. This is of interest because it  indicates the spread of this phrase beyond the original geographical  location to which the idiom was specifically bound. In other words,  the notion of an “east wind” bringing destruction or as an idiom  of destruction has, in these instances, been decontextualized from  the geography in which it arose (Palestine) and is applied to  geographies where it does not apply directly (Egypt, Mesopotamia, and  the broader Mediterranean). He presents not only several relevant  connections with the Old World but also impressive information on the  presence of “east winds” in Mesoamerica. He then presents  distinct, plausible explanations for the usage of the phrase within a  Book of Mormon set within a Mesoamerican context. Altogether, Hull  shows a mastery of source materials and capabilities in a large  variety of ancient contexts, cultures, and languages to make his  point: the allusion to “east winds” might not be as odd as it may  seem at first blush.

Kerry  Hull teams up with Mark Alan Wright, another Mesoamericanist, to  provide the next chapter, one of the chapters that will (and should,  in my opinion) exert the most influence among Latter-day Saint  readers on contemporary understandings of Abinadi’s martyrdom.  Titled “Ethnohistorical Sources and the Death of Abinadi,” this  chapter presents a very important study of the methods and means of  painful torture and ritualized execution common throughout North and  Central America. Rather than a common “colloquial” assumption of  Abinadi being burned at the stake, the Book of Mormon text attributes  Abinadi’s death to being beaten, or otherwise assaulted, with  burning firebrands. Hull and Wright present ethnohistorical  documentation on how this was accomplished broadly within an ancient  American context, potentially resulting in “an extended process of  torture” that could have taken hours if not days. “This refined  view of Abinadi’s death [Page 269] contributes to a greater appreciation of  his act of willing martyrdom, knowing, as he likely did, the nature  of physical torture he would have to endure” (209). This type of  understanding, in my view, should become the standard interpretation  and understanding of Abinadi’s execution, and an explication of  context in print form is invaluable. However, it is also important to  understand the broader questions this understanding evokes in LDS  understanding of the Book of Mormon and scripture in general. This is  an example of the type of influence of “colloquial”  interpretations, which exemplifies the power of human imagination and  assumptions, combined with cultural blinders, to influence our  understanding of the scriptures.

The  next natural question: If this is such a “spot on” case of Meso-  or North American cultural practices that illuminate the narratives  of the Book of Mormon, what else might we have overlooked? There is  certainly much more work to be done here.

The  final part of the volume consists of two papers that take a  theological or philosophical approach to distinct portions of the  Abinadi narrative. In “Infant Salvation: Book of Mormon Theology in  a 19th-Century Context,” Amy Easton-Flake hones in on Abinadi’s  statement that “little children also have eternal life” (Mosiah  15:25) and compares the Book of Mormon treatment of infant baptism  with prominent views among a variety of denominations of 19th  century America. Though I am not an expert in 19th century religious  history, I find Easton-Flake’s exposition a model of how to  understand the Book of Mormon within the context of its  translation. More discussions such as this would be important  contributions for viewing the Book of Mormon’s status as  a 19th century document, that is, a document translated in the 19th  century. Specifically, Easton-Flake notes how integral the discussion  of infant baptism was to the broader issues of free will debated in  the period. In comparing the teachings of the Book of Mormon with  those of a variety of denominations, Easton-Flake concludes that

> the  Book of Mormon does not prescribe to or endorse any one of the  dominant theological positions in early nineteenth-century America.  Instead, the book clearly resonates with different aspects of various  denominational thought while also offering a more concise rationale  for infant salvation and maintaining a focus on Christ’s grace that  is not seen in other denominations’ treatises on the subject. Its  ability to touch on many of the most pressing issues within the  nineteenth century debate, while constructing its own unique  teaching on the subject as a whole, [Page 270] suggests a theological  sophistication that has not often been granted to the Book of Mormon.  (252‒53)

The  analysis and evidence that lead to this conclusion are well worth  careful scrutiny.

The  final chapter of the volume, Joseph Spencer’s “‘As Though’:  Time Being, and Negation in Mosiah 16:5‒6” builds on recent  philosophical readings of Paul and his usage of the words as and though as they occur in the phrases as  though and as  though not . His  philosophical analysis is fascinating and important. But the careful  analysis and theological logic of Spencer’s argument cannot be  simply summarized here. Readers are encouraged to read this essay  particularly on their own.  I will simply point to  part of the conclusion of this impressive chapter, which mainly  concerns the layering of real and possible worlds:

> Sin  and faith, that is, are two different ways of layering worlds. Faith  amounts to a layering of the possible and the actual in such a way  that the two interpenetrate, the future possible interrupting the  present actual and all actuality opening directly on its fundamental  possibilities. Sin, however, amounts to a layering of the possible  and the actual in such a way that one entirely obscures — if not  eradicates — the other, the merely possible posing as and in the  place of the actual. (280)

While  perhaps denser prose than many readers will be used to, this chapter  pays well in dividends of deep thought that may help us understand  the folly of living in the possible worlds of sin that reject and  attempt to negate the reality of living in the light of our Savior.

While  Spencer’s piece is the last of the essay-chapters of the volume,  the book contains two appendices of distinct note. Appendix 1 is  a heavily annotated critical text version of the Abinadi  narrative (Mosiah 11‒17). This will prove a valuable tool for  students of the Book of Mormon who seek to understand the English  text of the book and its connections (literary, textual,  narratological, theological, and historical) to the rest of the Book  of Mormon and the Bible. It is an impressive array of connections and  insights, a work that will, one hopes, be the beginning of other  critical textual work for other sections of the Book of Mormon to be  produced by BOMA. The second appendix is a bibliography of important  works (scholarly and devotional) on the Abinadi narrative. Like the  first appendix, this appendix may prove to be a handy research and  study aid for those who wish to deepen their understanding of this  section of the Book of Mormon.

[Page 271] In  short, this volume is a valuable resource. I heartily recommend it to  all students of the Book of Mormon. It contains important original  research and insights, and is as well as valuable model for future  analysis of this book of scripture.

---
Notes

[1] The  discrepancy may be accounted for in a number of ways. Most  interpreters see Mormon as playing an editorial role (see footnote 28  on page 285 within the chapter contributed by Joseph Spencer).  Hilton, however, while recognizing the influence of Abinadi’s  speech on Mormon, does not engage himself with these interpretations,  and presents only superficial arguments against such a possibility.  Rather, Hilton points to the possible influence of the angel that  visits King Benjamin, based on the fact that the strongest literary  connections between Benjamin’s speech and Abinadi’s occur in the  sections Benjamin quotes from the angel. Hilton broaches the  possibilities (put forward by others initially) that not only did the  angel teach Abinadi’s words, but the angel may have been Abinadi  himself. Much of this is speculative (as Hilton points out), but  Hilton presents it as being of great importance: “This potential  influence is not tangential in understanding Book of Mormon  teachings. If Abinadi did teach King Benjamin (or another angel  taught Abinadi’s words to King Benjamin), then Abinadi is the first  prophetic witness found in Mormon’s abridgement of the large plates  of Nephi, influencing all prophetic voices after him” (109).  However, this seems interpretive overreach. Do we really need to  postulate or speculate on something like this to shore up our notions  that Abinadi’s teachings were very important within the Nephite  prophetic record and upon Mormon’s endeavor? What Hilton fails to  discuss, though, is the possibility of further redaction of these  records between the period when the original speeches were written  and how they came down to Mormon. It seems much more plausible to  postulate a harmonization of the records within the Church  established by Alma1, probably accomplished by Alma2.  There is even plausible literary evidence for this, specifically in  the form of the gloss of the word seed in Mosiah 15:11, which  reads, “or they are [Page 267] the heirs of the kingdom of God.” This  language is prominent in the writings and sermons of Alma2; and  it appears to be a later insertion because it breaks up the flow of  Abinadi’s words in this section. 1

