[Page 1] Abstract: Moroni’s years of wandering alone after the battle of Cumorah  have been often discussed, but not in the context of how they  impacted his writing and editorial work. John Bytheway’s latest  offering provides us insight into the man Moroni and how his  isolation impacted the material that he left for his latter-day  readers.

Review  of John Bytheway, Moroni’s Guide to Surviving Turbulent Times . (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book , 2017). 159 pp., $11.99.

Some  who pick up John Bytheway’s newest book, Moroni’s  Guide to Surviving Turbulent Times ,  may not be sure what they are going to get. His often-humorous  approach deters many serious scholars from engaging his work. While  his typical approach extends to this new book, those who chose to  read it will find themselves pleasantly surprised and quickly drawn  in.

The  book centers on Moroni the man, not the angel. I find the book  valuable for this alone, as scriptural figures are often placed on  pedestals that deny them their basic humanity. Throughout the book,  readers will find themselves getting to know Moroni and empathizing  with his struggles. Youth and single adults will have a special  reason to pay attention to Moroni’s words when Bytheway reminds his  readers that “This may be a family church … but it was restored  through an unmarried teenager who was visited and tutored by an  angel-who spent at least the last twenty years of his life as a  single adult, alone and wandering for his own safety” (3).  “Moroni,” he continues, “is one of the symbols of our  membership” and “[his] best work was done while he was a single  adult” (3).

[Page 2] The  book encompasses Mormon 7 to Moroni 10; the section over which Moroni  had editorial oversight. Bytheway provides a number of interesting  insights and personal applications — which he refers to as  “Likening Moroni” — in special sections at the end of each  chapter.

In  addition to introducing readers to Moroni, Bytheway’s book  discusses a number of doctrines at some depth. A full examination is  beyond the purview of this short review. As an example, however, I  will touch on Bytheway’s discussion of the gift of the Holy Ghost  in Moroni 2 (one of the longer chapters, at about seventeen pages).  This is a chapter which I believe to be “worth the price of  admission” on its own.

In  each of his analyses, Bytheway speculates on why Moroni left his  readers with these specific teachings and doctrines. Several of  Moroni’s chapters are exceptionally short, and Moroni 2 is no  different. Readers are reminded that Moroni was alone when he wrote  these chapters. “Thus,” Bytheway states, “the importance of the  companionship of the Holy Ghost for the lone man Moroni cannot be  overstated” (45). Bytheway goes on to point out various roles that  the Spirit fulfills for us: “warning light” (45–47), “tutor”  (47–50), “sword” (51–52), and “protector” (52–54). This  was accompanied by interesting study results from Wendy Watson Nelson  on the power of prayer in the recognition of the presence of the Holy  Ghost during times of trial (54–56). Bytheway followed this with a  conversation on the privilege of having the Holy Ghost with us at all  times. Interestingly, he reminds us that Mormon—through a letter  recorded by Moroni — described his people’s demise in terms of  their relationship with the Holy Ghost (59).

In  the closing pages of this chapter, Bytheway points out that “the  gift of the Holy Ghost is a privilege…to live up to” (59), and  hence “we have to desire it, to want it, and to let it in as we  would receive a guest into our home.” Bytheway writes, “Moroni  knew of the privilege of the Holy Ghost, and he felt it important  enough to devote precious space on the plates to teach future  generations” (59–60).

One  of the best ways this book can be described is as a starting point.  Bytheway has not written a scholarly book; instead, he has produced a  short work intended to encourage genuine discipleship and the  applicability of ancient scripture to modern situations. He  acknowledges this at the end of the book: “Not everyone will liken  scriptural stories in the same way, nor should they. … In sharing  these ideas, I am hoping others may find them helpful and have  something to think about as they ponder their own ways to liken  Moroni’s final words” (155).

[Page 3] The  doctrines and principles that Moroni emphasizes in his closing  section of the Book of Mormon are relatively simple. Bytheway’s  message reflects that simplicity by focusing on the Gospel of Jesus  Christ as a sustaining force in times of adversity. Moroni may have  been physically isolated, but he was never truly alone. Christ’s  gospel helped him to survive. Bytheway helps readers see how the Book  of Mormon can be a survival guide for the latter days too.

This  book is heartily recommended for both youth and adults finding their  own way into the Book of Mormon, as well as to experienced readers  looking for new insights that will make the scriptures come alive for  them. Above all, John Bytheway’s in-depth discussion of Moroni and  the invaluable work he accomplished offers counsel, doctrinal  insights, and hope for anyone who has ever felt alone.