[Page 49] Abstract: This informative and very readable volume, targeted to a Latter day  Saint audience, serves as an introduction to the Apocrypha and an  exploration of Latter-day Saint views of the books. Even those  already familiar with the Apocrypha will find this book insightful in  the Latter-day Saint approaches it brings to bear. Even so, the book  touches too lightly on some issues, including the extent of the  Apocrypha, the phenomenon of pseudonymity, and the reasons for the  current exclusion of the Apocrypha from the Latter-day Saint canon.

Review  of Jared W. Ludlow, Exploring the Apocrypha from a Latter-day  Saint Perspective (Springville, Utah: CFI, 2018). 234 pp. $16.99.

Latter-day  Saints have a unique relationship to the books that comprise the  Apocrypha, a body of religious texts that includes the books of  Esdras, Judith, Tobit, Maccabees, Wisdom of Solomon, Ecclesiasticus,  and additions to some of the canonical books of the Old Testament.  These texts are regarded as scripture by Catholic and Orthodox  communities but are excluded from the Jewish and Protestant canons.  On one hand, as with the two latter communities, the LDS Standard  Works do not include these other texts. On the other hand, however,  our belief in revealed ancient scripture outside the traditional  canon suggests that we should approach the Apocrypha with special  interest and insight. The Lord himself states that those who study  the Apocrypha while enlightened by the Spirit “shall obtain benefit  therefrom” (D&C 91:4–5). Yet, for the most part, Latter-day  Saints have not availed themselves of the benefit of which the Lord  speaks. Jared Ludlow, professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young  University, takes a significant step toward [Page 50] rectifying this situation  through his book Exploring  the Apocrypha from a Latter-day Saint Perspective .

The  purposes of this book, as explained in the preface, are to introduce  the Apocrypha to Latter-day Saints and to explain “the role it can  play in our own spiritual lives” (x). The organization of the book  addresses this dual purpose. Two introductory chapters describe the  Apocrypha in general terms (Chapter 1, “Apocrypha: What Is It and  Where Did It Come From?”) and recount the history of its reception  among Latter-day Saints (Chapter 2, “Joseph Smith and the  Latter day Saint Use of the Apocrypha”). Twelve subsequent  chapters address each book of the Apocrypha in turn. Each chapter  describes the historical background and contents of the book and  then, in a “Conclusion” section, evaluates its potential  doctrinal significance for Latter-day Saints. Most of the chapters  cover narrative books, so the description includes a summary of the  narrative; however, in the last two chapters, which cover Wisdom of  Solomon and Ecclesiasticus, Ludlow groups the sayings into categories  and summarizes them by topic.

To  my mind, the three adjectives that best describe this book are informative , concise , and readable . The book is  impressively learned, but the lay reader will be grateful that the  erudition underlying the arguments, rather than cluttering the main  text, is in large part relegated to the notes at the end of each  chapter. The book is designed to motivate readers to read the  Apocrypha for themselves, and Ludlow successfully navigates the fine  line between too much and too little description.

Latter-day  Saints will find many interesting gems in this book. For example,  Ludlow highlights the messianic prophecies in 2 Esdras (see pages 84,  88, 89), and he discusses Esther, Susanna, and Judith in terms of  their potential as role models for women believers (see pages 40–41,  52, 57, 141–42). Even those already familiar with the Apocrypha  will find this book stimulating in the way it presents the Apocrypha  from a Latter-day Saint perspective. For instance, I found  Ludlow’s discussion of Jewish and Latter-day Saint responses to  persecution, in the conclusion to the section on 1 Maccabees  (163–65), especially thought-provoking.

In  my reading of Exploring the Apocrypha , I noted a few points  I wished were explored in more depth. One of these is the fluid  boundary around the corpus of books that we call the Apocrypha.  Ludlow touches lightly on this issue in parts of his discussion in  Chapter 1. For instance, he mentions that the apocryphal books  included in the earliest complete Greek Bible manuscripts (4th–5th  centuries AD) had “different contents and ordering, which seems to  indicate fluidity related to these texts at that [Page 51] time” (9). He also  mentions that “Eastern Orthodox Christians tended to accept all the  books of the Apocrypha and some additional ones, including 3  Maccabees, Psalm 151, and 4 Maccabees (in an appendix)” (9–10).  These other books do not receive much discussion elsewhere in Exploring the Apocrypha . Psalm 151, for example, is mentioned  as one of the “[w]orks for which the discovery of Hebrew or Aramaic  manuscripts of their texts … has confirmed the view that they were  composed in one or other of these languages” (5), but it does not  appear on the categorized list of apocryphal books on the preceding  page, and it is not discussed further in the volume.

How,  then, do we explain the eventual exclusion of the Apocrypha from our  canon? Ludlow mentions a more satisfying possibility: “Beyond these  cases of Apocrypha use during the time of Joseph Smith, we can search  in vain for instances of Joseph Smith preaching from the Apocrypha;  they don’t seem to exist. … This may be a reason the Apocrypha  was not included in the LDS canon: it was simply not a major source  for sermons or writings” (27). Bound up with this is doubtless the  fact that the Bible many early Church members owned would have  contained only the Protestant canon, without the Apocrypha.

In  summary, Exploring  the Apocrypha is an excellent introduction to a very complicated body of  literature. It makes the Apocrypha accessible to a lay readership,  and it also suggests ways in which Latter-day Saints can understand  and apply its teachings. The book is well-researched and accurate,  although a few points it covers briefly could be corrected or  discussed in more depth. Ludlow has fulfilled his task as an  experienced guide. May his readers go on to undertake their own  explorations of this fascinating corpus.

---
Notes

[1] The  fluidity of this group of books implies that the distinction between  “the Apocrypha” and the broader category of “apocryphal texts”  or “Pseudepigrapha” is less rigid than Ludlow’s brief  discussion (6–7) would suggest. Without an explicit discussion of  this issue, some readers of Exploring the Apocrypha may be  tempted to imagine a neat three-part division between the biblical  canon, the Apocrypha, and the Pseudepigrapha. Yet the more fluid view  resonates with the Latter-day Saint belief in an open canon which is,  itself, at the tip of a continuum of authoritative and  semi-authoritative texts. Examples demonstrating the fluid nature of  this continuum include the Lectures on Faith, which were included in  the Doctrine and Covenants from 1835 to 1921; the Joseph Smith  Egyptian Papyri, which have an ambiguous relationship to the  canonical Book of Abraham; and the hymn “O Say, What Is Truth,”  which was included in the Pearl of Great Price when it was originally  canonized in 1880. All this points to a close parallel between our  Restoration canon and the ancient biblical canon. 1

[2] On  pages 6–7 and in endnotes 21–22 on page 17, Ludlow provides a  brief but intriguing discussion of how the apocryphal texts came into  being. He addresses the classic problem of how those apocryphal books  that are pseudonymously attributed to Old Testament prophets could  ever have been promulgated as legitimate religious texts. (In the  narrow definition of the “Apocrypha,” this question would apply  mainly to 2 Esdras, but in view of the permeable boundary  between the Apocrypha and the broader category of “apocryphal  texts,” as discussed above, the question has wider relevance.) In  answer to this question, Ludlow takes up a theory developed by R. H.  Charles around 1912 and endorsed to an LDS [Page 52] audience by Stephen E.  Robinson in 1983. 2 The pseudonymous books of the Apocrypha, according to this theory,  were produced as a “pious fraud,” or, in other words, “an  intentional deceit practiced to gain normative standing for new  ideas.” 3 Such a measure was necessary, according to Charles and Robinson,  because religious authorities at that time believed “that the  heavens were sealed and that the spirit of prophecy had departed from  Israel,” so that any work claiming inspiration outside the  established prophetic canon would fail to find acceptance among the  authorities. 4 (It is worth noting that the explicit reference to the fraudulent,  deceptive nature of this enterprise is Robinson’s; Charles is more  concerned with the motivating factor, the belief that the canon was  closed.)

[3] More  discussion of this issue would have been helpful, particularly since  Charles’s theory is both problematic and contested. 5 Although it is certain that some religious groups of the relevant  period (around 200 bc to 100 ad) held a conservative view of the  biblical canon, the religious climate of that time was very diverse,  and there is little if any evidence for the kind of censorship that  Charles’s theory posits; “indeed there was nothing to prevent any  writer at this time issuing his book either anonymously or in his own  name.” 6 Further, “Charles’s explanation charges the apocalyptists [or the  writers of pseudonymous apocryphal works] not only with deception but  also with a marked credulity in believing that such deception  would be accepted by their readers at its face value.” 7 This points to a non sequitur in Charles’s theory, for if  the prophetic canon were regarded as closed and final, putting a new  work under the name of an ancient prophet would by no means guarantee  its acceptance; in fact, in the religious climate this theory  presupposes, such [Page 53] a work would doubtless come under accusations of  sacrilege. Ultimately, Charles’s interpretation represents a  refusal to come to grips with the mystical worldview embodied in the  texts, an aspect of Charles’s work that has been noted elsewhere. 8

[4] Personally,  I find the theory of D. S. Russell to be more persuasive. According  to Russell, the pseudonymous writers of apocryphal texts “believed  that they themselves were recipients of divine revelations.” Their  descriptions of the ancient prophets receiving revelation “reflect  an actual experience in which they believed themselves to be inspired  by the spirit of God and thereby to receive revelations concealed  from the ordinary run of men.” More specifically, “the  apocalyptic visionary saw the ancient patriarch or prophet being  introduced to these mysteries and in so doing he was introduced to  them himself. What the ancient worthy saw he himself was now seeing.  They were sharing a common knowledge; they were recipients of a  common revelation.” 9 This would, of course, resonate with Restoration scriptures like the  Book of Abraham, in which Abraham recounts in the first person  revelations that he received. Joseph Smith, who received the Book of  Abraham by revelation, would be a precise modern parallel to the  “apocalyptic visionary” that Russell describes. This does not  necessarily imply that all these texts are equally true revelations. Nevertheless, this approach is a less arbitrary  alternative to that of Robinson, which would label Joseph Smith’s  scripture as revelation and the apocryphal works as fraud .  Our experience as Latter day Saints, which often includes having  to endure uncharitable labeling of our scripture, should give us  empathy for the ancient writers.

[5] In  his analysis of the Lord’s statement regarding the Apocrypha in D&C  91, Ludlow states that “the Apocrypha was not to be translated as  part of the JST, and, consequently, it is not part of the LDS canon”  (23). But the fact that the Apocrypha was not translated is not a  sufficient reason for its exclusion from the canon. Other parts of  the Bible also were not touched in the JST and yet remain in the  canon, most notably Song of Solomon, about which Joseph Smith wrote  in the manuscript of his inspired translation, “The Songs of  Solomon are not Inspired writings.” 10 Further, this would imply that the decision not to include the  Apocrypha in the canon occurred early in the Church’s history and  was directly [Page 54] based on this revelation, which is contradicted by the  very interesting story Ludlow recounts about the deposit of the Bible  in the cornerstone of the Nauvoo Temple, in which it was decided that  the Bible placed in the deposit “should be complete—containing  the Apocrypha” (24).

[6] If  the exclusion of the Apocrypha from our canon was due to accidents of  history, which I think is likely, one may wonder whether these books  could legitimately be regarded as part of our canon after all.  Indeed, on reading D&C 91, it is hard to see what in this  revelation distinguishes the Apocrypha from the rest of the Bible.  Other parts of the Bible have also been tampered with by the hands of  men (see 1 Nephi 13:20–41). Scripture in general,  including the Bible, can be understood properly only by the Spirit  (see 1 Corinthians 2:11–16; 2 Peter 1:19–21;  Moroni 10:4– 5; D&C 50:19–23). A ready  illustration of this last point is found in Ludlow’s discussion of  teachings in Ecclesiasticus that do not “agree with LDS teachings  or modern sensibilities.” He refers to the statement in D&C 91  that the Apocrypha contains both true and false teachings, and he  suggests applying this principle to avoid “false doctrine.” But  the examples that Ludlow gives in footnote 9, including the doctrines  of harsh discipline for children, the finality of death, and God as a  source of evil (specifically in the punishment of sinners), are not  so different from doctrines taught in the Bible itself. 11 It is even possible that the reason Joseph Smith was not required to  translate the Apocrypha was not because the Apocrypha was regarded as  less important or authoritative but because it was less problematic  than other parts of the Bible. The Lord states in D&C 91:1 that  the Apocrypha “is mostly translated correctly”—something that  could not be said, for example, of the book of Genesis and the  Gospels of Matthew and John! Thus, Joseph Smith may not have needed  to translate the Apocrypha because it was already acceptable as it  stood. However, on the other side of the argument, it could be that  it was specifically the [Page 55] “interpolations” that were at issue in  the Apocrypha, in contrast to the rest of the Bible, in which Joseph  Smith’s task was to restore “plain and precious things” that  had been “taken away” (1 Nephi 13:28).

