[Page 257] Abstract: The recently released Abinadi:  He Came Among Them in Disguise , a new book from Brigham  Young University’s Book of Mormon Academy, offers readers  multidisciplinary approaches to Mosiah 11–17 that highlight the  literary, historical, and doctrinal richness of the story of Abinadi.  Students and scholars of the Book of Mormon are sure to benefit  greatly from this new volume.

Review  of Shon D. Hopkin, ed. Abinadi: He Came Among Them in Disguise (Provo and Salt Lake City: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young  University, and Deseret Book, 2018), 404 pp. $27.99.

The  first section of the book (“Literary Lenses: Narratological,  Sociopolitical, Biblical”) approaches Mosiah 11–17 from a  narratological perspective. As Jared W. Ludlow (“‘A Messenger of  Good and Evil Tidings’: A Narrative Study of Abinadi”) explains  in his contribution, “A narratological study looks at  all the components that go into the telling of a story in order to  appreciate its different narrative facets (the aesthetic [Page 258] dimension)  and to better understand the purpose and emphasis of the writer (the  rhetorical dimension)” (2). A narrative approach helps readers  better appreciate the story of Abinadi as just that: a story. It can  clarify and amplify how the story should be read and understood by  looking closely at the bare bones text. As the additional articles in  this section by Daniel L. Belnap (“The Abinadi Narrative,  Redemption, and the Struggle for Nephite Identity”) and Frank F.  Judd Jr. (“Conflicting Interpretations of Isaiah in Abinadi’s  Trial”) help further demonstrate, the story of Abinadi is rich and  rewarding when read closely and carefully.

The  next section of the book (“Intertextual and Intratextual Lenses:  The Book of Mormon and the Bible”) looks at the relationship  between the Bible and the Book of Mormon as witnessed primarily in  Mosiah 11–17. Nicholas J. Frederick (“‘If Christ Had Not Come  Into the World'”) explores the nature of the quotations of the  King James Bible in the Abinadi pericope, while Shon D. Hopkin  (“Isaiah 52–53 and Mosiah 13–14”) looks at the variants in  the Book of Mormon’s quotations of biblical texts and compares them  to textual witnesses, including the Dead Sea Scrolls, the Masoretic  Hebrew Bible, and the Greek Septuagint. Combined, their articles  paint a complicated picture when it comes to how exactly the Book of  Mormon quotes the Bible (and the significance of such).

By  understanding the ethnohistorical background of this gruesome  practice, Hull and Wright conclude, readers can better appreciate  both evidence for the Book of Mormon’s antiquity as well as the  figure of Abinadi as a true martyr.

The  final section of Abinadi looks at the theology of Mosiah 11–17  (“Theological Lenses: Historical and Philosophical”). Amy  Easton-Flake (“Infant Salvation: Book of Mormon Theology in a  Nineteenth-Century Context”) focuses her remarks on what the Book  of Mormon [Page 260] teaches about infant baptism and the status of infants and  children in the plan of salvation (Mosiah 15:25; Moroni 8:10–21).  She specifically compares the Book of Mormon’s teachings on this  matter to those espoused by other 19th century New England and New  York Christian movements, including Presbyterian, Methodist, Baptist,  Restorationist, and Universalist sects. After looking carefully at  early 19th century theological treatises and sermons from leading  voices of these traditions, her research reveals that “the Book of  Mormon does not prescribe to or endorse any one of the dominant  theological positions in early nineteenth-century America. Instead,  the book clearly resonates with different aspects of various  denominational thought while also offering a more concise rationale  for infant salvation and maintaining a focus on Christ’s grace that  is not seen in other denominations’ treatises on the subject”  (252–53).

All  told, Abinadi: He Came Among Them in Disguise is an excellent example of the sort of  scholarship that can and should be performed on the Book of Mormon.  It offers something for those interested in approaching the Book of  Mormon from multiple perspectives while moving the scholarly  discussion forward.

---
Notes

[1] In  2013 a group of Latter-day Saint scholars organized the Book of  Mormon Academy, “an academic think tank and research group begun at  Brigham Young University … to promote scholarship and teaching on  the Book of Mormon.” 1 The first publication of the Book of Mormon Academy, Abinadi:  He Came Among Them in Disguise ,  offers a collection of articles that explores Mosiah 11–17 from  textual, theological, historical, and anthropological perspectives.

[2] On  one hand, as Frederick points out, the Book of Mormon is very clearly  “filled with hundreds of quotations from and allusions to the King  James Bible” (117), including the KJV New Testament. 2 At first blush this would appear to undermine the Book of Mormon’s  claims to historicity. But on the other hand, at some key points the  Book of Mormon’s quotations of the Bible include variant  readings not found in the KJV that do nevertheless find support from  ancient textual witnesses. As Hopkin explains, “In the Abinadi  narrative, of the twenty variants that exist [between the Book of  Mormon and the KJV], fourteen find support in an ancient manuscript  witness  — such as the Septuagint, the Targums, or the Dead Sea  Scrolls — or they are an equally appropriate translation from the  Masoretic Text” (153).

[3] How  might we reconcile this? Hopkin reasonably suggests, “The Book of  Mormon may not have been a modern creation , but it was  certainly a modern translation , purposefully reflecting  language from Joseph Smith’s day, most importantly the King James  Version, and [Page 259] departing from it only when necessary” (162, emphasis  in original). 3 All of this is to say that while this particular issue (the  relationship between the KJV and the Book of Mormon) is still being  explored, the intertextual work exemplified in Abinadi is  precisely what is needed for further understanding.

[4] In  Part Three (“Cultural-Historical Lenses: Mesoamerican and North  American”) of Abinadi , Kerry Hull (“An ‘East Wind’:  Old and New World Perspectives”) and Mark Alan Wright  (“Ethnohistorical Sources and the Death of Abinadi”) situate  Mosiah 11–17 in an ancient New World context by reading some small  but significant details about the Abinadi narrative in light of  current archaeological and ethnohistorical knowledge. Take, for  instance, Abinadi’s martyrdom. According to the Book of Mormon, the  wicked priests of Noah “took [Abinadi] and bound him, and scourged  his skin with faggots, yea, even unto death” (Mosiah 17:13).  This method of execution — a torturous death by firebrand — has  been documented to have been practiced by post- and pre-Columbian  North and Central American peoples. 4

[5] The  death of Abinadi was an act of martyrdom, an act of bravery, and a  result of obedience. … His bold teaching in the face of certain  death represents the very essence of his faith in the words and  promises of his God. … Beyond the pains and physical anguish of  possibly being burned at the stake, Abinadi likely suffered for hours  if his death conformed to standard ethnohistorical accounts. (224) 5

