[Page 15] Abstract: In this article, the author attempts to shed light on practices  alluded to in the Psalms that may have formed part of the ritual  system and theology of Solomon’s original temple. He describes  various aspects of the ritual system of pre-exilic Israel, including  pilgrimage, questioning at the gates, epiphany, and royal rites. In  the culmination of these rites, the king, who likely led the  procession up to the temple, was enthorned on or beside the Lord’s  own throne and transformed or “reborn” as a Son of God, appearing  before the people in glorious fashion as the representative of  Yahweh.

[ Editor’s  Note: Part of our book chapter reprint series, this article is  reprinted here as a service to the LDS community. Original pagination  and page numbers have necessarily changed, otherwise the reprint has  the same content as the original.

See  David J. Larsen, “Ascending into the Hill of the Lord: What the  Psalms Can Tell Us About the Rituals of the First Temple,” in Ancient Temple Worship: Proceedings of The Expound Symposium 14  May 2011, ed. Matthew B. Brown, Jeffrey M. Bradshaw, Stephen D.  Ricks, and John S. Thompson (Orem, UT: The Interpreter Foundation;  Salt Lake City: Eborn Books, 2014), 171–88. Further information at https://interpreterfoundation.org/books/ancient-temple-worship/ .]

In  light of this and other evidence, I believe Bunta is correct in  suggesting that visions taking place in the Jerusalem Temple should  be seen as essentially equivalent to visions of the heavenly temple  and that the heavenly ascent motif occurred in settings such as  Ezekiel 1 that were long prior to 1 Enoch.

Working  from Bunta’s general conclusions, I will take the next logical  step: moving the origins of the heavenly ascent motif further back  beyond Ezekiel into the pre-exilic cult of the Jerusalem Temple. I  will argue that this type of theophanic experience — an ascent to  heaven to see God — was a principal focus of the temple liturgy in  monarchic times as depicted in some of the Psalms.

Later  heavenly ascent narratives include, among others features, the  following: a) the visionary being taken or led on a journey upwards  through the various levels of heaven, b) passing through a series of  gates guarded by angelic beings who require adherence to moral laws  and answers to questions or passwords (e.g., the names of angels or  the Godhead), c) standing before the Throne of God or seeing His  Divine Face, and d) the initiation of the visionary into the heavenly  order, including anointing, clothing, coronation, and enthronement.

The  ritual system of the Jerusalem Temple in pre-exilic times paralleled  the features of these later texts in important ways, which can be  outlined as follows:

  - Pilgrims  travel to the Jerusalem Temple at least three times a year during the  major pilgrimage festivals. The pilgrimage culminated in an ascent of  the temple mount to the temple precincts. It seems that sometimes  these processions were led by the king and accompanied by the Ark of  the Covenant. The  procession was subjected to questioning by the keepers of the temple  gates, who required a test of moral worthiness for admission. The  purpose of the pilgrimage was to experience the “epiphany” or  “theophany” of Yahweh, to stand in the Lord’s presence and to  see His face. [Page 18] The  king would have participated in further rituals, including washing,  anointing, clothing, and enthronement.

We  will now discuss details of each of these aspects of the ritual  system — pilgrimage, questioning at the gates, epiphany, and royal  rites — in turn.

At  the three major pilgrimage festivals ( Pesach , Shavuot ,  and Succot ),  the Israelites were directed to “go up” to “appear before the  Lord.” In Exodus 34:23-24, we read:

> Thrice  in the year shall all your men children appear before the Lord GOD,  the God of Israel. (see also Exodus 23:14-17; Deuteronomy 16:16;  Isaiah 1:11-13).

While  the earliest references may not have necessarily envisioned a  pilgrimage to Jerusalem, they seem to imagine an ascent to an  elevated sacred site. In later references, however, we do have  pilgrims (and not just the men, see Deuteronomy 16:11, 14; 31:10–13)  coming from all around the region to worship the Lord at the Temple  in Jerusalem. In the time of the prophet Zechariah, Israel (and, in  fact, all nations) were expected to observe this temple pilgrimage,  or they would receive no rain (Zechariah 14:16-19).

Isaiah  30:29 seems to allude to the same type of festal temple pilgrimage:

> You  shall have a song as in the night when a holy festival is kept; and  gladness of heart, as when one sets out to the sound of the flute to  go to the mountain of the LORD, to the Rock of Israel (nrsv).

A  number of Psalms have a similar tone, and we can imagine that they  could have been composed for or sung during the pilgrimage. Perhaps  some of these were the type of song that Isaiah had in mind. Psalm  84, for example, describes a travelling group who is longing to be at  the courts of the temple.

> How  lovely is your dwelling place, O LORD of hosts! My soul longs, indeed  it faints for the courts of the LORD; my heart and my flesh sing for  joy to the living God … Happy are those whose strength is in you,  in whose heart are the highways to Zion. As they go through the  valley of Baca they make it a place of springs; the early rain also  covers it with pools. They [Page 19] go from strength to strength; the God of  gods will be seen in Zion (nrsv,  cf. Psalm 65:1-4).

The  LXX (Psalm 83:6; English 84:5) sees this procession as an ascension  (using the verb anabaino ).  We should note that this pilgrimage party, singing “as they go  through the valley of Baca,” has the objective of reaching the  temple and seeing the God of gods in Zion (nrsv  translation, based on the LXX reading). The Psalm goes on to mention  (in vv. 8-9) that the Lord’s anointed, a reference to the king, is  with this group, and they ask God for a blessing upon him.

Psalm  122 is another clear example:

> I  was glad when they said to me, “Let us go to the house of the  LORD!” Our feet are standing within your gates, O Jerusalem.  Jerusalem — built as a city that is bound firmly together. To it  the tribes go up, the tribes of the LORD, as was decreed for Israel,  to give thanks to the name of the LORD. For there the thrones for  judgment were set up, the thrones of the house of David (nrsv).

Psalm  118:27 appears to depict a festal procession that has come up to the  great altar of the temple as part of a ritual ceremony. Psalm [Page 20] 68  presents very clearly a liturgical procession that is going into the  temple, delineating the order in which the tribes were to proceed,  which is reminiscent of Psalm 122’s pilgrimage procession.

Psalm  68:24-27 reads:

> 24  Your solemn processions are seen, O God, the processions of my God,  my King, into the sanctuary — 25  the singers in front, the musicians last, between them girls playing  tambourines: 26  “Bless God in the great congregation, the LORD, O you who are of  Israel’s fountain!” 27  There is Benjamin, the least of them, in the lead, the princes of  Judah in a body, the princes of Zebulun, the princes of Naphtali  (nrsv).

The  vivid depictions of the great power of Yahweh that is celebrated on  this occasion convey the idea that these processions were meant to be  imagined as a commemoration of Yahweh’s victory and were somehow  imagined to be led by Yahweh himself. Verses 17-18 of this psalm  further elucidate this picture:

> 17  With mighty chariotry, twice ten thousand, thousands upon thousands,  the Lord came from Sinai into the holy place. 18  You ascended the high mount, leading captives in your train and  receiving gifts from people, even from those who rebel against the  LORD God’s abiding there (nrsv).

[Page 21] This  recalls in the Hebrew Bible the imagery of the Ark of the Covenant,  representing the Presence of the Lord, being carried ahead of the  camp of Israel during the Exodus (Numbers 4:5-6; 10:33-36; etc.),  into battle against Israel’s enemies (1 Samuel 4; 14:8), in  procession around the city of Jericho (Joshua 6:4-20), and being  taken in procession up to Jerusalem by King David (2 Samuel 6).

We  read in Numbers 10:35-36 that:

> Whenever  the ark set out, Moses would say, “Arise, O LORD, let your enemies  be scattered, and your foes flee before you.” And whenever it came  to rest, he would say, “Return, O LORD of the ten thousand  thousands of Israel.”

Interestingly,  Psalm 68 begins the way the Numbers passage begins, with: “Let God  rise up, let his enemies be scattered; let those who hate him flee  before him” (Psalm 68:1). The “ten thousand thousands of Israel”  is reminiscent of the similar number of chariots that Psalm 68  describes as ascending with Yahweh up the high mountain and into the  temple. It would appear that Psalm 68 describes or is meant to  accompany a procession of the Ark up to the temple, using the imagery  of the victorious march of Yahweh leading the host of Israel at the  time of the Exodus.

A  similar procession was performed at Solomon’s dedication of the  temple (1 Kings 8:1), which took place at the time of the Feast of  Tabernacles (1 Kings 8:2). The fact that the Chronicler (2 Chronicles  6:41) has Solomon quoting part of Psalm 132 in this context may  indicate that he knew of a temple tradition in which Psalm 132 was  sung to accompany a re-enactment of the procession of the Ark into  the temple.

Whether  the pilgrimage processions were accompanied by the Ark or not, there  seems to be abundant evidence in the Psalms that the festival  participants imagined themselves as joining Yahweh in his victorious  march up to his holy dwelling-place on Mount Zion. As discussed  previously, because the Israelites equated the top of the mountain  and [Page 22] more specifically the temple with heaven, the climb up the temple  mount would have been imagined as an ascent to heaven.

We  can conclude from this that a liturgical heavenly ascent was one of  the principal features of the ritual system of the First Temple.  Further details from the Psalms help confirm that this ritual ascent  bore many more similarities to the literary accounts of heavenly  ascent found in later texts.

Psalm  118 makes reference to passing through “the gates of righteousness”  (v. 19), apparently in the context of a festal procession ( ḥag ,  v. 27). The speaker pleads:

> 19  Open to me the gates of righteousness, that I may enter through them  and give thanks to the LORD. 20  This is the gate of the LORD; the righteous shall enter through it.

I  read Psalm 24 in light of the preceding considerations. The psalm  starts out with a doxology praising the Lord for his Creation. This  hymn parallels the similar one (which actually quotes Psalm 96) that  the Chronicler tells us was sung at the occasion of the David’s ark  procession (1 Chronicles 16:23-33). Psalm 24:3–4 describes someone  who desires to go up to the temple, and verse 6 can be seen to  indicate that this is a group of people (nrsv  has “company” and Donald W. Parry reads “circle”) who are  going up to the temple. Taking the situations presented in Psalms  118, 132, and the vision of Ezekiel into consideration, the life  setting we can imagine here for Psalm 24 is a procession of pilgrims  led by an individual (likely the king) who are accompanying Yahweh  (perhaps represented by the Ark) up to the temple. We can picture the  procession proceeding up the holy mountain until they reach the  temple gates, where they are required to stop.

Entrance  to the temple precincts involved the revelation of moral requirements  in the form of covenants from God, the acceptance of these on the  part of the worshippers, and confirmation to the gatekeepers that  these requirements were being met. Verse 5 seems to be spoken by the  gatekeepers or accompanying priest(s), declaring the blessings  promised to those who fulfill the requirements. V. 6 appears to be an  indication from the pilgrims that they do, indeed, comply with the  requirements.

The  idea of going to the holy place to see the Lord, or that the Lord  would make an appearance at a cultic site, is certainly not foreign  to the Hebrew Bible. I have already mentioned the visions of Ezekiel  and Isaiah. There are many others worthy of mention. King Solomon, in  1 Kings 3, goes up to the high place of Gibeon to offer sacrifice,  and the Lord appears to him in a dream. In 1 Samuel 3:21, we read:  “The LORD continued to appear at Shiloh, for the LORD revealed  himself to Samuel at Shiloh….” The prophet Malachi (Malachi 3),  in language reminiscent of some of the Psalms, envisioned that “the  Lord whom you seek will suddenly come to his temple” and asked:  “But who can abide the day of his coming, and who can stand when he  appeareth?”

The  priestly instructions for sacrifice recorded in Leviticus 9:3-6  declare:

> 3  And say to the people of Israel, “Take a male goat for a sin  offering; a calf and a lamb, yearlings without blemish, for a burnt  offering … For today the LORD will appear to you.” (cf. Exodus  20:24).

In  the story of the children of Israel at Sinai, while most of the  people of Israel are required (Exodus 19:12-13; cf. Psalm 24) to  remain at a distance from the foot of the holy mountain, a number of  individuals are chosen to ascend up the mountain together with Moses  and Aaron.

We  read in Exodus 24:9-11:

> 9  Then Moses and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of  Israel went up ( wayya’al ), 10  and they saw the God of Israel. Under his feet there was something  like a pavement of sapphire stone, like the very heaven for  clearness. 11  God did not lay his hand on the chief men of the people of Israel;  also they beheld God, and they ate and drank.

[Page 25] As  an important aside, I would mention that James Tabor, among others,  has noted that Exodus 24 bears a number of similarities to the  heavenly ascent genre. He explains:

To  cite just a few further examples of this theme, we can read in Psalm  17:15: “As for me, I shall behold your face in righteousness; when  I awake I shall be satisfied, beholding your form ( t e munateka ).”  Psalm 11:7 has: “For the LORD is righteous; he loves righteous  deeds; the upright shall behold his face.”

Psalm  27:4 puts the vision of the Lord explicitly in the context of the  temple: “One thing I asked of the LORD, that will I seek after: to  live in the house of the LORD all the days of my life, to behold the  beauty of the LORD, and to inquire in his temple.”

[Page 26] The  language of so many of the Psalms, especially if we attempt to view  them in a cultic setting, combined with the numerous other biblical  expressions of the expectation of Theophany in connection with cultic  ritual lead us to the conclusion that the principal goal of one or  more of the pilgrimage festivals in pre-exilic times was to ascend to  the temple so that one could experience the Theophany and “see the  face of the Lord,” however this was imagined or ultimately  realized.

In Exagoge of Ezekiel the Tragedian, starting in line 67, Moses is made to say:

> I  had a vision of a great throne on the top of Mount Sinai and it  reached till the folds of heaven. A noble man was sitting on it, with  a crown and a large scepter in his left hand. He beckoned to me with  his right hand, so I approached and stood before the throne. He gave  me the scepter and instructed me to sit on the great throne. Then he  gave me a royal crown and got up from the throne. I beheld the whole  earth all around and saw beneath the earth and above the heavens.

This  sequence was also arguably a part of the pre-exilic temple ritual. We  read in 1 Chronicles 29: 23:

> Then  Solomon sat on the throne of the Lord as king instead of David his  father, and prospered; and all Israel obeyed him.

The  idea that when the king was enthroned, he was being seated on the  cherubim throne of Yahweh seems to be an early, pre-exilic concept.  With that in mind, we can then get a broader perspective of the  pre-exilic coronation rituals by looking at the relevant psalms

Psalm  2:6-7 reads:

> Yet  have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion. I will declare the  decree: the LORD hath said unto me, Thou art my Son; this day have I  begotten thee.

[Page 27] We  can interpret this passage to refer to God having taken the king up  to the top of the temple mount, which would be equivalent to an  ascent into heaven and having enthroned him there. The Lord gives a  decree to the king, announcing him to be the son of God.

Psalm  110:1 has the Lord directing the king to sit at his right hand. Psalm  2:2 indicates that the king has previously been anointed. Just as the  visionary in the ascent narratives is described as being washed,  anointed, clothed, and invested with royal regalia as part of his  heavenly experience, we learn from the Bible that the coronation of  kings followed a similar pattern. The king was washed and purified,  likely at the spring of Gihon (1 Kings 1:34). He was anointed on the  head with a perfumed olive oil that was kept in a horn in the  sanctuary (1 Kings 1:39; Psalm 89:20; Psalm 23:5). He was clothed in  robes and also wore a priestly apron (ephod, see 1 Chronicles 15:27),  sash (Isaiah 22:21; “girdle” in kjv),  and diadem/headdress (see Ezekiel 21:26). Finally, the king was  consecrated a priest “after the order of Melchizedek” (Psalm  110:4).

Just  as Moses was understood in later Jewish writings to have been deified  by his experience on Mt. Sinai, this may very well have been ritually  true for the Israelite kings as well.

Margaret  Barker describes a Second Temple Ritual in which the high priest,  Simon, emerges from the temple and is treated as if he were Yahweh.  She notes, citing ben Sira 50:17:

This  Second Temple Ritual expression involving the high priest as the  representative of Yahweh should likely be understood to be an example  of post-exilic borrowing of pre-exilic royal rites — attributing,  in the absence of the monarchy, to the high priest functions  previously attached to the figure of the king. Turning again to the  narrative of Solomon’s coronation in 1 Chronicles 29, verse 20:

> And  David said to all the congregation, Now bless the LORD your God. And  all the congregation blessed the LORD God of [Page 28] their fathers, and bowed  down their heads, and worshipped the LORD, and the king.


## Conclusion

To  summarize my findings, we can see that:

  - The  origin of the heavenly ascent motif should be sought even earlier  than Bunta supposed, namely in the context of the pre-exilic temple  cult. The  pilgrims were required to go up to the temple at ordained festal  times. The  pilgrimage culminated in a climb to the pinnacle of the holy mountain  of God. Because the peak of the temple mount and temple structure  represented heaven, the upward journey likely would have been  imagined as a heavenly ascent. The  procession to the temple would have involved passing through gates  and being confronted by guardians who required adherence to moral  laws and answers to questions or passwords. A  key purpose for arriving at the temple was to experience the Divine  Theophany, thus “appearing before the Lord” or perhaps even  “seeing the face of the Lord.” The  king, who likely had led the procession up to the temple, was  enthroned on or beside the Lord’s own throne, was transformed or  “reborn” as a Son of God, and appeared before the people in  glorious fashion as the representative of Yahweh.

[Page 29] In  light of these findings, it is my conclusion that the earliest roots  of the Israelite tradition of heavenly ascent should not be sought in  the book of 1 Enoch, as is commonly argued, nor even in the earlier  book of Ezekiel, as Silviu Bunta suggests, but rather in the Psalms  and in other early pre-exilic biblical texts. The ascent to heaven  was not merely a literary invention based on a creative  interpretation of prophetic texts but was a cultic drama made real  for worshippers through the temple liturgy. I believe that the ascent  to heaven to stand before the Throne of God and to see his Face was a  key feature of early Israelite religion and one of the major  paradigms of the pre-exilic royal cult of the First Temple.

> The  ceremony in question was performed, it is stated clearly, just at  sunrise. The king entered the theater just as the day was dawning.  Unquestionably he took the seat regularly reserved for him alone. It  must have been located at the western side of the theater and was no  doubt elevated somewhat above the remainder of the seats in the  edifice in such manner and to such height that the first rays of the  rising sun upon this particular day might fall unobstructedly upon  the king’s person and be reflected brilliantly from the robe of  silvered cloth which he was wearing, undoubtedly for this very  purpose. The elevated royal seat resembled in various essential  respects, and was no doubt even regarded as, a throne, and that too a  throne of the character which the Bible very appropriately terms a kisse’ kabod , “a throne of radiance”, 2) a throne bathed  in fiery light, the throne of Yahweh Himself. And as the people,  assembled at that very early hour primarily to observe and even to an  extent to participate in this very ceremony, beheld the king, seated  upon his elevated throne and brilliantly radiating light from his  very person, as it seemed, the light of the first rays of the rising  sun upon this solstitial day, they hailed him as a god. Julian  Morgenstern, “The King-God among the Western Semites and the  Meaning of Epiphanes,” Vetus Testamentum 10, no. 2 (1960):  156ff.

---
Notes

[1] In  her monograph on the Temple in Jerusalem, Old Testament scholar  Margaret Barker remarked: “The easiest way to enter into the world  of [Page 16] the ancient temple is to read the Psalms and try to imagine the  setting for which they were written.” 1 The world of the First Temple is considered largely inaccessible, as  there are very few texts from the pre-exilic period that are  available to us. This is a frustrating situation for those who long  for insights into the Golden Age of the Israelite monarchy and the  mysteries of Solomon’s original temple. In this chapter I will  attempt to shed some light on practices alluded to in the Psalms that  may have formed part of the ritual system and theology of that First  Temple.

[2] The  specific focus of this study comes largely from my reading of an  article by Dr. Silviu Bunta, published in the recent festschrift for Rachel Elior, With  Letters of Light . 2 I offer a brief summary of Dr. Bunta’s argument:

[3] He  argues that 1 Enoch should not, as per the common view, be seen as  the first example of an ascent to heaven in Jewish literature. He  notes that Paul Joyce of Oxford University sees Ezekiel’s temple  vision (starting in Ezekiel 40) as a heavenly ascent narrative and  then argues that the vision of God’s Kavod in Ezekiel 1 should likewise be seen as an ascent to heaven because  it is also a vision of the heavenly temple. In  support of this conclusion, he asserts that the ancient Near East  understanding did not differentiate between the “earthly” and  “heavenly” temple — the earthly temple was the heavenly temple.  The dwelling-place of the gods is often associated with the tops of  mountains. That the early Israelites shared a similar conceptual  view, he argues, is implied by many biblical references, most notably  in the Psalms (see, e.g., Psalms 43:3; 46:4-5; 48:9; 50:2; 76:2;  132:13-140), to God dwelling on the holy mountain. He  asserts that 1 Enoch 14 and Aramaic Levi seem to refer to the top of  Mt. Hermon as the place to which they ascend during their visions. 3 Associated  with this view is the idea that the sanctuary was to be equated with  the holy mountain and thus with heaven. “When one enters a temple  on earth,” says Bunta, “one reaches the top of the sacred  mountain and is described as ‘entering heaven.’” 4 Worshippers in the earthly temple were thought to be in heaven,  standing before God. 5 [Page 17] Finally,  he sees the temple vision of God on his throne in Isaiah 6 (cf. 1  Kings 22) as evidence supporting his claim. 6 In essence, Isaiah ascending Mount Zion to the temple would be  equivalent to his ascending into heaven (see 1 Enoch 93).

[4] Psalm  122 is one of a body of psalms (Psalms 120-134) that are designated  in their superscriptions as being shir  ha-mmaʻalot ,  or a “song of ascents.” These are also frequently designated as  “pilgrim songs.” Holladay explains that these should be seen as  “a song sung when ascending (as a pilgrim) to Jerusalem”, and  that this group of psalms should be seen as a “songbook for  pilgrimage.” 7 While we don’t know when all of the psalms in this set were  composed, Holladay sees at least Psalm 122 (as well as Psalm 132) as  pre-exilic. 8

[5] As  the pilgrims reached Jerusalem, perhaps coming along what Isaiah  calls the Way of Holiness (Isaiah 35:8; cf. Isaiah 62:10; Psalm  84:5), 9 they would have had to “ascend” to Jerusalem’s mountainous  perch and then climb the temple mount itself to get to the sanctuary.  Psalm 24 asks: “Who shall ascend ( mi-ya’aleh )  the hill of the LORD? And who shall stand in his holy place?”

[6] The  Hebrew word ālâ appears to be used often as a paradisical term 10 in the Hebrew Bible for ascending in procession to sacred places,  including going up to the promised land of Israel (i.e., from out of  Egypt, e.g. Exodus 3:8, 17) and ascending the holy mountain (e.g.,  Exodus 19:20). The directive for the thrice-yearly pilgrimage  commanded the Israelites to “go up” ( ālâ )  to the cultic site (Exodus 34:24, etc.).

[7] Psalm  47, a song full of ritual allusions, depicts the people clapping,  shouting, and singing because “God has gone up ( ālâ )  with a shout, the LORD with the sound of a trumpet” (Psalm 47:5).  It may be hard for us to imagine how God could have been seen as  joining a festal procession, but the idea was common in the ancient  Near East, where in the great festival processions of Egypt, Assyria,  and Babylon, statues representing the gods were carried along the  festal highways into the gods’ respective temples. 11

[8] Another  “song of ascents,” or “pilgrim song,” is the pre-exilic royal  Psalm 132, which has long been understood to have been composed to  commemorate King David’s finding of the Ark and its transfer to  Jerusalem (see vv. 6-8; cf. 1 Samuel 6:13; 2 Samuel 6). 12 The procession that David led included “all of the house of Israel”  following King David and the Ark up to the place of the sanctuary  (compare the singing, dancing, shouting, and trumpet blasts of 2  Samuel 6:12-15 with the previously mentioned description of similar  activities during the procession of Psalm 47).

[9] The  prophet Ezekiel, as part of his vision of the future ideal temple,  gives in Ezekiel 44:1-3, a description of the king entering through  the vestibule of the same gate (the eastern gate) that Yahweh himself  had gone through. Chapter 46:1-12 describes the king leading pilgrims  through the temple gates on festal days. While these events are  described for the future temple, they should likely be understood to  represent previous traditions with which the prophet was familiar. 13

[10] In  verse 3, we hear the questions: “Who shall ascend the hill of the  Lord? And who shall stand in his holy place?” At the gates, there  were likely priests (see, e.g., 2 Kings 25:18; later, they were  Levites, see, e.g., Ezekiel 44:11; 1 Chronicles 9:17-27) that were  stationed there as gatekeepers. 14 [Page 23] There appears to be a question and answer dialogue that takes place,  plausibly between the processional party and the gatekeepers. 15

[11] In  verses 3-5, the qualifications for entry to the temple precincts are  established. 16 As Craig Broyles notes, the “qualifications are ethical, not sacral  in nature.” 17 We see in Psalm 118 that it is only “the righteous” who are  permitted to pass through the gate (Psalm 118:20). While Psalm 24  appears to have an abbreviated list of requirements, Psalm 15 gives  ten qualifications — reminiscent of the Decalogue given at Sinai —  which can be similarly viewed as moral requirements for beginning an  ascension of the holy mountain to stand in Yahweh’s presence.

[12] After  having confirmed that the pilgrims are living the covenantal  requirements, there is a call for the gates to be opened so that “the  King of Glory may come in” (Psalm 24:7–9; cf. Psalm 118:19). It  is interesting to note that Broyles interprets the use of the name  Yahweh in response to the questions of Psalm 24:8 and 10 to signify  that “the name of God [is] used as a ‘password’ through the  gates.” 18 Furthermore, he argues that the name “King of glory” is used here  as a “new name” — he assumes this because the respondents in  verses 8 and 10 appear to not know the name. 19

[13] If  we take it to represent a similar context, Psalm 118 seems to  indicate that the procession has been allowed to go through the  gates, has received a blessing from the Lord, and now makes its way  to the altar of the temple. Mowinckel saw the festal procession as  indicated in verse 27 as approaching and perhaps circling, the  altar. 20 As noted previously, Parry sees Psalm 24:6 as describing the  processional group as a circle (reading dur instead of dôr ).  He notes that this could be a reference to a religious prayer circle  in which the participants inquire of or pray to the Lord in hopes to  see his face (Psalm 24:6, “seek to see the face of the God of  Jacob,” based on the LXX: zetounton  to prosopon tou theou Iakob ). 21

[14] The  Psalms depict the purpose of the pilgrimage to the temple not simply  to “appear before the Lord”, but, as previously mentioned, Psalm  84:7 (as in rsv/nrsv,  based on the LXX reading: ophthesetai  ho theos )  declares that the expectation is to be able to see the Lord. Some  scholars [Page 24] have argued that the injunction in Exodus 34:24 (etc.) to  appear in the presence of the Lord may have originally read: “to  see the face of the Lord.” While the Masoretic Text has the Niph’al imperfect of the verb ra’ah (“to see”), meaning “you will be seen” or “you will  appear,” some argue that the original reading would have had a Qal imperfect, “you will see.” 22 Holladay  suggests that the text may have been “changed for theological  reasons.” 23

[15] …Moses  (or alternatively Moses, Aaron and the seventy elders), ascend[s] the  mountain, enter[s] the presence of God, the realm of the divine. He  is given revelation in the form of heavenly tablets, then descends  back to the mortal realm … [H]e becomes a semi-divine figure,  eating and drinking in the divine presence and returning from the  mountain with his face transformed like an immortal (Exodus 24:11;  34:29-30). 24

[16] We  may also note that the Exodus and Sinai experiences are an important  theme in the Psalter, as can be seen, for example, in Psalms 68, 81,  95, 99, 114, and others. Mowinckel and others saw the festal  procession to the temple mount as a reliving of the journey through  the wilderness to experience the theophany at Mount Sinai (compare,  for example, Exodus 15 and Psalm 68). 25

[17] The  principal paradigm of these texts is that God would appear in the  described cultic situations. Klaus Seybold sees theophany as one of  the key recurring features of the Psalms and explains that the  theophany must have been a cultic event and that the relevant psalms  reveal a “tradition of an event experienced and passed on in  worship…” He argues that the “oldest of these texts (Psalm 18;  68; 97) record the pre-exilic existence of such liturgical  traditions, as do the references [outside] the Psalter (such as  Isaiah 6; Judges 5; Deuteronomy 33, etc.).” 26

[18] Seybold  sees in Psalm 63, as in Psalm 18, evidence of an advent celebration  in which the appearance of Yahweh was dramatically represented. “I  have seen you in the sanctuary, and beheld your power and glory”  (v. 2). 27 This psalm seems to place the king in the setting of the Holy of  Holies of the temple, experiencing a Theophany of Yahweh. 28

[19] Another  key feature of many later heavenly ascent narratives is that after  the visionary has beheld the Deity on his throne, the visionary  himself is enthroned either on the throne of God or on a similar  throne beside God’s. To cite a relevant example, later Jewish  traditions understood Moses when he ascended Mount Sinai as having  seen God on his throne and then having been himself enthroned in  heaven and set to rule as God’s vice-regent on Earth. 29

[20] When  he emerged from the Holy of Holies he was like the morning star, like  the sun shining on the temple; his very presence made the court of  the temple glorious. When he had poured the libation, the trumpet  sounded and “all the people together … fell to the ground upon  their faces to worship ( proskunein )  their LORD …” (ben Sira 50:17). The most natural way to read this  is that they were worshipping the high priest, or rather, Yahweh whom  he represented. 30

[21] If  the “throne of the Lord” that Solomon was enthroned on refers to  the cherubim-throne in the Holy of Holies, then a situation very much  like that described for Simon, where he emerged from the temple with  the early morning light causing his glorious raiment to gleam  brilliantly, likely ensued. 31 Zechariah 12:8 informs us that, ideally, the monarchs of the house of  David were to be like the Angel of the Lord, representing God before  the people. This is likely what was believed to have been the king’s  status after he was set on God’s holy hill, enthroned at his right  hand, and declared to be the Son of God. Ritually, he had ascended  into heaven to stand before the throne of God and was enthroned  there. After this experience, the king would have been seen as having  been transformed into an angelic messenger, the representative of  Yahweh.

