[Page 371] Abstract :  While Christmas traditions around the world have evolved, some losing  their focus on the Christ child, there is still need for us to center  our thoughts and hearts on his message of forgiveness and redeeming  love.

There was  a time when Christmas truly did commemorate the birth of the  Savior of the world as reflected in those sacred hymns such as O,  Little Town of Bethlehem , Away in a Manger , and Silent Night . But, alas, through the passage of time, these  sacred hymns were partially replaced by Jingle Bells and even Jingle Bell Rock . Christmas is a joyful time, as  reflected in a song of halls bedecked with holly. Neighborhood  carolers invariably end their medley of songs with the ever-popular We Wish You a Merry Christmas , including the refrain “Oh,  bring us some figgy pudding … and a cup of good cheer.” What  once began as a sacred, yet joy-filled, [Page 372] commemoration of the  birth of Christ the Lord has gradually undergone a transition  from the “Bread of Life” to figgy pudding.

We lived  for several years in Europe, and I remember the overwhelming  feeling of dismay one December as large signs in the city were  changed from “Christmas Celebration” to “Winterfest.” The  city fathers felt that the word “Christmas” might offend those  citizens not of any Christian persuasion.

We had  some English-speaking friends in a communist dominated  country who asked if we might be able to send them some English  children’s books telling the story of the Nativity. We told them we  would be pleased to help, so we visited several book shops in search  of books for young children about the birth of Baby Jesus. We were  disappointed to find a plethora of books about Rudolf the  Red-Nosed Reindeer, Frosty the Snow Man, The Night before Christmas,  and Santa Claus, but there were no children’s books about  shepherds, wise men, Joseph, Mary, and Jesus.

Many  countries have perpetuated legends of a saintly soul known for  his kindness and compassionate giving. Some traditions refer to this  man as St. Nicholas, Kris Kringle, or Santa Claus. Regardless of his  origins, this legendary mortal being became a model of  generosity and selfless giving. Over the years Santa Claus became the  man to whom children would make their demands for gifts. A few years  ago in late December, I walked into a department store and  spotted a fairly large man in overalls with a white, bushy  beard. I approached him and asked enthusiastically: “What are  the chances of meeting Santa Claus on his day off?” He smiled and  said, “Being Santa isn’t all it’s cracked up to be.” Then he  showed me his left hand which was black and blue. He explained, “I  was Santa Claus in the middle school last Wednesday afternoon and,  unfortunately, we ran out of candy canes and a little rascal  seated on my lap was so disappointed not to get his candy cane he bit  my hand — hard.” Santa is no longer a symbol of  compassionate giving to others; rather, he has become the font for  receiving.

In  December of 1961 in Germany, my missionary companion and I were  invited to spend Christmas Eve in the home of a family comprised  of five young children and their parents who all lived in a cozy  little apartment. The mother and older children had been baptized.  However, the father resisted baptism because of [Page 373] his addiction to  alcohol. Somehow he was able to maintain steady employment, but  whenever we visited the family, the room was filled with fumes, and  the father invariably slurred his speech.

So, it was  with some apprehension that we accepted the invitation to spend  a sacred evening with this family. When we arrived in their  home, to our pleasant surprise and relief, it was readily apparent  that the father had not drunk any alcohol for several hours. The air  had a subtle fragrance of pine from the little four-foot tree in  the corner of the room with a vestige of smoke wafting from the  burning candles. The father uncharacteristically assumed his role as  patriarch and invited us all to join in singing Christmas hymns. None  of the songs mentioned Rudolf or Frosty or the wish that Santa would  replace missing front teeth for Christmas. Each and every hymn was  about the Light of the World.

After  a considerable length of time singing all the verses of each and  every hymn, this young father rose to his role as family patriarch,  and with dignity and reverence he opened the Bible. He could have  asked one of the elders to read these sacred passages, but he assumed  that responsibility and began to read: “And it came to pass in  those days, that there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus,  that all the world should be taxed” (Luke 2:1). He did not raise  his voice, nor was there any dramatic enunciation of the words. Here  was a humble father whose life was a tug of war with trials  and troubles, and he was re-telling (or reading) a sacred story  with the authenticity of an eye witness.

He  continued: “And she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped  him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger; because  there was no room for them in the inn” (Luke 2:7). Reading further  he spoke of “shepherds abiding in the field” and the voice of an  angel declaring: “For unto you is born this day in the city of  David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord” (Luke 2:6, 10). The  shepherds “came with haste, and found Mary, and Joseph, and the  babe lying in a manger. And when they had seen it, they made  known abroad the saying which was told them concerning this child …  But Mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart”  (Luke 2:16–17, 19).

[Page 374] I have  had the blessing and privilege of attending General Conference  sessions, temple dedications, solemn assemblies, and countless  testimony meetings, but I have seldom felt the Spirit being  manifest more strongly than in that cozy cottage with an alcoholic  father and his little family on Christmas Eve.

Of all the  hymns about the Savior, perhaps the one most beautiful — because it  is the most personal — is the “Song of Redeeming Love.” After  Alma relinquished the civic office of chief judge in order to devote  full time as a high priest over the church, he went first to the  people in Zarahemla, where he asked them a series of 42  soul-searching questions. Among these questions he asked: “[I]f ye  have experienced a change of heart, and if ye have felt to sing  the song of redeeming love, I would ask, can ye feel so now?”  (Alma 5:26). During that Christmas Eve so long ago, we truly felt the  song of redeeming love. That young father eventually entered the  waters of baptism, and he, too, was able to sing the song of  redeeming love, the song extolling the Atonement of Christ and the  miracle of forgiveness, the greatest Christmas gift of all.

---
Notes

[1] The  late President Gordon B. Hinckley observed that “There would be no  Christmas if there had not been Easter. The babe Jesus of Bethlehem  would be but another baby without the redeeming Christ of Gethsemane  and Calvary, and the triumphant fact of the Resurrection.” 1 So it is that Christmas is but the overture to the Savior’s mortal  ministry, culminating in His atoning sacrifice that enables all  mortals to overcome the bonds of death and manifests His redeeming  love to all who come unto Him with full purpose of heart.

