[Page 223] Abstract: Christ’s voluntary subjection to the horrible realities of this  world transformed him forever. His vulnerability became his capacity  to save and heal all humankind. Our own suffering develops our  capacity for love, which is the power that makes us useful to others,  and humility, which is the root of wisdom.

During  chemotherapy, I live my life in fourteen-day cycles. On Day 1,  I check myself into the infusion center. The nurse punches  a needle into my chest. It connects to a catheter that  dumps directly into a large vein in my neck. They hook me up to  my life-saving poison. For the first hours, I type briskly on my  computer. Then I start to feel the effects. Waves of nausea  sweep over me. My vision feels thick. They flush my line with saline,  filling my mouth with a metallic taste, then hook me up to  a pump worn around my waist. It’s like being pregnant with  a laptop. My family members take me home, where I lie under  blankets, watching episodes of the Great British Baking Show until it  is time for everyone to go to sleep. But it’s hard to sleep. I keep  waking up, groping for the vomit bag in the darkness. My husband  snores peacefully at my side. I am alone.

To  elude the nausea, I imagine myself in one of my favorite places  in the world, a place that now seems to belong to another  lifetime. I am walking along a trail of deep, fine, black  sand. The children and the dog bound joyfully ahead, tearing up and  down the steep dunes on either side, hiding behind clumps of grass,  leaping out with shrieks of delight. The trail opens up onto the  windswept expanse of Te Henga, a wild beach on the west coast of  Auckland. Waves from the Tasman Sea rise, crash, and line the sand  with a layer of reflected light and sea foam. With their toes,  the children sweep patterns into the shining sand. The wind rushes  off the sea, blowing the tops off the breakers. Every once in [Page 224] a while, a large wave rushes up unexpectedly, flooding the  beach with water and chasing us to higher ground.

On  Day 2 of the chemo cycle, I awake still nauseated, still  connected to the pump, the needle still in my chest. Every seven  breaths, the pump squirts out a bit more therapeutic poison. At  midday, I tentatively eat mouthfuls of soup, vomit bag at hand.  I feel some strength come back into my body. On Day 3, I awake  and enjoy lying in bed. I listen to the hustle of the household  as everyone gathers their things and rushes off to school. When the  house is quiet again, I emerge and eat some of the miso soup  with rice my husband has made and left on the stovetop. It is warm  and salty. In the afternoon, I go to the infusion center and get  “unplugged” from my pump. In the evening, I take a nice  hot shower.

On  Days 3–14, I reenter life’s hustle and bustle. I drive  kids to music lessons and athletic practices. I toss bunches of  cilantro and carrots into the shopping cart. I pore over primary  sources and send emails containing multiple exclamation points.  I watch the kids scamper up the walls at the climbing gym and  even try some routes myself. At home we fold dough into pretzels,  pound rice into mochi, and pull hot sugar into buttermints. On Day  14, I feel buoyant and witty. Life is good. Only, tomorrow is  Day 1.

I watched  my mother endure two years of cancer treatments before passing away  in December 2008. During the last months of her life she was in  terrible pain. She was a woman of obedience and faith, who  trusted in God. How can God, who is loving, good, and all-powerful,  allow such undeserved suffering? For such a long time? In such  a good [Page 225] and loving person, so needed by her family and by the  world? All over the world, there are trials far beyond cancer.  Families are torn apart. Bodies are mangled by war, collisions, gang  violence. Minds are beset by addiction, depression, crushing anxiety.  Innocent children die because of malnutrition or abuse or just the  odd combination of genes. The powerful prosper at the expense of the  weak. Yet God allows it all.

In  “A Latter-day Saint Theology of Suffering,” Francine Bennion  gently dismantles the notion that righteousness guarantees a mortal  life free from danger and an afterlife with no conflict. Bennion  points out that according to the Latter-day Saint teaching of  a premortal struggle between God and Lucifer, the purpose of  life is to exercise agency in the face of difficulty. If God were to  control and shield our lives from harm at every turn, it would be  like living under Lucifer’s plan: only one will in control, with no  space for us to experience agency and choose our own path. She  writes:

Bennion  argues that to experience suffering, to navigate a world of  agency-created obstacles and be subject to natural laws, is to live  in God’s reality. It is to live God’s life and mature in it.

On  a recent Day 2, I walked the two flights of stairs to my  third- floor office. Slowly, from step to step, I trudged. My  lungs, compressed to two-thirds their normal capacity by a buildup  of fluid, heaved without effect. After a day and a half  without food or water, my body drooped. All of a sudden  I remembered a story that passed across my desk as I was  writing a history of Latter-day Saints in Germany — the story  of a sister so faithful, so in tune with the Spirit, during  World War II, she knew exactly where the Allied bombs would fall in  her city. Yet she nearly starved in the postwar months when her  entire family had to live on two potatoes per day, and she insisted  the children eat some of her portion. [Page 226] She was at death’s door when  a Latter-day Saint American soldier arrived on their doorstep  with a box of food. She was so believing, so receptive to  revelation, yet God allowed her to weaken day by day until she lacked  the strength to stand. To a much severer degree, she also knew  weakness. Her resilience carried her on to the miracle, and past it.

Suffering’s  value is fellowship with others and unity with Christ. It was not  enough for Jesus to wield healing power, to stop up others’ wounds,  and to lift others’ sorrows. It was necessary for him to feel  wounds in his own flesh, to feel suffocating despair, to wonder when  his misery would end. In the Book of Mormon, the prophet Alma taught  Christ would go forth

> suffering  pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that  the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the  pains and the sicknesses of his people. And he will take upon him  death, that he may loose the bands of death which bind his people;  and he will take upon him their infirmities, that his bowels may be  filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according  to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities.  (Alma 7:11–12)

Christ’s  voluntary subjection to the horrible realities of this world  transformed him forever. His vulnerability became his capacity to  save and heal all humankind. Our own suffering develops our capacity  for love, which is the power that makes us useful to others, and  humility, which is the root of wisdom.

Yes ,  says a small voice inside me, but I wish it didn’t  have to be this hard. And how come it isn’t this hard for everyone?  Other people sail through life and say it is all because of God’s  blessings. They live to be old and cantankerous. Why do people who  cook from scratch and run marathons get colon cancer at age 37, when  people who eat Cheetos, drink soda pop, and watch five hours of TV  a day do just fine?

“God,”  I whisper on days when I am too weary to weep and rage,  “this is a terrible plan. You could take away this illness,  but you don’t. You could fix our problems and right the world, but  you don’t. You’re supposed to lead us in the right way, but you  let us stumble and cause harm that cannot be undone. If you are good,  and if you love us, why do you allow us to suffer or inflict  suffering on others? If you healed a leper, or a man with  palsy, or the woman who bled, why not me and those I love?”

[Page 227] Suffering  is often a solitary experience. In pain, I do not feel  beautiful, engaging, cheerful, or strong. In the midst of unbecoming  symptoms, I feel abominably weak. I feel ashamed to be so  useless, so untidy. I want to crawl into a dark corner and  curl whimpering into a ball. Why would I drag someone else  into this sickly swamp? Company brings little comfort — only the  stark contrast of my illness with others’ health, my shadow with  their sunny skies.

> Where  art thou, O God? When wilt thou deliver me?

I have  wrestled with God, seeking some epiphany that would make the problem  of suffering feel right. I found there were no answers to the  hurts and indignities of this world, for these things are not  questions. Suffering never feels right. It feels like suffering. Like  prayer, it is a form of work.

Christ  worked mightily in the final hours of his life. He struggled quietly  in the Garden of Gethsemane, heavy with the sicknesses of humankind,  lonely and pressed down. He stood raw and wounded, enduring the banal  cruelty of magistrate and mob. He bore his burden through Jerusalem’s  crowded streets. Exposed, he called for water, but tasted vinegar.  The weight of his body dragged on his nail-pierced hands and on his  lungs, arresting his breath. He witnessed his mother’s torment and  could do nothing for her. Alone, he cried out into the darkness,  unable to hear God’s voice. Then finally his task was finished.

Going  from “deathly ill, very horrible” to “very cheerful, all is  well” in the course of fourteen days is not resurrection. But it  has taught me about beginnings and ends. Having experienced  suffering, one develops power over it — not the power to stop it,  or take it away from someone you love, but to know its sorrows fade.  Having experienced suffering, [Page 228] one receives power from it — the  power to share others’ burdens and be humble, to see one’s own  burdens and be kind.

In  the middle of the Auckland Domain there is a giant pohutakawa  tree unlike any other I’ve seen. Many years ago it split, each half  crashing to the ground. It almost died. But it remained intact at the  base, just above the roots. It kept drinking water and eating  sunlight. Now its sprawling limbs are covered in green leaves and red  blossoms, a refuge for songbirds and a shady castle for  children. One day, I sat on one of the limbs that struck the  ground long ago. Thicker than my waist, worn smooth by grasping hands  and scampering feet, the limb stretched along the ground, curling and  dividing into branches, twigs, and leaves that reached upward toward  the sun. I draped myself along the limb, smelled it, felt its  warmth. As the breeze blew past my cheek and rustled the leaves,  I felt the great limb move — very slowly, like a tender  sigh from deep inside this living spirit. Once nearly destroyed, this  tree was now more wonderful than any other in the Domain because  children could play in its branches.

Christ  showed us the way. He walked through paths of temptation, want,  indignity, and pain. He humbled himself not just before the God of  the universe, but before the ugliness and cruelty of everyday life.

Christ  is here, among us. Turn your eyes from heaven and behold your fellow  beings who beat their breasts. Let your hearts be broken but not  afraid. Let the children play in the rough branches, around the empty  oil drums, amongst the refuse of the fallen world. Weep with those in  pain. Stop to tend fellow travelers by the wayside.

Like  the pohutakawa tree, do not cease from drinking water and eating  sunlight, even when you are nearly broken. For love and its sacred  power, reach out. From the ground, from the dark abyss — stretch,  stretch out your hands.

---
Notes

[1] On  Days 1 and 2, as I pass through that deep valley, I wonder  whether Christ despaired in his suffering and wished it had never  come to him. Did his moral perfection and divine knowledge insulate  him from discouragement? Was he able to float grandly above the fray,  detached from his body’s hurts and wants, observing frailty but not  subjected to it? I remember he “felt exceedingly heavy” 1 and prayed, “Father, if it be thy will, let this cup pass from  me.” 2 I remember he “shrank not to drink the bitter cup” 3 but wonder if he found it unbearably bitter. Did he ever think,  “I can’t do this,” or “I don’t know how long  I can keep this up”?

[2] I remember  he cried out in agony and desolation, “My God, my God, why hast  thou forsaken me!” 4

[3] I think  suffering on this earth is an indication of God’s trust, God’s  love. I think it is an indication that God does not want us to  be simply obedient children playing forever under his hand, but wants  us able to become more like himself. In order to do that we have to  know reality … If we are to be like God, we cannot live forever in  fear that we may meet something that will scare us or that will hurt  us. 5

[4] For  centuries, theologians have dedicated their lives to this question of  theodicy — the arbitrary cruelty of a world created for us by  an all- knowing, all-powerful, all-loving God. I cannot solve  this problem with a quote from scripture or a line from  a sermon, especially when living in the middle of what Francine  Bennion calls the “meeting of reality, the falling, the hungering,  the screaming, the crawling on the floor, the being disfigured and  scarred for life psychologically or physically.” 6 I know the teaching: Experiencing this world with its dangers  was my choice, the choice of every human. I know my own slogans:  Life is a marathon. Suffering comes from attachment. No pain, no  gain. But —

[5] On  the other side of suffering is strength. It is a peculiar sort  of confidence that derives from having had no confidence at all.  Things that once seemed difficult are now no trouble, and things that  seemed like trouble now reveal themselves as gifts. People who once  seemed vexing, inexplicable, or foreign now strike me as familiar  because they have known pain. People who once seemed broken and  tainted with ruin while I imagined myself to be whole are now my  sisters and brothers. Truly, now I know that I am nothing,  which thing I never had supposed. 7

