[Page 153] Abstract: Those who follow world events are painfully aware that peace in the  Middle East — and particularly in the Holy Land — seems eternally  elusive. From a distance we watch events unfold which we are not able  to fully comprehend because of that very distance. There are  individuals who are burdened with the devastating reality of living  with war and perpetual turmoil in the Holy Land. One of those is  Sahar Qumsiyeh, a Palestinian Arab Latter-day Saint who grew up in  the West Bank near Bethlehem. Her story of how she converted to  Mormonism and learned how to find peace in a troubled world is  recommended reading for every Latter-day Saint.

Review  of Sahar Qumsiyeh, Peace for a Palestinian: One Woman’s Story of  Faith Amidst War in the Holy Land (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book,   2018). 176 pp. $15.99.

Deseret  Book is to be congratulated for its recent publication of Peace  for a Palestinian: One Woman’s Story of Faith Amidst War in the  Holy Land . The   author of this thoughtful and provocative book is Dr. Sahar  Qumsiyeh, a Palestinian-Arab Latter-day Saint who was born in  Jerusalem and grew up in the West Bank near Bethlehem. She converted  to Mormonism while attending BYU in 1996 and has served since then as  a Relief Society president, Primary president, district Relief  Society president, and full-time missionary in England. She is now  a professor of mathematics at BYU-Idaho.

The  foreword to the book was written by Dr. Camille Fronk Olson.

The  decision to publish the book was likely not an easy one for Deseret  Book. It will take many of its readers out of their comfort zones and  expose them to a reality they probably never considered before —  the Palestinian side of the Arab-Israeli conflict.

[Page 154] The  book, however, is not about politics. It is a devotional book that  explores religious lessons learned through experience. In its fifteen  short chapters, the author describes the process by which she learned  to find peace despite the harsh realities of the world around her,  growing up in a land occupied by the military of another nation  and being deprived of the security and peace Latter-day Saints in  many countries take for granted.

The  narrative is built around events from Qumsiyeh’s life. Perhaps  surprisingly, several of those events have to do with the  difficulties she faced simply to go from her home near Bethlehem to  attend church six miles away in Jerusalem. She describes how hard it  was to travel through the various Israeli checkpoints and roadblocks  to arrive at the BYU Jerusalem Center, where the local LDS branch  meets. Often she had to devise imaginative and dangerous ways to make  the journey, including climbing over walls, climbing through holes in  walls, and sometimes simply praying that soldiers would not see her  as she attempted to pass by them without being noticed. On one  occasion, soldiers shot at her as she was attempting to make the  trip.

Latter-day  Saints in many locations, with Mormon friends and meetinghouses  nearby, may have a hard time grasping why she was willing to take so  many risks to attend church each week. But with no other Latter-day  Saints in the town where she lived, with family members hostile to  her conversion to Mormonism, and living in the West Bank with its  dangers and degradations, attending church was the only time in her  week when she could feel safe and at peace. She explains that to take  the sacrament and enjoy the comfort that comes through worship with  fellow believers, she was willing to face the uncertainty and danger.

A  key strategy employed in the abuse of others is dehumanization —  viewing one’s opponents as less than worthy of concern (they’re  “the enemy”) and thus absolving oneself of the need for empathy  toward them. It is this strategy that has allowed soldiers,  segregationists, terrorists, and extermination-camp operators to  claim they were doing good while they were harming or killing other  human beings. Qumsiyeh writes of how she and those around her  experienced constant dehumanization from the Israelis, who seemed to  her to be totally uncaring of the consequences of their actions on  those they were hurting. But the important part about her story is  that she also writes candidly of how her experiences led her, in  turn, to also dehumanize the Israelis.

A  turning point in her life came one day while she was receiving harsh  treatment at a border crossing. Suddenly and unexpectedly, she came  to see an Israeli soldier as a brother who deserved her love and  forgiveness. [Page 155] She had friends and classmates who were killed by  Israeli soldiers, and her family members had suffered brutality from  them. But to come to see this one soldier as someone deserving of her  love and God’s love changed her life and opened her heart to a new  perspective on the world. People who really believe that all are  brothers and sisters are no longer able to dehumanize anyone, and  Qumsiyeh was surprised to find herself in that situation. The title Peace for a Palestinian doesn’t refer to the political peace  we hope will come soon to the Holy Land but rather to the inner peace  Qumsiyeh found by more fully following the Prince of Peace.

This  book will likely stretch the feelings of Latter-day Saint readers who  have come to automatically embrace the idea that God endorses the  policies of the State of Israel and that the Arabs are impediments to  God’s will. Sheltered from the kinds of realities Palestinians face  daily, it is not difficult for many American Latter-day Saints to  turn a blind eye. But the existence of Arab Latter-day Saints who  worship in Arab LDS congregations in Bethlehem, Jordan, and Lebanon  should teach Mormons everywhere that all are indeed alike unto God.

In Peace for a Palestinian , Sahar Qumsiyeh candidly tells of her  own conversion to those words. A good place for others to start their  own conversion process will be to read her book.

---
Notes

[1] Many  Latter-day Saints who have lived in the Middle East have come to feel  the concerns of their fellow Saints who live under the conditions  Qumsiyeh describes. Hopefully, anyone who genuinely cares about  others can come to a new perspective, as Qumsiyeh did, by taking to  heart words like these: “Race makes no difference; color makes no  difference; nationality makes no difference. … Our Father does not  favor one people over another.  … Both the Jews and the Arabs are  children of our Father. They are both children of promise, and as a  church we do not take sides. We have love for and an interest in  each.” 1

