The  Book of Mormon must be read as an ancient, not as a modern book.  Its mission, as described by the book itself, depends in great  measure for its efficacy on its genuine antiquity. —Hugh  Nibley

Even  scholars who bracket Book of Mormon historicity, such as Grant Hardy  in his de-historicized literary analysis of the text, have  acknowledged this.

An  honest reckoning of the claims made by Joseph Smith, to say nothing  of the Book of Mormon itself, leads to an inescapable conclusion  which I shall argue for in the following pages of this article: the  historicity of the Book of Mormon is an imperative for the legitimacy  of Mormonism as a theological, moral, and metaphysical system. The  book not only must be chiefly read as a sacred history of God’s  dealings with a remnant of the house of Israel in ancient America but  must also actually be such a history for it to carry any meaningful  theological and moral legitimacy.


## The  Inspired Fiction Theory for the Book of Mormon

In  response to what they see as overwhelming evidence against the Book  of Mormon’s historical authenticity, but in a wish to maintain that  the book might still be “inspired” scripture in some sense, some  have originated a theory that the Book of Mormon may not be  historical yet somehow revelatory or inspired and therefore  scriptural. For the sake of convenience, I call this the Inspired  Fiction Theory (IFT) for the Book of Mormon.

Far  from the conniving charlatan of the anti-Mormon polemics of yore,  Joseph Smith, in Price’s revisioning, was acting out of pure  intentions. He meant well in fabricating new scripture, and, as such,  can only be lauded. What’s more, that Joseph Smith took the Bible  as his prime source for fabricating new scripture only further shows  his holy designs:

Price  feels no constraint in rhapsodizing on the Book of Mormon as inspired  pseudepigrapha and Joseph Smith as its inspired author. This, Price  explains, frees us from the discomfiture inherent in an obviously  unhistorical Book of Mormon being held up as historical by decades of  dogma in the The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and  opens up new vistas of scriptural exploration. Now the Book of Mormon  can be read the way it should have been all along: as nonliteral,  unhistorical, and fictitious. Were it not for the fact that he  essentially calls Joseph Smith a creative liar, Latter day  Saints might well be pleased to see Price so favorably comparing  their prophet to the (equally mendacious) authors of the Bible!

On  the flipside, according to Dunn, it is irrelevant for Book of Mormon  apologists to argue for the text’s complexity as a way to shore up  its credibility, since automatic writing has also produced works that  exhibit complexity and marks of antiquity. Dunn observes that “some  apologists have claimed that evidence for the Book of Mormon’s  ancient character ‘proves’ or validates its doctrinal teachings.”  But “such claims,” he continues,

As  such, Dunn urges, readers need to stop fretting over the historicity  of the Book of Mormon, or whether it has nineteenth century or  ancient characteristics. What matters is solely the “inspiration”  of the book, which, like other works written under similar  circumstances, was produced through the marvel of automatic writing.  And after all, what more could the faithful ask for than to have  their prophet go from being a two-timing huckster to a literary  bright like William Blake and Charlotte Brontë!

In  a survey of these arguments, the commonalities between these and  other renderings of the IFT become clear. First, in each recasting [Page 134] of  this theory, Joseph Smith was never in the possession of ancient  Nephite plates, or ancient Nephite Interpreters, or any other ancient  Nephite artifacts, for that matter. These were either fabricated to  bamboozle Joseph’s family and friends or were just imagined  altogether (or, in Taves’ more charitable formulation, were  fabricated and then out of an act of sincere religious conviction  metaphysically alchemized into genuine Nephite relics). Second,  nothing recorded in the Book of Mormon corresponds to historical  reality. Third, the historicity of the Book of Mormon is irrelevant  with regard to whether the book is “inspired.” Scripture does not  need to be historical to be from God, and that includes the Book of  Mormon.


## The  Incoherence of the Inspired Fictionists

The  problems with the IFT’s foundational assumptions aside, William  Hamblin has succinctly summarized what is perhaps the most fatal  logical inconsistency with this system:

The  case against the IFT can be elucidated with this simple question,  which proponents of such must answer: if the Book of Mormon isn’t  historical, then was Joseph Smith a deliberate liar when he said he  had golden plates, and was visited by an ancient Nephite prophet, or  was he delusional? Or was he perhaps a sincere liar, in that he came  to believe in his own delusion? To these interrogatories a follow-up  question may be asked: why would God choose a liar or a lunatic to  bring about the Restoration? As Hamblin puts it,

[Page 136] Kent  Jackson has made this point even more forcefully: “Relegating the  Book of Mormon to inspired parable or morally uplifting allegory  presents serious problems of logic.”

Williams  even goes so far as to argue that the parallels offered by Dunn are  not real parallels at all:


## Historicity  as a Necessity for the Theological Vitality of the Book of Mormon

Focusing  on this last purpose, Elder Jeffrey R. Holland affirmed,

Whatever  principles they may convey, they pale in comparison to what the Book  of Mormon testifies about Christ. It is all fine and good to read  what a modern writer may imagine about Jesus. I am by no means  disparaging the work of Lew Wallace or Nikos Kazantzakis. But it is  an entirely different matter to read an account that purports to give  a real history of Jesus’s actions and teachings. Consider this  example given by B. H. Roberts in 1909. In his important three-volume  work defending the Restoration, Roberts quotes the following from  John Watson:

I  can’t think of any New Testament scholar or any historian of  Christianity or any faithful Christian, for that matter, who wouldn’t  be ecstatic to find authentic extra-biblical sayings of Jesus. It  would likely revolutionize our understanding of the life and  teachings of Christ, as Elder Roberts recognized:

It  is its claimed historical authenticity that makes the Book of  Mormon’s testimony of Jesus so significant. That, to Roberts, is  what makes the Book of Mormon a “new witness” for God. For if the  Book of Mormon is historically authentic, then it contains  historically authentic sayings of Jesus outside of the gospels. And  not only that, it preserves a record of not just the historical  existence of Jesus of Nazareth but Jesus the exalted Christ.

The  ultimate purpose of the Book of Mormon — to prove unto all nations  that Jesus is the Eternal God and has performed an infinite atonement  — is frustrated if its story about him is not authentic history.  “Jesus Christ did show himself unto the people of Nephi, as the  multitude were gathered together in the land Bountiful, and did  minister unto them; and on this wise did he show himself unto them.”  So says Mormon in his editorial introduction to the narrative in 3  Nephi 11–30. But if a resurrected Jesus’s wounds were never  really felt by a real group of ancient people (3 Nephi 11:14–15),  and if he really didn’t lay his hands on twelve Nephites and give  them authority to administer ordinances (3 Nephi 18–19), or  actually declare what the fundamental principles of his gospel were  (3 Nephi 11:31– 41; 27:13–22), then the witness of the  Book of Mormon carries none of the theological power it proclaims to  have.

Those  spoken of in the Book of Mormon are portrayed as real individuals who  reaped witnessed miraculous blessings by exercising faith in Jesus  Christ. Their stories are not presented as pious fiction, but as  fact. “God has not ceased to be a God of miracles,” Moroni  declared.

> Behold,  are not the things that God hath wrought marvelous in our eyes? Yea,  and who can comprehend the marvelous works of God? … And who shall  say that Jesus Christ did not do many mighty miracles? And there were  many mighty miracles wrought by the hands of the apostles. And if  there were miracles wrought then, why has God ceased to be a God of  miracles and yet be an unchangeable Being? And behold, I say unto you  he [Page 149] changeth not; if so he would cease to be God; and he ceaseth not  to be God, and is a God of miracles. (Moroni 9:16–19)

Marvelous  indeed are these phony miracles narrated in the Book of Mormon if  they never happened.

Likewise,  the dire warning given by Nephi at the end of 2 Nephi becomes  toothless if Nephi did not actually exist, or if his testimony is  nothing more than the product of Joseph Smith’s imagination.

> And  now, my beloved brethren, … Christ will show unto you, with power  and great glory, that they are his words, at the last day; and you  and I shall stand face to face before his bar; and ye shall know that  I have been commanded of him to write these things, notwithstanding  my weakness. … And now, my beloved brethren, all those who are of  the house of Israel, and all ye ends of the earth, I speak unto you  as the voice of one crying from the dust: Farewell until that great  day shall come. And you that will not partake of the goodness of God,  and respect the words of the Jews, and also my words, and the words  which shall proceed forth out of the mouth of the Lamb of God,  behold, I bid you an everlasting farewell, for these words shall  condemn you at the last day. For what I seal on earth, shall be  brought against you at the judgment bar; for thus hath the Lord  commanded me, and I must obey. Amen. (2 Nephi 33:10‒15)

This  impassioned plea from Nephi to remember and keep the words of Christ  in the Book of Mormon means nothing if a real Nephi never said these  words. For, if a real Nephi never existed, then a real Nephi will  never meet us at the judgment bar of God, as he proclaimed would  happen; and his imaginary words will not condemn us at the judgment  of God, because they were never actually spoken.

The  same goes for Moroni’s own similar promise that he shall meet his  readers “before the judgment-seat of Christ, where all men shall  know that my garments are not spotted with your blood. And then shall  ye know that I have seen Jesus, and that he hath talked with me face  to face, and that he told me in plain humility, even as a man telleth  another in mine own language, concerning these things” (Ether  12:38–39), as well as his concluding remarks at the end of the Book  of Mormon.

> And  I exhort you to remember these things; for the time speedily cometh  that ye shall know that I lie not, for ye shall see me at the bar of  God; and the Lord God will say unto you: Did I not declare my words  unto you, which were written by this [Page 150] man, like as one crying from the  dead, yea, even as one speaking out of the dust? I declare these  things unto the fulfilling of the prophecies. And behold, they shall  proceed forth out of the mouth of the everlasting God; and his word  shall hiss forth from generation to generation. And God shall show  unto you, that that which I have written is true. (Moroni 10:27–29)

If  Moroni never existed, then these pronouncements become meaningless,  for if the Book of Mormon is fictional, then we will no sooner meet a  fictional Moroni at the judgment-seat of Christ than the fictional  orphan Oliver Twist, the fictional Captain Ahab of the Pequod ,  or the fictional adulteress Hester Prynne.

Elsewhere  Moroni writes, “Behold, I speak unto you as if ye were present, and  yet ye are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and  I know your doing” (Mormon 8:35). Moroni then proceeds to detail an  unflattering litany of sins and malfeasances he claims to have been  shown in vision several centuries before their manifestation among  the latter-day children of men: pride, greed, lust, pollution,  unfaithfulness, and other vices. Moroni, after chastising his future  readers for their transgressions, ends his woeful prognostications  with a dreadful pronouncement: “Behold, the sword of vengeance  hangeth over you” (Mormon 8:41). The entire chapter is a humbling  read, which includes an earnest plea for us, the modern readers of  the Book of Mormon, to repent and return to Christ. But what a sham  this warning is if a real Moroni was not shown a real vision of what  was to transpire in the last days. Any power, gravity or urgency  captured in this chapter — directed by a pleading prophet to a  morally decaying people — is swept away if it is fictional.

If  what the Book of Mormon reports about Jesus and these other prophets  is nothing more than fiction, then the Book of Mormon’s witness of  Christ is no more a witness for Christ than any other fictional work.  To view the Book of Mormon as nothing more than “inspired” or  “inspiring” fiction like any other book would not only destroy  the power of the Book of Mormon, but, as explained before, would also  cast Joseph Smith in a highly unflattering light: that of a liar  (conscious or otherwise) or a raving lunatic. Elder Holland  recognized the implications of such, and forcefully admonished that

Some  might dismiss this stance as overly melodramatic, the pontifications  of a dogmatic fundamentalist who lacks the prudence to read the Book  of Mormon stripped of the crass literalism that shackles Mormon  exegetes to a hermeneutic of naïveté and credulity. But the fact  that lively debate surrounding the authenticity of the Book of Mormon  has persisted for nearly two centuries should indicate that many more  like Elder Holland have recognized the serious implications that  attend the book’s fraudulence or authenticity.

If  we could indeed just read the Book of Mormon as “inspired”  fiction, then one wonders why every criticism imaginable has been  leveled against it since its publication. Why is this book so  threatening? What is so scandalous about this book that writers of  many philosophical and religious persuasions have mercilessly rained  their rage and fury down upon it? If it is just another nice,  inspiring fictional book about Jesus, then why the acrimonious  denouncements of the Book of Mormon as a vile imposition? Why is the  Book of Mormon currently opposed by an army of authorities who feel  it a moral duty to expose the Book of Mormon for what it really is? The polemical strife which persists around the Book of Mormon  forces us to ask the fundamental question: is this book what it  claims to be? Did the stories it records actually happen? Did it come  forth the way Joseph Smith said it did, or by some other fraudulent  means? And, depending on how one answers these questions, what are  the ramifications for the lives of millions of Latter-day Saints  throughout the globe?


## The  Book of Mormon’s Role in the Restoration

Terryl  Givens has looked closely at the role of the Book of Mormon in Joseph  Smith’s larger restoration project and concludes that

It  is therefore upon the Book of Mormon that Latter-day Saints build  their confidence in not only Joseph Smith as a prophet, but the  divinity of Christ and his church. President Ezra Taft Benson taught  that


## Conclusion:  “God’s actual entry into real history”

The  legitimacy of the most important theological claims of the Book of  Mormon hinges on whether the attending story that conveys the  doctrine actually happened. Its supremely important purpose, to  testify that Jesus is the Eternal God and has performed an eternal  and infinite atonement, relies entirely on whether the historical  testimony of him provided in the pages of the book is authentic. The  Book of Mormon, accordingly, must be historical and read as history  in order for it to contain the fullness of the theological power it  claims to have. If the Book of Mormon is not historical, and if it is  read only as fiction, then any pretense to its being an additional  witness for the divinity of Jesus in any worthwhile sense is  obliterated.

To  read the Book of Mormon as inspired fiction is not only to violently  wrest it out of both its ancient and modern Sitz im Leben , but  is also to effectively neuter its theology. The grounding of  Latter-day Saint faith and practice rests, in an inextricable  measure, on the historicity of the Book of Mormon and the attending  events surrounding the Restoration. What Joseph Cardinal Ratzinger  (Pope Benedict XVI) argued about the Bible certainly holds true for  the Book of Mormon:


## Postscript:  Answering Objections

When  this paper originally appeared online in 2013, it generated lively  discussion on the Interpreter Foundation blog and on other Latter-day  Saint-themed blogs. I would be remiss if I did not at least briefly  address a few of the more pressing objections which have been raised  to my paper by commentators across the Internet.

Insisting  on the absurdity of the IFT belittles those who lack faith in Book of  Mormon historicity but want to remain active in the Church.

At  no point in my paper have I questioned the sincerity of those who  profess the IFT. Nor have I ever called for discipline against those  who hold to such views while participating in the Church. I have,  rather, striven to demonstrate the logical absurdity of the IFT and  the dangerous implications I believe it has for what I believe is the  core of Latter-day Saint faith if followed to its inevitable logical  end. If individual members wish to remain active in the Church while  holding to the IFT, I have no objection to such. I am not calling for  any active Latter-day Saint who ascribes to the IFT to have his or  her membership status called into question in any capacity. My  admittedly adamant critique of an abstract ideology (the IFT) is not  the same as my calling for members of the Church who may hold such  views to resign their memberships or be ecclesiastically punished  with disciplinary action.

Grant  Hardy has affirmed that one must not believe in Book of Mormon  historicity to be saved. As such, he disagrees with Smoot on the  imperative for Book of Mormon historicity.

I  actually agree with Hardy that, speaking strictly in terms of  soteriology, affirming faith in the historicity of the Book of Mormon  is not a prerequisite for salvation. The imperative of which I speak  is not necessarily an intrinsically soteriological one, but rather a  logical one which carries implications for whether one should have  faith in Joseph Smith’s soteriology to begin with. Said  another way, I am arguing that there is a logical imperative to  believe Joseph Smith’s account of the coming forth of the Book of  Mormon if you’re going to give his subsequent claims about the  nature of God, Christ, salvation, and eschatology any credence at  all. It logically does not make sense to profess that Joseph Smith’s  soteriology is true when the claimed prophetic or revelatory  foundation underlying the truthfulness of that soteriology is  predicated on the reality of his most important truth claims. To put  it simply: I am asking why we should for one moment believe anything  Joseph Smith claimed about God and the fate of the human soul if his  foundational truth claims are fraudulent.

Beyond  this point, I disagree somewhat with Hardy when he says that  affirming a correct religious worldview is irrelevant to individual  salvation. The passages quoted above from Nephi and Moroni  (2 Nephi 33:10‒15; Moroni 10:27–29) make it clear that  at the judgment there will be an accounting for whether the  individual accepted or rejected the teachings of Book of Mormon  prophets. This is especially true with regard to the [Page 158] Book of Mormon’s  prophetic teachings concerning the nature of Jesus Christ and his  gospel. So while I agree with Hardy when he stresses that the  judgment will take into account not just ideological loyalty but also  personal moral behavior, I feel like downplaying the importance of  intellectually or mentally assenting to revealed truth which results  in adherence to the principles and ordinances of the gospel should be  avoided.

God  is known elsewhere in scripture to utilize divine deception to  impress certain points on the minds of believers (e.g., Doctrine and  Covenants 19:5–12), so He therefore may have done the same by  revealing a fictional Book of Mormon to Joseph Smith.

This  objection fails on two counts. First, the issue with D&C 19:5–12  is not one of divine deception but rather divine equivocation.  Equivocating the meaning of a word or phrase such as endless  torment or eternal damnation “that it might work upon  the hearts of the children of men” (v. 7) is not the same as  outright falsehood. In this instance, God affirms that “endless  torment” and “eternal damnation” do in fact exist, just not the  way most Bible readers have thought because of their faulty reading  of scripture which God left uncorrected for rhetorical effect. This  is emphatically not the same thing as if God were to blatantly lie to  someone by, say, conjuring illusory hallucinations of a resurrected  Nephite angel and ancient golden plates in the mind said individual.

Second,  this objection takes for granted that D&C 19:5–12, which was  communicated by Joseph Smith in the summer of 1829, is in fact an  authentic revelation from a higher power. But by the time Joseph  Smith communicated this revelation he had been claiming to friends  and family visitations of the angel Moroni for at least six years and  had been claiming to have in his possession the golden plates for  nearly two years. If Joseph was lying or deluded about his  visitations with a non-existent Moroni for six years and his custody  of non-existent or non-ancient plates for two years, then why should  we take seriously for even one moment his word that this revelation  came from God?

If  the Book of Mormon must be read historically, then all scripture must  be read historically to be consistent.

Insisting  that all scripture be uniformly read as the same thing or in  the same manner is fallacious. One would not read the opening  chapters of Genesis the same way one would read the opening chapters  of 2 Kings or the opening lines of the book of Revelation or the  opening section of the Doctrine and Covenants. So too with the Book  of Mormon. Nephi’s narrative preserved in his small plates should  not be read the same way as Zenos’s allegory preserved in Jacob 5  or Christ’s sermons in 3 Nephi. As I have demonstrated at great  length, as an overall comprehensive literary entity the Book of  Mormon principally purports to be a historical narrative, even though  subgenres (poetry, allegory, epic, and myth) are at times embedded  within this narrative to draw out theological and moral points. This  is why we may insist on reading the Book of Mormon as history while  making no such insistence for, say, the book of Proverbs or the  Creation account(s) in Genesis or other portions of scripture which  do not purport to be history but rather something else.

Insisting  on the imperative for a historical Book of Mormon is unhelpful or  unreasonable because such applies a double standard to the Book of  Mormon which one would not hold to other scripture.

As  clever as this article is (and I truly do appreciate its  tongue in cheek novelty), it is wholly fallacious. For all  his or her cleverness, the anonymous author of this piece did not  stop to consider that attempts to compare the claimed authorship and  recovery of Deuteronomy with that of the Book of Mormon are misguided  on several points. David Larsen, a personal friend and colleague  of mine, has recognized this. At the risk of being accused of  intellectual sloth, inasmuch as I agree with every point he makes in  his rebuttal, I reproduce his comment here in full:

The  biblical narrative describing the coming forth of the “book of the  law” (Deuteronomy) during the reign of king Josiah is detailed in  2 Kings 22–23. If our anonymous author would kindly point  to where this account claims from firsthand, personal experience that  a resurrected Moses hand-delivered the scroll of the text he  personally composed to the pious Josiah, who subsequently translated  the scroll by means of supernatural aid, then I might be inclined to  give the article some consideration. Until that time, the point our  mysterious satirist tries but fails to make with this piece is  unworthy of any further serious consideration.

---
Notes

[1] [Page 125] Abstract :  Some have come to insist that the Book of Mormon should be read as  inspired fiction, which is to say that readers, including Latter-day  Saints, should abandon any belief in the Book of Mormon as an  authentic ancient text and instead should see it as an inspired  frontier novel written by Joseph Smith that may act as scripture for  those who follow his teachings. This paper provides reasoning to  reject this proposition as not only logically incoherent but also  theologically impotent. 1 It raises the objection that this position fundamentally undercuts  the credibility of Joseph Smith. The Prophet’s direct claims  concerning the coming forth of the Book of Mormon as well as how the  Book of Mormon presents itself to the world do not easily permit any  leeway for a “middle ground” on this matter.

[2] The  Book of Mormon claims to be “an abridgment of the record of the  people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites … [and] an abridgment  taken from the Book of Ether” that was “written by way of  commandment, and also by the spirit of prophecy and of revelation”  (Book of Mormon Title Page). This has proven to be somewhat awkward  for religious scholars [Page 126] who are comfortable in safely doting over  neglected or long forgotten religious texts that are considered  little more than academic curiosities. When confronted with the  book’s claims to historicity, non-Latter-day Saint scholars are  often compelled either to stake out a position on such or politely  refrain by “bracketing” the question altogether, focusing on less  volatile matters (such as reception history). Indeed, the touchy  manner in which Book of Mormon historicity is often broached in  contemporary academia calls to mind the quip once made by Jacob  Neusner: “Religious experience in the third century is fascinating.  Religious experience in the twentieth century is frightening or  absurd.” 2

[3] The  Book of Mormon’s origins being wrapped up with claims of angels and  gold plates and seer stones and ancient Israelites sailing to the New  World exacerbates an already uncomfortable situation for those who  “want to salvage Joseph Smith’s prophetic role … by avoiding  what they see as the embarrassing ramifications of his naked prose or  the fragility of the book’s historical claims.” But why precisely  have historians attempting secular approaches to Latter-day Saint  history been so “hard pressed to devise nonliteral readings”  of the Book of Mormon? Whence this discomfort? The answer is obvious:  “Joseph’s prophetic writings [are] grounded in artifactual  reality, not the world of psychic meanderings. It is hard to  allegorize — and profoundly presumptuous to edit down — a sacred  record that purports to be a transcription of tangible records  hand-delivered by an angel.” 3

[4] Joseph  and his associates insisted from the beginning that the Book of  Mormon was a translation from an authentic ancient document written  in “Reformed Egyptian” on metal plates and buried by the last  ancient author about ad 421. … The strong historical assertions of  the book seem to allow [Page 127] for only three possible origins: as a  miraculously translated historical document, as a fraud (perhaps a  pious one) written by Joseph Smith, or as a delusion (perhaps  sincerely believed) that originated in Smith’s subconscious. 4

[5] Perhaps  the chief architect of the IFT is Anthony A. Hutchinson, who in the  early 1990s made, as far as I can tell, the first serious case for  such. 5 Hutchinson begins his articulation of the theory thus:

[6] Members  of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints should confess in  faith that the Book of Mormon is the word of God but also abandon  claims that it is a historical record of the ancient peoples of the  Americas. We should accept that it is a work of scripture  inspired by God in the same way that the Bible is inspired, but one  that has as its human author Joseph Smith, Jr. 6

[7] For  Hutchinson, there can be no question that the Book of Mormon is not a  genuine historical text. He dismisses the work of Hugh Nibley, John  Sorenson, and other Latter-day Saint scholars who have argued [Page 128] for the  ancient authenticity of the Book of Mormon, lamenting that he cannot  see any redeeming argument for historicity. 7 Hutchinson further voices suspicion concerning the trustworthiness of  the accounts provided by Joseph Smith and his closest associates  (such as the Three and Eight Witnesses) for the coming forth of the  Book of Mormon. 8 Given the underwhelming evidence for Book of Mormon’s antiquity and  the “visionary character” 9 of Joseph Smith’s claims, Hutchinson insists that there were no  real Nephites, no golden plates, and no angel Moroni outside of the  fruitful imagination of the impressionable Palmyra seer.

[8] But  despite his insistence on the Book of Mormon’s unhistorical nature,  Hutchinson does not feel it necessary to totally abandon the book’s  spiritual power. “I believe the Book of Mormon to be the word of  God because I am moved by its story and the story of its author,  Joseph Smith the prophet, and the story of people brought  together by its coming forth.” 10 All that is therefore needed to accept the Book of Mormon as  scripture, Hutchinson believes, is to confess faith in a compelling  story, regardless of whether that story actually ever happened.

[9] Hutchinson  is by no means alone in promulgating the IFT. When he is not busy  casting doubt on the historical existence of Jesus of Nazareth, 11 Robert M. Price asks us to acknowledge Joseph Smith as the “inspired  author” of the Book of Mormon. 12 “If Joseph Smith is to be considered not the excavator and  translator but the author of the Book of Mormon,” Price reasons,  “the situation is far removed from that of some crude hoax or  practical joke.” 13 But the non-historicity of the Book of Mormon apparently doesn’t  matter to Price, who feels it entirely proper to count the Book of  Mormon as “scriptural” and Joseph Smith as “inspired” for no  other reason than the noble intentions behind the grand scheme.

[10] Joseph  Smith, disillusioned by the strife and confusion of rival Christian  sects, each of which claimed the authority of the Bible for its  distinctive teachings, finally decided to cut the Gordian Knot of [Page 129] Bible exegesis by creating a new scripture that would undercut the  debating of the denominations and render them superfluous. 14

[11] Smith’s  apparent, fundamental source material still survives: the Bible. Like  the Gospel writers, … Joseph Smith seems to have created new holy  fictions by running the old ones through the shredder and  reassembling the shreds in wholly new combinations. His method  appears to be precisely that of the old rabbis and of the New  Testament evangelists. So, not only did Smith do the same sort of  thing biblical writers themselves did to produce new Bible text, he  even did it the same way. 15

[12] Then  there is Scott Dunn, who makes the case for the Book of Mormon as a  specimen of “automatic writing.” 16 Automatic writing is the “claimed psychic ability allowing a person  to produce written words without consciously writing. The words  purportedly arise from a subconscious, spiritual, or supernatural  force.” 17 In this scenario, we are to understand that Joseph Smith was a  psychic savant who channeled the [Page 130] text of the Book of Mormon from an  “intelligence” outside of himself. 18 Rather than scandalize Latter-day Saints, Dunn muses on the  possibility that “God use[s] automatic writing to help his prophets  produce latter day scripture.” 19 If we view the Book of Mormon as the offspring of Joseph Smith’s  (godly?) psychosis, “wholly or partially the result of [his]  psychological processes,” 20 we can safely put it next to other impactful books that were likewise  purportedly the result of automatic dictation, including A Course  in Miracles by Helen Cohn Schucman, Jane Eyre by Charlotte  Brontë, and Jerusalem by William Blake.

[13] But  what, exactly, leads Dunn to conclude that the Book of Mormon is the  product of automatic writing? Nothing less than a commanding “number  of parallels … between Joseph Smith’s production of scripture and  instances of automatic writing.” 21 These parallels include

[14] multiple  authorship, use of archaic language, accounts of bygone historical  figures, accurate descriptions of times and places apparently  unfamiliar to the writer, narratives with well-developed characters  and plot, accounts of various ministries of Jesus Christ, poetics,  occasionally impressive literary quality, doctrinal, theological, and  cosmological discussions, and even discourses by deity. 22

[15] As  if that weren’t enough to clinch the matter, Dunn draws attention  to the dubious manner in which Joseph Smith created the Book of  Mormon. Peering into a “crystal or stone,” 23 Joseph effortlessly dictated page after page of text at a  breathtakingly fast pace without referencing notes or making  corrections. This process, Dunn avows, is unmistakably characteristic  of automatic writing. “Automatic writing … provides a simple  explanation of these circumstances,” 24 he insists. As with Hutchinson and Price, Dunn believes that his  iteration of the IFT renders moot the question of the Book of  Mormon’s contested origins, inasmuch as automatic writing can  account for such things as “Smith’s scriptural productions  repeating things he may have heard or overheard in conversation, camp  meetings, or other [19th century] settings without any concerted  study of the issues,” as well as the argument made by some [Page 131] “that  Smith was too ignorant and uneducated to create a book of such  complex construction and profound teachings.” 25

[16] In  other words, with Dunn’s version of the IFT there is no need to  debate whether Joseph pilfered Ethan Smith’s View of the Hebrews (a favorite candidate as a source of supposed plagiarism) or had at  his disposal a copy of the Bible during the production of the Book of  Mormon. 26 After all, automatic writing allegedly grants a medium the ability to  unconsciously channel previously retained information through “quirk  of memory” known as cryptomnesia . 27 This innocent memory bias would grant Joseph subconscious recall of,  say, what he learned during his time scrutinizing the Bible or the  holdings of the Manchester village library without turning him into a  conscious fraud.

[17] are  clearly made in ignorance of automatic texts, many of which evidence  historical and philosophical knowledge beyond that of the writer.  Since the theologies of these other writings clash with the Book of  Mormon and with each other, it is fallacious to suggest a connection  between doctrinal claims of a book and the miraculous aspects of its  contents. 28

[18] More  recently Ann Taves, a professor of religious studies at UC Santa  Barbara, has argued for what she calls the “materialization” of  authentic Nephite relics out of a mundane act of fabrication on  Joseph Smith’s [Page 132] part. 29 Wishing to bridge the seemingly impassible divide between those who  dismiss Joseph as a conscious fraud and those who revere him as an  inspired prophet, 30 Taves attempts to “open up some new options” by “playing with  the idea of [the] discovery” of the gold plates not “as a literal  recovery” of ancient artifacts but as an act of “skillful  seeing.” 31

[19] In  Taves’ formulation, Joseph began as a sincere visionary who  materialized his subjective encounters with the divine through an act  of pious concoction. “As a highly imaginative individual, prone to  visionary experiences,” Taves writes, “Smith may well have  believed he saw the plates in his visits to the hill.” 32 This sincere religious or metaphysical conviction granted Joseph the  conscientious fortitude to create “a representation of the  plates” he saw in vision by forging his own set of plates. 33 Rather than engaging in deception, however, Taves believes Joseph  faked the plates “in the knowledge that they would become the  sacred reality that the Smith family believed them to be.” 34 Accordingly, the plates are not a dishonest forgery, but rather  comparable to “the way a crucifix represents the crucifixion, an  Eastern Orthodox icon is said to manifest the reality of the saint it  depicts, the way Eucharistic wafers are thought to be transformed  into the literal body of Christ, or the way that Mary ‘created’  Jesus in her womb.” 35 In fact, Taves even compares Joseph’s materialization of the plates  to the process of the Lord making shining stones for the Brother of  Jared in the Book of Mormon (Ether 3). 36

[20] [Page 133] “In  comparing the gold plates and the Eucharistic wafer,” Taves hastily  clarifies, “I am not making an argument for the reality of ancient  plates (or the real presence of Christ) but raising the possibility  that when materializing the plates, Smith might have been thinking  more like a good Catholic than a good Calvinist. The comparison,  in other words, allows us to consider the possibility that Smith  viewed something that he had made (metal plates) as a vehicle through  which something sacred — the ancient golden plates — could be  made (really) present.” 37 That may be well and good, but what about those who would insist that  Joseph Smith’s sincere belief that he had plates given to him by an  angel was merely a manifestation of a psychotic delusion? Taves  anticipates this objection by arguing that “strictly speaking, from  a psychiatric perspective, we can’t call Smith delusional”  because “the distinction between ordinary belief and delusion turns  on context, that is, on whether the beliefs make sense within the  context of a culture or subculture.” 38 The oft-discussed “magic world view” 39 of Joseph Smith and his contemporaries affords the Prophet’s claims  about angels and seer stones a contextual home that spares him the  shameful reproach of being labeled “delusional,” according to  Taves. 40

[21] As  such, Taves concludes, the testimony of Joseph Smith and others who  affirmed the existence of the plates “should not be taken as  testimony to the materiality of ancient golden plates but  rather as testimony to the witnesses’ ability to see reality in the  way Joseph Smith did, that is, as a supernaturally charged  reality in which angels produced, transported, and ultimately  withdrew a believed-in simulation.” 41 For Taves, then, the experience shared by Joseph Smith and his  closest family and friends with the coming forth of the Book of  Mormon was not a miraculous recovery of an ancient record or  conscious deception, but a process of turning what began as a  personal “dream-vision” 42 of Joseph Smith into a communal experience crafted through a process  of materializing a sincerely believed religious artifice.

[22] No  matter how ingenious or sympathetic these attempts to deny the Book  of Mormon’s historicity and yet maintain its inspiration may be,  they simply do not work. The logical flaws in these and other  iterations of the IFT are manifold. “For a variety of reasons”  which we shall now outline, “such efforts [to read the Book of  Mormon as inspired fiction] may be well intentioned, but they are  untenable.” 43

[23] Before  anything else, it is necessary to point out that the IFT is  problematic in that it begs the question of the Book of Mormon’s  non historicity. In other words, proponents of the IFT must  first assume that the Book of Mormon is not historical before they  can proceed any further. This conclusion, however, is far from  foregone and is in fact highly debatable. If the work of Latter-day  Saint scholars in the past 50 years has proven anything, it is that a  rigorous defense of the Book of Mormon’s historicity can be and has  been made in such a compelling manner that one must confront this  body of scholarship and adequately account for it before one can  propose any Inspired Fiction reading. 44 This is precisely what proponents of the IFT have not done.  They have not adequately responded to the work of scholars writing on  behalf of the Book of Mormon’s historicity. With few exceptions,  they have [Page 135] merely assumed or uncritically accepted the conclusion that  the Book of Mormon is not historical.

[24] Joseph  Smith claimed to have had possession of golden plates written by the  Nephites, and to have been visited by Moroni, a resurrected Nephite. If  the Book of Mormon is not an ancient document, there were no  Nephites. If  there were no Nephites, there were no golden plates written by  Nephites; and there was no Nephite named Moroni. If  there was no Moroni and no golden plates, then Joseph did not tell  the truth when he claimed to possess and translate these nonexistent  plates, and to have been visited by a resurrected man. Hence,  Joseph was either lying (he knew there were no plates or angelic  visitations, but was trying to convince others that there were), or  he was insane or deluded (he believed there were golden plates and  angelic visitations which in fact did not exist). 45

[25] If  [those who read the Book of Mormon as inspired fiction] wish to  maintain that the Book of Mormon is not an ancient document, but that  Joseph Smith was somehow still a prophet, they must present some  cogent explanation for Joseph’s wild claims of possessing  nonexistent golden plates and being visited by nonexistent angels. 46

[26] The  book itself announces its historicity repeatedly. Can it really be  true in any sense if it consistently misrepresents its origin? Joseph  Smith also was consistent in maintaining that the book describes real  events and real people. … Can these sources be relied on for  anything if they unfailingly misrepresent the nature of the  “keystone” of the Latter-day Saint faith? 47

[27] Inconveniently  for proponents of the IFT, Joseph Smith’s insistence on the  historicity of the Book of Mormon, as well as the reality of his  encounter with the angel Moroni and his translation of the plates,  was constant throughout his life. To ignore or obfuscate this fact is  to wink at a foundational piece of evidence in assessing the nature  of the Book of Mormon and Joseph Smith’s truth claims. The  well-documented firsthand statements of Joseph Smith describing the  coming forth of the Book of Mormon must be satisfactorily  explained by the proponents of the IFT. 48

[28] If  we grant that Joseph Smith was the author — even the “inspired  author” of the Book of Mormon — we must then ask why he would  perpetuate falsehoods throughout his life concerning the coming forth  and historicity of the Book of Mormon. Why would he keep up the ruse  if he knew he was the author and not the prophetic translator of the  Book of Mormon? Perhaps Joseph came to believe his own delusions, as  some have argued. 49 But is a deluded though sincere mountebank someone we really wish to  follow as a prophet? And should his ruse really be treated [Page 137] as the  word of God? After a thorough look at not only the statements of  Joseph Smith but also statements in the Doctrine and Covenants and  the Book of Mormon itself, Jackson asks some hard questions which  those who opt for the IFT routinely neglect:

[29] Can  the Book of Mormon indeed be “true,” in any sense, if it  lies repeatedly, explicitly, and deliberately regarding its own  historicity? Can Joseph Smith be viewed with any level of  credibility if he repeatedly, explicitly, and deliberately lied  concerning the historicity of the book? Can we have any degree  of confidence in what are presented as the words of God in the  Doctrine and Covenants if they repeatedly, explicitly, and  deliberately lie by asserting the historicity of the Book of Mormon?  If the Book of Mormon is not what it claims to be, what possible  cause would anyone have to accept anything of the work of  Joseph Smith and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints  given the consistent assertions that the Book of Mormon is an ancient  text that describes ancient events? 50

[30] Hutchinson  attempts to circumvent this problem by insisting that the involvement  of seer stones, angels, and visions in Joseph Smith’s narrative  preclude any possibility of the gold plates being real. 51 Taves likewise attempts to maneuver around this stumbling block for  her thesis by downplaying the physicality or real-worldliness of the  experiences of the Book of Mormon witnesses. 52 But these argument do not engage what was actually claimed by those  involved in the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. For instance, the  testimony of the Eight Witnesses is an obstacle that those who wish  to banish the Book of Mormon to the purely metaphysical realm must  overcome. Although IFT revisionists have tried to dismiss the  experience of the Eight Witnesses as nothing more than subjective or  visionary, Richard Lloyd Anderson has convincingly thwarted this  tactic. 53 The experience of the Eight Witnesses complements the more visionary  experience of the Three Witnesses and lends credibility to the claim  that a physical set of plates “which has the [Page 138] appearance of ancient  work” actually existed (Testimony of the Eight Witnesses). 54

[31] Additional  deconstruction of Hutchinson’s thesis in particular could be  furnished, but for brevity’s sake it is needful here only to  mention the work of Louis Midgley, who has provided a sustained  critique of Hutchinson’s work. 55 Midgley’s rebuttal of Hutchinson (as well as his other  counter-arguments to the IFT) is substantive, not to be passed over  lightly by those who advocate the IFT. 56

[32] Turning  to Price’s contention that Joseph Smith was the inspired author of  the Book of Mormon, the question of whether God would inspire a liar  is a non-issue for Price, who is an avowed atheist. 57 Because there is no God, Price’s “inspiration” means anything  except actual revelation. Indeed, Price seems to see the inspiration  of the Book of Mormon in the same sense that one would see  inspiration in the works of Shakespeare or Homer, i.e., nothing more  than an excellent literary quality. “We ought to realize,” Price  opines, “that for Joseph Smith to be the author of the Book of  Mormon, with Moroni and Mormon as narrators, makes moot the old  debates over whether Smith was a hoaxer or charlatan.” 58 By way of comparison, Price asks if Herman Melville and Shakespeare  should also be considered hoaxers, because they too [Page 139] wrote their  fictional narratives in first person, introducing new fictional  characters in the process. 59

[33] This  argument, however, falls flat as soon as one realizes that  Joseph Smith never claimed the Book of Mormon was fiction. He  claimed, rather, to have translated by miraculous means an ancient  record written on tangible golden plates given to him by an angel, an  angel who for good measure was once an ancient prophet and in fact  one of the principle authors of the very book! “To my knowledge,”  Hamblin quips in response to Price, “Shakespeare never said that  the resurrected Hamlet appeared to him in a dream and gave him a  prewritten play Hamlet on golden plates. Shakespeare also  never claimed to have been resurrected and ascended into heaven.  Frankly, the two examples are not even slightly analogous.” 60

[34] To  insist on such mercurial definitions of “scripture” and  “inspiration” as Price would have us do is to make these crucial  concepts almost meaningless. To paraphrase Robert Alter, “[This]  concept of [scripture] becomes so elastic that it threatens to lose  descriptive value.” 61 Within Latter-day Saint theology, what gives a text “inspiration”  and makes it “scripture” is not its literary merit but when the  text is created under the influence of the Holy Ghost (see Doctrine  and Covenants 68:4). But Price does not believe the Holy Ghost is  real. He may call any work of literary excellence “scripture” if  he likes, but for him to call the Book of Mormon “scripture”  while denying that it comes from God is to introduce a concept  totally alien to the faith of the Latter-day Saints.

[35] This  is not to deny that works outside the modern canon can be beneficial  or enlightening or perhaps even “scriptural” in a loose sense in  that they might contain ideas and concepts that, from a Latter-day  Saint perspective, are true and in harmony with what God has  revealed. Indeed, there is a richness of truth and beauty to be found  in works of art, literature, music, and film from multiple cultures  and religious traditions. When Doctrine and Covenants 88:118 directs  us to seek “words of wisdom” out of “the best books,” it  doesn’t restrict these books to only the standard works of the  Church. Latter-day Saints are therefore not by any means exclusionist  when it comes to granting the presence of divine inspiration in many  sources. 62 But this is entirely different from what Price is getting at in his  talk about the Book of Mormon’s being inspired fiction.

[36] [Page 140] Nor  does Dunn escape unscathed from criticism. Both Robert Rees and  Richard Williams provide well-argued criticisms of Dunn’s  hypothesis that the Book of Mormon is the product of automatic  writing. 63 Rees criticizes Dunn’s double standard in uncritically accepting  the accounts of other automatic scribes, while simultaneously  questioning Joseph Smith’s own account.

[37] It  is surprising that Dunn seems to take at face value the claims of  other automatic scribes about the source of their manuscripts but  doesn’t seem to accept Joseph Smith’s own account of his sources  as valid. That is, if Dunn uncritically accepts the witness of  writers of automatic texts regarding the processes by which they  received their material, why question the source Joseph Smith claimed  for the Book of Mormon? 64

[38] For  Dunn’s hypothesis to work, he must unquestioningly accept the  claims of others who produced texts by automatic writing but also  unquestioningly reject Joseph Smith’s own claims concerning the  coming forth of the Book of Mormon. Additionally problematic are the  numerous ways in which the Book of Mormon does not exhibit  characteristics of automatic writing, including not just the actual  verification of some of its historical claims, but also the nature of  the experience of Joseph Smith and the others involved in the coming  forth of the Book of Mormon. 65

[39] Joseph  Smith never invoked traditional spiritualist experiences or  explanations, unlike spiritualists of the nineteenth century. When I  was first contemplating writing this essay, I contacted a  professional colleague of mine whose expertise is in the psychology  of religion and who is well qualified in matters of spirituality and  spiritualism in the history of [Page 141] religion. His initial response to the  automaticity hypothesis was that it seemed odd since Joseph Smith,  unlike mediums and spiritualists of the nineteenth century, never  invoked spiritualism as a source or influence. For most  spiritualists, the channeling or mediumship is the crucial issue, but  Joseph never made such claims. Rather, he consistently reported that  the source of the message was the metal plates and that his own  translation occurred by the gift and power of God; he was able to  show the plates to several credible witnesses who testified of their  existence. 66

[40] Interestingly,  this is not the first time Joseph Smith’s alleged mental  instability has been used to explain the origin of the Book of  Mormon. As early as 1903, B. H. Roberts responded to I. Woodbridge  Riley’s hypothesis that Joseph Smith was an epileptic, 67 a bizarre theory that has from time to time resurfaced.

[41] As  for Taves, while she presents her version of the IFT with scrupulous  politeness, it ultimately amounts to little more than a modified  retelling of the pious-fraud theory made popular in recent years by  Dan Vogel (whom Taves approvingly quotes throughout her own work).  The problem with Taves’ particular theory is twofold. First, she is  able to make a case only for what she herself admits is a largely  “conjectural” 68 reading of the historical evidence by obscuring what Joseph and his  closest supporters believed about the coming forth of the Book of  Mormon. Contrary to what Taves claims, there is not “too much  conflicting evidence to come to a firm conclusion about what Smith  really believed about the plates.” 69 Besides Jackson’s work cited above, 70 the recent analysis provided by MacKay and Dirkmaat, to name just one  example, amply demonstrates that Joseph Smith left a  crystal-clear account of how he recovered and translated the Book of  Mormon and what such meant for him and his followers. 71

[42] [Page 142] Taves’  contention that the “materialization” of the gold plates is  comparable to the Catholic Eucharist or the Orthodox icon might be  appropriate if Joseph or any of his early followers ever claimed to  understand the existence of the Book of Mormon plates in those terms,  but in fact there is no evidence that any of them did. The only  evidence Taves cites which might come close to satisfying this  requirement is the early letter from Joseph’s skeptical uncle Jesse  Smith to the former’s brother Hyrum. 72 In this letter Jesse vehemently denies any particle of truth to his  nephew’s visionary claims, and dismisses Joseph’s enterprise as a  blasphemous outrage. At one point he speaks of Joseph “mak[ing] his  own gods” and having “eyes to see things that are not.” 73 Taves esteems this letter as “an extraordinarily rich passage that  opens up … lines of inquiry” into the direction she wishes to  take her readers (that is, to her own version of the IFT). 74 This, however, hardly seems warranted. Instead of seeing Jesse  Smith’s letter as a sort of profound window into Joseph Smith’s  religious consciousness, as Taves does, it should instead be read in  light of how most of Joseph Smith’s contemporaries reacted to his  claims: as a scornful dismissal of Joseph’s truth claims.

[43] This  brings us to the second failing of Taves’ thesis. To avoid the  logical pitfall articulated above (how does Joseph Smith not come out  as utterly delusional if he did not possess real ancient plates?)  Taves attempts to categorize Joseph as something other than  “delusional” as defined by current psychiatric standards. She  insists, as seen above, that “the distinction between ordinary  [religious] belief,” such as those she determines were held by  Joseph Smith, and “delusion turns on context, that is, on whether  the beliefs make sense within the context of a culture or  subculture .” 75 So the question is whether Joseph Smith’s claims (an angel came to  him and gave him golden plates, which he translated with a seer  stone) would have made sense within the context of Western New York  in the mid- to late-1820s. Taves believes the answer is yes and cites  Quinn as justification. 76

[44] [Page 143] But  this overlooks what I believe is an important piece of evidence: how  most of those outside of Joseph Smith’s immediate circle of family  and friends reacted to the young seer’s claims. In fact, even a  cursory glance at contemporary reactions to the Book of Mormon  reveals an unrelenting torrent of incredulity, derision, and mockery  from Joseph Smith’s neighbors. In June of 1829, the same month that  Jesse Smith scorned his nephew for his visionary claims, the Wayne  Sentinel spoke of “much speculation” swirling around “a  pretended discovery, through superhuman means, of an ancient record,  of a religious and divine nature and origin, written in ancient  characters impossible to be interpreted by any to whom the special  gift has not been imparted by inspiration.” The article went on to  report that “most people entertain an idea that the whole matter is  the result of a gross imposition, and a grosser superstition.” 77 Jonathon Hadley, a Rochester newspaperman who was consulted to  possibly print the Book of Mormon, 78 dismissed Joseph Smith’s report of the recovery and translation of  the record as “the greatest piece of superstition that has come  within our knowledge.” The “account of this discovery was soon  circulated,” Hadley continues, and was “almost invariably treated  as it should have been — with contempt .” Those who did  believe Joseph’s story, such as Martin Harris, where disdainfully  written off as “blindly credulous” dupes. 79

[45] The  pugnacious Abner Cole, editor of the Palmyra Reflector who  published pilfered extracts of the Book of Mormon before its full  release in March 1830, 80 not only mercilessly lampooned the Book of Mormon with his satirical  Book of Pukei, 81 but did not hesitate to compare [Page 144] Joseph Smith with “the most  notorious impostors that have figured either in ancient or modern  times.” 82 The Gem , a paper out of nearby Rochester, announced the  publication of the Book of Mormon with the excited headline  “IMPOSITION AND BLASPHEMY!!” Joseph Smith’s claims, the paper  indignantly proclaimed, were “in point of blasphemy and imposition,  the very summit.” 83 The very man who typeset the Book of Mormon when it went to press in  the fall of 1829, John Gilbert, himself deemed the book “a very big  humbug.” 84 Finally, there is Alexander Campbell, who published the first serious  and sustained critique of the Book of Mormon in his Millennial  Harbinger in 1831. Fittingly for this present discussion, what  word did Campbell use to summarize Joseph Smith’s claims?  “Delusions.” 85 Thundered Campbell,

[46] The  [Book of Mormon] professes to be written at intervals and by  different persons during the long period of 1020 years. And yet for  uniformity of style, there never was a book more evidently written by  one set of fingers, nor more certainly conceived in one cranium since  the first book appeared in human language, than this same book. If I  could swear to any man’s voice, face or person, assuming different  names, I could swear that this book was written by one man. And  as Joseph Smith is a very ignorant man and is called the  author on the title page, I cannot doubt for a single moment that  he is the sole author and proprietor of it. 86

[47] This  declaration, naturally, is accompanied by accusations that the Book  of Mormon is an “impious fraud” 87 and Joseph Smith an “ignorant and impudent liar.” 88 Even those sympathetic enough to Joseph’s claims to examine the  Book of Mormon with even a modicum of objectivity were initially  taken aback by the strangeness of the circumstances surrounding its  purported origin. Parley P. Pratt recalled his encounter with “an  old Baptist deacon by the name of Hamlin” who “began to tell of a book , [Page 145] a STRANGE BOOK, a VERY STRANGE BOOK! in his  possession, which had been just published.” What made this book so  strange? “This book … purported to have been originally written  on plates either of gold or brass, by a branch of the tribes of  Israel; and to have been discovered and translated by a young man  near Palmyra, in the State of New York, by the aid of visions, or the  ministry of angels.” 89 Rather than immediately accept this account, however, Pratt first  ventured to Palmyra “and inquired for the residence of Mr. Joseph  Smith.” Only after interrogating Hyrum Smith, one of those involved  in the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, and “duly weighing the  whole matter in [his] mind,” did Pratt accept that “[Joseph’s  claims] were true.” 90

[48] “Imposition.”  “Superstition.” “Humbug.” “Impostor.” “Delusion.”  “Fraud.” These are hardly the reactions one would expect if in  fact Joseph Smith’s claims were right at home in the religious and  cultural environment of his Palmyra residence. 91 It was precisely because Joseph Smith’s description of the  coming forth of the Book of Mormon was so outrageous and extravagant  to contemporary sensibilities that the entire affair was sneeringly  written off as a superstition or a hoax by so many. It was precisely  because Joseph Smith’s claims were so wild that Charles Anthon, as  he remembered years after the event, ominously warned Martin Harris  in the winter of 1828 that he was being taken in by a charlatan. 92

[49] While  it is true that Joseph did enjoy some early followers in New York  (followers whom early opponents of Joseph Smith deemed just as  delusional as their prophetic leader), the overwhelmingly skeptical  reception the Book of Mormon received in its early years of  circulation is, I believe, strong evidence against Taves’ argument.  Fluhman observes that “the Book of Mormon served [nineteenth  century] anti-Mormons as the quintessential sign of Smith’s fraud” 93 and “the glaring marker [Page 146] of his deception.” 94 This fact highlights just how abjectly absurd and, yes, delusional  Joseph’s claims seemed to those who did not accept the reality of  his angelic interviews or the existence of ancient plates. Taves  might insist that we narrow down the “culture or subculture” of  belief to include basically only the Smith family and a handful of  some close friends to accommodate her theory. But in that case why  should anyone give the Smith family any more credence than the Manson  family?

[50] So  far I have provided a critique of the IFT by directly challenging the  arguments of its professors. I wish, however, to make several  additional points. Let’s begin by asking a simple question: what is  the purpose of the Book of Mormon? Why does the book exist? To answer  this we turn to title page of the Book of Mormon, which Joseph Smith  insisted was translated from the plates, and was not a modern  composition. 95 According to the title page, the purpose of the Book of Mormon is  threefold: (1) “to show unto the remnant of the house of Israel  what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers,” (2) “that  they may know the covenants of the Lord, that they are not cast off  forever,” and (3) “to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that  Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all  nations.”

[51] From  the title page to the book’s final declaration, this testament  reveals, examines, underscores, and illuminates the divine mission of  Jesus Christ as recorded in the sacred accounts of two New World  dispensations (Jaredite and Lehite) written for the benefit of a  third dispensation, the dispensation of the fulness of times. The  Book of Mormon has many purposes, but this one transcends all  others. 96

[52] Brant  Gardner explains that the Book of Mormon “emphasizes the Atoning  Messiah’s mission. The structure of Mormon’s work emphasizes the  Messiah, and at the end we have Moroni affirming that the purpose [Page 147] of  the Nephite preaching and particularly their records, has been to  declare this supremely important message.” 97 There is thus a fundamental difference between the Book of Mormon and  other writings about Jesus, such as Ben-Hur or The Last  Temptation of Christ . In the case of the Book of Mormon, the  theological power of the text comes from its insistence that what it  describes actually happened. When a resurrected, deified Christ is  purported to have actually appeared to an assembly of ancient  descendants of Israel on the American continent, the account is not  to be treated with the same sort of perfunctory curiosity or  amusement that one would expend on The Da Vinci Code or any  other modern fictional account about Jesus. Ben-Hur and The  Last Temptation of Christ never profess to be anything more than  fictional accounts of the life and teachings of Jesus, even if they  are based, in part, on the Gospel accounts of the life of Jesus.

[53] Were  a parchment discovered in an Egyptian mound, six inches square,  containing fifty words which were certainly spoken by Jesus, this  utterance would count more than all the books which have been  published since the first century. If a veritable picture of the Lord  could be unearthed from a catacomb, and the world could see with  its own eyes what like He was … that picture would have at once a  solitary place amid the treasures of art. 98

[54] [Page 148] If  [Watson’s observation] be true, and I think no one will question  it, then how valuable indeed must be … the Book of Mormon!  Containing not fifty, but many hundreds of words spoken by Jesus …  [and] the account of Messiah’s appearance and ministry among the  people, his very words repeated … that we may better understand …  his teachings. … It was mainly for this purpose that the Nephite  records were written, preserved, and finally brought forth to the  world. 99

[55] one  has to take something of a do-or-die stand regarding the restoration  of the gospel of Jesus Christ and the divine origins of the Book of  Mormon. Reason and righteousness require it. Joseph Smith must be  accepted either as a prophet of God or else [Page 151] as a charlatan of the  first order, but no one should tolerate any ludicrous, even laughable  middle ground about the wonderful contours of a young boy’s  imagination or his remarkable facility for turning a literary phrase.  That is an unacceptable position to take — morally, literarily,  historically, or theologically. 100

[56] the  history of the Book of Mormon’s place in Mormonism and American  religion generally has always been more connected to its status as signifier than signified , or its role as a sacred sign  rather than its function as persuasive theology. The Book of Mormon  is preeminently a concrete manifestation of sacred [Page 152] utterance, and  thus an evidence of divine presence, before it is a repository of  theological claims. 101

[57] Or,  as Givens writes elsewhere, what outrages rival Christian  denominations to this day isn’t so much “its content [of the Book  of Mormon],” which Christians could hardly object to, “but rather  its manner of appearing; it has typically been judged not on the  merits of what it says , but what it enacts .” 102 For the Book of Mormon is undoubtedly the primary evidence for Joseph  Smith’s divine call. What more could a skeptical world ask for  in the way of proof of a genuine prophet and seer than an unlearned  frontiersman “[finding] through the ministration of an holy angel,  and translat[ing] into our own language by the gift and power of  God” 103 an ancient record written in “hieroglyphics, the knowledge of which  was lost to the world”? 104 Perceptive scholars like Paul C. Gutjahr recognize this clearly. “The  presence of a new sacred text testified to the special status and  powers of Joseph, who had translated it, and in turn Joseph testified  to the truth of the book through his continuing revelations from  God,” writes Gutjahr in a refreshingly honest and evenhanded  non-Mormon treatment of the Book of Mormon. “Neither the Prophet  nor the book would, without the other, wield the oracular power each  enjoyed.” 105

[58] the  Church stand[s] or fall[s] with the truthfulness of the Book of  Mormon. The enemies of the Church understand this clearly. This is  why they go to such great lengths to try and disprove the Book of  Mormon, for if it can be discredited, the Prophet Joseph Smith goes  with it. So does our claim to priesthood keys, and revelation, and  the restored Church. But in like manner, if [Page 153] the Book of Mormon is  true … then one must accept the claims of the Restoration and all  that accompanies it. 106

[59] Without  the historicity of the Book of Mormon, both its contents and the  manner of its coming forth, Joseph Smith has no genuine prophetic  qualification. When the historicity of the Book of Mormon, and by  implication the historicity of the Restoration, is sacrificed on the  altar of the IFT, Joseph Smith goes in an instant from being a  “choice seer” (2 Nephi 3:7) chosen by God to reveal a new  dispensation of the gospel to just another religious imposter; at  best well-meaning but deluded, at worst a pathological liar. “It  should be obvious,” writes Daniel C. Peterson, “that,  if the Book of Mormon were false, little or nothing that is  distinctive to our faith would stand. Joseph Smith’s prophetic  mission and all of the other revelations that came through him would  be called into question.” 107 It should be obvious, but for some inexplicable reason this  straightforward truth seems to elude proponents of the IFT.

[60] The  Inspired Fiction Theory in all its present articulations obscures the  fact that Joseph Smith’s prophetic authenticity is entirely  dependent on the historicity of the Book of Mormon and the story of  its coming forth. The moment Joseph Smith claimed not only to be in  the possession of physical golden plates given to him by a  resurrected Nephite which he was able to translate by the gift and  power of God, but also to have shown these plates to other witnesses  is the moment he allowed himself no comfortable middle ground wherein  we could divorce the historicity of these events from [Page 154] Joseph’s  prophetic credibility. Contrary to the contention of Loyd Ericson,  “if it could be shown that the Book of Mormon was not a translation  of an ancient text” the situation would not merely be one of  reconfiguring our understanding of “its coming forth and the  narratives surrounding it” but rather being logically compelled to  dismiss Joseph Smith’s claims to prophetic inspiration. 108 To abandon faith in the historicity of the Book of Mormon is to  effectively abandon — whether intentionally or not — faith in  Joseph Smith’s sanity, honesty, and divine ordination.

[61] To  advance the IFT is to admit — unwillingly or not — that whatever  else he was, Joseph Smith was a liar. No matter how much he’s  masked with trivialized adjectives like inspired or pious ,  he deceived people into believing false claims. He either lied or was  deluded in claiming the angel Moroni delivered real golden plates for  him to translate. For any Latter-day Saint who takes the truth claims  of the Church seriously, this concession should be totally  unacceptable and vigorously rejected. For what the IFT asks  Latter-day Saints to concede is nothing less than the very heart and  soul of the Church of Jesus Christ. Joseph Smith did not call the  Book of Mormon the “keystone of our religion” for no reason. 109 He knew, as do millions of Saints throughout the world, that to  abandon the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon is to see the arch of  Latter-day Saint doctrine come tumbling down in a spectacular crash.

[62] It  is of the very essence of biblical [or Mormon] faith to be about real  historical events. It does not tell stories symbolizing  suprahistorical truths, but is based on history, history that took  place here on this earth. The factum historicum [Page 155] (historical  fact) is not an interchangeable symbolic cipher for biblical [or  Mormon] faith, but the foundation on which it stands: Et incarnatus  est — when we say these words, we acknowledge God’s actual  entry into real history. 110

[63] We  conclude with the simple, sobering declaration of Joseph Smith  himself, which directly underscores the point I’ve labored to make  in the pages of this article: “Take away the Book of Mormon and the  revelations and where is our religion? We have none.” 111

[64] In  a 2016 FairMormon Conference presentation, Grant Hardy spoke on the  topic of “more effective apologetics” and offered thoughts on how  Latter-day Saints might best defend the faith and answer sincere [Page 156] questions from doubtful Church members. 112 During the question and answer portion of his presentation Hardy  responded to questions about Book of Mormon historicity and the  Inspired Fiction Theory thus:

[65] Q.  What about theories of the Book of Mormon as inspired fiction? A.  There are certainly problems with the historicity of the Book of  Mormon, but the institutional Church can’t and won’t change. The  historical claims of our Mormon scripture are more direct than those  made by the Bible, and they are more central to the book’s message  — not just with regard to gold plates and angels, but also in the  sense of bearing witness that God has a plan for human history, and  that he intervenes rather dramatically from time to time (Christ  appearing in the ancient Americas is very significant). When  people talk about “inspired fiction,” it’s worth thinking  harder about what they might mean. Perhaps that the Book of Mormon is  a product of human genius, like other literary or religious works. Or  it may be the product of general revelation, in which God or some  higher power makes himself known to humans, who then communicate that  encounter with the Divine though various scriptures such as Buddhist  sutras or the Daodejing or the Bhagavad Gita or the Qur’an. Or  there may be special revelation in which God inspired Joseph to  create the Book of Mormon in such a way that it exemplifies specific  truths of unique importance. In any case, however, we might ask, “Can  faith in the Book of Mormon as inspired fiction be a saving faith?”  My answer is, “Absolutely!” I believe that if someone at the  judgment bar were to say to God, “I couldn’t make sense of  the Book of Mormon as an ancient American codex, given the available  evidence, but I loved that book, I heard your voice in it, and I  tried to live by its precepts as best I could,” then God will  respond, “Well done, my good and faithful servant.” For  me, I expect to see the resurrected Nephi and Moroni at the judgment  bar. It matters to me that they are real individuals. At the same  time, I’m not sure that God will [Page 157] ask, “Did you believe the right  things about the Trinity, Joseph Smith, the plan of salvation,  and the nature of revelation,” let alone my opinions about  polygamy, same-sex marriage, blacks and the priesthood, women’s  ordination, politics, or Mormon history. Rather, I believe he will  say, “Were you my disciple? Did you strive to know me better? Were  you constantly trying to refine your ideas and actions in light of  your growing understanding? Were you fully engaged in the Church? How  did you treat those with different beliefs and values? And by the  way, you were wrong on a number of things you felt strongly about.” I  believe that at the judgment day, when Mormons and ex-Mormons, Jews  and Christians, Hindus and Buddhists, Muslims and Sikhs, agnostics  and atheists are gathered together, we’re all going to be surprised  in one way or another. In fact, I’m sure of it. If I’m not  surprised, that would be a huge surprise. 113

[66] The  main problem with this counter-argument is that it fails to take into  consideration the importance of scriptural genre. Said briefly,  literary scholars, including biblical literary scholars, emphasize  that not all scriptural writings are the same category or genre of  writing. Some purport to be historical narrative, some myth, others  poetry, and others prophecy. The goal of the literary critic, and by  extension the biblical critic at large, is to identify and classify  which genre(s) a given scriptural text [Page 159] falls under. 114 Such is of utmost importance in determining how to exegete and read  the text. As such, one would not read a biblical poem or myth the  same way one would read historical annals. Different interpretive  tools or methods must be enlisted to properly read these different  genres.

[67] An  online satirical article titled “The Imperative for a Historical  Book of Deuteronomy” aims to refute my thesis by using a sort of argumentum ad absurdum . 115 The anonymous author of this piece means to demonstrate “that if we  were to apply the same standards that are applied in his article for  the Book of Mormon toward other scripture, like Deuteronomy for  example, the arguments will not hold and other scriptures that are  found to be non-historical will be dropped by those accepting the  methods given in Smoot’s article.” The author of the article  insists that “Historical criticism over the last few hundred years  has shown beyond a shadow of a doubt that Moses did not write  Deuteronomy, but was in fact written between 640 bce and 550 bce,”  and so asks if [Page 160] in fact “[the Book of Deuteronomy must] possess  historicity … in order to convey spiritual truth.” 116

[68] There  is very little that can be appropriately compared between Joseph’s  claim that the Book of Mormon is an ancient record that he, himself,  translated and the ancient tradition that Deuteronomy was written by  Moses. We have Joseph Smith’s own statements on the matter, as well  as those of his family and friends. We have no such statements from  Moses or from the so-called Deuteronomists. We have no way of knowing  who originally authored [Deuteronomy]. We have no witnesses that can  claim to have seen Moses as he was writing the book or dictating it,  nor any who have seen the original manuscript. So it does no good to  call Moses a liar, nor the Deuteronomists or the Jews who later  received the text. We can assume that someone, at some time, made  claims that were not entirely truthful regarding the authorship of  the text or parts of the text, but we could not blame later readers  for being ignorant of the actual process of how things went down. But  with the Book of Mormon, the story is completely different. Unlike  with Deuteronomy, we do have a certain degree of access to the man  that brought us this text. As far as I understand the matter, Joseph  Smith did believe and teach that the Book of Mormon was of ancient  origin. One perhaps could argue that Joseph was misled and that  Moroni gave him a golden book that was not really of ancient origin  but was an amalgamation of modern sources inscribed on gold plates  (or insert your favorite theory), but you would have to then either  argue that Moroni, a messenger from God, was being deceptive or that  Joseph Smith himself made the whole thing up or was lying about many  parts of the story. To me, [Page 161] there is a difference between ancient  pseudepigraphal texts and what they may be able to offer as far as  spiritual and life lessons, and a modern prophet claiming to have had  visions and being given a text through the gift and power of God. As  Latter-day Saints, there is no real imperative to take all of the  Bible and its claims as literal, historical or “true.” The claims  of Joseph Smith regarding the Book of Mormon, however, are a  completely different matter to us, theologically, and cannot be  lumped together with books of the Bible. Perhaps for someone trained  in biblical studies the difference might seem a technical one, but  for believing Latter-day Saints, the difference is like night and  day. I  would also point out that we do not necessarily need to see malicious  intent in the ascription of Deuteronomy to Moses. There could be  various reasons that individuals would want to attribute the book to  Moses, but if you look at the case of some of the Psalms that are  assigned to David, in the end I think that some of these authorial  attributions are based simply on later editors’ beliefs,  assumptions, and ignorance regarding the actual author of an older  text. I’m not saying that this is the case with Deuteronomy, but we  do see later redactors adding names into the text where they did not  previously exist. In  the Church, we are encouraged to pray to God to gain a witness of the  truthfulness of the Book of Mormon and one of the book’s ancient  authors promises that we will receive a response. There is no such  promise made for the Book of Deuteronomy, neither within its pages or  from modern prophets. I don’t imagine that Jewish proselytes are  encouraged to pray about the Book of Deuteronomy in this way. I do  not mean, with this statement, to diminish anyone’s belief in  Deuteronomy or in any other part of the Bible. This is a statement  regarding the spiritual witness promised specifically in the Book of  Mormon. In my mind, I equate reading the words of claimed ancient  prophets and then praying to know if those words are true with a  historical Book of Mormon. I do not feel — and this is my opinion  and understanding — that God would give a witness of the truth of a  book that merely claimed to be historical but was not. If the entire  premise of the book was [Page 162] a fabrication, I do not imagine that God  would be in the business of confirming to people that the book was  true. 117

