[Page 143] Abstract: The Neal A. Maxwell Institute for Religious Scholarship has recently  published a new study edition of the Book of Mormon.  Edited by Grant Hardy, the Maxwell  Institute Study Edition (MISE) incorporates important  advances in Book of Mormon scholarship from the past few  decades while grounding the reader’s experience in the text of the  Book of Mormon. The reformatted text presented in the MISE  improves the readability of the Book of Mormon, while  footnotes, charts, bibliographies, and short explanatory essays  highlight the strides made in recent years related to Book of Mormon  scholarship. The MISE is a phenomenal edition of the  Book of Mormon that is representative of the sort of close  attention and care Latter-day Saints should be giving the text.

Review  of Grant Hardy, ed. The Book of Mormon: Another  Testament of Jesus Christ, Maxwell Institute Study Edition (Provo,  UT: Neal A. Maxwell Institute for Religious Scholarship,  Religious Studies Center at Brigham Young University / Salt Lake  City: Deseret Book, 2018). 648 pp. $35.00 (paperback).

The MISE “reproduces the official 1981 (2013) text exactly,  aside from the modifications in punctuation needed for the addition  of quotation marks and poetic stanzas” (xvi). That Hardy was given  a license by the Church to use its official text of the  Book of Mormon, besides the fact that the MISE is  published by a Church-sponsored academic institution, should  quickly assuage any doubts readers may have about whether Church  leaders feel it is appropriate to undertake a critical study of  the Book of Mormon. In fact, besides offering  bibliographies of scholarly resources on the Book of Mormon  (xvii–xviii, 624), the MISE also directs its readers’  attention to official “[Latter-day Saint] resources on the history,  transmission, and translation of the Book of Mormon” in  the form of the Joseph Smith Papers website and the Gospel  Topics essays (xviii). Latter-day Saint readers may therefore rest  assured, knowing that the MISE represents a synthesis of  some of the best institutional and independent research on the  Book of Mormon available.

Another  key component to the MISE is the incorporation of  Royal Skousen’s fundamentally important Book of Mormon  Critical Text Project. Skousen, “a professor of linguistics and  English language at Brigham Young University, is the central  figure in the academic analysis of the Book of Mormon text,  including its origins, transmission, variants, and grammar” (xvi).  Any reliable study edition of the Book of Mormon must  utilize Skousen’s work, which Hardy of course recognizes:

> The  footnotes [in the MISE ] highlight instances in which earlier  readings of the original and printer’s manuscripts may be more  accurate, clearer, or more felicitous. All of the textual notes in  this edition are derived from Skousen’s work, as are many of the  suggestions for alternative punctuation and word order. The notes  here, however, are simplified, dispensing with Skousen’s  indications of variants within a source, original and corrected  readings in the manuscripts, spelling anomalies, and types of  manuscript changes. (xvi)

This  acknowledgement serves nicely in giving general readers some exposure  to Skousen’s voluminous work without overwhelming them with the  finer technical points of his scholarship. The MISE thus  balances well the need to make the Book of Mormon readable  while also providing useful critical notes.

The  maps and charts provided as appendices in the MISE are helpful  study aids that should help readers better visualize the  Book of Mormon, keep straight its underlying sources and  transmission process, and [Page 147] remain grounded in both its internal  chronology and the chronology of its translation and publication in  the nineteenth century (599–610). The reproduction of primary  sources from Joseph Smith and others involved in the coming  forth of the Book of Mormon (including Emma Smith,  Martin Harris, Lucy Mack Smith, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer,  Mary Musselman Whitmer, and Elizabeth Ann Whitmer Cowdery) is  likewise helpful and may give readers a glimpse into the rich  documentary record connected to the same (611–19).

Perhaps  the most noticeable difference between the MISE and Hardy’s  2003 Reader’s Edition is the “general notes” that appear  toward the end of the book (620–624). Topics discussed include  “anachronisms,” “chronology,” “coherence,”  “demographics,” “geography,” “language,” “translation,”  and “witnesses.” In each case Hardy summarizes the issue and  provides a plausible answer provided by Latter-day Saint  apologists. For example, after listing the most commonly mentioned  anachronisms in the Book of Mormon (“horses, elephants,  cattle, sheep, goats, swine, barley, wheat, steel, silk, swords, and  chariots”), Hardy writes,

> Several  of these [anachronistic] items are mentioned only in passing, and it  may be that the attention of the translator was focused on other,  more significant matters. The King James Bible similarly includes  anachronistic references to silk, steel, brass, and candles, and the  Book of Mormon follows that translation in many respects.  Or familiar terms may have been used to represent things unknown to  the early Nephite settlers or to readers in Joseph Smith’s  day, as happened when the Spaniards first encountered New World  animals, plants, and artifacts. For instance, many of the “swords”  in the Book of Mormon could have been macuahuitl —  wooden clubs embedded with obsidian blades (such weapons, unlike  metal swords, could be stained with blood, as at Alma 24:12-15).  Some of the anachronistic items may have had very limited production,  though it is possible future discoveries will validate at least  a few. References to cement at Helaman 11 were long thought to  be anachronistic but have since been amply documented in Mesoamerica  of the first century BC, and a New World species of barley was  confirmed in the 1980s (though not yet in Mesoamerica). Perhaps the  most troublesome of the commonly mentioned anachronisms is horses,  which Joseph Smith certainly had experience with, yet there may  be more to the story. The Nephite scripture mentions [Page 148] horses in ten  verses (aside from biblical quotations), but no one in the  Book of Mormon is ever said to have ridden a horse.  This is odd from a nineteenth-century American perspective. In  any case, lists of apparent anachronisms should be considered  alongside lists of correspondences with the ancient Americas such as  roads, large cities, seasonal warfare, earthwork and timber  fortifications, and sophisticated writing systems as well as cultural  connections to the ancient Near East recognized only after the  publication of the Book of Mormon, including prophetic  commission and covenant patterns (1 Nephi 1, Mos 2–6),  literary devices (e.g., 2 Nephi 4, Alma 6), a few  Hebrew and Egyptian names (e.g., Nephi, Sariah, Mosiah, Alma,  Jershon, Paanchi), and details regarding ancient olive cultivation  (Jacob). (620)

The  design quality and look of the MISE is nothing short of  superb. The type is crisp, the layout clean, and the notes and  critical apparatus nonintrusive. This minimalism ensures that the  reader is not distracted from what should be the main focus: the  text. The original woodcuts by noted Latter-day Saint artist Brian  Kershisnik that illustrate the MISE amplify its aesthetic  appeal. In short, the MISE looks good; an obvious care for  aesthetic detail has gone into its production.

Lest  I am misunderstood by my earlier comments, let me be clear that  I by no means suggest that those who do not pick up a copy  of [Page 149] the MISE will suffer divine punishment. Rather, I am  saying that the sort of serious, close, careful, and thoughtful  analysis and presentation Hardy gives the Book of Mormon  with his new study edition is precisely the sort of engagement  with the book that Latter-day Saints are obliged to undertake; both  for their own sake as well as for ensuring that the Book of Mormon  is received positively by non-Latter-day Saints. We Latter-day Saints  do ourselves no favors in presenting the Book of Mormon to  the world in a sloppy, amateurish, or uncritical manner that is  likely to turn the book into a stumbling block rather than  a foundation for admiration and testimony.

So,  while one does not necessarily have to read the MISE to gain  a testimony of the Book of Mormon (or even just  a basic appreciation for it), reading it certainly wouldn’t  hurt. In fact, I cannot imagine how anyone (except perhaps the  most doggedly cynical) could engage the MISE without having  their opinion of the Book of Mormon elevated. For members  of the Church who already have a testimony, I likewise  cannot imagine how any who took the time to become familiar with the MISE would not have their testimony strengthened. I can  therefore unreservedly recommend the MISE to anyone wishing to  gain more from their study of the Book of Mormon.

---
Notes

[1] Whether  reading it as an act of piety, out of a desire to debunk its  pretentions to divine revelation, or as an exercise in academic  curiosity, one thing cannot be denied: the thoughtless handwaving and  blithe dismissal past critics had for the Book of Mormon  can no longer be seriously entertained. We are long past the days  when the Book of Mormon can be feasibly deemed “a  bungling and stupid production … [with] nothing to commend it to  a thinking mind,” 1 or [Page 144] “a yeasty fermentation, formless, aimless, and inconceivably  absurd.” 2 Rather, an informed, intelligent, and fair-minded evaluation of the  book reveals “a remarkable text … worthy of serious study,” 3 a text that “should rank among the great achievements of  American literature,” 4 indeed, “a fascinating tale well worth reading for a number  of reasons” 5 that tells a “dramatic story in a fine biblical style.” 6

[2] As  such, members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints  should avail themselves of resources that will enhance their study of  the Book of Mormon in a manner befitting the book’s  importance. Latter-day Saints are obliged by prophetic command to  seek “out of the best books words of wisdom” (Doctrine and  Covenants 88:118). If they do not, if they treat the Book of Mormon  lightly or “trifle with sacred things” intellectually as well as  spiritually, they are liable to bring themselves and “the whole  Church under condemnation” for having squandered “this great and  marvelous gift the Lord has given to us.” 7

[3] The  latest publication that seeks to engage the Book of Mormon  is Grant Hardy’s new Maxwell Institute Study Edition . 8 The MISE , to borrow a useful acronym from Blair Hodges, 9 aims to help its intended Latter-day Saint readers “learn to read  this sacred text as carefully as possible, with detailed attention to  language, structure, and historical context,” the desired outcome  for readers that “its message of salvation [Page 145] through Jesus Christ  will become more compelling and its lessons for life more clear”  (xvii). Hardy is certainly well-prepared to guide readers through the  Book of Mormon. “In 2003, Hardy published his Reader’s  Edition of the Book of Mormon with the University of  Illinois Press to help scholars and students of other faiths engage  more closely with” the book. 10 This edition has accomplished its purposes well, having become  a valuable resource for Book of Mormon scholarship. 11 Hardy has likewise produced an important monograph that analyzes the  Book of Mormon from the perspective of literary theory and  criticism. 12 Himself a committed member of the Church who recognizes the need  for unflinching intellectual honesty while also respecting faith, 13 it would be no exaggeration to say Hardy is one of the best-prepared  individuals to offer a study edition of the Book of Mormon  for Latter-day Saints.

[4] In  terms of structure, the MISE foregoes the traditional  versified double columns Latter-day Saints are familiar with and opts  for a reformatted layout that includes “original chapter  divisions (since these were apparently on the gold plates and thus  were intended by the ancient authors), modern paragraphing,  superscripted verse numbers, [Page 146] indentation of embedded documents,  a hypothetical map based on internal references, and  multi-chapter and section headings that highlight the narrative  context and structure” (xvi–xvii). Accompanying “footnotes  point out textual variants, direct quotations, references to specific  events, chronological markers, alternative punctuation, and a few  explanations of language, literary forms, and transmission” (xvii).  While “these explanations represent only a sampling of the  kinds of features that could be observed from close readings of the  text,” they nevertheless highlight “the narrative complexity and  coherence of the Book of Mormon,” which in turn “offer[s]  some of the strongest evidences of its historicity and miraculous  translation” (xvii). 14 For this reason alone, Latter-day Saints should be very interested in  picking up a copy of the MISE .

[5] This  essentially boils down the apologetic answer given by believing  Latter-day Saint scholars on the issue of Book of Mormon  anachronisms since at least the early work of Hugh Nibley and John L.  Sorenson. Hardy’s purpose with the MISE , however, is not to  get bogged down in polemics, so he keeps his discussion of apologetic  issues to a minimum (enough to raise the points being debated  and spark readers’ interest by giving a concise summary) and  instead directs interested readers’ attention to a bibliography  and online sites that offer “valuable resources for Book of Mormon  scholarship” (624). 15 That Hardy included this material in the MISE seems to clearly  indicate that his intended audience is not the same as that for his Reader’s Edition . Since it is at times both overtly pastoral  and overtly apologetic, the MISE is geared toward a mainline  Latter-day Saint readership, as opposed to the inter-faith and  academic readership intended with the Reader’s Edition .

