[Page vii] Abstract: In this article I argue that faith is not only rationally justifiable  but also inescapable simply because our decisions regarding ultimate  questions must necessarily be made under conditions of objective  uncertainty. I review remarks by several prominent thinkers on  the subject — both avowed atheists and several writers who have  addressed the challenge implicit in issues related to faith and  reason. I end my discussion by citing William James, who  articulated clearly the choices we must make in addressing these  “ultimate questions.”

First,  my task here isn’t to prove faith, as such, true but to  argue that faith is or can be, “compatible with reason.”

Second,  my obligation isn’t to demonstrate that any particular tenet  of any particular faith is true. That’s not my job.

Now,  this is somewhat unsatisfying. After all, few if any people have  faith generically , without a specific object of faith.  By analogy, nobody speaks “language.” People speak English, say,  or German, or Arabic, or Chinese. Thus too, religious believers  assert specific propositions — for [Page viii] example, that Moses received the  law on Sinai, that Jesus rose from the dead, that Muhammad  encountered Gabriel on Mt. Hira’, or that Joseph Smith  translated the Book of Mormon “by the gift and power of God.”

Thus,  my task here today is not only modest but also artificially abstract.  Still, we proceed.

As  a very blunt statement of unfaith, I choose a passage from the 1903  essay, “A Free Man’s Worship,” by the great philosopher and  logician Bertrand Russell, the most vocal and famous atheist of the  twentieth century:

In  contrast to that, I offer a statement from the great Harvard  psychologist and philosopher William James:

That  second affirmation — “that we are better off even now if we  believe” — is, I think, demonstrably true. Scores of studies show  that religious faith or religious involvement correlates, on the  whole, with superior physical, mental, and emotional health. That  isn’t my topic for today, however, even though such considerations  might be enough, in themselves, to demonstrate that faith is  reasonable.

I  will argue that faith is rationally justifiable and also, as a  subordinate and perhaps dispensable point, that faith is inescapable  — for the simple and sufficient reason that decisions regarding  ultimate questions must be made, and must necessarily be made under  conditions of objective uncertainty.

By  “publicly accessible, objective proof,” I mean not only the kind  of proof we find in mathematics and, par excellence, in geometry —  where, if the proof is valid, anybody who understands it must logically accept its conclusion — but also the rather looser kinds  of proof we sometimes see [Page x] in laboratories and elsewhere. And I  specifically mean to exclude personal spiritual experiences, which  may convince those who have them to the point of certainty but which,  by their very nature, are subjective — meaning not “false” but  uniquely accessible to their “subject,” to the person who  experiences them — and nontransferable. They may be more or less  described, but they cannot be fully conveyed to another, any more  than another who hears me describe my headache or my Alpine hike in  Switzerland’s Berner Oberland experiences my pain or thereby sees  the Lauterbrunnen Valley in the way I saw it. Reading about headaches  or the Swiss Alps is simply not the same thing as having a headache  or traveling to Switzerland.

Responding  directly to W. K. Clifford, James observes that

We’ve  already discussed “living” and “dead” hypotheses. The  distinction between “forced” and “avoidable” hypotheses  should be fairly obvious: Whether life arose in a warm tidal pool or  near a hot deep-ocean vent, for example, has no practical impact on  my life. Nor does the question of whether Napoleon ate eggs for  breakfast on the morning of the Battle of Waterloo. In such cases —  science and the study of history offer many of them — I can avoid  deciding.

But  the ultimate questions with which religion and irreligion deal are  not of that nature. Back to William James:

At  this point, his argument is very similar to Pascal’s famous  “wager”:

I’ve  already stipulated above that there are large issues — the ultimate  questions — for which publicly accessible, objective proof is  unavailable. So I will proceed on the assumption that, on these  fundamental questions, the questions with which religion (and its  negation) concern themselves, the answers are, so far as publicly  demonstrable arguments go, neither 100% certain nor 100% impossible  but somewhere in between and, let us say, in the rough vicinity of  50/50. Perhaps — judgments will vary — they’re 30/70 or even  5/95.

But  “live options” remain, and, on these issues, a decision is  inescapable. Theists decide. Atheists decide. Not to decide is also,  itself, effectively and unavoidably to decide. To behave agnostically  is, practically speaking, to behave atheistically. The choice is  forced upon us.

How,  though, are we to decide when the objective facts are inadequate to  compel our judgment? Decision-making under uncertainty should be very  familiar to the risk-takers and investors who flock to this  conference. In the end, we have little alternative but to go with  what feels right to us.

“Our  passional nature,” says William James,

Here’s  an expressly Jamesian analogy from the contemporary Claremont  philosopher Stephen Davis:

Still,  wouldn’t it be preferable to follow rigorous logic and irrefutable  data here, rather than to take a leap of faith? Yes, it would. But  we’ve already stipulated that rigorous logic and irrefutable data  are not, in fact, available to fully ground a choice.

I  close with the final paragraph from William James’s “The Will to  Believe,” in which he himself is citing Fitz James Stephen:

---
Notes

[1] That  title, our severely limited time, and the diverse character of this  FreedomFest 1 audience suggest at least two things:

[2] That  Man is the product of causes which had no prevision of the end they  were achieving; that his origin, his growth, his hopes and fears, his  loves and his beliefs, are but the outcome of accidental collocations  of atoms; that no fire, no heroism, no intensity of thought and  feeling, can preserve an individual life beyond the grave; that all  the labors of the ages, all the devotion, all the inspiration, all  the noonday brightness of human genius, are destined to extinction in  the vast death of the solar system, and that the whole temple of  man’s achievement must inevitably be buried beneath the debris of a  universe in ruins — all these things, if not quite beyond dispute,  are yet so nearly certain that no philosophy which rejects them can  hope to stand. Only within the scaffolding of these truths, only on  the firm foundation of unyielding despair, can the soul’s  habitation henceforth be safely built. 2

[3] Summarizing  the views he once held as an atheist, Leo Tolstoy sounds like Lord  Russell: “You are a temporary, incidental accumulation of  particles.” 3 “The meaninglessness of life” is “the only indisputable piece  of knowledge available to man.” 4 The bottom line, as one American atheist philosopher put it, is that  the things that matter most will ultimately be at the mercy of the  things that matter least. 5

[4] [Page ix] Science  says things are; morality says some things are better than other  things; and religion says essentially two things. First, she says  that the best things are the more eternal things, the overlapping  things, the things in the universe that throw the last stone, so to  speak, and say the final word. … The second affirmation of religion  is that we are better off even now if we believe her first  affirmation to be true. 6

[5] For  my remarks today, I will draw heavily upon William James. In his  classic 1896 lecture “The Will to Believe,” James responded to  the English mathematician and philosopher W. K. Clifford, who had  asserted that “it is wrong always, everywhere, and for every one,  to believe anything upon insufficient evidence.” 7 James was, he said, offering an “essay in  justification of faith,  a defence of our right to adopt a believing attitude in religious  matters, in spite of the fact that our merely logical intellect may  not have been coerced.” 8

[6] Let  me stipulate that there are large issues — the ultimate questions —  for which publicly accessible, objective proof is unavailable. 9

[7] “Let  us,” proposes William James, “give the name of hypothesis to  anything that may be proposed to our belief; and just as the  electricians speak of live and dead wires, let us speak of any  hypothesis as either live or dead. A live hypothesis is one which  appeals as a real possibility to him to whom it is proposed.” 10

[8] Of  course, people will differ on what is possible or not, what is  plausible or implausible. As James puts it, “deadness and liveness  in an hypothesis are not intrinsic properties, but relations to the  individual thinker.” 11

[9] When  the Cliffords tell us how sinful it is to be Christians on such  “insufficient evidence,” insufficiency is really the last thing  they have in mind. For them the evidence is absolutely sufficient,  only it makes the other way. They believe so completely in an  anti-christian order of the universe that there is no living option:  Christianity is a dead hypothesis from the start. 12

[10] “Next,”  he says, “let us call the decision between two hypotheses an  option. Options may be of several kinds. They may be — 1, living or dead ; 2, forced or avoidable ; 3, momentous or trivial. “ 13

[11] [Page xi] “Wherever  there is no forced option,” says James, “the dispassionately  judicial intellect with no pet hypothesis, saving us, as it does,  from dupery at any rate, ought to be our ideal.” 14

[12] Wherever  the option between losing truth and gaining it is not momentous, we  can throw the chance of gaining truth away, and at any rate  save ourselves from any chance of believing falsehood , by not  making up our minds at all till objective evidence has come. In  scientific questions, this is almost always the case; and even in  human affairs in general, the need of acting is seldom so urgent that  a false belief to act on is better than no belief at all. Law courts,  indeed, have to decide on the best evidence attainable for the  moment, because a judge’s duty is to make law as well as to  ascertain it, and (as a learned judge once said to me) few cases are  worth spending much time over: the great thing is to have them  decided on any acceptable principle, and got out of the way.  But in our dealings with objective nature we obviously are recorders,  not makers, of the truth; and decisions for the mere sake of deciding  promptly and getting on to the next business would be wholly out of  place. Throughout the breadth of physical nature facts are what they  are quite independently of us, and seldom is there any such hurry  about them that the risks of being duped by believing a premature  theory need be faced. The questions here are always trivial options,  the hypotheses are hardly living (at any rate not living for us  spectators), the choice between believing truth or falsehood is  seldom forced. The attitude of sceptical balance is therefore the  absolutely wise one if we would escape mistakes. What difference,  indeed, does it make to most of us whether we have or have not a  theory of the Röntgen rays, whether we believe or not in mind-stuff,  or have a conviction about the causality of conscious states? It  makes no difference. Such options are not forced on us. On every  account it is better not to make them, but still keep weighing  reasons pro et contra with an indifferent hand. 15

[13] We  see … that religion offers itself as a momentous option. We  are supposed to gain, even now, by our belief, and to lose [Page xii] by our  non-belief, a certain vital good. Secondly, religion is a forced option, so far as that good goes. We cannot escape the issue by  remaining sceptical and waiting for more light, because, although we  do avoid error in that way if religion be untrue , we lose the  good, if it be true , just as certainly as if we positively  chose to disbelieve. 16

[14] A  game is going on between you and the nature of things which at the  day of judgment will bring out either heads or tails. Weigh what your  gains and your losses would be if you should stake all you have on  heads, or God’s existence: if you win in such case, you gain  eternal beatitude; if you lose, you lose nothing at all. If there  were an infinity of chances, and only one for God in this wager,  still you ought to stake your all on God; for though you surely risk  a finite loss by this procedure, any finite loss is reasonable, even  a certain one is reasonable, if there is but the possibility of  infinite gain. 17

[15] [Page xiii] not  only lawfully may, but must, decide an option between propositions,  whenever it is a genuine option that cannot by its nature be decided  on intellectual grounds; for to say, under such circumstances, “Do  not decide, but leave the question open,” is itself a passional  decision, — just like deciding yes or no, — and is attended with  the same risk of losing the truth. 18

[16] Imagine  the following situation: while entering a steep downgrade, a truck  driver suddenly discovers that her brakes have failed. The truck is  starting to pick up speed, and the driver sees that soon she will be  in danger. The driver is faced with a choice: she can either  immediately jump from the truck, risking bruises and broken bones  while escaping the greater danger of a possible crash farther down  the hill. Or she can remain in the truck, risking a crash but hoping  eventually to guide it down the hill to a level spot. But the driver  does not know how long the downgrade is; she cannot see where it ends  and this stretch of road is new to her. It  surely seems that this is a genuine option for the driver. It is  live, because both possibilities appeal to her as distinct  possibilities. It is forced, because there is no third option beside  jumping now or staying with the truck (jumping later is a logical  possibility, but is clearly too unsafe to be seriously considered).  It is momentous, because her life is at stake. And the evidence is  ambiguous because, let’s say, neither possibility seems to her any  safer or more dangerous than the other. … James would claim that  she now has the intellectual right to choose whichever option she  wants to choose, to let her passional nature decide. 19

[17] [Page xiv] Moreover,  James points out, “pure insight and logic, whatever they might do  ideally, are not the only things that really do produce our creeds.” 20 We don’t arrive at our moral beliefs or even our political views or  economic ideas purely on the basis of indisputable data and  irresistible chains of logic. And anyway, James asks rhetorically,  “Objective evidence and certitude are doubtless very fine ideals to  play with, but where on his moonlit and dream-visited planet are they  found?” 21

[18] In  this life, said the apostle Paul, we “see through a glass,  darkly.” 22 That’s our situation, and we must do the best that we can. When the  facts are uncertain but a decision absolutely must be made, it’s  scarcely irrational to make a decision — as both theists and  atheists in fact do . 23

[19] These  are questions with which all must deal as it seems good to them. They  are riddles of the Sphinx, and in some way or other we must deal with  them. … In all important transactions of life we have to take a  leap in the dark. … If we decide to leave the riddles unanswered,  that is a choice; if we waver in our answer, that, too, is a choice:  but whatever choice we make, we make it at our peril. If a man  chooses to turn his back altogether on God and the future, no one can  prevent him; no one can show beyond reasonable doubt that he is  mistaken. If a man thinks otherwise and acts as he thinks, I do not  see that any one can prove that he is mistaken. Each must act as he  thinks best; and if he is wrong, so much the worse for him. We stand  on a mountain pass in the midst of whirling snow and blinding mist,  through which we get glimpses now and then of paths which may be  deceptive. If we stand still we shall be frozen to death. If we take  the wrong road we shall be dashed to pieces. We do not certainly know  whether there is any right one. What must we do? “Be strong and of  a good courage.” Act for the best, hope for the best, and take what  comes. … If death ends all, we cannot meet death better. 24

