[Page 227] Abstract: In the days of the first Israelite temple, only certain individuals  were allowed into the temple and sacrificial services; foreigners and  eunuchs were excluded. However, in Isaiah 56:1–8, formerly excluded  individuals are invited into the presence of God at the temple. This  paper will explore how metaphorically connecting Isaiah’s words  with Abraham, the eponymous father of the covenant faithful, may  demonstrate that even the most unlikely candidates for the presence  of God are like Abraham; they too will inherit the ancient covenants  according to their faithfulness.


## Abraham:  Exemplar of Covenantal Faithfulness

The  contrast between the introductions to the character of Abraham in  Genesis and the Book of Abraham is stark. The Book of Abraham gives  us a more robust introduction into the character and righteous  desires of Abraham before God interacts with Abraham. We learn  in Abraham 1:2 that Abraham, having been “a follower of  righteousness, desiring also to be one who possessed great knowledge,  and to be a greater follower of righteousness, and to possess a  greater knowledge, and to be a father of many nations, a prince of  peace, and desiring to receive instructions, and to keep the  commandments of God, [he] became a rightful heir, a High  Priest, holding the right belonging to the fathers.” In all  likelihood, Abraham went to the temple to receive a fullness of these  blessings. However, later Israelite laws (Exodus 12:43–45;  Leviticus 22:25; Deuteronomy 23:1–3) might have excluded someone  like Abraham from the temple and sacrificial services, the very place  where he most likely would have encountered fulfillment of these  righteous desires.

As  Abraham 1 continues we learn that wicked priests targeted Abraham for  execution. God came to save him with these words, “Abraham,  Abraham, behold, my name is Jehovah, and I have heard thee, and have  come down to deliver thee, and to take thee away from thy father’s  house, and from all thy kinsfolk, into a strange land which thou  knowest not of” (Abraham 1:16). Then the promise from God, “I will  lead thee by my hand, and I will take thee, to put upon thee my name,  even the Priesthood of thy father, and my power shall be over thee”  (Abraham 1:18). Core themes in these verses include “put upon  thee my name” and “strange land.” We’ll explore these themes  further in Isaiah 56:1–8 to demonstrate that even though  Abraham was metaphorically a stranger and a eunuch, characteristics  that could potentially exclude one from the temple, according to  certain readings of Israelite law (e.g., Exodus 12, Leviticus 22,  Deuteronomy 23), he still qualified for God’s covenant. Abraham had  full access to the temple and to the promises of God. Isaiah speaks  comfort to those who worry they may be excluded from the temple and  God’s promises; if they keep the law of God and his sabbaths, they  will be invited in. If they are faithful [Page 230] like Abraham, they receive  the promises of Abraham, which are fully expressed in the temple.


## Instructive  Irony in the Abrahamic Promises and the Story of Abraham

The  promise of land and posterity pervade the Abraham story and are key  elements of God’s everlasting covenant. Ironically, these are the  very aspects of the divine promises to Abraham that appear to be most  in jeopardy throughout the Abraham story. Why? Because Abraham is  like a stranger in the land and is like a eunuch who cannot have  children.

Isaiah  promises such individuals (strangers and eunuchs) that they can be  admitted into God’s temple and receive his everlasting name. I see  a compelling and instructive connection to Abraham in the words of  Isaiah. Let us review Abraham’s position as a stranger and a eunuch  of sorts and learn from the instructive irony that the Abraham story  presents to us.

In  addition to being a wandering stranger in and out of his promised  land, the blessings of posterity also eluded him. Abraham and Sarah [Page 231] were barren (Genesis 11:30). This major obstacle to the fulfillment  of God’s promises was only later rectified through divine  intervention (Genesis 21). Significantly, God tested this promise to  Abraham as well. As soon as Abraham arrived in Egypt, Pharaoh took  Sarah away (Genesis 12). How could Abraham have posterity without his  covenant wife? Sarah was later liberated. But sometime after Abraham  and Sarah returned prosperous to the Promised Land, the famine having  abated, king Abimelech took Sarah from Abraham with the intent to  make her his wife (Genesis 20). Once again, the promise of posterity  was put in peril only to be resolved after a period of testing.  Though Abraham and Sarah are often revered for their faithfulness,  God truly put to the test their trust in him and their trust in his  promises.

On  other occasions, Abraham and Sarah attempted to fulfill God’s  promises on their own. Abraham adopted his servant Eliezer as his son  and heir (Genesis 15). God came to Abraham to reaffirm the covenantal  promises and explain that they would be fulfilled in other ways.  Sarah gave Hagar to Abraham as a means to have posterity (Genesis  16). Though God had blessings in store for Hagar and Ishmael (Genesis  16:10), God clarified that he would yet fulfill his promise to  Abraham and Sarah (Genesis 17:19). Indeed he did, through the birth  of Isaac. But soon thereafter God put Abraham to test yet again,  commanding him to sacrifice Isaac, his beloved son (Genesis 22). The  subsequent salvation of Isaac is well-known. What is central to the  story is that God faithfully fulfills his promises to his servants if  they trust in him and live his law.

As  can be seen there is much irony in the Abraham story. Abraham is  introduced as the man of promise. God offers him all that a righteous  individual could desire. And yet at every turn, those blessings are  just out of reach or potentially put in jeopardy. However, Abraham  trusted the Lord and eventually realized all his righteous desires.  Because of his faithfulness, Abraham has become an example for  millions of people throughout the ages that even the most unlikely of  individuals can have God’s divine name securely in their lives,  granting them access to God’s greatest blessings. These blessings  are symbolically represented by returning to the presence of the Lord  in his temple.


## Exclusion  from the Temple

In  addition to this layering of admissibility to the temple, certain  categories of people were barred from the presence of God and hence  from the fullness of his blessings. Several Old Testament quotes  should help to establish this reality, “He that is wounded in the  stones, or hath his privy member cut off, shall not enter into the  congregation of the lord. A bastard shall not enter into the  congregation of the lord; even to his tenth generation shall he not  enter into the congregation of the lord. An Ammonite or Moabite  [i.e., a foreigner] shall not enter into the congregation of the  lord; even to their tenth generation shall they not enter into the  congregation of the lord for ever” (Deuteronomy 23:1–3).

Deuteronomy  23 seems to exclude certain classes of people from the temple. Anyone  who was a non-Israelite, that is, a foreigner or a stranger is  excluded (in this passage the non-Israelites are identified as  Ammonites and Moabites, historic enemies of Israel). Also excluded  are eunuchs, that is, someone who could not procreate. They were  permanently barred from the temple.

Other  Old Testament passages also appear to exclude strangers or foreigners  from temple or sacrificial services. For example, Exodus 12:43– 45  gives instructions about who is included or excluded from the  Passover sacrificial rituals, “And the lord said unto Moses and  Aaron, This is the ordinance of the passover: There shall no  stranger eat thereof: But every man’s servant that is bought for  money, when thou hast circumcised him, then shall he eat thereof. A  foreigner and an hired servant shall not eat thereof.” We read  later in this chapter that only foreigners who convert to the worship  of Yahweh (through circumcision) and thus are no longer considered  foreigners will be allowed to keep the Passover.

Later  we read in Leviticus 22:25, in the context of instructions to priests  regarding how to enact the sacrifices at the temple, “Neither from  a stranger’s hand shall ye offer the bread of your God of any of  these; because their corruption is in them, and blemishes be in them: they shall not be accepted for you”  (emphasis added). Again, a stranger is barred [Page 233] from offering the  sacrifice, though apparently the priest could make the sacrifice on  behalf of the stranger or foreigner.

In  light of these Old Testament passages, Isaiah’s message was  revolutionary that God’s “house shall be called an house of  prayer for all people” (Isaiah 56:7, emphasis added) and  that those individuals formerly barred from the temple and  sacrificial services are now openly admitted.


## Isaiah  56:1–8

I  have introduced Abraham as an exemplary faithful follower of God and  yet one who may have been excluded from the first Israelite temple  according to some Mosaic laws. I’ll now explore Isaiah 56:1–8,  interpreting these verses in light of the Abraham story. I’ll also  consider additional themes and ideas in these Isaiah passages,  connecting them to Abraham and other illustrative scriptures where  appropriate. Major themes are justice and judgment; servants,  strangers, and eunuchs; sabbaths and covenants; and everlasting names  and memorials.


## Isaiah  56:1

Isaiah  56 opens with statements that God’s redemptive salvation is near to  come and therefore everyone should prepare, which nicely echoes the  themes in the opening chapter of Isaiah:

Zion  shall be redeemed with  judgment [justice], and  her converts [repentant people] with  righteousness. (Isaiah 1:27)

Those  who practice justice and righteousness toward others and themselves  will find redemption through the justice and righteousness of the  Lord. Abraham was certainly one who exercised righteous judgment with  the intent to help redeem others as demonstrated by his bargaining  with the Lord to save Sodom and Gomorrah if but ten righteous  individuals were found in the cities (Genesis 18:23–33)


## Isaiah  56:2

Isaiah  56:2 further describes the state of those who keep judgment and do  justice. They are blessed, they keep the sabbath, and they eschew  evil. The importance of sabbath observance will be addressed in the  Isaiah 56:4 section of the paper. Let us focus a moment on the  phrase, “blessed is the man.” It also appears in Psalm 1. This  psalm serves as the overriding [Page 234] thesis statement for the entire book  of Psalms and contains direct links to the message of Isaiah 56 as  well as subtle connections to Abraham.


## Isaiah  56:3

Isaiah  56:3 introduces readers to two key constituents who desired to come  to the Lord in his temple but had legitimate reasons for voicing  their concerns that they would be excluded. The stranger worries that  he will be separated from the people of God and thus be cut off from  the presence of God while the eunuch identifies the cause of his  inadmissibility into the temple. I have already established thematic  linkages between Abraham and each of these constituencies. To make  those thematic connections more apparent, let us consider additional  Abrahamic passages from Genesis.

In  Genesis 17, God visits Abraham, now nearly 100 years old, and renews  the promise that he will have land and posterity. To provide evidence  for the promises, God renames Abraham (from Abram) and says, “And I  will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after  thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God [Page 235] unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. And I will give unto thee, and  to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the  land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession; and I will be their  God” (Genesis 17:7–8).

Perhaps  the eunuchs would find comfort in remembering Abraham. Concerned  about being “dry trees,” they could look to Abraham who “planted  a grove [of trees] in Beersheba [at the seven wells], and called  there on the name of the lord, the everlasting God” (Genesis  21:33). Just as Abraham called on the name of God and received God’s  promises, so too could faithful eunuchs hope for such blessings from  the Lord.


## Isaiah  56:4

After  Isaiah identified the concerns followers of God had in preceding  verses, he transitions to explain in concrete terms what God expects  of the faithful. In summary, God expects observance of sabbaths,  attentiveness to things that please him, and holding fast to  covenants. We will consider briefly here the sabbaths and why this  requirement was so essential for access to God.


## Isaiah  56:5

If  the stranger and eunuch are willing to agree to these terms and  conditions, to keep the sabbaths, they are then admitted into the  temple. But then God offers everlasting blessings. God promises that  even if they do not have living posterity in this life, he will give  them a place and a name better than sons and daughters, a name  that will never perish. The phrase “place and a name,” Hebrew yad  vashem , seems to be a rather insignificant phrase in  English. However, in Hebrew and ancient Israelite culture this phrase  was permeated with everlasting significance. It signified a monument  or a memorial, but more importantly it represented God’s eternal  hand of fellowship and his everlasting name. Instead of one’s  immortality secured by the memorializing of a name on stone or  of having a large and growing posterity, God assures immortality by [Page 238] naming his faithful servants, by placing his name on them. And his  name is everlasting. We see this doctrine taught clearly in the Book  of Mormon. In Mosiah 5:5–9, King Benjamin teaches that those  willing to covenant with God receive an eternal name, that of the  children of Christ. They will be called Christians, Christ.

In  Genesis 11, the people of the earth settle the plain of Shinar and  devise a plan to build a great city and tower whose top could touch  the heavens. Their rationale for such an undertaking? “Let us make  us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole  earth” (Genesis 11:4). They wanted to make and secure their  own name by physical, man made objects and monuments to avoid  being scattered across the earth as if human efforts could provide  the lasting safety they wanted. In stark contrast stands Abraham,  introduced in the same chapter as the tower of Babel. God comes to  Abraham in Genesis 12:2 and says, “[Abraham], I will … make  thy name great.” Instead of seeking to make his own name great,  Abraham let God make Abraham’s name great. When individuals seek to  establish their own promised lands without the direction of God,  their only recourse to “immortality” is human-made, the physical  objects and memorials that humans can create. But these eventually  will crumble to the dust. If instead people are like Abraham, they  can follow God, who will make their names great by leading them to  their promised lands where they will find refreshment and eternal  life.


## Isaiah  56:6

“O  ye seed of Abraham his servant, ye children of Jacob his chosen. He is the lord our God: his judgments are in all the  earth. He hath remembered his covenant for ever, the word which he  commanded to a thousand generations. Which covenant he  made with Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac; And confirmed the same  unto Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an everlasting  covenant” (Psalm 105:6–10).

Correspondences  between Psalm 105, Abraham, and Isaiah 56 are many. First, Abraham is  identified as the Lord’s servant in Psalm 105. This connects to  Isaiah 56:6, where we see the formerly excluded strangers and eunuchs  identified as servants to God. Second, the covenant that God  initiated with Abraham is remembered in Psalm 105. This is the very  covenant the servants of God (the eunuchs and strangers) must take  hold of in Isaiah 56:6. Third, themes of the law ( torah ) and  everlasting covenants (which are secured by obedience to God’s law)  are invoked in Psalm 105. Isaiah 56 plays on both themes of law and  everlasting covenant. Insofar as people keep the law, they will be  admitted into the temple where God will place his everlasting name  upon them as a sign that they have eternal right to the everlasting  covenants of Abraham. Finally, the barrenness of Abraham is but a  memory in Psalm 105 (and will be for the eunuchs as well) as  thousands of generations of posterity are acknowledged.


## Isaiah  56:7

In  Isaiah 56:6–7 we learn that the strangers and eunuchs have become  servants to God and that once in the temple, these servants joyfully  participate in prayer and worship. Perhaps these strangers and  eunuchs sang Psalm 113 in the temple. Psalm 113 plays upon the themes  of servants, barrenness, and praise, which connect both to Isaiah 56  and the Abraham story, “Praise ye the lord. Praise, O ye servants  of the lord, praise the name of the lord. … He maketh the barren  woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of children.  Praise ye the lord,” (Psalm 113:1, 9). Just as Sarai was originally  described as “Sarai was barren; she had no child” (Genesis  11:30), now because of the promises [Page 243] of God, she became a joyful  mother of children. In fact the meaning of her son Isaac’s name,  “he will laugh” is poetically connected to Sarai’s laughter at  becoming a mother (Genesis 18:13, 15; 21:6). Psalm 113 also connects  to Isaiah 56 thematically because the servants are commanded to  praise the name of the Lord. As we explained above, the name  of God is a permanent symbol to the righteous recipients of it, of  their everlasting access to his promises and presence.


## [Page 244] Isaiah  56:8

Isaiah  56:8 indicates that God seeks to gather in from the dispersed corners  of the earth not just the outcasts of Israel, he wants to gather in  all of his children. God will gather in non-Israelites as well and  make them part of his covenant if they are willing. Jesus testifies  of this doctrine in John 10:16, where he explains to his disciples,  “Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must  bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and  one shepherd.” We know this message was descriptive of scattered  Israel and those who are adopted into Israel through baptism. These  God seeks to bring into the fold as the Allegory of the Olive tree  (Jacob 5) so beautifully and symbolically represents. The gathering  takes place at the temple. The temple is where the fullness of the  Abrahamic promises are made and realized. It is at the temple where  the faithful take God’s name upon themselves yet again, as they do  in other saving ordinances such as baptism.


## Conclusion

God  wants to give us a name, that of Jesus Christ. For the faithful,  God’s everlasting name includes access to the temple and covenants.  Through temples and the blessings of this covenantal name of Christ, all the righteous who keep God’s law and honor his sabbaths  will be like Abraham. They will have a fullness of the Abrahamic  covenant, the promise of enduring posterity, and rest in a promised  land. God’s temple embodies these promises and covenants. He stands  ready to welcome in all who would faithfully hold fast to his  covenant and join him in his holy mountain in joyful prayer and  worship.

---
Notes

[1] In  the most basic sense, God’s everlasting covenant is represented by  these things: a promised land, priesthood, posterity, to be blessed,  and to be a blessing to others (Genesis 12:1–3) 1 .  All God’s children have access to these promises. But how does  reading Isaiah 56 with Abraham in mind make the case that all people  can be heirs to God’s promises? Primarily, Abraham is an excellent  example of one who practiced fidelity to God and received a fullness  of God’s promises. However, had Abraham lived during the first  temple period (ca. 10th century BC to 6th  century BC) — according to a metaphorical interpretation of  biblical law to be explained a bit further into the paper — he may  have been excluded from the temple and sacrificial services (Exodus  12:43–45; Leviticus 22:25; Deuteronomy 23:1–3) 2 .  Only later were such exclusionary prohibitions [Page 228] lifted (see Isaiah  56). What are the qualities of Abraham that possibly would have  excluded him from the temple? He was like a stranger or a foreigner  in the land of Canaan (Abraham 1–2; Genesis 12). And he was like a  eunuch, incapable of having posterity with his wife Sarah until there  was miraculous intervention (Genesis 11:30; 21:3). In  this article, I’ll review the story of Abraham and the covenantal  promises that God offered him. I’ll then explore Isaiah 56:1–8  verse by verse to call upon the memory of Abraham to argue that all  people, even those considered most excluded from the promises of God,  as symbolized by exclusion or inclusion to the temple, will be  brought into the fold if they are willing to practice justice (keep  the torah = law of God) and observe the Lord’s sabbaths. 3 Abraham:  Exemplar of Covenantal Faithfulness One  of the best starting points to lay the foundation for understanding  God’s everlasting covenant is with the story of Abraham. 4 In this story, readers learn of God’s promises, his testing the  faith of Abraham, the faithful response by Abraham, and the eventual  fulfillment of all promises. The story of Abraham essentially begins  in Genesis 12 when God speaks to Abraham, commanding him to leave his  homeland. Without much explanation, God also guarantees Abraham’s  posterity, [Page 229] a promised land, and endless blessings. These are  promises anyone would aspire to obtain. Curiously, in the Genesis  version of the Abraham story, God pronounces the covenant blessings  without any indication as to why Abraham was the chosen recipient.  Only as his life story plays out in Genesis do we see Abraham’s  consistent faithfulness to the Lord, which qualifies him for the  promised blessings. The  contrast between the introductions to the character of Abraham in  Genesis and the Book of Abraham is stark. The Book of Abraham gives  us a more robust introduction into the character and righteous  desires of Abraham before God interacts with Abraham. We learn  in Abraham 1:2 that Abraham, having been “a follower of  righteousness, desiring also to be one who possessed great knowledge,  and to be a greater follower of righteousness, and to possess a  greater knowledge, and to be a father of many nations, a prince of  peace, and desiring to receive instructions, and to keep the  commandments of God, [he] became a rightful heir, a High  Priest, holding the right belonging to the fathers.” In all  likelihood, Abraham went to the temple to receive a fullness of these  blessings. However, later Israelite laws (Exodus 12:43–45;  Leviticus 22:25; Deuteronomy 23:1–3) might have excluded someone  like Abraham from the temple and sacrificial services, the very place  where he most likely would have encountered fulfillment of these  righteous desires. As  Abraham 1 continues we learn that wicked priests targeted Abraham for  execution. God came to save him with these words, “Abraham,  Abraham, behold, my name is Jehovah, and I have heard thee, and have  come down to deliver thee, and to take thee away from thy father’s  house, and from all thy kinsfolk, into a strange land which thou  knowest not of” (Abraham 1:16). Then the promise from God, “I will  lead thee by my hand, and I will take thee, to put upon thee my name,  even the Priesthood of thy father, and my power shall be over thee”  (Abraham 1:18). Core themes in these verses include “put upon  thee my name” and “strange land.” We’ll explore these themes  further in Isaiah 56:1–8 to demonstrate that even though  Abraham was metaphorically a stranger and a eunuch, characteristics  that could potentially exclude one from the temple, according to  certain readings of Israelite law (e.g., Exodus 12, Leviticus 22,  Deuteronomy 23), he still qualified for God’s covenant. Abraham had  full access to the temple and to the promises of God. Isaiah speaks  comfort to those who worry they may be excluded from the temple and  God’s promises; if they keep the law of God and his sabbaths, they  will be invited in. If they are faithful [Page 230] like Abraham, they receive  the promises of Abraham, which are fully expressed in the temple. Instructive  Irony in the Abrahamic Promises and the Story of Abraham The  promise of land and posterity pervade the Abraham story and are key  elements of God’s everlasting covenant. Ironically, these are the  very aspects of the divine promises to Abraham that appear to be most  in jeopardy throughout the Abraham story. Why? Because Abraham is  like a stranger in the land and is like a eunuch who cannot have  children. Isaiah  promises such individuals (strangers and eunuchs) that they can be  admitted into God’s temple and receive his everlasting name. I see  a compelling and instructive connection to Abraham in the words of  Isaiah. Let us review Abraham’s position as a stranger and a eunuch  of sorts and learn from the instructive irony that the Abraham story  presents to us. Abraham  was commanded to leave his homeland and wander as a stranger in a new  land (Genesis 12:1–3). Then as now, strangers or foreigners often  struggled in new lands to adapt to new cultures, languages,  environments, peoples, laws, and social networks and norms. Being a  stranger was seldom seen as an advantage. Strangers were often on the  margins of society with little to no access to “blessings” the  larger society had to offer. 5 Strangers usually had no legal right to land or inheritance. And if  they had no posterity, they would have no one to maintain their  memory or family, 6 no one to provide them proper burial rights. 7 Not only did Abraham arrive as a stranger in his promised land, when  he arrived the land was blighted with devastating famine (Genesis 12)  — not very promising! Again he uprooted, leaving behind his new  homeland to become a stranger in the land of Egypt. In  addition to being a wandering stranger in and out of his promised  land, the blessings of posterity also eluded him. Abraham and Sarah [Page 231] were barren (Genesis 11:30). This major obstacle to the fulfillment  of God’s promises was only later rectified through divine  intervention (Genesis 21). Significantly, God tested this promise to  Abraham as well. As soon as Abraham arrived in Egypt, Pharaoh took  Sarah away (Genesis 12). How could Abraham have posterity without his  covenant wife? Sarah was later liberated. But sometime after Abraham  and Sarah returned prosperous to the Promised Land, the famine having  abated, king Abimelech took Sarah from Abraham with the intent to  make her his wife (Genesis 20). Once again, the promise of posterity  was put in peril only to be resolved after a period of testing.  Though Abraham and Sarah are often revered for their faithfulness,  God truly put to the test their trust in him and their trust in his  promises. On  other occasions, Abraham and Sarah attempted to fulfill God’s  promises on their own. Abraham adopted his servant Eliezer as his son  and heir (Genesis 15). God came to Abraham to reaffirm the covenantal  promises and explain that they would be fulfilled in other ways.  Sarah gave Hagar to Abraham as a means to have posterity (Genesis  16). Though God had blessings in store for Hagar and Ishmael (Genesis  16:10), God clarified that he would yet fulfill his promise to  Abraham and Sarah (Genesis 17:19). Indeed he did, through the birth  of Isaac. But soon thereafter God put Abraham to test yet again,  commanding him to sacrifice Isaac, his beloved son (Genesis 22). The  subsequent salvation of Isaac is well-known. What is central to the  story is that God faithfully fulfills his promises to his servants if  they trust in him and live his law. As  can be seen there is much irony in the Abraham story. Abraham is  introduced as the man of promise. God offers him all that a righteous  individual could desire. And yet at every turn, those blessings are  just out of reach or potentially put in jeopardy. However, Abraham  trusted the Lord and eventually realized all his righteous desires.  Because of his faithfulness, Abraham has become an example for  millions of people throughout the ages that even the most unlikely of  individuals can have God’s divine name securely in their lives,  granting them access to God’s greatest blessings. These blessings  are symbolically represented by returning to the presence of the Lord  in his temple. Exclusion  from the Temple Before  we can appreciate the nature of the message of Isaiah 56, we must  first understand how aspects of the Law of Moses may have placed  significant barriers against entry into the temple or sacrificial  services for some types of individuals. One scholar explains,  “Although all Israel [Page 232] must keep a heightened level of moral and  ritual purity, there are indeed gradations of holiness as one more  closely approaches the divine presence. One finds a ring-like  structure in Priestly texts in which God occupies the holy of holies,  with the high priest at the next level of holiness. At a lower level  are the other priests who work in the sanctuary, who in turn are  followed by the Levites who maintain, move, and guard God’s  sanctuary. Finally, one has the other Israelite tribes along with  anyone else residing in the Holy Land, which is the land made holy by  God’s presence.” 8 In  addition to this layering of admissibility to the temple, certain  categories of people were barred from the presence of God and hence  from the fullness of his blessings. Several Old Testament quotes  should help to establish this reality, “He that is wounded in the  stones, or hath his privy member cut off, shall not enter into the  congregation of the lord. A bastard shall not enter into the  congregation of the lord; even to his tenth generation shall he not  enter into the congregation of the lord. An Ammonite or Moabite  [i.e., a foreigner] shall not enter into the congregation of the  lord; even to their tenth generation shall they not enter into the  congregation of the lord for ever” (Deuteronomy 23:1–3). Deuteronomy  23 seems to exclude certain classes of people from the temple. Anyone  who was a non-Israelite, that is, a foreigner or a stranger is  excluded (in this passage the non-Israelites are identified as  Ammonites and Moabites, historic enemies of Israel). Also excluded  are eunuchs, that is, someone who could not procreate. They were  permanently barred from the temple. Other  Old Testament passages also appear to exclude strangers or foreigners  from temple or sacrificial services. For example, Exodus 12:43– 45  gives instructions about who is included or excluded from the  Passover sacrificial rituals, “And the lord said unto Moses and  Aaron, This is the ordinance of the passover: There shall no  stranger eat thereof: But every man’s servant that is bought for  money, when thou hast circumcised him, then shall he eat thereof. A  foreigner and an hired servant shall not eat thereof.” We read  later in this chapter that only foreigners who convert to the worship  of Yahweh (through circumcision) and thus are no longer considered  foreigners will be allowed to keep the Passover. Later  we read in Leviticus 22:25, in the context of instructions to priests  regarding how to enact the sacrifices at the temple, “Neither from  a stranger’s hand shall ye offer the bread of your God of any of  these; because their corruption is in them, and blemishes be in them: they shall not be accepted for you”  (emphasis added). Again, a stranger is barred [Page 233] from offering the  sacrifice, though apparently the priest could make the sacrifice on  behalf of the stranger or foreigner. In  light of these Old Testament passages, Isaiah’s message was  revolutionary that God’s “house shall be called an house of  prayer for all people” (Isaiah 56:7, emphasis added) and  that those individuals formerly barred from the temple and  sacrificial services are now openly admitted. Isaiah  56:1–8 I  have introduced Abraham as an exemplary faithful follower of God and  yet one who may have been excluded from the first Israelite temple  according to some Mosaic laws. I’ll now explore Isaiah 56:1–8,  interpreting these verses in light of the Abraham story. I’ll also  consider additional themes and ideas in these Isaiah passages,  connecting them to Abraham and other illustrative scriptures where  appropriate. Major themes are justice and judgment; servants,  strangers, and eunuchs; sabbaths and covenants; and everlasting names  and memorials. Isaiah  56:1 Isaiah  56 opens with statements that God’s redemptive salvation is near to  come and therefore everyone should prepare, which nicely echoes the  themes in the opening chapter of Isaiah: Zion  shall be redeemed with  judgment [justice], and  her converts [repentant people] with  righteousness. (Isaiah 1:27) Those  who practice justice and righteousness toward others and themselves  will find redemption through the justice and righteousness of the  Lord. Abraham was certainly one who exercised righteous judgment with  the intent to help redeem others as demonstrated by his bargaining  with the Lord to save Sodom and Gomorrah if but ten righteous  individuals were found in the cities (Genesis 18:23–33) Isaiah  56:2 Isaiah  56:2 further describes the state of those who keep judgment and do  justice. They are blessed, they keep the sabbath, and they eschew  evil. The importance of sabbath observance will be addressed in the  Isaiah 56:4 section of the paper. Let us focus a moment on the  phrase, “blessed is the man.” It also appears in Psalm 1. This  psalm serves as the overriding [Page 234] thesis statement for the entire book  of Psalms and contains direct links to the message of Isaiah 56 as  well as subtle connections to Abraham. Several  valuable insights can be drawn from Psalm 1 that relate to Isaiah 56  and to Abraham. Through God’s miraculous intervention, Abraham  brought “forth his fruit [i.e., the promised child Isaac] in his  season,” in the season that God had ordained. Furthermore, God  prospered Abraham in all things (Genesis 13:2; 14:18–20; 20:15–16;  21:22; 22:17–18). Psalm 1 also identifies the blessed man as the  one who delights in the law of the Lord. The Hebrew word torah underlies the English word law in Psalm 1. The law of the Lord  ( torah ) can refer to any and all of the laws of God, though  over the centuries interpreters have often equated torah specifically with the Law of Moses, especially as found in the Five  Books of Moses. That man who meditates day and night on the torah is compared to a fruitful tree planted by living waters. This tree  will live, grow, prosper, and never die. Such imagery echoes themes  in Isaiah 56. Indeed, the Lord tells the eunuch of Isaiah 56:3 not to  call himself a dry tree. Instead the eunuch who keeps the Lord’s  sabbaths will be more prosperous than if he had many sons and  daughters. So too, Abraham was for a time like a eunuch, not able to  have children. But eventually Abraham had many children. He became  like a fruitful tree planted by the rivers of water. 9 Isaiah  56:3 Isaiah  56:3 introduces readers to two key constituents who desired to come  to the Lord in his temple but had legitimate reasons for voicing  their concerns that they would be excluded. The stranger worries that  he will be separated from the people of God and thus be cut off from  the presence of God while the eunuch identifies the cause of his  inadmissibility into the temple. I have already established thematic  linkages between Abraham and each of these constituencies. To make  those thematic connections more apparent, let us consider additional  Abrahamic passages from Genesis. In  Genesis 17, God visits Abraham, now nearly 100 years old, and renews  the promise that he will have land and posterity. To provide evidence  for the promises, God renames Abraham (from Abram) and says, “And I  will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after  thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God [Page 235] unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. And I will give unto thee, and  to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the  land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession; and I will be their  God” (Genesis 17:7–8). This  Genesis passage plays upon themes of Abraham’s foreignness in the  Promised Land. But that quality of Abraham does not preclude access  to “everlasting possessions” or knowledge that “I will be their  God.” So too, Isaiah argues, is it for the foreigner who “hath  joined himself to the Lord.” 10 Perhaps  the eunuchs would find comfort in remembering Abraham. Concerned  about being “dry trees,” they could look to Abraham who “planted  a grove [of trees] in Beersheba [at the seven wells], and called  there on the name of the lord, the everlasting God” (Genesis  21:33). Just as Abraham called on the name of God and received God’s  promises, so too could faithful eunuchs hope for such blessings from  the Lord. Isaiah  56:4 After  Isaiah identified the concerns followers of God had in preceding  verses, he transitions to explain in concrete terms what God expects  of the faithful. In summary, God expects observance of sabbaths,  attentiveness to things that please him, and holding fast to  covenants. We will consider briefly here the sabbaths and why this  requirement was so essential for access to God. Keeping  the sabbath was a sign of God’s covenant with Israel. “Wherefore  the children of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath  throughout their generations, for a perpetual covenant. It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever”  (Exodus 31:16– 17). Those people formerly excluded from the  temple and God are now included with the expectation that they keep  the sabbath holy days. 11 [Page 236] Inclusion  into God’s everlasting covenants is not automatic, however, because  covenants are reciprocal. 12 Each party brings something to the agreement. In this instance, what  must the potential covenantal candidate do? Keep the sabbaths. Notice  that “sabbaths” is in the plural in Isaiah 56:4. Does this plural  represent attending church each Sunday? No, this plural signifies  that the sabbaths were any sacred day set aside to worship and  celebrate God (Exodus 23:14–17; 34:18–23; Deuteronomy 16:1–17).  Examples include the following: (1) The weekly Sabbath, to celebrate  the creation of earth and the deliverance from oppression (Exodus  20:8–11; Deuteronomy 5:12–15); (2) The sabbath festival of  Passover, to celebrate God saving the Israelites from Egypt  (Leviticus 23:5; Deuteronomy 16:1–8); (3) The sabbath of  Pentecost, to thank God for the prosperity and abundance of the earth  (Deuteronomy 16:9–12); (4) The sabbath festival of  booths, to celebrate God’s presence among the Israelites as they  wandered in the wilderness (Deuteronomy 16:13–17); and (5) The  sabbatical year, every seventh year, to celebrate that God gave  Israelites the land (Leviticus 25:1–22). Many of these sabbaths  required people [Page 237] to go to the temple and make offerings to the Lord;  it was a holy day that involved the act of pilgrimage worship.  Significantly, the temple was central to these sabbaths. If some  people were excluded from the temple, how could they keep the  sabbaths or covenants with God? And if people were not keeping the  sabbaths of God, how would they be making full use of their access to  him through the temple? That is to say, if they were not celebrating  the sabbaths, they likely were not attending the temple, and if they  did not have access to the temple, they could not keep the sabbaths.  Isaiah rectifies that. Those formerly excluded from the temple could  have access if they kept the sabbaths, which required that they enter  the temple and participate in the religious rites and festivals that  occurred there on holy days. Isaiah  56:5 Some  of the most powerful themes in Isaiah 56 are found in verse 5. Here  we learn that God will give a place to the strangers and eunuchs in  the temple. Indeed, he gives them an everlasting memorial in the  temple. 13 That everlasting memorial is his name, which these new servants have  taken upon themselves. They will never again be cut off from the  presence of the Lord. 14 If  the stranger and eunuch are willing to agree to these terms and  conditions, to keep the sabbaths, they are then admitted into the  temple. But then God offers everlasting blessings. God promises that  even if they do not have living posterity in this life, he will give  them a place and a name better than sons and daughters, a name  that will never perish. The phrase “place and a name,” Hebrew yad  vashem , seems to be a rather insignificant phrase in  English. However, in Hebrew and ancient Israelite culture this phrase  was permeated with everlasting significance. It signified a monument  or a memorial, but more importantly it represented God’s eternal  hand of fellowship and his everlasting name. Instead of one’s  immortality secured by the memorializing of a name on stone or  of having a large and growing posterity, God assures immortality by [Page 238] naming his faithful servants, by placing his name on them. And his  name is everlasting. We see this doctrine taught clearly in the Book  of Mormon. In Mosiah 5:5–9, King Benjamin teaches that those  willing to covenant with God receive an eternal name, that of the  children of Christ. They will be called Christians, Christ. Let  us take a moment to explore further what is in a name. 15 Why is a name so important? 16 A name (or a noun) is a way of identifying [Page 239] something, defining its  character, characteristics, features, function, role, boundaries,  purpose, past history, or future potential. 17 For example, the name “Adam” is the masculine form of the Hebrew  word a damah, which means “dirt or earth” (Genesis 2:7). 18 Eve’s name is also specifically given due to her role. Her name is  a form of the Hebrew word hawwah which means, “life.” She  truly was the mother of all living people (Genesis 3:20), therefore  her name was given to identify a key aspect of her character as well  as future potential. Abraham  had two names, both of which identify his character, purpose, and  future potential. His original name was Abram (Genesis 12:1),  a combination of two Hebrew words “ab” = father and “ram” =  high, lofty, exalted. His original name identified his future  potential, character, and role. Indeed, Abram is now an exalted  father (D&C 132:20). His original name could also have  served as a testimony of the characteristics of God the Father, that  is, that Heavenly Father is an Exalted Father. Later, Abram’s name  was changed to Abraham (Genesis 17). This new name derived, once  again, from the combination of two Hebrew words “ab” = father and  “raham” = multitudes. This name speaks to the character,  characteristics, role, and future potential of Abraham, that he would  be a father of multitudes. Today millions upon millions of people  identify Abraham as their father (see Genesis 22:15–18). Sarah,  Abraham’s wife, also had a name change. She originally was named  Sarai, which meant “my princess” (Genesis 11:29). Later Sarai’s  name was changed to Sarah (Genesis 17:15), which in Hebrew means  “princess.” 19 As a faithful daughter of God her name appropriately identified her  character and role as a princess. [Page 240] Naming  in ancient Israel carried weighty significance. The namer had  authority over or responsibility for what was named. 20 For example, Adam had the responsibility to name the animals at  creation (Genesis 2:19–20). Adam’s naming of animals signified  that Adam had responsibility for being a good steward of the animals  of the earth in addition to his role as the keeper of the Garden of  Eden (Genesis 2:15). When God names someone, or places his name on  them, he has defined that individual’s character, characteristics,  role, and future potential. Furthermore, by naming people, God takes  responsibility for the stewardship of those individuals that they  might flourish. He allows them to fully participate in his love,  protection and covenants. When God names someone, that individual  becomes part of his dominion and kingdom. 21 God  wants to make his children great through his name. Unfortunately,  humans tend to try to make their own names great. 22 They try to make a name for themselves instead of having God make [Page 241] them great through his name. 23 Isaiah 56 and the story of Abraham intersect on this point. In  Genesis 11, the people of the earth settle the plain of Shinar and  devise a plan to build a great city and tower whose top could touch  the heavens. Their rationale for such an undertaking? “Let us make  us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole  earth” (Genesis 11:4). They wanted to make and secure their  own name by physical, man made objects and monuments to avoid  being scattered across the earth as if human efforts could provide  the lasting safety they wanted. In stark contrast stands Abraham,  introduced in the same chapter as the tower of Babel. God comes to  Abraham in Genesis 12:2 and says, “[Abraham], I will … make  thy name great.” Instead of seeking to make his own name great,  Abraham let God make Abraham’s name great. When individuals seek to  establish their own promised lands without the direction of God,  their only recourse to “immortality” is human-made, the physical  objects and memorials that humans can create. But these eventually  will crumble to the dust. If instead people are like Abraham, they  can follow God, who will make their names great by leading them to  their promised lands where they will find refreshment and eternal  life. Isaiah  56:6 Isaiah  56:6 promises that those who love his name and join themselves to him  will become his servants. In the Old Testament, servants can refer to  a variety of individuals or groups: Moses, other prophets,  King David, King Solomon, Davidic kings, the people of Israel,  and all those who have bound themselves to the Lord through  covenant. 24 In Isaiah 56, [Page 242] servants refer to the covenant people of God, those  willing to obey the torah . Other Old Testament passages  broaden our understanding of what it means to be a covenant-keeping  servant of God while also echoing Abraham and key ideas in Isaiah  56. 25 “O  ye seed of Abraham his servant, ye children of Jacob his chosen. He is the lord our God: his judgments are in all the  earth. He hath remembered his covenant for ever, the word which he  commanded to a thousand generations. Which covenant he  made with Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac; And confirmed the same  unto Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an everlasting  covenant” (Psalm 105:6–10). Correspondences  between Psalm 105, Abraham, and Isaiah 56 are many. First, Abraham is  identified as the Lord’s servant in Psalm 105. This connects to  Isaiah 56:6, where we see the formerly excluded strangers and eunuchs  identified as servants to God. Second, the covenant that God  initiated with Abraham is remembered in Psalm 105. This is the very  covenant the servants of God (the eunuchs and strangers) must take  hold of in Isaiah 56:6. Third, themes of the law ( torah ) and  everlasting covenants (which are secured by obedience to God’s law)  are invoked in Psalm 105. Isaiah 56 plays on both themes of law and  everlasting covenant. Insofar as people keep the law, they will be  admitted into the temple where God will place his everlasting name  upon them as a sign that they have eternal right to the everlasting  covenants of Abraham. Finally, the barrenness of Abraham is but a  memory in Psalm 105 (and will be for the eunuchs as well) as  thousands of generations of posterity are acknowledged. Isaiah  56:7 In  Isaiah 56:6–7 we learn that the strangers and eunuchs have become  servants to God and that once in the temple, these servants joyfully  participate in prayer and worship. Perhaps these strangers and  eunuchs sang Psalm 113 in the temple. Psalm 113 plays upon the themes  of servants, barrenness, and praise, which connect both to Isaiah 56  and the Abraham story, “Praise ye the lord. Praise, O ye servants  of the lord, praise the name of the lord. … He maketh the barren  woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of children.  Praise ye the lord,” (Psalm 113:1, 9). Just as Sarai was originally  described as “Sarai was barren; she had no child” (Genesis  11:30), now because of the promises [Page 243] of God, she became a joyful  mother of children. In fact the meaning of her son Isaac’s name,  “he will laugh” is poetically connected to Sarai’s laughter at  becoming a mother (Genesis 18:13, 15; 21:6). Psalm 113 also connects  to Isaiah 56 thematically because the servants are commanded to  praise the name of the Lord. As we explained above, the name  of God is a permanent symbol to the righteous recipients of it, of  their everlasting access to his promises and presence. Isaiah  56:6–7 are also poetically parallel to Isaiah 56:4–5. Once again,  God addresses the non-Israelites, the strangers. He promises that  inasmuch as they keep his sabbaths, and lay hold to the covenants  they will be brought into the temple. God’s holy mountain and house  of prayer are synonyms for the temple as multiple scriptural  references illustrate. 26 The temple is where God will accept the prayers and offerings of all the covenant faithful. Though  we have focused primarily on specific groups excluded from the temple  (e.g., strangers and eunuchs) throughout this paper, the promises of  the temple that Isaiah describes here are for all people. The  phrases in Isaiah 56:2 “blessed is the man” 27 and “the son of man” (literally in Hebrew ben adam = son  of Adam) are both generic phrases referring to any human. Isaiah is  here speaking of a day when the covenant will be universally  available to any man or woman, regardless of his or her  circumstances, regardless if under the Law of Moses he or she would  have been excluded from God’s assembly at the temple. Everyone who  keeps the law and the sabbaths will be invited into the divine  covenants and be counted as God’s people. In this regard, Isaiah  transitions from focusing on specific cases of exclusion to  proclaiming that all people, whether eunuch or stranger or  some other temple-excluded group, can be brought into the temple.  Isaiah ends the 56:1–8 pericope on this note. [Page 244] Isaiah  56:8 Isaiah  56:8 indicates that God seeks to gather in from the dispersed corners  of the earth not just the outcasts of Israel, he wants to gather in  all of his children. God will gather in non-Israelites as well and  make them part of his covenant if they are willing. Jesus testifies  of this doctrine in John 10:16, where he explains to his disciples,  “Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must  bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and  one shepherd.” We know this message was descriptive of scattered  Israel and those who are adopted into Israel through baptism. These  God seeks to bring into the fold as the Allegory of the Olive tree  (Jacob 5) so beautifully and symbolically represents. The gathering  takes place at the temple. The temple is where the fullness of the  Abrahamic promises are made and realized. It is at the temple where  the faithful take God’s name upon themselves yet again, as they do  in other saving ordinances such as baptism. Conclusion God  wants to give us a name, that of Jesus Christ. For the faithful,  God’s everlasting name includes access to the temple and covenants.  Through temples and the blessings of this covenantal name of Christ, all the righteous who keep God’s law and honor his sabbaths  will be like Abraham. They will have a fullness of the Abrahamic  covenant, the promise of enduring posterity, and rest in a promised  land. God’s temple embodies these promises and covenants. He stands  ready to welcome in all who would faithfully hold fast to his  covenant and join him in his holy mountain in joyful prayer and  worship. 1 .	Throughout  	this paper, God’s everlasting covenant to Abraham will be  	expressed interchangeably with the phrases everlasting  	covenant , God’s  	promises , God’s  	covenants , the  	Abrahamic promise ,  	and the  	Abrahamic covenant . 2 .	 In this paper, I use the words stranger and foreigner interchangeably. I speak of Abraham in a semantic category of  	being a stranger or a foreigner. I also interpret the Deuteronomy 23  	exclusion of foreigners from the temple (Ammonites and Moabites) to  	represent strangers and foreigners in general who, not being letter  	of the law Israelites, would be excluded from the temple. Using this  	reasoning, had Abraham been alive during the first temple period,  	letter of the law interpretations of biblical law may have,  	ironically, identified Abraham as a non-Israelite. There are a  	variety of Hebrew words that underlie the English stranger or foreigner in the King James Version translation of the Bible.  	In Genesis 15:13 God calls Abraham a ger, a Hebrew word  	with the basic meaning of stranger , newcomer , sojourner , temporary dweller . Other Hebrew words  	underlying the English words stranger and foreigner are zar (a stranger to a family or household, one who is  	not part of the family or tribe) and nekar (a foreigner,  	pertaining to another tribe or family). Isaiah 56 uses nekar repeatedly, not ger . And Deuteronomy 23 does not use the  	words ger, nekar, or zar specifically. Instead, a  	certain class of strangers or foreigners to Israel are identified:  	ancient enemies or antagonists of Israel, the Ammonites and  	Moabites.

[2] In  the most basic sense, God’s everlasting covenant is represented by  these things: a promised land, priesthood, posterity, to be blessed,  and to be a blessing to others (Genesis 12:1–3) 1 .  All God’s children have access to these promises. But how does  reading Isaiah 56 with Abraham in mind make the case that all people  can be heirs to God’s promises? Primarily, Abraham is an excellent  example of one who practiced fidelity to God and received a fullness  of God’s promises. However, had Abraham lived during the first  temple period (ca. 10th century BC to 6th  century BC) — according to a metaphorical interpretation of  biblical law to be explained a bit further into the paper — he may  have been excluded from the temple and sacrificial services (Exodus  12:43–45; Leviticus 22:25; Deuteronomy 23:1–3) 2 .  Only later were such exclusionary prohibitions [Page 228] lifted (see Isaiah  56). What are the qualities of Abraham that possibly would have  excluded him from the temple? He was like a stranger or a foreigner  in the land of Canaan (Abraham 1–2; Genesis 12). And he was like a  eunuch, incapable of having posterity with his wife Sarah until there  was miraculous intervention (Genesis 11:30; 21:3).

[3] In  this article, I’ll review the story of Abraham and the covenantal  promises that God offered him. I’ll then explore Isaiah 56:1–8  verse by verse to call upon the memory of Abraham to argue that all  people, even those considered most excluded from the promises of God,  as symbolized by exclusion or inclusion to the temple, will be  brought into the fold if they are willing to practice justice (keep  the torah = law of God) and observe the Lord’s sabbaths. 3

[4] One  of the best starting points to lay the foundation for understanding  God’s everlasting covenant is with the story of Abraham. 4 In this story, readers learn of God’s promises, his testing the  faith of Abraham, the faithful response by Abraham, and the eventual  fulfillment of all promises. The story of Abraham essentially begins  in Genesis 12 when God speaks to Abraham, commanding him to leave his  homeland. Without much explanation, God also guarantees Abraham’s  posterity, [Page 229] a promised land, and endless blessings. These are  promises anyone would aspire to obtain. Curiously, in the Genesis  version of the Abraham story, God pronounces the covenant blessings  without any indication as to why Abraham was the chosen recipient.  Only as his life story plays out in Genesis do we see Abraham’s  consistent faithfulness to the Lord, which qualifies him for the  promised blessings.

[5] Abraham  was commanded to leave his homeland and wander as a stranger in a new  land (Genesis 12:1–3). Then as now, strangers or foreigners often  struggled in new lands to adapt to new cultures, languages,  environments, peoples, laws, and social networks and norms. Being a  stranger was seldom seen as an advantage. Strangers were often on the  margins of society with little to no access to “blessings” the  larger society had to offer. 5 Strangers usually had no legal right to land or inheritance. And if  they had no posterity, they would have no one to maintain their  memory or family, 6 no one to provide them proper burial rights. 7 Not only did Abraham arrive as a stranger in his promised land, when  he arrived the land was blighted with devastating famine (Genesis 12)  — not very promising! Again he uprooted, leaving behind his new  homeland to become a stranger in the land of Egypt.

[6] Before  we can appreciate the nature of the message of Isaiah 56, we must  first understand how aspects of the Law of Moses may have placed  significant barriers against entry into the temple or sacrificial  services for some types of individuals. One scholar explains,  “Although all Israel [Page 232] must keep a heightened level of moral and  ritual purity, there are indeed gradations of holiness as one more  closely approaches the divine presence. One finds a ring-like  structure in Priestly texts in which God occupies the holy of holies,  with the high priest at the next level of holiness. At a lower level  are the other priests who work in the sanctuary, who in turn are  followed by the Levites who maintain, move, and guard God’s  sanctuary. Finally, one has the other Israelite tribes along with  anyone else residing in the Holy Land, which is the land made holy by  God’s presence.” 8

[7] Several  valuable insights can be drawn from Psalm 1 that relate to Isaiah 56  and to Abraham. Through God’s miraculous intervention, Abraham  brought “forth his fruit [i.e., the promised child Isaac] in his  season,” in the season that God had ordained. Furthermore, God  prospered Abraham in all things (Genesis 13:2; 14:18–20; 20:15–16;  21:22; 22:17–18). Psalm 1 also identifies the blessed man as the  one who delights in the law of the Lord. The Hebrew word torah underlies the English word law in Psalm 1. The law of the Lord  ( torah ) can refer to any and all of the laws of God, though  over the centuries interpreters have often equated torah specifically with the Law of Moses, especially as found in the Five  Books of Moses. That man who meditates day and night on the torah is compared to a fruitful tree planted by living waters. This tree  will live, grow, prosper, and never die. Such imagery echoes themes  in Isaiah 56. Indeed, the Lord tells the eunuch of Isaiah 56:3 not to  call himself a dry tree. Instead the eunuch who keeps the Lord’s  sabbaths will be more prosperous than if he had many sons and  daughters. So too, Abraham was for a time like a eunuch, not able to  have children. But eventually Abraham had many children. He became  like a fruitful tree planted by the rivers of water. 9

[8] This  Genesis passage plays upon themes of Abraham’s foreignness in the  Promised Land. But that quality of Abraham does not preclude access  to “everlasting possessions” or knowledge that “I will be their  God.” So too, Isaiah argues, is it for the foreigner who “hath  joined himself to the Lord.” 10

[9] Keeping  the sabbath was a sign of God’s covenant with Israel. “Wherefore  the children of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath  throughout their generations, for a perpetual covenant. It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever”  (Exodus 31:16– 17). Those people formerly excluded from the  temple and God are now included with the expectation that they keep  the sabbath holy days. 11

[10] [Page 236] Inclusion  into God’s everlasting covenants is not automatic, however, because  covenants are reciprocal. 12 Each party brings something to the agreement. In this instance, what  must the potential covenantal candidate do? Keep the sabbaths. Notice  that “sabbaths” is in the plural in Isaiah 56:4. Does this plural  represent attending church each Sunday? No, this plural signifies  that the sabbaths were any sacred day set aside to worship and  celebrate God (Exodus 23:14–17; 34:18–23; Deuteronomy 16:1–17).  Examples include the following: (1) The weekly Sabbath, to celebrate  the creation of earth and the deliverance from oppression (Exodus  20:8–11; Deuteronomy 5:12–15); (2) The sabbath festival of  Passover, to celebrate God saving the Israelites from Egypt  (Leviticus 23:5; Deuteronomy 16:1–8); (3) The sabbath of  Pentecost, to thank God for the prosperity and abundance of the earth  (Deuteronomy 16:9–12); (4) The sabbath festival of  booths, to celebrate God’s presence among the Israelites as they  wandered in the wilderness (Deuteronomy 16:13–17); and (5) The  sabbatical year, every seventh year, to celebrate that God gave  Israelites the land (Leviticus 25:1–22). Many of these sabbaths  required people [Page 237] to go to the temple and make offerings to the Lord;  it was a holy day that involved the act of pilgrimage worship.  Significantly, the temple was central to these sabbaths. If some  people were excluded from the temple, how could they keep the  sabbaths or covenants with God? And if people were not keeping the  sabbaths of God, how would they be making full use of their access to  him through the temple? That is to say, if they were not celebrating  the sabbaths, they likely were not attending the temple, and if they  did not have access to the temple, they could not keep the sabbaths.  Isaiah rectifies that. Those formerly excluded from the temple could  have access if they kept the sabbaths, which required that they enter  the temple and participate in the religious rites and festivals that  occurred there on holy days.

[11] Some  of the most powerful themes in Isaiah 56 are found in verse 5. Here  we learn that God will give a place to the strangers and eunuchs in  the temple. Indeed, he gives them an everlasting memorial in the  temple. 13 That everlasting memorial is his name, which these new servants have  taken upon themselves. They will never again be cut off from the  presence of the Lord. 14

[12] Let  us take a moment to explore further what is in a name. 15 Why is a name so important? 16 A name (or a noun) is a way of identifying [Page 239] something, defining its  character, characteristics, features, function, role, boundaries,  purpose, past history, or future potential. 17 For example, the name “Adam” is the masculine form of the Hebrew  word a damah, which means “dirt or earth” (Genesis 2:7). 18 Eve’s name is also specifically given due to her role. Her name is  a form of the Hebrew word hawwah which means, “life.” She  truly was the mother of all living people (Genesis 3:20), therefore  her name was given to identify a key aspect of her character as well  as future potential.

[13] Abraham  had two names, both of which identify his character, purpose, and  future potential. His original name was Abram (Genesis 12:1),  a combination of two Hebrew words “ab” = father and “ram” =  high, lofty, exalted. His original name identified his future  potential, character, and role. Indeed, Abram is now an exalted  father (D&C 132:20). His original name could also have  served as a testimony of the characteristics of God the Father, that  is, that Heavenly Father is an Exalted Father. Later, Abram’s name  was changed to Abraham (Genesis 17). This new name derived, once  again, from the combination of two Hebrew words “ab” = father and  “raham” = multitudes. This name speaks to the character,  characteristics, role, and future potential of Abraham, that he would  be a father of multitudes. Today millions upon millions of people  identify Abraham as their father (see Genesis 22:15–18). Sarah,  Abraham’s wife, also had a name change. She originally was named  Sarai, which meant “my princess” (Genesis 11:29). Later Sarai’s  name was changed to Sarah (Genesis 17:15), which in Hebrew means  “princess.” 19 As a faithful daughter of God her name appropriately identified her  character and role as a princess.

[14] [Page 240] Naming  in ancient Israel carried weighty significance. The namer had  authority over or responsibility for what was named. 20 For example, Adam had the responsibility to name the animals at  creation (Genesis 2:19–20). Adam’s naming of animals signified  that Adam had responsibility for being a good steward of the animals  of the earth in addition to his role as the keeper of the Garden of  Eden (Genesis 2:15). When God names someone, or places his name on  them, he has defined that individual’s character, characteristics,  role, and future potential. Furthermore, by naming people, God takes  responsibility for the stewardship of those individuals that they  might flourish. He allows them to fully participate in his love,  protection and covenants. When God names someone, that individual  becomes part of his dominion and kingdom. 21

[15] God  wants to make his children great through his name. Unfortunately,  humans tend to try to make their own names great. 22 They try to make a name for themselves instead of having God make [Page 241] them great through his name. 23 Isaiah 56 and the story of Abraham intersect on this point.

[16] Isaiah  56:6 promises that those who love his name and join themselves to him  will become his servants. In the Old Testament, servants can refer to  a variety of individuals or groups: Moses, other prophets,  King David, King Solomon, Davidic kings, the people of Israel,  and all those who have bound themselves to the Lord through  covenant. 24 In Isaiah 56, [Page 242] servants refer to the covenant people of God, those  willing to obey the torah . Other Old Testament passages  broaden our understanding of what it means to be a covenant-keeping  servant of God while also echoing Abraham and key ideas in Isaiah  56. 25

[17] Isaiah  56:6–7 are also poetically parallel to Isaiah 56:4–5. Once again,  God addresses the non-Israelites, the strangers. He promises that  inasmuch as they keep his sabbaths, and lay hold to the covenants  they will be brought into the temple. God’s holy mountain and house  of prayer are synonyms for the temple as multiple scriptural  references illustrate. 26 The temple is where God will accept the prayers and offerings of all the covenant faithful.

[18] Though  we have focused primarily on specific groups excluded from the temple  (e.g., strangers and eunuchs) throughout this paper, the promises of  the temple that Isaiah describes here are for all people. The  phrases in Isaiah 56:2 “blessed is the man” 27 and “the son of man” (literally in Hebrew ben adam = son  of Adam) are both generic phrases referring to any human. Isaiah is  here speaking of a day when the covenant will be universally  available to any man or woman, regardless of his or her  circumstances, regardless if under the Law of Moses he or she would  have been excluded from God’s assembly at the temple. Everyone who  keeps the law and the sabbaths will be invited into the divine  covenants and be counted as God’s people. In this regard, Isaiah  transitions from focusing on specific cases of exclusion to  proclaiming that all people, whether eunuch or stranger or  some other temple-excluded group, can be brought into the temple.  Isaiah ends the 56:1–8 pericope on this note.

