[Page 230]


## “May  He Protect”

[Page 232]

The  etymological and semantic connection between the name “Jacob” and  divine protection surfaces at several salient moments in the Book of  Mormon. This paper will look at how Lehi, Sariah, and their family  may have understood the name Jacob and why Lehi and Sariah likely  bestowed this important name on their “firstborn in the wilderness”  (2 Nephi 2:1-2, 11) not only to commemorate their ancestor, but in  the express hope that their son Jacob would be the beneficiary of  divine protection. I will also endeavor to show that Jacob’s  references to his brother Nephi as a “protector” may also allude  to Jacob’s own name and his father Lehi’s blessing. I will  further attempt to show that Mormon uses the biblical literary  etymology of the name Jacob in terms of “supplant,” “usurp,”  or “rob” as an editorial theme around which the Lamanites’  Esau-like accusations that the Nephites had usurped them or “robbed”  them of their birthright revolve (e.g., Mosiah 10:10; Alma 20:13; cf.  Alma 54:24). Mormon demonstrated the irony of the Gadianton  [Gaddianton] robbers using the age-old anti-Nephite polemic  (e.g., 3 Nephi 3:10). After defeating the Gaddianton robbers in a  battle for survival, the faithful Lehites, many of whom were  descendants of two Jacobs, prayed “May the God of Abraham, and the  God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, protect this people in  righteousness, so long as they shall call on the name of their God  for protection” (3 Nephi 4:30). That God, Yahweh or Jesus Christ,  was Jacob-Israel’s — and thus the Lehites’—true “protector.”  For the greater part of Lehite history, the Nephites enjoyed the God  of Jacob’s protection until they no longer “came unto Jesus  Christ with broken hearts and contrite spirits, but … did curse  God, and wish to die” but still “would struggle with the sword  for their lives” (Mormon 2:14).


## “He  Hath Protected”

The  name “Jacob” first appears in the Book of Mormon at 1 Nephi 5:14  in connection with Lehi’s sons obtaining the brass plates and  Lehi’s discovery of their contents:

> And  it came to pass that my father, Lehi, also found upon the plates of  brass a genealogy of his fathers; wherefore he knew that he was a  descendant of Joseph; yea, even that Joseph who was the son of Jacob ,  who was sold into Egypt, and who was preserved by the hand of the Lord, that he might preserve his father , Jacob , and all his household from  perishing with famine. (1 Nephi 5:14)

[Page 233]

Lehi  and Sariah evidently named their youngest sons Jacob and Joseph —  whose births are finally mentioned in 1 Nephi 18, though they were  born years earlier — after their ancestors Jacob and Joseph, quite  conceivably because of the (fuller) brass plates account of Genesis  37–50. However, they may have had additional purposes in the naming  of their sons. Consider the powerful testimony that Sariah bears  concerning the Lord’s protection and preservation of her (then  only) four sons after they had returned with the brass plates.

> And  she spake, saying: Now I know of a surety that the Lord hath  commanded my husband to flee into the wilderness; yea, and I [Page 234] also  know of a surety that the Lord hath protected my sons, and delivered them out of the hands of Laban. (1 Nephi 5:8)

Thus,  Jacob’s naming plausibly memorialized not only their ancestor, the  forefather of all Israel, whom the Lord had protected and preserved  (from Esau, Laban, the famine in Canaan, etc.), but also commemorated  the Lord’s protection and preservation of Jacob’s four older  brothers when they travelled to obtain the brass plates so that the  family might be spiritually protected and preserved — i.e., from  “perish[ing] in unbelief” (1 Nephi 4:13). The plates taught them  more about their ancestors, protecting many of their posterity from  similarly “perish[ing] in unbelief” (1 Nephi 4:13). In fact,  Jacob’s name may have constituted a kind of prayer for the  preservation of the family throughout their wilderness journey and  beyond, expressing the added hope of “protection” for the special  son who was their “firstborn in the wilderness” (2 Nephi 2:1-2,  11), born far away from their homeland.


## “Thou  Shalt Dwell Safely with Thy Brother”

Before  discussing the connection between Jacob (“may he protect,” “he  has protected”), divine protection, and Jacob’s use of the term  “protector,” it is necessary to note textual evidence of parental  concern over divine protection for Jacob. 1 Nephi 18, the chapter  that mentions the births of Jacob and Joseph (see 1 Nephi 18:7),  mentions the threat that their abusive elder brothers and  brothers-in-law (Laman, Lemuel, and the sons of Ishmael) posed to  Lehi’s young sons: “And Jacob and Joseph also, [Page 235] being young,  having need of much nourishment, were grieved because of the  afflictions of their mother” (1 Nephi 18:19).

It  was this abusive situation (and probably many others) that Lehi  referenced when he acknowledged that Jacob had suffered great  “afflictions” and “much sorrow” as a boy (1 Nephi 2:1). Lehi,  however, promised Jacob that he would eventually be beyond the grasp  of his abusive brothers:

> And  now, Jacob, I speak unto you: Thou art my first-born in the days of  my tribulation in the wilderness. And behold, in thy childhood thou  hast suffered afflictions and much sorrow, because of the rudeness of  thy brethren. Nevertheless, Jacob [may-he-protect],  thou knowest the greatness of God; and he shall consecrate thy  afflictions for thy gain. Wherefore, thy soul shall be blessed, and thou shalt dwell safely with thy brother, Nephi ; and thy days  shall be spent in the service of God. Wherefore , I know that thou  art redeemed , because of the righteousness of thy Redeemer; for  thou hast beheld that in the fulness of time he cometh to bring  salvation unto men. (2 Nephi 2:1-3; cf. Deuteronomy 33:28)

> And  it came to pass that the Lord did warn me, that I, Nephi, should  depart from them and flee into the wilderness, and all those who  would go with me. Wherefore, it came to pass that I, [Page 236] Nephi, did take  my family, and also Zoram and his family, and Sam, mine elder brother  and his family, and Jacob and Joseph, my younger brethren, and also  my sisters, and all those who would go with me. And all those who  would go with me were those who believed in the warnings and the  revelations of God; wherefore, they did hearken unto my words. (2  Nephi 5:5-6)

Only  separation from Laman and Lemuel et al. or “depart[ure] from them”  permitted Jacob and any other member of the family to escape an  increasingly abusive situation and to “dwell safely with … Nephi”  (2 Nephi 2:3).

Nephi’s  protective measures were not simply reactive, but proactive. He knew  that departure from his older brothers would not be enough.  Therefore, using the sword of Laban as a prototype, he fashioned  numerous swords to protect his people:

> And  I, Nephi, did take the sword of Laban, and after the manner of it did  make many swords, lest by any means the people who were now called  Lamanites should come upon us and destroy us; for I knew their hatred  towards me and my children and those who were called my people. (2  Nephi 5:14)

Nephi’s  foresight proved accurate. He subsequently noted that “forty years  had passed away, and we had already had wars and contentions with our  brethren” (2 Nephi 5:34). These passages provide the backdrop for  Jacob’s description of Nephi as “protector” in the introduction  of his speech in 2 Nephi 6:2, a mere two verses after Nephi’s  statement regarding “wars and contentions with our brethren” (2  Nephi 5:34).


## “Unto  Whom Ye Look as a King or a Protector”

> A Behold,  my beloved brethren, I, Jacob [may-he-protect], B having  been called of God and ordained after the manner of his holy  order, B ′ and having been consecrated by my brother Nephi , A ′ unto  whom ye look as a king or a protector , and upon  whom you depend for safety … (2 Nephi 6:2; cf. Deuteronomy  33:28)

By  means of this structure, Jacob’s speech highlights the connection  between his name and divine protection, as further accentuated by  the close identification that he makes between his divine calling and  ordination and Nephi’s consecrating him. Jacob thus rearticulates  his father’s blessing of protection and safety upon him that was  bound up with his future priestly, temple service: “thou shalt  dwell safely with thy brother Nephi, and thy days shall be spent in  the service of thy God” (2 Nephi 2:3).

Nephi  was not just the Nephites’ “protector,” he was Jacob’s, too,  in fulfillment of his father’s final blessing and the wish  expressed in his parents’ naming him Jacob (“may-he  [God]-protect”). Sariah recognized that “the Lord hath protected  my sons” (1 Nephi 5:8); her youngest sons and that part of the  family “who believed in the warnings and the revelations of God”  (2 Nephi 5:6) continued to receive divine protection.


## “A  Great Protector”

Years  later, when Jacob received the small plates from Nephi, he alluded to  the written version of his speech as preserved upon the small plates  within Nephi’s personal writings. The introductory portion of his  personal record thus recalls the introduction of his written sermon:

> Wherefore,  I, Jacob , take it upon me to fulfill the  commandment of my brother Nephi. Now Nephi began to be old and saw  that he must soon die, wherefore, he anointed a man to be a king and  ruler over his people … The people having loved Nephi exceedingly,  he having been a great protector for them, having wielded the sword of Laban in their defense , and having  labored in all his days for their welfare. (Jacob 1:8-10)

Of  all the details in Nephi’s life that Jacob could have chosen to  include in commenting on Nephi’s death, he mentioned that the  people [Page 239] “loved Nephi exceedingly,” in no small part because “he  [had] been a great protector for them.”


## “Redeemed  … from All Evil”: Divine Wrestling and Protective Embraces

Genesis  33 completes the arc of Jacob’s divine “wrestle” in Genesis 32,  with his reconciliatory “embrace” by Esau. I wish here to suggest  that several divine protection and divine embrace passages in 2 Nephi  and Enos should be understood against the backdrop of Jacob’s  “wrestle” and “embrace” in Genesis 32–33. When Lehi, Nephi,  Jacob, and Enos used the terms “redeem” and “redeemer,” they  bring to mind Jacob’s biography:

In  Genesis 48, Jacob’s blessing of Joseph’s sons was recorded thus:

> And  he [Jacob] blessed Joseph, and said, [The] God [ hā ʾ ĕlōhîm ],  before whom [ lĕpānāw ] my fathers Abraham and Isaac did  walk, The  God [ hā ʾ ĕlōhîm ]  which fed me all my life long unto this day, The Angel which  redeemed me [ hammal ʾ āk  haggō ʾ ēl ʾ ōtî ]  from all evil, bless the lads; and let my name [i.e.,  Jacob/Israel] be named on them, and the name of my fathers Abraham  and Isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the  earth. (Genesis 48:15-16)

The  juxtaposition of “before whom” [(ʾ ăšer …) lĕpānāw ] and “God” [ hā ʾ ĕlōhîm ]  recalls Jacob’s “wrestling”” experience at Peniel (pĕnî ʾ ēl )  wherein he had “seen God face to face [ʾ ĕlōhîm  pānîm ʾ el-  pānîm ]” (Genesis 32:30), and the subsequent reconciliatory  “embrace” of his brother and his “see[ing] [Esau’s] face [ pānêkā ], as though [he] had seen the face of God [ pĕnê ʾ ĕlōhîm ]”  (Genesis 33:10). Jacob’s mention of “the Angel [who] redeemed me”  in parallel with “the God” alludes back to the divine  man/angel/God with whom he “struggled” (becoming “Israel”)  and “prevailed.”

The  biblical narrator in Genesis 32, by means of a paronomasia on ya ʿ ăqōb (Jacob) and wayyē ʾ ābēq (“and there wrestled”) and bĕhē ʾ ābĕqô (“in his wrestling”) inextricably linked the name Jacob (“may  he [God] protect”) with the idea of being locked in the arms of  divinity. Hugh Nibley writes:

[Page 241]

The  paronomastic lexical association between “wrestling” and  “embracing” in terms of the name Jacob is confirmed in the  subsequent reconciliation or (at-one-ment) of Jacob with his brother  Esau: “And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him [ way ḥ abbĕqēhû ],  and fell on his neck, and kissed him: and they wept” (Genesis  33:4). Our English word “embrace” ultimately derives from Latin in + bracchium (“arm”; cf. Spanish brazos ,  “arms”)—i.e., “in arms.” The German verb umarmen ( um , “around” + Arme “arms”), “embrace,”  “enfold,” to “lock in … one’s arms,” concretely expresses  the image.

[Page 242]

It  might be easy here to overlook additional language that firmly links  Lehi’s experience back to that of his ancestor Jacob. Lehi moreover  declared that “the Lord hath redeemed my soul from hell” just as  Jacob invoked “the God” or “the Angel which redeemed me from  all evil” to put the name Jacob-Israel on them. Both Jacob and Lehi  had “seen” their Redeemer’s face (Genesis 32:30 [MT 32:31]) or  “glory” (2 Nephi 1:15) and had been in the arms of Divinity as  the summa res of their redemption.

It  is against the biblical Jacob-wrestle-embrace-redemption backdrop  that we should examine Lehi’s earlier promise to his son Jacob:

> Wherefore, thy soul shall be blessed , and thou shalt dwell safely with thy brother, Nephi ; and thy  days shall be spent in the service of thy God [i.e., in the temple].  Wherefore, I know that thou art redeemed , because of the  righteousness of thy Redeemer [cf. Jacob’s gō ʾ ēl ];  for thou hast beheld that in the fulness of time he cometh  to bring salvation unto men. And thou hast beheld in thy  youth his glory ; wherefore, thou art blessed even as  they unto whom he shall minister in the flesh. (2 Nephi 2:3-4; cf.  Deuteronomy 33:28)

Shortly  thereafter, Nephi and his younger brothers fled from their older  brothers in much the same way that Jacob fled from the anger and  hatred of his brother, Esau. The charge in both cases was  “supplanting” or “robbery” (see Genesis 27:35-36; Mosiah  10:16; Alma 20:13; 54:17, see further below). Genesis 27:41 states,  “Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing wherewith his father  blessed him: and Esau said in his heart, The days of mourning for my  father are at hand; then will I slay my brother Jacob.” In 2 Nephi  4:13, Nephi recorded, “And it came to pass that not many days after  his death, Laman and Lemuel and the sons of Ishmael were angry with  me because of the admonitions of the Lord.”

Rebekah  warned Jacob to “flee” (“flee thou to Laban my brother to  Haran,” Genesis 27:43) from his brother Esau. Similarly, the Lord  warned Nephi to flee from older brothers, “the Lord did warn me,  that I, Nephi, should depart from them and flee into the  wilderness , and all those who would go with me” (2 Nephi 5:5;  cf. 4:33). In both instances, the warning to flee constitutes a part  of the divine protection being afforded the two Jacobs.

> And  Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father  Isaac, the Lord which saidst unto me, Return unto thy country,  and to thy kindred, and I will deal well with thee: I am not worthy  of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth, which thou  hast shewed unto thy servant; for with my staff I passed over this  Jordan; and now I am become two bands. Deliver me , I pray  thee, from the hand of my brother , from the hand of Esau: for  I fear him, lest he will come and smite me, and the mother with the  children. And thou saidst, I will surely do thee good, and make thy  seed as the sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered for multitude.  (Genesis 32:9-12)

Jacob’s  prayer finds its analog in Nephi’s Psalm (which clearly has other  antecedents in the Psalms of the Hebrew Bible). Like Jacob’s  prayer, [Page 245] Nephi’s Psalm is both a plea for protection and cry for  redemption, which are themselves not mutually exclusive. The  “wrestle” with the divine “man” (ʾ îš ,  ʾ ĕlōhîm , or mal ʾ āk ,  Genesis 32:24, 28; 48:16) that follows Jacob’s prayer is matched by  a similarly envisioned divine encounter that Nephi anticipated:

> O  Lord, wilt thou redeem my soul ? Wilt thou deliver me out of  the hands of mine enemies ? Wilt thou make me that I may shake at  the appearance of sin? May the gates of hell be shut continually  before me, because that my heart is broken and my spirit is contrite!  O Lord, wilt thou not shut the gates of thy righteousness before me,  that I may walk in the path of the low valley, that I may be strict  in the plain road! O Lord, wilt thou encircle me around in the robe of thy righteousness! O Lord, wilt thou make a way  for mine escape before mine enemies! Wilt thou make my path straight  before me! Wilt thou not place a stumbling block in my way — but  that thou wouldst clear my way before me, and hedge not up my way,  but the ways of mine enemy. (2 Nephi 4:31-33)

Subsequently  and appropriately, Jacob, son of Lehi, is the one who established the  image of the divine embrace as a primary means of teaching about the  protective aspects of the atonement and divine mercy. Jacob’s use  of divine embrace imagery in the context of Psalm 95:7-11, which [Page 247] he  quoted, portrayed the worshipper at the veil or the threshold of  “enter[ing] into” the Lord’s “rest”:

> Wherefore,  my beloved brethren, I beseech of you in words of soberness that ye  would repent, and come with full purpose of heart, and cleave  unto God as he cleaveth unto you [cf. Hebrew dbq =  “cleave”] . And while his arm of mercy is  extended towards you in the light of the day , harden not your  hearts. (Jacob 6:5; cf. 2 Nephi 32:4)

Jacob’s  influential image of the Lord’s “arm of mercy” being “extended”  appears throughout the remainder of the Book of Mormon (see, e.g.,  Mosiah 16:12; 29:20; Alma 5:33; 19:36; 29:10; 3 Nephi 9:14; Mormon  6:17). Certainly, the exodus image of Yahweh’s redeeming  “outstretched arm” (e.g., Deuteronomy 26:8; Jeremiah 27:5)  influenced Jacob’s development of this idea (see especially the  Lord’s “arm” in 2 Nephi 8:5, 9 as quoted from Isaiah 51:5,  9-11). However, the “arms of [the Lord’s] love” (2 Nephi 1:15)  must have also influenced Jacob, as did Zenos’s and Isaiah’s  image of the Lord’s “stretched forth” or “spread out” hands  (Jacob 5:47; Isaiah 65:2; see especially Jacob 6:4). But it is the  reconciliatory wrestling and embrace of Genesis 32–33  that evidently became, for Lehi, Nephi, Jacob, and their successors,  a specific source for preaching the atonement of Jesus Christ and its  effects.

Enos’s  autobiography evidences a notable parallelistic feature — Enos  (man), “father” (Jacob) – “man” (ʾ îš/ ʾ ĕnôš ),  “wrestle” (echoing Jacob)—wherein the terms flip: first, Enos  (man) flips from the name itself to emphasize its meaning — i.e.,  to “man” (ʾ îš- ʾ ĕnôš )  and second, [Page 248] “father” as identifying Jacob (the son of Lehi) to  the term “wrestle” which functions as a paronomastic identifier  of Jacob (the son of Isaac, and patriarchal ancestor of Israel).

Moreover,  it is significant that Enos — unlike the Genesis narrator who  specified that a “man” wrestled with Jacob — never explicitly  mentioned the individual with whom he “wrestled.” That is because  the “wrestle that [he] had before God” was also with a “man,”  namely himself — Enos (Heb. ʾ ĕnôš “man”)! Enos also seemed to allude to Jacob’s new name “Israel”  when he described his and his people’s later “strugglings” on  behalf of, and with the Lamanites (Enos 1:10, 11, 14). Amid these  struggles Enos obtained a promise that the Nephite records would be  protected or “preserved” (1:15-18).


## [Page 249] “May  … the God of Jacob Protect this People”

In  addition to the writings of Nephi, Jacob, and Enos, another part of  Nephite sacred history that revolves around the Jacob-Esau story is  the traditional Lamanite grievance that Nephi had “robbed” their  fathers. As Zeniff reported, “they said that he robbed them”  (Mosiah 10:16)—i.e., he had taken the plates of brass, and  “supplanted” them in their right to rule. In the words of  Lamoni’s father: “Behold, he robbed our fathers” (Alma  20:13). As noted above, Nephite writers — e.g., Enos and his  successors — recognized that Nephi and his successors fit the  biblical type of Jacob and the Lamanites fit the type of Esau in  terms of fraternal relationship dynamics and their underlying  grievances.

Thus,  when Jesus quoted Malachi in 3 Nephi 24-25, Malachi’s declaration  on tithing and “robbing” God took on additional significance for  the Lamanite and Nephites in light of two historical issues that had  existed among them: Lamanite charges of “robbery” against the  Nephites and the more recent, but related issue of the Gaddianton  “robbers.” It should be remembered here Jesus’s audience were  “the house of Jacob,” “the seed of Jacob,” “the remnant of  Jacob” or “the sons of Jacob”:

> For  I am the Lord, I change not; therefore ye sons of Jacob [ bĕnê ya ʿ ăqōb ]  are not consumed. Even from the days of your fathers ye are gone away  from mine ordinances, and have not kept them. Return unto me and I  will return unto you, saith the Lord of Hosts. But ye say: Wherein  shall we return? Will [Page 250] a man rob [ hăyiqba ʿ]  God? Yet ye have robbed [ qōbĕ ʿ îm ]  me. But ye say: Wherein have we robbed [ qĕba ʿ ănûkā ] thee ? In tithes and offerings. Ye are cursed with a curse, for ye  have robbed me [ qōbĕ ʿ îm ], even this whole nation . (3 Nephi 24:6-9; quoting Malachi 3:6-9)

When  it came to the issue of systematic “robbery,” however, the  Nephites were by no means faultless. According to Mormon’s  abridgment of Helaman’s record, secret combinations began among the  Nephites as a political dispute (see Helaman 1). Bearing in mind the  original meaning of “Jacob” (“may he protect”) and the  pejorative associations ascribed to the name by the Genesis text  (Genesis 25:26; 27:36) and prophetic texts (Jeremiah 9:4 and Malachi  3:6-9), it is interesting to consider Mormon’s description of the  Gadianton robbers’ (hereafter Gaddianton robbers’, see below)  program of systematic “protect[ion] and preserv[ation]”:

> But  behold, Satan did stir up the hearts of the more part of the  Nephites, insomuch that they did unite with those bands of robbers , and did enter into their covenants  and their oaths, that they would protect and  preserve one another in whatsoever difficult circumstances they  should be placed, that they should not suffer for their murders, and  their plunderings, and their stealings . (Helaman 6:21)

Just  one generation after the time of Nephi the son of Helaman and just  two generations after the rise of the Gaddianton robbers, they  threatened the very survival of the Nephites and Lamanites. Like many  of the “robbers” themselves, the Lamanites and Nephites were  “Jacob” or “the seed of Jacob” (3 Nephi 5:24; Mormon 5:24;  7:10; cf. Alma 46:23). 3 Nephi 4:10 states that they “did not fear  [the robbers]; but they did [Page 253] fear their God and did supplicate  him for protection .” Miraculously, the robbers were defeated  and the faithful preserved. The jubilation that followed (4:29-31)  took on a ceremonial nature where the text quotes three liturgical  exclamations thanking the Lord and invoking his continual  “preservation” or “protection.” The second, in particular,  seems to play on the meaning of “Jacob”:

> And  they did rejoice and cry again with one voice, saying: May the  God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob , protect [cf. ya ʿ ăqōb ]  this people in righteousness so long as they call on the name of  their God for protection . (3 Nephi 4:30; cf. Deuteronomy  33:28)

The  Lord did protect Lehi’s family and descendants, including Jacob’s  descendants, “so long as they call[ed] on their God for  protection,” protection that also came as an extended fulfillment  of the ancient blessing of Jacob-Israel in Deuteronomy 33:28 and  Lehi’s son, Jacob, in 2 Nephi 3:2.

When  they ceased to “call upon God for protection” (a few generations  later), swift destruction ensued. The “robbers” from which the  descendants of Jacob had been protected would play a decisive role in  the destruction of the Nephites: “And they did not come unto Jesus  with broken hearts and contrite spirits, but they did curse God, and  wish to die. Nevertheless they would struggle with the sword  for their lives” (Mormon 2:14). Mormon promised his readers, “in  the end of this book [i.e., the entire Book of Mormon] ye shall see  that this Gaddianton did prove, yea, almost the entire destruction of  the people of Nephi” (Helaman 2:13).

Accordingly,  Mormon marked the presence and influence of the Gaddianton robbers at  each stage of his people’s destruction. When he was “forbidden to  preach” to the people as a whole “because of the hardness of  their hearts” (Mormon 1:17), Mormon wrote that concomitantly, the  “ Gaddianton robbers , who were among the Lamanites, did  infest the land” (Mormon 1:18). Increasingly, “the land was  filled with robbers and with Lamanites” (Mormon 2:8; cf. 10) until,  Mormon tells us,

> My  heart did sorrow because of this the great calamity of my people,  because of their wickedness and their abominations. But behold, we  did go forth against the Lamanites and the robbers of Gaddianton ,  until we had again taken possession of the lands of our inheritance.  And the three hundred and forty and ninth year had passed away. And  in the three hundred and fiftieth year we made a treaty with the  Lamanites [Page 254] and the robbers of Gaddianton , in which we did get  the lands of our inheritance divided. (Mormon 2:27-28)

In  the end, however, the Lord removed that protection, and the Nephites,  once so favored of the Lord, were destroyed. But the Lord removed his  divine protection from the Lamanites too. Moroni states, “And  behold, it is the hand of the Lord which hath done it. And behold  also, the Lamanites are at war one with another ; and the  whole face of this land is one continual round of murder and  bloodshed ; and no one knoweth the end of the war” (Mormon 8:8).  The Gaddianton problem remained a danger for them: “And now,  behold, I say no more concerning them, for there are none save it  be the Lamanites and robbers that do exist upon the face of the  land” (Mormon 8:8-9).

“The  God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,” had  ceased to “protect” the Nephites and Lamanites “in  righteousness” because they no longer “call[ed] on the name of their  God for protection ” (see again 3 Nephi 4:31; cf. Deuteronomy  33:28). The Lord did, however, protect Nephite records (including the  “plates of Jacob”) in accordance with the promise secured by Enos  and his fathers, including his father Jacob.


## Conclusion

The  last thing that Mormon wrote before his death informed his latter day  audience that they are descendants of Jacob and that this identity is  critical to their eternal welfare: “And ye will also know that ye  are a remnant of the seed of Jacob ; therefore ye are numbered  among the people of the first covenant; and if it so be that ye  believe in Christ, and are baptized, first with water, then with fire  and with the Holy Ghost, following the example of our Savior,  according to that which he hath commanded us, it shall be well with  you in the day of judgment. Amen” [Page 255] (Mormon 7:10). His son wrote,  similarly, “But behold, I will show unto you a God of miracles,  even the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob;  and it is that same God who created the heavens and the earth, and  all things that in them are” (Mormon 9:11).

Amulek  appealed to his ancestors’ and forebears’ (Lehi, Nephi, Jacob,  and Enos’s) use of the image of Jacob’s “wrestle” and atoning  “embrace” to teach about how the atonement of Jesus Christ protects the truly penitent from the demands of divine  justice: “And thus mercy can satisfy the demands of justice, and encircles them in the arms of safety , while he that exercises no  faith unto repentance is exposed to the whole law of the  demands of justice; therefore only unto him that has faith unto  repentance is brought about the great and eternal plan of redemption”  (Alma 34:16; cf. 2 Nephi 1:15; 4:33; Enos 1:2; cf. “mercy, which  overpowereth justice,” Alma 34:15).

Although  mercy through the atonement protects the repentant, it cannot and  will not save a man or a woman “in” his or her sins. Perhaps,  then, we can again detect an allusion to “Jacob” in Alma’s  explanation of this doctrine to Corianton: “What, do ye suppose  that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit.  If so, God would cease to be God” (Alma 42:25).

In  the end, the Nephites, whom “the Lord would not always suffer …  to take happiness in sin” (Mormon 2:13), were overtaken by divine  justice and the consequences of their unrighteousness. It might have  been otherwise, as Mormon laments: “For I know that such will  sorrow for the calamity of the house of Israel; yea, they will sorrow  for the destruction of this people; they will sorrow that this people  had not repented that they might have been clasped in the arms of  Jesus ” (Mormon 5:11).

[ Editor’s  Note: The author would like to thank Allen Wyatt, Jennifer Tonks,  Robert F. Smith, and Victor Worth.]

---
Notes

[1] [Page 229] Abstract: The name Jacob (ya ʿ ăqōb)  means “may he [i.e., God] protect,” or “he has protected.” As  a hypocoristic masculine volitive verbal form, 1 it is a kind of blessing upon, or prayer on behalf of the one so  named that he will receive divine protection and safety (cf.  Deuteronomy 33:28). Textual evidence from Nephi’s writings suggests  that his brother Jacob’s protection was a primary concern of their  parents, Lehi and Sariah. Lehi saw Nephi as the specific means of  divine protection for Jacob, his “first born in the wilderness.”  Moreover, the term “protector” is used twice in LDS scripture, in  both instances by Jacob himself (2 Nephi 6:2; Jacob 1:10), this in  reference to Nephi, who became the “great protector” of the  Nephites in general and Jacob in particular. All of the foregoing is  to be understood against the backdrop of the patriarch Jacob’s  biography. Lehi, Nephi, Jacob, and Enos all expressed their  redemption in terms reminiscent of their ancestor Jacob’s being  “redeemed … from all evil,” a process which included Jacob  “wrestling” a divine “man” and preparing him to be reconciled  to his estranged brother by an atoning “embrace.” Mormon employed  the biblical literary etymology of the name Jacob, in the terms  “supplant,” “usurp,” or “rob” as a basis for Lamanite  accusations that Nephites had usurped them or “robbed” them of  their birthright. Mormon, aware of the high irony, shows that the  Gadianton [Gaddianton] robbers take up the same polemic. The faithful  Lehites, many of whom were descendants of two Jacobs, prayed “May  the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,  protect this people in righteousness, so long as they shall call on  the name of their God for protection” (3 Nephi 4:30). By and large,  they enjoyed the God of Jacob’s protection until they ceased to  call upon their true protector for it.

[2] The  name Jacob easily constitutes one of the most important personal  names in the biblical corpus. It is equally important in the Book of  Mormon. With the benefit of comparative Semitic linguistic evidence,  scholars now generally accept that the name “Jacob” is a  hypocoristic volitive (or jussive) form of a Semitic verb *ʿ qb meaning “to  protect” or “guard,” 2 rather than a derivation from a denominative verb formed on ʿ eqēb (“heel”), 3 i.e., “to grab the heel” or “to supplant” as suggested by the  onomastic etiological puns of Genesis 25:26 (“he took hold on  Esau’s heel ”  [ ba ʿ ăqēb ])  and 27:36 (“he hath supplanted me” [ wayya ʿ qĕbēnî ]).  The related text Hosea 12:3 [MT 12:4] states “He took his brother by the heel [ʿ āqab ]  in the womb” (Hosea 12:4). Phyllis Trible describes it is a “folk  etymology” which gives his name the meaning of “grasper, schemer,  or conniver.” 4 I dislike the term “folk etymology” since it is sometimes equated  with “false” etymology. As Moshe Garsiel has rightly noted, “We  are dealing here [in Genesis 25:26, 27:36, Hosea 12:3 (MT 12:4)] with  a literary etymology (and not a ‘popular’ one).” 5 From a scientific etymological perspective, “Jacob” ( ya ʿ ăqōb )  has the much more positive [Page 231] meaning, “may he [i.e., God] protect,”  or “he has protected.” 6 That is, it is probably short (hypocoristic) for Jacob-El as y ʿ qb- ʾ l “may-El-protect (him),” as the original text of Deuteronomy 33:28  likely read. 7

[3] As  a Semitic name, Jacob was not unusual. The similarly formed name of  the 14th dynasty Semitic Hyksos ruler Yaqub-Har ( y ʿ qb  hr “may Horus protect” or y ʿ qb- ʿ r “may the exalted one protect”) is attested in scarab seals. 8

[4] Photo 1: “Shiqmona” scarab. Photo 2: “Berlin” scarab with cartouche. 9

[5] Nephi  here summarized Joseph’s enslavement in Egypt and the eventual  source of divine protection and preservation for Jacob and the rest  of his family. This statement is more important than may appear at  first glance. Here Nephi succinctly recounted the narrative of  Genesis 37–50, a fuller form of which was preserved on the plates  of brass. 10

[6] Nephi,  probably as his father did, read the entire narrative of Genesis  37–50 (in the much fuller form that he had it) as a story of  protection and “preservation.” Indeed, there appears to be an  allusion to the meaning of Jacob’s name (“may he protect”) in  the verb translated “preserve” (cf. Genesis 32:20: “And Jacob  called the name of the place Peniel: for I have seen God face to  face, and my life [ soul] is preserved [ wattinā ṣ ēl  napšî ]”; Genesis 45:5: “God did send me [Joseph] before you to preserve life [ lĕmi ḥ yâ ]”).  It is worth noting here that the Semitic verb ʿ qb as preserved in the Ethiopic verb ʿ aqaba (“guard, watch, keep watch, safeguard, tend [flocks], preserve …  protect”) 11 and substantive participle ʿ aqābbi (“guardian, guard, keeper, watchman, protector, official” cf. kjv  Akkub) 12 and South Arabic ʿ qbt(n) (“watchtower”) 13 and * m ʿ qbt (“guard, guardian”) 14 convey this sense of protection.

[7] Sariah’s  statement, “the Lord hath protected,” precedes Nephi’s first  mention of his brother Jacob by a mere six verses. Jacob would be  born about one year later. 15 Of all the names in the Hebrew onomasticon through which an Israelite  parent might express hope for protection or gratitude for past  protection, “Jacob” is by far the most prominent, suitable, and  likely candidate. Jacob’s name, in effect, becomes Sariah’s  “psalm” as preserved in 1 Nephi 5:8.

[8] And  so the very blessing that Lehi bestowed on Jacob prior to his death  was a blessing of divine protection through his brother Nephi: he  would enjoy divine protection under his brother’s care so that all  of his time could “be spent in the service of God”—i.e., as a  priest and a teacher in the Nephite temple. 16 The blessing on Jacob-Israel in Deuteronomy 33:28 (“Israel shall  then dwell in safety”) was also Jacob’s personal and familial  blessing.

[9] In  order to help Nephi to protect the faithful members of the  Lehite/Ishmaelite family and perhaps “others” 17 in the land of promise who had attached themselves to the clan, the  Lord gave Nephi advanced warning of another attempt by his brothers  upon his life and person:

[10] The  word “protector” is used twice in Latter-day Saint scripture 18 and Jacob uses it in both instances (2 Nephi 6:2; Jacob 1:10). That  fact, coupled with the fact that Jacob’s name means “may he [God]  protect” or “he has protected,” bids us to consider the  potential relationship of both these statements to Jacob’s name and  biography. His first recorded words in [Page 237] the Book of Mormon are  preserved in a speech given to the Nephites, probably shortly after  Nephi’s “coronation” or ascension as leader of the nascent  Nephite nation. 19 Jacob’s introduction to the written version of this speech is an  autobiographical note. It is here that Jacob uses the term  “protector” for the first time, echoing the original,  non-pejorative meaning of “Jacob” as a part of the following  chiastic structure:

[11] It  is difficult to surmise precisely what term for “protector” Jacob  would have used here. The related Hebrew name Akkub may yield one  possibility. Akkub (ʿ aqqûb ),  itself a qattûl / qattūl noun formation from the verb  ʿ qb and cognate  with the name Jacob, denotes “protector” or “protected” 20 (cf. Ethiopic ʿ aqqābi ).  Other possibilities conceivably include substantive participial forms  of šmr or n ṣ r .  Whatever the case, Jacob’s use of a rare term rendered “protector”  in connection with his own name Jacob (“may [God] protect”)  together with the phrase “depend upon for safety” as a possible  allusion to Deuteronomy 33:28 (“Israel shall then dwell in  safety”), this in juxtaposition with an allusion to [Page 238] Lehi’s  blessing (“shalt dwell safely with thy brother, Nephi,” 2  Nephi 2:3), merits special attention.

[12] When  Jacob added to “protector” the words “upon whom you depend for  safety” (2 Nephi 6:2), he alluded to Deuteronomy 33:28 (“Israel  shall then dwell in safety, untroubled 21 is the fountain of Jacob [-El]”) and back to the content of his  father’s dying blessing upon him personally: “ thou shalt dwell  safely with thy brother, Nephi; and thy days shall be spent in  the service of thy God” (2 Nephi 2:3). Perhaps apart from his  younger brother Joseph, nobody depended upon or benefited from  Nephi’s protection more than Jacob himself. Jacob’s brother Nephi  became the fulfillment of Lehi’s and Sariah’s eponymous hope for  Jacob—“may he [the Lord] protect” him. Nephi himself  constituted the Lord’s means of protecting Jacob, Joseph, and the  other faithful members of the Lehite Ishmaelite clan.

[13] Just  as Nephi, whose name apparently derives from the Egyptian word nfr 22 (“good,” “fair,” “goodly”), 23 suggests that his name was appropriately bestowed because he was one  “having been born of goodly parents” and one “having a …  knowledge of the goodness and mysteries of God” (1 Nephi  1:1), 24 Jacob’s statements in 2 Nephi 6:2 and Jacob 1:10 suggest that his  name was also fitting for one who whom the Lord had protected (along with the other “Nephites”) from the Lamanites, Nephi being  the instrumentality of that divine protection and the fulfillment of  Lehi’s final blessing upon Jacob.

[14] Over  a decade ago, John Tvedtnes and Matthew Roper insightfully noted that  Enos’s autobiographical description of his “wrestle … before  God” was a literary allusion to Jacob the patriarch’s “wrestling”  with a “man” at Peniel. 25 In a previous more recent study, 26 I noted that the use of the verbal noun “wrestle” [* hē ʾ ābēq from *ʾ bq , cf. wayyē ʾ ābēq / bĕhē ʾ ābĕqô ]  constituted a deliberate wordplay on Enos’s father’s name “Jacob”  ( ya ʿ ăqōb )  in terms of the verbal root ʾ bq in Enos 1:2. I have further argued that this holds additional  implications for Enos’s autobiographical wordplay on his own name  in Enos 1:1, especially in view of the patriarch Jacob’s  (subsequently Israel’s) having “ha[d] … power [ śārîtā ;  or better, [Page 240] struggled ] 27 with God and with men [ʾ ănāšîm ,  cf. ʾ ĕnôš =  “man”; cf. also ʾ îš ]  and hast prevailed” (Genesis 32:28).

[15] One  of the most puzzling episodes in the Bible has always been the story  of Jacob’s wrestling with the Lord. When one considers that the  word conventionally translated as wrestled ( yē ʾ āvēq )  can just as well mean ‘embrace’ and that it was in this ritual  embrace that Jacob received a new name and the bestowal of priestly  and kingly power at sunrise (Genesis 32:24-30), the parallel to  the Egyptian coronation embrace becomes at once apparent. 28

[16] As  Stephen Geller observes, “the story becomes the account of a  gracious, if not guarded, reconciliation. So the linking o f  way ḥ abbĕqēhû an d wayyē ʾ ābēq is no casual ornament but a device deeply meaningful to the logic of  the story: the surest sign of literary intention.” 29 In fact, the somewhat homonymous Hebrew verbs ʾ bq (“wrestle”) and ḥ bq (“embrace”) that feature so prominently in Genesis 32–33 may  ultimately derive from the same Semitic root. In Ugaritic ḥ bq means “to embrace, take in one’s arms, cover.” 30 Both appear to be cognate with the Akkadian verb epēqu (or  earlier, epēqum ) = “to embrace; grow over, round” and  “embrace (in affection),” 31 which was ḥ abāqum in Eblaite. 32

[17] Mark  Smith suggests that “ * ḥ bq means to hold someone by wrapping one’s arms around the person.” 33 This appears to be the exact sense of Lehi’s words in 2 Nephi 1:15,  a passage which Nibley further cites as an example of the “ritual  embrace” or divine embrace “that consummates the final escape  from death” 34 :  “But behold , the Lord hath redeemed my soul from hell ; I  have beheld his glory , and I a m  encircled abo u t eternall y in the arms of his love ” (2 Nephi 1:15). 35

[18] Tremper  Longman writes, “the ver b ḥ bq (embrace) refers to a gesture or action that denotes affection for  another … especially in the context of greetings or welcomes,  particularly for the first time or after separation (Gen. 29:13; 2  Kings 4:16).” 36 The patriarch Jacob is the object of this verb in Genesis 29:13  (“then Laban heard the tidings of Jacob [ ya ʿ ăqōb ]  his sister’s son, that he ran to meet him, and embraced him [ way ḥ abbeq-lô ],  and kissed him, and brought him to his house”) and Genesis 33:4  (“And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him [ way ḥ abbĕqēhû ],  and fell on his neck, and kissed him: and they wept”). He is the  subject of the verb in Genesis 48:10: “And he brought them near  unto him; and he kissed them, and embraced them [ way ḥ abbēq  lāhem ].” In each instance, the ḥ bq – ya ʿ ăqōb paronomasia serves to strengthen the cognitive link between Jacob’s  name and the affectionate, protective embrace. The Lord’s embrace  of Lehi speaks to a kind of realized eschatology that his ancestor  Jacob had attained to through the events of Genesis 32–33.  Recognizing the paronomasia on ya ʿ ăqōb – wayyē ʾ ābēq – way ḥ abbĕqēhû is key to not only understanding the entire cycle that deals with  Jacob’s life and redemption, but also to understanding how Lehi,  Nephi, Jacob, Enos, and their successors may have read and understood  that cycle. For example, Mormon describes Alma’s experience that  recalls the Jacob-Esau cycle and Enos’s autobiography:  “Nevertheless Alma labored much in the spirit, wrestling with  God in mighty prayer , that he would pour [Page 243] out his Spirit upon the  people who were in the city; that he would also grant that he might  baptize them unto repentance” (Alma 8:10). The new name Israel had  been bestowed or put upon Jacob as part of his requested blessing  while enfolded in the arms of—”wrestling” with — this  God/ Angel, just as Lehi was “encircled about eternally in the  arms of [the Lord’s] love” (2 Nephi 1:15).

[19] Jacob  had seen his divine protector, the Lord — the protector implied in  his hypocoristic, theophoric name. Nevertheless, we note that Lehi  gave Jacob a blessing (“thy soul shall be blessed”; “wherefore  thou art blessed”) of divine protection bestowed through his  brother Nephi (“thou shalt dwell safely with thy brother”), the  promise of “redemption” (i.e., atonement, “I know that thou art  redeemed”), and declared Jacob’s earlier theophany as a young man  (“thou hast beheld that … he cometh to bring salvation unto men.  And thou hast beheld in thy youth his glory”; Nephi later asserted,  “My brother, Jacob, also has seen him”). 37 All of this recalls, and appears [Page 244] to be meant to recall, their  ancestor Jacob’s esoteric “temple” experience at Peniel, and  his subsequent reconciliation with Esau.

[20] Years  later, when Esau went out to meet his brother Jacob, the latter’s  “terror is almost palpable” 38 as evident in his arrangement of his family in two camps, the  children of the concubines (or wives of lesser status) in the front,  etc. Jacob’s distress is evident in his prayer:

[21] Nibley  cites Nephi’s petition as an example of a ritual embrace and “a  dramatic situation” (cf. temple drama): “It was the custom for  one fleeing for his life in the desert to seek protection in the tent  of a great sheik, crying out, ‘Ana dakhīluka ’, meaning ‘I  am thy suppliant,’ whereupon the Lord would place the hem of his  robe over the guest’s shoulder and declare him under his  protection.” 39 Nephi’s plea, “O Lord, wilt thou redeem my soul,” was a plea  for protection and atonement. As Nibley puts it, “to be redeemed is  to be atoned.” 40 Nephi’s subsequent plea, “O Lord, wilt thou encircle me in the  robe of thy righteousness!” constitutes a more intense plea for the  same outcome. Nephi desired the same redemptive embrace(s) that Jacob  his ancestor (Genesis 32–33) and his father Lehi had experienced.

[22] A  temple situation is presupposed by the imagery of “gates”—“the  gates of [thy] righteousness [ ša ʿ ărê-ṣ edeq ]”  (Psalm 118:19-20) 41 or “gate of [Page 246] heaven [ ša ʿ ar  haššāmayîm ]” 42 (of the “house of God[s] [ bêt ʾ ĕlōhîm ,  cf. Bethel]” in Genesis 28:17) opposite “the gates of hell.”  Nibley clearly recognized the “temple” nature of Nephi’s Psalm:

[23] He  [Nephi] comes to the tent of the Lord and enters as a suppliant; and  in reply, the Master, as was the ancient custom, puts the hem of the  robe protectively over the kneeling man’s shoulder ( katafa ).  This puts him under the Lord’s protection from all enemies. They  embrace in a close hug, as Arab chiefs still do; the Lord makes a  place for him and invites him to sit down beside him — they are  at- one. (2 Nephi 4:33; Alma 5:24) 43

[24] Patriarch  Jacob’s triumph consisted in his being reconciled to the Lord and  to his inimical brother Esau and thus being “redeemed … from all  evil.” Lehi, Nephi, Jacob, and Enos experienced reconciliation and  at-one ment with the Lord, too. They longed to experience the  reconciliation that Jacob experienced with Esau with their own family  members who “would not come unto [Lehi] and partake of the fruit”  of the tree of life (1 Nephi 8:18)—i.e., were not willing to come. 44

[25] The  impact of ancestral stories about Jacob and his divine protection are  perhaps nowhere more evident than in the writing of Jacob’s son, Enos,  whose autobiographical introduction contains wordplay both on his  name and the name of his father, Jacob: 45

[26] Behold,  it came to pass that I, Enos [ʾ ĕnôš ,  Hebrew “man”], knowing my father [i.e., ya ʿ ăqōb ]  that he was a just man [ʾ îš/ ʾ ĕnôš ]—for  he taught me in his language and in the nurture and admonition of the  Lord — and blessed be the name of my God for it — And I will tell  you of the wrestle [* hē ʾ ābēq, pun on ya ʿ ăqōb ]  which I had before God [ lipnê ʾ ĕlōhîm ,  cf. Peniel], 46 before I received a remission of my sins. (Enos 1:1-2)

[27] In  this way, Enos’s introduction cunningly recalls both Nephi’s  autobiographical wordplay and the paronomasia on “Jacob” found  throughout the Genesis narratives, especially the scene in Genesis  32, in which Jacob ( ya ʿ ăqōb) “passed over the ford Jabbok ” ( yabbōq ) and “there wrestled [ wayyē ʾ ābēq ] a man [ʾ îš ,  cf . ʾ ĕnôš ]”  (32:22, 24 [MT 23, 25]). 47 Jacob refused to break his hold on the “man” unless the “man”  blessed him, whereupon the “man” pronounced a new name on Jacob:  “Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel [ yiśrā ʾ ēl ]  for as a prince hast thou power [ śārîtā , or, thou  hast struggled ] 48 with God [ʾ ĕlōhîm ] and men [ʾ ănāšîm ,  plural of “Enos”]” (32:26-29). The patriarch Jacob gave the  place the new name “Peniel” (pĕnî ʾ ēl ,  “face of God”) because he had “seen God face to face [ʾ ĕlōhîm pānîm ʾ el-pānîm ],”  a name to which Enos alluded when describing his “wrestle … before God [* lipnê ʾ ĕlōhîm ],”  as Tvedtnes and Roper note. 49 This is the pivotal event in the life story of him who went from  being a grabber of his brother’s “heel” and a “supplanter”  to one whom his once-estranged brother “embraced” ( way ḥ abbĕqēhû ,  Genesis 33:4; cf. wayyē ʾ ābēq ,  Genesis 32:24 [MT 25]), another sublime pun on “Jacob” ( ya ʿ ăqōb ).

[28] Moreover,  that the Nephites themselves were likely aware 50 of the prophet Jeremiah’s pejorative wordplay on the name Jacob is  well-known: “Take ye heed every one of his neighbour, and trust ye  not in any brother: for every brother will utterly supplant [ʿ āqôb ya ʿ qōb ],  and every neighbour will walk with slanders” (Jeremiah 9:4).  Malachi, perhaps cognizant of Jeremiah’s earlier wordplay, used a  similar wordplay in his well-known declaration on tithing and  “robbing” God (see immediately below). Importantly, Malachi 3-4  became “Lehite” texts when Jesus himself quoted them in full to  the Nephites and Lamanites.

[29] As  Luis Alonso-Schökel and Moshe Garsiel have individually noted, 51 Malachi played on the name Jacob ( ya ʿ ăqōb )  in terms of verb qb ʿ,  to “rob.” The wordplay takes the form of paronomasia exploiting  the homophony of Jacob and the verb qb ʿ.  The use of qb ʿ  in connection with the name Jacob emphasizes that “Jacob” or the  “sons of Jacob” (i.e., Israel as a nation) stands guilty of  “robbing” the Lord. This is considered such an important point  that the verb is repeated four times in closed proximity for  emphasis.

[30] Jesus  declared that he was “commanded” to “give” this particular  text to his Lamanite and Nephite audience. Citing this scripture to  the “sons of Jacob” not only suggested but ensured that  they would be included in “this whole nation” (or, “the nation  — all of it”). In other words, they would be brought under the  same condemnation as their brethren in the eastern hemisphere. This  wordplay also recalls the Genesis narrative with its paronomasia on  “Jacob,” “heel,” and the denominative verb ʿ qb ,  to “supplant,” “usurp” (Genesis 25:26; 27:36). The verbs qb ʿ and ʿ qb are formed from the same three root letters, homophonous (similar in  sound), and as LXX Greek Malachi 3 suggests, can be treated as  virtually synonymous. 52 In other words, “supplanting” was tantamount to “robbing.”

[31] This  very issue—“supplanting” or “robbery”—had long been one  of the traditional grievances of the Lamanites against the Nephites.  According to this tradition, Nephi “robbed” the birthright of  Laman (Mosiah 10:16; Alma 45:17). 53 Nephi not only “robbed,” but supplanted Laman and Lemuel’s  “right” to rule, just as Jacob “supplanted” Esau: “he [Page 251] had  taken the ruling out of their hands” (Mosiah 10:15). Nephite  writers like Enos and Zeniff manifested awareness of this biblical  parallel. They understood that this perceived “robbery,”  “supplanting” or “usurpation” constituted the basis for  the Lamanites’ longstanding “hatred” and treatment of the Nephites  — i.e., robbery, plunder, and murder (Mosiah 10:17).

[32] Mormon  further informs us that during this same period the Nephites were in  “a state of such awful wickedness” in part because “thos e  Gaddianton robbers [were] filling the  judgment-seats — having usurped [cf. the negative,  denominative meaning o f ʿ qb ,  “supplant,” or “usurp”] the power and authority of the land;  laying aside the commandments of God, and not in the least aright  before him; doing no justice unto the children of men” (Helaman  7:4). Not insignificantly, Mormon indicated that th e Gaddianton  robbers themselves eventually adopted the old traditional  anti-Nephite Lamanite polemic that the Nephites had “robbed” or  “retained” from the Lamanites their “right[s] to the  government” 54 (see especially 3 Nephi 3:10 in view of Alma 54:17 18, 24) 55 [Page 252] in order to justify their own practices of robbery, plunder, and  murder (3 Nephi 4:5).

[33] In  Helaman 2:11-12, Gaddianton is spelled with the double- d in  the Original Book of Mormon Manuscript, and is allowed by the O MS  spacing at Helaman 2:4. As pointed out by John W. Welch and Kelly  Ward in 1985, the Hebrew word for “band; bandits,” gĕdûd ,  is spelled with the double- d . 56 In fact, the Hebrew phrase ʾ îš  gĕdûdîm “band of robbers” is even used in Hosea 6:9 (cf.  Hosea 7:1 “bandits” NRSV ; Genesis 30:11 “troop” 57 kjv), and this matches the plural Neo-Babylonian gudūdānu ,  and Phoenician b ʿ l ʾ gddm “gang of  robbers” (cf. Psalm 56:7 yāgôddû “they form a gang,”  as emended). 58

[34] By  the time the Savior appeared to the Lamanites and Nephites in 3 Nephi  11, both politico-ethnic groups had been heavily involved in the  practices of the Gaddianton robbers (Helaman 6:17-18, 30-31,  37-38). They had been guilty of “robbing” God in their ceaseless  attempts to “get gain” 59 and their concomitant oppression of the poor (Helaman 6:39).

[35] Mormon  notes that it was not just the “unbelieving” 60 Lamanites that destroyed the Nephites, but also the Gaddianton  robbers from whom he had once saved and “protected” the Nephites  and Lamanites (3 Nephi 4)—the seed of Jacob (“may he  protect”).

